NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHY DOES THE TREASURY ISSUE TIPS? THE TIPS–TREASURY BOND PUZZLE
Matthias Fleckenstein
Francis A. Longstaff
Hanno Lustig
Working Paper 16358
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16358

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2010

We are grateful for helpful discussions with Jim Lewis, Eric Neis, Peter Meindl, Derek Schaefer, Mike
Rierson, and Marcus Tom. All errors are our responsibility. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Matthias Fleckenstein, Francis A. Longstaff, and Hanno Lustig. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Why Does the Treasury Issue Tips? The Tips–Treasury Bond Puzzle
Matthias Fleckenstein, Francis A. Longstaff, and Hanno Lustig
NBER Working Paper No. 16358
September 2010
JEL No. E6,G12,G14
ABSTRACT
We show that the price of a Treasury bond and an inflation-swapped TIPS issue exactly replicating
the cash flows of the Treasury bond can differ by more than $20 per $100 notional. Treasury bonds
are almost always overvalued relative to TIPS. Total TIPS–Treasury mispricing has exceeded $56
billion, representing nearly eight percent of the total amount of TIPS outstanding. TIPS–Treasury mispricing
is strongly related to supply factors such as Treasury debt issuance and the availability of collateral
in the financial markets, and is correlated with other types of fixed-income arbitrages, These results
pose a major puzzle to classical asset pricing theory. In addition, they raise the issue of why the Treasury
issues TIPS, since in so doing it both gives up a valuable fiscal hedging option and leaves large amounts
of money on the table.

Matthias Fleckenstein
UCLA Anderson School of Management
110 Westwood Plaza
Los Angeles
matthias.fleckenstein.2012@anderson.ucla.edu
Francis A. Longstaff
UCLA
Anderson Graduate School of Management
110 Westwood Plaza, Box 951481
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and NBER
francis.longstaff@anderson.ucla.edu

Hanno Lustig
UCLA Anderson School of Management
110 Westwood Plaza, Suite C413
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and NBER
hlustig@anderson.ucla.edu

1. INTRODUCTION

The Treasury bond and the Treasury inﬂation-protected securities (TIPS) markets
are two of the largest and most-actively-traded ﬁxed-income markets in the world.
Despite this, we ﬁnd that there are persistent arbitrage opportunities on a massive
scale across these two markets. Furthermore, these arbitrages are almost invariable
in one direction; Treasury bonds are consistently overpriced relative to TIPS. For
example, we show that the price of a Treasury bond can exceed that of an inﬂationswapped TIPS issue exactly matching the cash ﬂows of the Treasury bond by more
than $20 per $100 notional amount. To the best of our knowledge, the relative
mispricing of TIPS and Treasury bonds represents the largest arbitrage ever documented in the ﬁnancial economics literature. The TIPS–Treasury arbitrage poses a
major puzzle to classical asset pricing theory.
The U.S. Treasury has two distinct technologies at its disposal for ﬁnancing
primary government deﬁcits. It can issue either nominal debt or inﬂation-indexed
debt of various maturities. For most of its history, the Treasury has relied exclusively
on the ﬁrst technology. More recently, however, the Treasury has relied increasingly
on the second technology.1 These technologies are very diﬀerent. Nominal debt
allows for state contingency in real returns by creating inﬂation. In response to an
adverse ﬁscal shock, the government can exploit this state contingency to smooth
taxes either through surprise inﬂation or the announcement of inﬂation at some
point in the future before the current nominal debt matures. In contrast, indexed
debt does not allow for this type of state contingency. Thus, by issuing indexed
debt, the government clearly gives up a valuable ﬁscal hedging option.
These considerations imply that the Treasury has strong disincentives to issue
TIPS. In particular, our results indicate that the Treasury could have saved up to
$56 billion by buying back TIPS, entering into inﬂation swaps, and issuing Treasury
bonds with the same maturity instead. Hence, from a public ﬁnance perspective,
nominal debt unambiguously dominates indexed debt. Whenever the government
issues indexed debt, it gives up a valuable option and leaves money on the table at
the same time. On average, the U.S. government has to levy $2.92 more in taxes, in
present discounted value, to repay $100 of debt issued if the debt is indexed rather
than nominal. This leaves us with the perplexing question: Why does the Treasury
issue TIPS?
Furthermore, our ﬁndings of persistent arbitrage in these markets also imply
that the Treasury–TIPS price diﬀerentials cannot be used to back out the mar1

On January 29, 1997, the Treasury auctioned $7 billion of 10-year TIPS. Prior to
that auction, all U.S. debt was nominal debt.
1

ket’s inﬂation expectations, a common practice. In fact, the implied measure is
biased downwards and, moreover, the bias worsens in times of increased volatility
in ﬁnancial markets.
In this paper, we proceed by ﬁrst describing the TIPS–Treasury arbitrage strategy. The intuition behind this simple strategy is that the inﬂation-linked cash ﬂows
from a TIPS issue can be converted into ﬁxed cash ﬂows using inﬂation swaps.
The resulting cash ﬂows can be structured to match exactly the cash ﬂows from a
Treasury bond with the same maturity date as the TIPS issue. Thus, price diﬀerences between the inﬂation-swapped TIPS issue and the Treasury bond represent
straightforward arbitrage opportunities. The data set includes daily prices for 29
matched-maturity pairs of TIPS issues and Treasury bonds for the 64-month period
from July 2004 to November 2009.
We show that there is persistent arbitrage across all 29 pairs of TIPS and
Treasury bonds. For individual pairs, the mispricing often exceeds $10 to $20.2
Translated into yields, the average size of the arbitrage is 54.5 basis points, but can
exceed 200 basis points for some pairs. The average size of this mispricing is orders
of magnitude larger than the transaction costs of executing the arbitrage strategy.
We also consider an extensive list of alternative factors that might mitigate the
ability of an arbitrageur to proﬁt from this strategy. In particular, we consider the
potential impact of transaction costs, diﬀerential taxation, credit risk, institutional
and foreign ownership of Treasury bonds and TIPS, collateralization, the ability to
short Treasury bonds, market liquidity, and other factors. None of these factors are
able to provide a fully satisfactory explanation for the existence of these arbitrage
opportunities.
While the TIPS–Treasury arbitrage is important in its own right, there are
deeper reasons why the study of signiﬁcant arbitrages in the market may provide
key asset-pricing insights. In particular, the value of an arbitrage strategy is unambiguously zero in any classical asset-pricing model. This means that we can study
arbitrages without having to invoke a speciﬁc asset-pricing model ﬁrst. Thus, by
studying arbitrages, we can completely ﬁlter out the “noise” of asset-pricing models
and directly identify forces driving prices in security markets which may lie outside
of classical asset-pricing theory.
To explore the forces that might be driving the arbitrage, we regress changes
in TIPS–Treasury mispricing on variables proxying for changes in systemic risk,
credit risk, investor sentiment, the supply of Treasury debt, market liquidity, and
the availability of Treasury collateral in the ﬁnancing markets. The results clearly
2

For simplicity, all bond prices and dollar mispricing values will be expressed in
terms of dollars per $100 notional or par amount throughout the remainder of the
paper.
2

indicate that the size of the arbitrage is strongly inﬂuenced by supply factors. In
particular, the size of the arbitrage narrows signiﬁcantly when the Treasury issues
either Treasury bonds or TIPS. Furthermore, the size of the arbitrage is strongly
positively related to the amount of repo failures in the primary dealer market. Since
repo failures are a result of the inability of investors to provide or deliver Treasury
bonds, they reﬂect disruptions in the supply of Treasury bonds in the market. There
is also some anecdotal evidence that the Federal Reserve’s program to purchase up
to $300 billion of longer-maturity Treasury bonds via a series of competitive auctions
beginning in April 2009 may have helped to reduce the size of the arbitrage.
Recent theory such as Duﬃe (2010), Ashcraft, Gârleanu, and Pedersen (2010),
Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009), and others stresses the role that frictions such
as slow-moving capital or funding constraints may play in propagating mispricing
in ﬁnancial markets. An important implication of this literature is that these types
of frictions may induce correlation across various types of arbitrages. We explore
this by regressing changes in TIPS–Treasury mispricing on changes in the corporate
bond/CDS arbitrage described by Duﬃe and on the CDX index/component arbitrage. Although these arbitrages occur in very diﬀerent markets, we ﬁnd that there
is strong commonality across these arbitrages. Furthermore, we examine whether
changes in mispricing are related to the returns on hedge funds that focus on diﬀerent types of arbitrage strategies. Again, we ﬁnd evidence of signiﬁcant correlation.
These results provide strong support for the implications of these friction-based
theories.
This paper contributes to the literature on the pricing of inﬂation-linked bonds.
Other important papers on real bonds include Roll (1996, 2004), Barr and Campbell (1997), Evans (2003), Seppälä (2004), Bardong and Lehnert (2004), Buraschi
and Jiltsov (2005), Campbell, Shiller, and Viceira (2009), Adrian and Wu (2009),
Gürkaynak, Sack, and Wright (2010), and many others. This paper diﬀers from
the previous literature by being the ﬁrst to formally study the no-arbitrage relation
between TIPS and Treasury bonds and explore the determinants of the mispricing.
Our paper also contributes to the emerging literature on government ﬁnance
by questioning the wisdom of issuing TIPS. In earlier work on government ﬁnance,
Campbell (1995) argues that a cost-minimizing government should respond to a
steeply sloped nominal yield curve by shortening the maturity structure since high
yield spreads tend to predict high expected bond returns in the future. In related
work, Barro (1997) asserts that governments can reduce their risk exposure and
better smooth taxes by shortening the maturity structure when the inﬂation process becomes more volatile and persistent. However, Lustig, Sleet and Yeltekin
(2008) argue for the almost exclusive use of long-term nominal debt, because such
debt mitigates the distortions associated with hedging ﬁscal shocks by allowing the
government to allocate them eﬃciently across multiple states and periods.
3

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a
brief introduction to the TIPS and inﬂation swap markets and describes the TIPS–
Treasury arbitrage strategy. Section 3 describes the data. Section 4 examines the
size of the TIPS–Treasury mispricing. Section 5 considers additional factors that
might drive a wedge between the pricing of TIPS and Treasury bonds. Section
6 explores the determinants of TIPS–Treasury mispricing. Section 7 examines the
relation between TIPS–Treasury mispricing and other types of arbitrages and ﬁxedincome arbitrage hedge fund returns. Section 8 discusses the TIPS issuance puzzle.
Section 9 summarizes the results and presents concluding remarks.
2. TIPS–TREASURY ARBITRAGE
In this section, we provide brief introductions to the TIPS and inﬂation swap markets. We then describe the arbitrage strategy that links the theoretical prices of
Treasury bonds, TIPS, and inﬂation swaps.
2.1 The TIPS Market
TIPS are direct obligations of the U.S. Treasury and are similar in most respects to
Treasury bonds.3 The key diﬀerence is that the principal amount of a TIPS issue is
adjusted over time to reﬂect changes in the CPI. Since the ﬁxed coupon rate for the
TIPS issue is applied to its principal amount, the actual semiannual coupon received
varies over time as the principal amount changes in response to the realized inﬂation
or deﬂation rate. Similarly, the ﬁnal principal amount paid to the bondholder equals
the maximum of the original principal amount or the inﬂation-adjusted principal
amount. Thus, TIPS investors’ principal is protected against deﬂation (although
the same is not true for coupon payments).
The principal amount of a TIPS issue is adjusted daily based on the Consumer
Price Index for All Urban Consumers, known as CPI-U. Let It denote the inﬂation
adjustment for a TIPS issue as of date t. The inﬂation adjustment is computed
as the ratio of the reference CPI at the valuation date t divided by the reference
CPI at the issuance date which we designate as time zero. The reference CPI for a
particular date during a month is linearly interpolated from the CPI reference index
for the beginning of that month and the CPI reference index for the beginning of the
subsequent month. The CPI reference index for the ﬁrst day of any calendar month
is the CPI-U index for third preceding calendar month. Thus, the reference CPI for
April 1 would be the CPI-U index for the month of January, which is reported by
3

For expositional convenience, we will generally refer to all nominal debt obligations
of the Treasury (including Treasury bills and Treasury notes) simply as Treasury
bonds throughout the paper.
4

the Bureau of Labor Statistics during February. The details of how the principal
amount of a TIPS issue is adjusted for inﬂation are described on the U.S. Treasury’s
website.4
The current total principal amount of all TIPS outstanding is in excess of $550
billion. The Treasury ﬁrst began auctioning TIPS in January 1997. Since then, 34
separate TIPS issues have been auctioned. Currently, the Treasury issues 5-year,
10-year, and 30-year TIPS on a regular cycle.
2.2 The Inﬂation Swap Market
Beginning with the ﬁrst TIPS auction in 1997, market participants began making
markets in inﬂation swaps as a way of hedging inﬂation risk. As the TIPS market
has grown, the inﬂation swaps market has become very liquid and actively traded,
particularly in the U.S. and the U.K.5 The notional size of the inﬂation swap market
is estimated by Kerkhof (2005) to be about one to two percent of the size of the
interest swap market. Based on estimates provided by the Bank for International
Settlements, this would imply a size of the inﬂation swap market on the order of $4
trillion. Conversations with inﬂation swap traders conﬁrm that these instruments
are fairly liquid with transaction costs on the order of ﬁve basis points.
In this paper, we focus on the most-basic and widely-used type of inﬂation
swap which is designated a zero-coupon swap. This swap is executed between two
counterparties at time zero and has only one cash ﬂow which occurs at the maturity
date of the swap. For example, imagine that at time zero, the ﬁve-year zero-coupon
inﬂation swap rate is 200 basis points. As is standard with swaps, there are no
cash ﬂows at time zero when the swap is executed. At the maturity date of the
swap in ﬁve years, the counterparties to the inﬂation swap exchange a cash ﬂow of
(1 + .0200)5 − It , where It is again the inﬂation adjustment factor. Thus, if the
realized inﬂation rate was 1.50 percent per year over the ﬁve year horizon of the
swap, It = 1.0155 = 1.077284. In this case, the net cash ﬂow from the swap would
be (1 + .0200)5 − 1.077284 = $0.026797 per dollar notional of the swap. The timing
and index lag construction of the index It used in an inﬂation swap are chosen to
match precisely the deﬁnitions applied to TIPS issues.
2.3 The Arbitrage Strategy
The idea behind the TIPS–Treasury arbitrage strategy is very simple. Imagine that
an investor buys a TIPS issue at par which has a coupon rate of s per semiannual
4

See http://www.treasurydirect.gov/instit/statreg/auctreg/auctreg gsr31cfr356.
pdf.
5

Kerkhof (2005) provides an excellent introduction to the inﬂation swap market.
Also see Jarrow and Yildirim (2003) and Hinnerich (2008).
5

period. Because of the inﬂation adjustment, the coupon paid at time t will be
sIt . Now imagine that the investor executes a zero-coupon inﬂation swap with
a maturity date and notional amount matching that of coupon payment for the
TIPS issue. At date t, the inﬂation swap pays a cash ﬂow of s(1 + f)t − sIt ,
where f is the ﬁxed inﬂation swap rate. The sum of the two cash ﬂows is now just
sIt + s(1 + f)t − sIt = s(1 + f)t which is a constant. Similarly, by executing zerocoupon inﬂation swaps with maturities and notional amounts matching the indexed
cash ﬂows from the TIPS issue, the investor can convert all of these indexed cash
ﬂows into ﬁxed cash ﬂows.
To make the mechanics of this arbitrage strategy more clear, Table 1 shows the
various components of the strategy and their associated cash ﬂows. The ﬁrst part of
the table shows the cash ﬂows associated with a Treasury bond purchased at price
P and with a coupon rate of c. The Treasury bond pays a semiannual coupon of c
per period, and then makes a principal payment of 100 at maturity date T .
The second part of the Table shows how the cash ﬂows from the Treasury bond
can be replicated exactly from a TIPS position. First, the arbitrageur purchases
a TIPS issue with a coupon rate of s and the same maturity date as the Treasury
bond for a price of V . The TIPS bond pays coupons of sIt each period, and then
makes a principal payment of 100IT at maturity. The arbitrageur then enters into
an inﬂation swap for each coupon payment date with a notional amount of s (or
s + 100 for the ﬁnal principal payment date). This converts all of the indexed
cash ﬂows from the TIPS into ﬁxed cash ﬂows. To match exactly the cash ﬂows
from the Treasury bond, however, the arbitrageur also needs to go long or short a
small amount of Treasury STRIPS for each coupon payment date. As shown at the
bottom of the second part of the Table, the net result is a portfolio that exactly
replicates the cash ﬂows from the Treasury bond in the ﬁrst part of the table.
To provide a speciﬁc example, Table 2 shows the actual cash ﬂows that would
result from applying the arbitrage strategy on December 30, 2008 to replicate the
7.625 percent coupon Treasury bond maturing on February 15, 2025. As shown,
the price of the Treasury bond is $169.479. To replicate the Treasury bond’s cash
ﬂows, the arbitrageur buys a 2.375 percent coupon TIPS issue with the same maturity date for a price of $101.225. Since there are 33 semiannual coupon payment
dates, 33 inﬂation swaps are executed with the indicated notional amounts. Finally,
positions in Treasury STRIPS of varying small notional amounts are also taken by
the arbitrageur. The net cash ﬂows from the replicating strategy exactly match
those from the Treasury bond, but at a cost of only $146.379. Thus, the cash ﬂows
from the Treasury bond can be replicated at a cost that is $23.10 less than that of
the Treasury bond. The transaction costs associated with the creation of the replicating strategy would likely only be on the order of $0.40. Even with very liberal
assumptions about the size of bid-ask spreads for the various components of the
6

strategy. total transaction costs for implementing the arbitrage would not exceed
$1.00 to $1.50. Thus, transaction costs cannot begin to account for arbitrages of
this magnitude.
3. THE DATA
The data for the study consist of daily closing prices for U.S. Treasury bonds, TIPS,
STRIPS, and inﬂation swaps for the period from July 23, 2004 to November 19,
2009. All data are obtained from the Bloomberg system. The TIPS and Treasury
pairs in the dataset have maturities ranging from 2007 to 2032. Daily closing prices
for TIPS and Treasury bonds are adjusted for accrued interest following standard
market conventions.
Inﬂation swaps are quoted in terms of the constant rate on the contract’s ﬁxed
leg. The traded maturities are 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12, 15, 20, 25, and
30 years. To obtain swap rates for intermediate maturities, we use cubic spline
interpolation. For maturities that include fractional years (e.g. 2.3 years), seasonal
patterns in inﬂation must be taken into account. To do this, we ﬁrst estimate
seasonal weightings for the CPI-U for each month of the year by regressing the
CPI-U index values for January 1980 to October 2009 period on monthly indicator
variables. The estimated weights are normalized to ensure than there is no seasonal
eﬀect for full-year swaps and then used to adjust the interpolated inﬂation swap
curve (seasonal adjustments are not used for maturities less than one year). The
details about the algorithm used to compute synthetic Treasury bond prices are
provided in the Appendix.
For our analysis, we match TIPS and Treasury bonds based on their respective
maturities. We deﬁne maturity mismatch as the number of days between the maturity of a TIPS issue and that of a Treasury bond with the closest maturity to that
of the TIPS issue. We only include pairs of TIPS and Treasury bonds in the sample
if the maturity mismatch is less than or equal to 31 days. This leads to a total of 29
TIPS–Treasury bond pairs.6 In particular, there are 7 exact matches, 9 mismatches
of 15 days, and 13 mismatches of 31 days. The 31-day mismatches occur only for
maturities of February 2015 or later. Thus, these mismatches represent a very small
percentage mismatch in the maturities of the TIPS and Treasury bonds. To adjust
for the maturity mismatches, we calculate the yield to maturity on the synthetic
ﬁxed rate bond formed from the TIPS issue and the inﬂation swaps, and then apply
this yield to calculate the price of a synthetic bond that would exactly match the
6

Speciﬁcally, the Treasury has issued 34 TIPS bonds to date. One of these issues
had matured by the beginning of the sample period. Four issues had maturity
mismatches in excess of 31 days.
7

maturity of the Treasury bond in the pair.
4. HOW LARGE IS THE ARBITRAGE?
Table 3 provides summary statistics for the arbitrages for each of the 29 pairs of
TIPS and Treasury bonds in the sample. The ﬁrst two columns show the maturity
date and coupon rate for the TIPS issue in each pair. The next two columns show
the maturity date and coupon rate for the Treasury bond in each pair. The column
labeled Days denotes the maturity mismatch between the two bonds. The central
panel of the table reports summary statistics for the arbitrages. The rightmost
panel of the table reports summary statistics for the arbitrages measured as the
basis point diﬀerence between the yield of the synthetic Treasury bond and the
actual Treasury bond for each pair.
The arbitrages reported in Table 3 are stunning in magnitude and likely the
largest ever documented in any ﬁxed income market.7 For example, many of the
arbitrages for the TIPS–Treasury pairs with maturities of 2015 or later reach values
in excess of $10. In fact, the arbitrage for the TIPS–Treasury pair maturing in 2025
reaches a level in excess of $23. What makes these ﬁndings even more dramatic is
that the TIPS and Treasury markets are two of the largest and most-liquid ﬁnancial
markets in the world. In almost every case, the value of the Treasury bond is larger
than its synthetic equivalent constructed from the matching TIPS issue and the
inﬂation swap. Thus, Treasury bonds appear to be almost uniformly “rich” relative
to the portfolios of Treasury securities that replicate their cash ﬂows.
The average sizes of the arbitrages shown in Table 3 are equally astonishing.
For example, the average size of the arbitrage between the TIPS and Treasury bonds
maturing in January 2029 and February 2029, respectively, is $6.84. Similarly, the
average basis-point size of the arbitrage between the TIPS and Treasury bonds
maturing in January 2014 and December 2013, respectively, is 103.66 basis points.
To illustrate the average size of the TIPS–Treasury mispricing, we compute the
TIPS-notional-weighted mispricing for each date during the sample period, where
the average is taken over all TIPS–Treasury pairs in the sample on that date. Figure
1 plots the weighted-average dollar mispricing for the TIPS–Treasury pairs. Figure
2 plots the corresponding weighted-average basis-point arbitrages for these pairs. As
7

Examples of ﬁxed-income arbitrages reported in the literature include Cornell and
Shapiro (1990), Amihud and Mendelson (1991), Boudoukh and Whitelaw (1991),
Longstaﬀ (1992, 2004), Daves and Ehrhard (1993), Kamara (1994), Jordan, Jorgensen, and Kuipers (2000), Grinblatt and Longstaﬀ (2000), Longstaﬀ, Santa Clara,
and Schwartz (2001), Yu (2006), Duarte, Longstaﬀ, and Yu (2007) and many others.
8

can be seen, the mispricing is evident throughout the entire sample period, not just
during the crisis period of 2008–2009. In particular, while the amount of mispricing
peaked at $9.60 or 175 basis points around the time of the Lehman bankruptcy in
the Fall of 2008, there were clearly earlier periods when the average mispricing was
in excess of $3 or about 60 basis points. In addition, Figures 1 and 2 show that
there is signiﬁcant time series variation in TIPS–Treasury mispricing throughout
the sample period. The overall average size of the arbitrages is $2.92. The overall
average basis-point size of the arbitrages is 54.5 basis points.
As discussed earlier, the total notional amount of TIPS outstanding has increased signiﬁcantly over time. In particular, the total amount of TIPS outstanding
at the beginning of the sample period in July 2004 was $222.60 billion, but increased
to $567.51 billion by the end of the sample period in November 2009. At the end
of the sample period, TIPS accounted for 7.91 percent of the total notional value
of marketable U.S. Treasury debt.
From the Treasury’s perspective, TIPS–Treasury mispricing represents a potential opportunity for reducing Treasury debt. For example, if Treasury bonds
have a higher market valuation than the equivalent inﬂation-swapped TIPS issues,
then the Treasury could potentially generate signiﬁcant savings by buying back all
the outstanding TIPS issues, issuing Treasury bonds with the same maturity, and
hedging out the inﬂation risk in the inﬂation swap market. The evidence in Han,
Longstaﬀ, and Merrill (2007) suggests that the Treasury is able to buy back large
quantities of its debt with only minor market impact costs. To evaluate the potential savings from this type of a debt exchange, we multiply the TIPS–Treasury
mispricing by the notional amount of TIPS outstanding and total this value over all
pairs of bonds available during the sample period (include the four with maturity
mismatches in excess of 31 days).
The total savings from the debt exchange are graphed in Figure 3. As shown,
the total savings increases secularly over the sample because of the increase in the
issuance of TIPS. Moreover, it spikes towards the end of 2008 in the wake of the
global ﬁnancial crisis and reaches a peak of $56.4 billion on December 30, 2008. By
the end of the sample period, the total savings is $11.2 billion.
Another perspective on this issue is given by computing the cost to the Treasury of issuing TIPS rather than Treasury bonds. This is perhaps a more realistic
measure of the costs incurred, because the Treasury could clearly have simply issued
Treasury bonds rather than TIPS. Figure 4 plots the total cost to the Treasury of
the 27 TIPS issuances during the sample period. The total costs of new issuances
during the sample period is $9.6 billion.8
8

This number does not include the 0.875 percent TIPS issue with maturity April 15,
2010 issued on October 29, 2004 because there is not a good match with a Treasury
9

On January 30, 2009, the Treasury issued $14.01 billion of 20-year TIPS at
a cost of $12.00 per $100 notional. This issuance alone cost the Treasury $1.68
billion. The Treasury has so far successfully auctioned $38.07 billion TIPS in 2010,
and is expected to auction $80 billion total during 2010, up from $58 billion in 2009.
Clearly, issuing these TIPS during periods characterized by increased volatility in
the ﬁnancial markets and ﬂights to nominal Treasury bonds implies that large new
TIPS issuance can be very costly from the taxpayers’ vantage point.
5. TIPS AND TREASURY BONDS
In the previous sections, we have shown that a simple no-arbitrage argument imposes a strong restriction on the relative prices of Treasury bonds and TIPS and
that this no-arbitrage restriction is frequently violated in the market. Before exploring the determinants of the mispricing, however, is it useful to ﬁrst consider
whether there are any additional institutional or economic factors that might drive
a wedge between the market prices of Treasury bonds and TIPS. In this section,
we consider a list of possibilities and brieﬂy evaluate their potential impact on the
analysis. A number of these factors will be addressed in the subsequent section
exploring the determinants of TIPS–Treasury mispricing.
5.1 Tax Diﬀerences
The Federal and State income taxation of Treasury bonds is identical to that of
TIPS in all but one small aspect. Speciﬁcally, since the notional amount of TIPS
accretes over time with realized inﬂation, taxable investors must treat this “phantom income” as if they were interest income for Federal tax purposes. In contrast,
taxable investors holding Treasury bonds only include coupons as interest income
(abstracting from original issue discount (OID) and premium amortization issues).
Interest income from both Treasury bonds and TIPS (including any accreted notional amounts) is exempt from State income taxation.
Although we do not have speciﬁc information about the ownership of TIPS,
discussions with market participants suggest that a large portion of outstanding
TIPS issues are held either directly or indirectly by tax-sheltered entities such as
pension plans and retirement funds. Thus, the phantom income provision is likely
to be somewhat irrelevant for many of these investors. This view is consistent
with a survey by the Bond Market Association in which 79 percent of respondents
indicated that the current tax status of TIPS is not a deterrent to buying TIPS,
some indicating that this was because of the tax-free status of their funds.9 Finally,
bond for the ﬁrst part of the sample period.
9

See http://archives1.sifma.org/research/tips survey.pdf.
10

it is important to observe that if the taxation of phantom income were to aﬀect the
valuation of TIPS, it should do so uniformly across all issues since the accretion
rate is the same for all TIPS.
5.2 Credit Risk
In recent years, it has become clear that the market attaches some positive probability to the event that the U.S. Treasury defaults on its debt. For example, Eurodenominated CDS contracts on the U.S. Treasury traded at spreads as high as 100
basis points during early 2009. There is an extensive literature on sovereign default
risk including Duﬃe, Pederson, and Singleton (2003), Pan and Singleton (2008),
and Longstaﬀ, Pan, Pedersen, and Singleton (2010), and many others. A key point
often made in this literature is that default risk for foreign-currency-denominated
sovereign debt may diﬀer from that for local-currency-denominated debt.
This foreign vs. local distinction is relevant for Treasury bonds and TIPS since
one can imagine scenarios in which the U.S. might be able to honor its nominal
debt by simply “printing more money,” but then not be able to pay oﬀ its inﬂationlinked debt. In essence, inﬂation-linked TIPS can be viewed as equivalent to foreigncurrency-denominated debt from a sovereign default-risk perspective. If the market
views the default risk of Treasury bonds as being lower than that of TIPS, then
TIPS might trade at prices lower than those implied by the no-arbitrage model.
5.3 Bid-Ask Spreads
Another possible diﬀerence between Treasury bonds and TIPS might be in the costs
of trading. In reality, however, the costs of trading Treasury bonds and TIPS are
both very small. Conversations with Treasury bond and TIPS traders indicate that
on average, a large ﬁnancial institution would typically face a bid-ask spread for
Treasury bonds on the order of a quarter of a basis point in yield. In terms of price,
this would translate into a two or three cent bid-ask spread for a ten-year Treasury
note. The same ﬁnancial institution would generally face a bid-ask spread for a
TIPS issue of about one basis point in yield during much of the study period. Bidask spreads for TIPS, however, roughly doubled with the onset of the ﬁnancial crisis
in 2008 and 2009 and are now about two basis points in yield. This would translate
into roughly a 15 cent bid-ask spread for a 10-year TIPS issue. Note also that the
bid-ask spreads for Treasury STRIPS would be on the same order of magnitude as
that of TIPS. Finally, the bid-ask spread on inﬂation swaps is on the order of ﬁve
basis points. Taken together, these values imply that TIPS–Treasury mispricing
greater than say, eight basis points, cannot be explained in terms of transaction
costs; the transaction costs are very small relative to the typical size of the pricing
diﬀerences between Treasury bonds and TIPS.
5.4 The Deﬂation Floor
11

As discussed earlier, the principal amount of a TIPS issue is protected against
deﬂation since the principal amount received by a TIPS holder at maturity cannot
be less than par. Thus, there is an embedded option or deﬂation ﬂoor incorporated
into the TIPS issues. Because of this, the value of a TIPS issue may be somewhat
higher than it would be if there was no protection against deﬂation.
The analysis in the previous sections abstracts from the value of the deﬂation
option. It is clear, however, that if we were to adjust observed TIPS prices by
subtracting out the value of the deﬂation option, then the estimated TIPS–Treasury
mispricing would be even larger than reported. Thus, the deﬂation ﬂoor in TIPS
prices goes in the wrong direction to explain TIPS–Treasury mispricing.
5.5 Repo Financing
A diﬀerence in an investor’s ability to obtain repo ﬁnancing for TIPS relative to
that of Treasury bonds might induce pricing diﬀerences between the two types of
Treasury debt. Discussions with market participants, however, indicate that both
types of debt are treated similarly by repo dealers. In particular, both Treasury
bonds and TIPS can be ﬁnanced at government repo rates with similar levels of
haircuts. Currently, a typical haircut applied to Treasury bonds or TIPS issues by
large institutional participants in the repo market would be on the order of two
to three percent. There is no material diﬀerence between the two types of debt in
terms of an investor’s ability to obtain repo ﬁnancing.
5.6 Collateral Value
Since the principal and interest from both Treasury bonds and TIPS is fully guaranteed by the U.S. Treasury, both types of debt are acceptable collateral for almost
all forms of public, private, and banking obligations. To provide some examples,
TIPS are equally acceptable as collateral for the Treasury Tax and Loan Program
and the Treasury Term Investment Option (see 31 CFR Parts 202 and 203), as
acceptable collateral for bonds secured by government obligations in lieu of bonds
with sureties (see 31 CFR Part 225), and as acceptable collateral for uninsured
deposits (see 12 CFR 550.320). Similarly, Treasury bonds and TIPS are equally
acceptable as collateral for virtually all State and local government purposes.
5.7 Eligibility for the Treasury STRIPS Program
Both Treasury bonds and TIPS are eligible for stripping under the Treasury’s
STRIPS program. The key diﬀerence is that stripped coupon from diﬀerent TIPS
issues is not fungible since each issue has its own CPI reference level. The U.S
Treasury’s Statement of the Public Debt reports that on December 31, 2009, 21.22
percent of the notional amount of all Treasury bonds, 4.99 percent of the notional
amount of all Treasury notes, and 0.03 percent of the notional amount of all TIPS
were held in stripped form.
12

5.8 Futures Contracts
Futures contracts on 2-year, 3-year, 5-year, 10-year, and 30-year Treasury notes
and bonds are traded at the Chicago Board of Trade. Each of these contracts
speciﬁes a list of Treasury notes and bonds that are deliverable in settlement of
futures positions. In contrast, futures contracts on TIPS are not currently traded
on any futures exchange. This distinction likely has little impact on the relative
pricing of most Treasury bonds and TIPS. This is because forward purchases or
sales of both Treasury bonds and TIPS can be readily executed by institutional
participants in the over-the-counter market. The key exception might be the case
of a cheapest-to-deliver bond at or near the expiration of a futures contract. Market
participants, however, indicate that any cheapest-to-deliver eﬀect on Treasury bond
prices would typically be very small in magnitude since the Treasury bond/futures
basis is actively traded and arbitraged by many ﬁnancial institutions.
5.9 Foreign Ownership
We attempted to obtain data on whether Treasury bonds and TIPS diﬀer in terms
of the foreign ownership of these securities. Unfortunately, only aggregate foreign
ownership data for Treasury bonds and TIPS are available. As of November 2009,
the largest foreign holders of U.S. Treasury bonds and TIPS are Mainland China
and Japan, with holdings of $789.6 billion and $757.3 billion, respectively. We note,
however, that an August 2008 report by the Oﬃce of Debt Management of the U.S.
Treasury Department provides a graph indicating that during the 2000-2008 period,
roughly 60 percent of TIPS were auctioned to dealers and brokers, 30 percent to
investment ﬁrms, and 10 percent to foreign entities. Similarly, Gongloﬀ (2010)
reports that foreign demand at TIPS auctions averages about 39 percent.
5.10 Institutional Ownership
To explore whether there are diﬀerences in the pattern of institutional ownership
between Treasury bonds and TIPS, we note that some data on institutional ownership is available via SEC Form 13F ﬁlings. In particular, Section 13(f) of the
Securities Exchange Act of 1934 requires that institutional investment managers
using the U.S mail (or any other means or instrumentality of interstate commerce)
in the course of their business and exercising investment discretion over $100 million
or more in Section 13(f) securities must ﬁle Form 13F. In making these ﬁlings, many
of these institutional investors provide information about their holdings of Treasury
and TIPS bonds.
The information about institutional holdings of Treasury bonds and TIPS included in these Form 13F ﬁlings is compiled by Bloomberg and is summarized in
their system for each bond or TIPS issue. We collected data on the TIPS issues
in the sample from the Bloomberg system and then collected data for a sample of
13

Treasury bonds with maturities closely matching those of the TIPS issues. We then
compared the percentages of the notional amount held by the institutions ﬁling
Form 13F. In doing this, however, it is important to provide the caveat that the
coverage of Treasury bonds and TIPS issues provided by these Form 13F ﬁlings and
tabulated by the Bloomberg system may not necessarily be comprehensive.
On average, 31.58 percent of the notional amount of the TIPS bonds in the
sample are reported on Form 13F. The corresponding value for a set of maturitymatched Treasury bonds is 25.02 percent. Thus, the total percentage amounts
reported are similar. A more detailed analysis, however, indicates that there are
some intriguing diﬀerences in the institutional ownership patterns. In particular,
investment ﬁrms (mutual funds, investment advisors, etc.) hold 20.69 percent of
the TIPS, but only 4.71 percent of the matching Treasury bonds. In contrast,
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York holds 8.41 percent of the TIPS, but 17.35
percent of the matching Treasury bonds. Thus, while the total reported institutional
ownership of TIPS and Treasury bonds is similar, the data indicate that investment
funds hold a much larger fraction of the TIPS than the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York, while the reverse is true for Treasury bonds. Insurance companies hold
2.48 percent of the TIPS and 2.96 percent of Treasury bonds.
5.11 Bond Dealers and Market Microstructure
We also investigated whether there are diﬀerences between Treasury bonds and
TIPS in the number and types of institutions functioning as bond dealers. The
Federal Reserve Bank of New York maintains a list of primary government securities dealers. This list currently includes BNP Paribas, Banc of America, Barclay’s
Capital, Cantor Fitzgerald, Citigroup, Credit Suisse, Daiwa, Deutsche Bank, Goldman Sachs, HSBC, Jeﬀeries, J.P. Morgan, Mizuho, Morgan Stanley, Nomura, RBC,
RBS, and UBS.
The Federal Reserve Bank of New York also lists the standards expected of
primary dealers. For example, primary dealers are expected to meet a $150 million
minimum net capital requirement. Furthermore, primary dealers are expected to
participate consistently as a counterparty to the New York Fed in its execution
of open market operations. Primary dealers are also required to participate in
all auctions of U.S. Government debt and to make reasonable markets in these
securities. These rules make clear that there is no diﬀerence between Treasury bonds
and TIPS in how these primary dealers are expected to conduct their operations.
This is also conﬁrmed by discussions with Treasury bond and TIPS traders who
indicate that there is little diﬀerence in how bond dealers make markets in the
two types of securities. The OTC market microstructure is very similar across the
Treasury bond and TIPS markets.
5.12 Supply Considerations
14

One clear distinction between Treasury bonds and TIPS issues is in terms of the
supply of these securities to the ﬁnancial markets. To provide some background on
the relative size of the TIPS market to the total Treasury bond market, we refer to
Table FD-2 of the March 2010 Federal Reserve Bulletin. The ratio of TIPS notional
debt outstanding to the total amount of Treasury debt held by the public was 6.67
percent at the end of 2005, 8.17 percent at the end of 2006, 9.05 percent at the end of
2007, 9.02 percent at the end of 2008, and 7.30 percent at the end of 2009. Thus, the
notional amount of TIPS was less that ten percent of the total amount of Treasury
debt held by the public during recent years. The ratio increased signiﬁcantly during
the 2005–2007 period, but has declined during the recent ﬁnancial crisis as total
Treasury debt issuance has accelerated.
5.13 TIPS Liquidity
As one measure of the relative liquidity of TIPS and Treasury bonds, we can examine
the average trading volume of the two types of securities by primary dealers. This
information is tabulated and reported online by the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York. Focusing on 2009, the total average daily trading volume in Treasury bonds
with maturities of three years or more by primary dealers was about $207 billion. In
contrast, the same measure for TIPS bonds was roughly $5 billion. Recall, however,
that TIPS bonds represent less that ten percent of the total amount of Treasury
debt held by the public. Thus, while TIPS may not be as intensively traded as
Treasury bonds, these results suggest that the average daily trading volume for
TIPS is still very substantial.
We also interviewed Treasury bond and TIPS traders who conﬁrmed this assessment of the relative liquidity of the two markets. In particular, one trader told
us that there are roughly 15 dealers who were competitive in providing quotes and
would be able to quickly execute purchases and sales of Treasury bonds. In contrast,
the same trader indicated that there were only about 5 dealers who would be able
to provide the same level of liquidity for TIPS. Despite this, however, the trader
felt that TIPS were liquid and that trades could be executed rapidly.
5.14 Costs of Shorting Treasury Bonds
To short a Treasury bond, an investor must ﬁrst borrow the bond through a reverse
repo arrangement. In return, the investor allows the owner of the bond to borrow
funds at some market determined rate. Typically, this rate is slightly below the
market rate and the diﬀerence represents the borrowing cost of the bond. Discussions with traders indicates that it was always possible to short Treasury bonds
throughout the sample period.
In extreme situations, however, this spread could widen. For example, during
the depths of the ﬁnancial crisis in the Fall of 2008, an arbitrageur wishing to short
15

a bond might have needed to allow the owner of the bond to borrow at a cost of
zero. Since short term repo rates were only on the order of 25 basis points during
this period, however, the eﬀective cost to the arbitrageur of allowing the owner of
the bond to borrow at zero was relatively minor.
In mid-2009, the Security Industry and Financial Markets Association (SIFMA)
mandated that repo failures result in the security lender being able to borrow at
a annual rate of −300 basis points. This change increased the maximum potential
cost to an arbitrageur of short selling Treasury issues in the extreme situation in
which the arbitrageur was not able to ﬁnd a repo dealer willing to lend him the
security. Given the timing of this provision, however, it is unlikely to have had
much impact on the results reported in this paper.
5.15 Mispricing in the Inﬂation Swaps Market
Could the large TIPS–Treasury mispricing documented in the previous section be
explained by massive mispricing in the inﬂation swaps market? To explore this,
we solve for the size of the parallel shift in the inﬂation swap curve that would
be required to eliminate the mispricing. The results argue strongly against the
mispricing being due entirely to inﬂation swap mispricing. In particular, inﬂation
swap rates (already viewed by many as anomalously low) would actually need to be
signiﬁcantly lower to explain the TIPS–Treasury mispricing. For example, Figure 5
plots the term structure of inﬂation swap prices that would be needed to reconcile
the December 30, 2008 mispricing between the Treasury bond and TIPS issue shown
in Table 2. As illustrated, the market would need to be anticipating signiﬁcant
deﬂation for ten years to reconcile the mispricing. Furthermore, the maximum
inﬂation swap rate over the entire horizon of the strategy would only be 0.28 percent.
Thus, it is very implausible that TIPS–Treasury mispricing could be explained by
mispricing in inﬂation swaps of this magnitude and in this direction. Furthermore,
inﬂation swap rates would need to be 51.5 basis points lower on average to explain
TIPS–Treasury mispricing during the sample period. Note that this is roughly ten
times as large as the bid-ask spread for inﬂation swaps. Furthermore, 51.5 basis
points represents an average error of more than 21 percent of the average level of
the ﬁve-year inﬂation swap during the sample period. Again, inﬂation swap pricing
errors of this nature seem very implausible.
5.16 Counterparty Credit Risk
The ﬁnancial crisis has focused signiﬁcant attention on the role of counterparty
credit risk in swap contracts. Since the arbitrage strategy involves the use of inﬂation swaps, it is important to consider whether counterparty credit risk could
account for some portion of TIPS–Treasury mispricing.
In a recent paper, Arora, Gandhi, and Longstaﬀ (2010) study the eﬀect of
16

counterparty credit risk on the pricing of CDS contracts. They document that
diﬀerences in the credit risk of dealers selling credit protection have only a very
small eﬀect on pricing of CDS contracts. They argue that the market practice of
requiring full collateralization of swap liabilities results in counterparty credit risk
having only a tiny eﬀect on the pricing of swap contracts. Their evidence is also
consistent with theoretical models of the eﬀect of counterparty credit risk on swap
contracts such as Duﬃe and Huang (1996) and others. In light of these results,
it is unlikely that counterparty credit risk has much of an eﬀect on the pricing on
inﬂation swaps.
6. WHAT DRIVES THE MISPRICING?
The evidence of signiﬁcant and persistent mispricing between TIPS and Treasury
bonds presents a major puzzle to our understanding of how these markets function.
In this section, we explore whether variation in the mispricing is linked to a number
of economic and ﬁnancial variables suggested by the literature or motivated by
the discussion in the previous section. By doing this, we hope to shed light on the
underlying reasons for the mispricing via the identiﬁcation of factors that may drive
the mispricing.
6.1 The Variables
There are a number of possible factors that might inﬂuence the size of TIPS–
Treasury arbitrage over time. We discuss each of these in turn and describe the
speciﬁc variables to be used in the regression analysis.
6.1.1 Systemic risk
The recent ﬁnancial crisis has highlighted the role that systemic risk may play in the
ﬁnancial markets. If investors fear that a major economic shock could propagate
through all investment asset classes, then Treasury security prices might be aﬀected
in anticipation of a potential ﬂight to quality or a ﬂight to liquidity. Recent research
on the eﬀects of ﬂights on security markets include Longstaﬀ (2004), Vayanos (2004),
Vayanos and Weill (2008), Beber, Brandt, and Kavajecz (2008), and many others.
We use two diﬀerent measures to capture the degree of systemic risk in the
ﬁnancial markets. The ﬁrst is the VIX index of implied volatility from S&P 500
index options. This well-known index is widely viewed as a measure of the level of
“fear” in the ﬁnancial markets and has been extensively used in the literature as a
proxy for the level of systemic risk. The VIX data is obtained from the Bloomberg
system.

17

The second measure is the credit spread on super senior CDO tranches.10
Speciﬁcally, we use the credit spread for the 15–30 percent synthetic CDO tranche
on the CDX investment grade index. The CDX index consists of an equally-weighted
average of the CDS quotes for a basket of 125 corporate debt issuers. The spread
for the 15–30 percent tranche on this index represents the market spread that an
investor would receive in exchange for absorbing credit losses on the CDX index in
excess of 15 percent of the notional amount. Thus, assuming that creditors recover
about 50 percent of the notional amount of their debt if a ﬁrm in the CDX index
were to default, then an investor in the 15–30 percent tranche would only begin
to suﬀer losses if 30 percent or more of the ﬁrms in the CDX index were to default. As shown by Giesecke, Longstaﬀ, Schaefer, and Strebulaev (2010), however,
an economic event in which more than 30 percent of corporate bond issuers in the
U.S. were to default is very unlikely, and has only occurred once during the past
150 years in the U.S. (during the 1873–1875 railroad crisis). Thus, the spread on
the 15–30 percent CDX tranche should reﬂect the market’s assessment of the risk
that this type of a devastating systemic shock of the ﬁnancial markets may occur.
The tranche spread data are provided to us by a large ﬁxed income institutional
investor.
6.1.2 Credit Risk
As discussed earlier, another possibility might be that the market perceives the
credit risk of TIPS as being slightly higher than that of Treasury bonds. In this
situation, TIPS might appear to be underpriced relative to Treasury bonds. On the
other hand, even if the market viewed the credit risk of TIPS and Treasury bonds
as equivalent, changes in aggregate credit risk in other markets might inﬂuence the
relative pricing of TIPS and Treasury bonds. This is because TIPS and Treasury
bonds might not be viewed as equally attractive safe havens in the event of a creditinduced ﬂight to quality in the ﬁnancial markets.
To explore the eﬀects of credit risk on TIPS–Treasury mispricing, we use three
credit-related variables. First, we use the 10-year swap spread. Swap spreads are
one of the most important indicators of the credit risk of the banking system, and
have been widely used as measures of aggregate credit risk.11 We obtained data on
the ten-year swap spread from the Bloomberg system. The second measure is the
CDX index described above. This index reﬂects the weighted-average CDS spread
for a portfolio of 125 U.S. investment grade ﬁrms. We obtained the CDX index data
from the same source as the CDX super senior tranche data. The third measure is
the spread for a CDS contract on the U.S. Treasury. This contract is denominated
10

For a description of the pricing of CDOs, see Longstaﬀ and Rajan (2008).

11

For example, see Duﬃe and Singleton (1997), Liu, Longstaﬀ, and Mandell (2006),
and others.
18

in Euros and reﬂects the market’s assessment of the credit risk of the United States.
One diﬃculty with this measure, however, is that it is only available since January
2008. Thus, there is only a partial time series of this data available.
6.1.3 Conﬁdence
Previous work on mispricing in Treasury markets has emphasized the role that consumer conﬁdence and portfolio behavior may play in ﬁnancial markets.12 In this
analysis, we use two measures of the level of conﬁdence. The ﬁrst is the Consumer
Conﬁdence Index reported monthly by the Conference Board. This survey measure directly reﬂects the level of reported conﬁdence by a broad cross section of
U.S. consumers. The second is the monthly change in the total amount of assets
in money market mutual funds as reported by the Investment Company Institute.
Intuitively, this measure should reﬂect changes in investors’ perceptions of the investment environment. In particular, investors may tend to place more of their
wealth in safer money market funds when they are less comfortable with the risk of
other investment opportunities, and vice versa. Thus, changes in the assets of these
funds may signal changes in aggregate market sentiment. The data are available
from the respective websites of these organizations.
6.1.4 Supply
The supply of Treasury securities available in the ﬁnancial markets may also be a
key factor aﬀecting the ability of arbitrageurs to exploit pricing diﬀerences between
the TIPS and Treasury bond markets. In particular, it may be easier to execute
arbitrage strategies in a market when there is an increase in the supply of onthe-run or recently-auctioned bonds. This follows from Kamara (1988), Cammack
(1991), Boudoukh and Whitelaw (1991), Amihud and Mendelson (1991), Kamara
(1994), Krishnamurthy (2002), Han, Longstaﬀ, and Merrill (2007), and others who
document that on-the-run bonds diﬀer in terms of their trading and pricing characteristics. To explore the eﬀects of supply on TIPS–Treasury mispricing, we include
the total notional amount of all TIPS and all Treasury bonds auctioned each month
during the sample period. These data are obtained from the Treasury website.
6.1.5 Liquidity
There is an extensive literature documenting that liquidity patterns can have signiﬁcant eﬀects on the valuation of securities. For example, see Boudoukh and Whitelaw
(1993), Vayanos and Vila (1999), Acharya and Pedersen (2005), Amihud, Mendelson, and Pedersen (2005), Huang and Wang (2008), Brunnermeier and Pedersen
12

For example, Longstaﬀ (2004) examines the eﬀect of changes in these factors
on the spread between Treasury yields and yields on REFCORP bonds that are
explicitly guaranteed by the U.S. Treasury.
19

(2009), Longstaﬀ (2009), and many others.
To study the eﬀects of changes in liquidity on the TIPS–Treasury mispricing,
we include two variables in the analysis. The ﬁrst is the ratio of total TIPS trading
volume by U.S. primary dealers to total coupon-bearing Treasury note and bond
trading volume by U.S. primary dealers. Intuitively, changes in this ratio may
capture variation in the liquidity of TIPS relative to that of Treasury bonds. Information on trading activity by primary bond dealers is reported by the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York.
The second measure is the total notional amount of repo fails experienced
by primary bond dealers. Repo fails represent a measure of market disruption
caused by investors’ inability to ﬁnd speciﬁc Treasury securities in the markets, and
directly reﬂects a breakdown in market liquidity. Speciﬁcally, a repo fail occurs
when a primary dealer is not able to deliver a Treasury security that the dealer
had previously committed to deliver as part of a securities repurchase agreement.
Alternatively, a repo fail occurs when the primary dealer does not receive back a
Treasury security pledged as collateral on a repurchase agreement. In either case,
the failure indicates that market participants are not able to locate speciﬁc Treasury
securities. Thus, repo fails should increase during stressed periods in which liquidity
and available supply of Treasury securities in the markets dries up. Information on
repo fails is also reported by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.13
6.1.6 Asset Purchases by the Federal Reserve
Finally, there is some strong but anecdotal evidence that permanent open market
operations by the Federal Reserve during the mortgage crisis have had a major
impact on the size of the arbitrage.14 On March 18, 2009, the Federal Open Market
Committee announced an unprecedented program to purchase up to $300 billion
of longer-dated Treasury bonds through a series of competitive auctions. Over the
course of the program the Federal Reserve’s Open Market Trading Desk purchased
$11 billion in nominal Treasury securities maturing in 1 to 2 years, $242 billion
maturing in 2 to 10 years, $42 billion maturing in 10 to 30 years, and $5 billion
13

In addition to the variables described in this section, we also examined whether
changes in TIPS–Treasury mispricing were related to Federal Reserve open market
purchases of Treasury bonds and TIPS, Federal Reserve securities lending, or the
amount of Treasury and TIPS trading by primary bond dealers. None of these
variables have explanatory power for changes in TIPS–Treasury mispricing.

14

Permanent open market operations include purchases or sales of securities on an
outright basis that add to or diminish reserves. These are diﬀerent from temporary
open market operations that consist of short-term repurchases or reverse repurchase
agreements.
20

in TIPS. In spite of the relatively small size of the TIPS purchases, relative to the
Treasury bonds, this program appears to have dramatically reduced the mispricing
gap between TIPS and Treasury bonds. On March 18, 2009, the average amount
of mispricing was $8.69. Figure 6 plots the time series of mispricing after the
announcement. This number declined to $6.49 by April 19, the date of the ﬁrst
outright TIPS purchase. The total amount tendered to the Treasury was $15.56
billion, and the total amount accepted was $1.50 billion. The mispricing then
declined to $2.08 on May 26 when a second TIPS purchase took place. The total
amount accepted at this second purchase was $1.55 billion. This represents an
overall decline of 76 percent in the potential savings to the Treasury during the
ﬁrst six weeks since the program was announced. As of July 14, 2010, the Federal
Reserve holds $46.55 billion of TIPS (out of a total of $564 billion outstanding).
This compares to holdings of $712 billion of Treasury notes and bonds, out of $5.75
billion outstanding.
6.2 Regression Analysis
To explore the relation between these variables and TIPS–Treasury mispricing, we
regress monthly changes in the mispricing on the corresponding changes or values
of these variables. Rather than doing this at the level of individual TIPS and
Treasury pairs, however, we focus on the average yield mispricing across all pairs,
where the average is weighted by the outstanding notional amount of the TIPS issue
(taking into account the accretion in the notional amount). Speciﬁcally, we regress
the monthly changes in the average mispricing value on the monthly changes in
the VIX index, the super senior CDX tranche spread, the ten-year swap spread,
the CDX investment grade spread, the Consumer Conﬁdence Index, and the total
assets in money market mutual funds, and on the total notional amounts of TIPS
and coupon-bearing Treasury bonds issued each month, the ratio of monthly TIPS
trading to Treasury bond trading by primary dealers, and the notional amount of
all repo fails reported each month by primary dealers.
Since the two systemic variables are strongly related to each other, we estimate
a number of speciﬁcations in which only one of these two variables is included at a
time. We use the same approach for the two credit variables which are also strongly
correlated, and for the two conﬁdence measures. The regression results from these
alternative speciﬁcations are reported in Table 4.
The results provide a number of important insights into the determinants of the
mispricing. First, they show that systemic risk, as measured by changes in the VIX
index, has some relation to changes in this mispricing for some of the speciﬁcations.
In particular, changes in the VIX are signiﬁcant at the ten-percent level for the ﬁrst
two speciﬁcations reported. In contrast, the super senior spread is never signiﬁcant
in any of the speciﬁcations.

21

Turning to the credit variables, Table 4 shows that neither changes in the
ten-year swap spread nor changes in the CDX index are signiﬁcant in any of the
speciﬁcations. Although not shown, we also estimate the regression using changes
in the spread of the Euro-denominated CDS contract on the United States. This
data is only available for the last 23 months of the study period. As with the other
credit variables, the U.S. CDS spread is not signiﬁcant in any of the regressions. The
results for the conﬁdence variables are similar to those for the credit variables. In
particular, neither of the conﬁdence variables are signiﬁcant in any of the regressions.
The results for the supply variables are very diﬀerent in nature. In particular,
the results indicate that there is a signiﬁcant relation between changes in mispricing
and the notional amount of both TIPS and Treasury bonds issued each month. The
amount of TIPS issuance is signiﬁcant at the ten-percent level in six of the speciﬁcations. The amount of Treasury issuance is signiﬁcant at the ten-percent level for
seven of the speciﬁcations, and signiﬁcant at the ﬁve-percent level for three of the
speciﬁcations. All of the coeﬃcients for the supply variables are negative in sign.
Figure 2 shows that the weighted-average mispricing variable is always positive.
Thus, the negative sign for TIPS and Treasury issuance has the clear implication
that as more TIPS and Treasury bonds are issued, the size of the arbitrage shrinks.
It is important to note that this result holds even though the TIPS-Treasury arbitrage involves taking a short position in the Treasury bond. Thus, the eﬀect of TIPS
and Treasury issuance on the arbitrage is not merely the result of an on-the-run
pricing eﬀect on Treasury bonds.
The strongest results in Table 4 are for the repo fail variable in the liquidity
category. The amount of repo fails is highly signiﬁcant in all of the eight speciﬁcations, often with t-statistics in excess of 4.00. All of the coeﬃcients for the amount
of repo fails are positive, indicating that as repo fails become more prevalent in the
market, the size of the arbitrage widens. Since repo fails are the result of market
participants experiencing diﬃculty in acquiring speciﬁc Treasury collateral, these
results provide clear evidence that the supply or liquidity of the securities involved
in the arbitrage is directly linked to the size of the arbitrage. As far as we are aware,
this is the ﬁrst time that such a result has been documented in the literature.
7. CORRELATED ARBITRAGE
A number of important recent papers have put forward potential explanations for
the existence of persistent mispricing in ﬁnancial markets. Mitchell, Pedersen, and
Pulvino (2007) and Duﬃe (2010) discuss the role that slow-moving capital may play
in allowing arbitrage opportunities to exist for extended periods of time. Shleifer
and Vishny (1997), Liu and Longstaﬀ (2004), Fostel and Geanakoplos (2008), Gorton and Metrick (2008), and Ashcraft, Gârleanu, and Pederson (2010) argue that
22

margins, haircuts, and other collateral-related frictions may permit arbitrage or
deviations from the law of one price to occur. Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009)
emphasize the role that the availability of funding may play in allowing liquidity
eﬀects on security prices.
A key implication of this literature is that arbitrage in diﬀerent markets could
be driven by common factors. For example, if capital returns slowly to the ﬁxedincome arbitrage hedge fund sector after periods of ﬂat performance, then arbitrages
arising in various types of ﬁxed income markets could display signiﬁcant commonality. Motivated by this, we explore the extent to which TIPS–Treasury mispricing is
correlated with other types of ﬁxed-income arbitrages as well as hedge fund returns.
7.1 Fixed-Income Arbitrage
We focus on two well-known and widely-followed types of ﬁxed-income arbitrage
strategies in this section. The ﬁrst is the CDS-Corporate bond basis strategy discussed by Duﬃe (2010). In this strategy, the spread for a CDS contract on a ﬁrm
is compared with the spread on corporate bonds issued by that ﬁrm. In theory, the
two spreads should be very similar. In reality, there is often a signiﬁcant diﬀerence
between the two spreads, which is termed the CDS/corporate-bond basis.15 Duﬃe
argues that this basis may be a result of slow-moving capital. In particular, entering into a CDS contract requires little capital, while purchasing a corporate bond
requires the use of signiﬁcant capital. Thus, if arbitrage capital in the market is
relatively scarce, then the CDS/corporate-bond basis may be able to persist. We
were given access to a proprietary time series by a major investment management
ﬁrm of the CDS/corporate-bond basis for the ﬁrms included in the CDX index for
the period from January 2005 to November 2009. We average the basis across these
ﬁrms and compute the monthly changes in the average basis. For simplicity, we
refer to this arbitrage as the CDS arbitrage.
The second arbitrage strategy is based on the diﬀerence between the CDX
index and the average CDX spreads for the 125 ﬁrms included in the CDX index.
Since contracts on the CDX index trade separately, the market price for a contract
on the CDX need not always equal the average value of the CDS spreads in the
index. This failure of the index to equal the sum of its parts is similar in concept to
the diﬀerence between the price of an ETF and the value of the ETF’s holdings.16
We were also given access to this data for the same time period as that for the
CDS/corporate-bond basis strategy described above. We designate this arbitrage
as the CDX arbitrage.
15

Also see Longstaﬀ, Mithal, and Neis (2005).

16

For example, see Tucker and Laipply (2010).

23

It is important to stress that these two arbitrage strategies are fundamentally
diﬀerent in terms of their use of capital. To implement the CDS/corporate-bond
basis strategy requires an investment in the underlying corporate bond and the use
of the arbitrageur’s capital. In contrast, the CDX index arbitrage strategy only
requires taking long and short positions in CDS contracts, involving little or no
capital. Note also that neither of these two arbitrage strategies involves Treasury
bonds or TIPS. Thus, ﬁnding that these strategies and TIPS–Treasury mispricing
are correlated would provide evidence in support of the implications of the literature
described above.
Table 5 reports the results from the regression of the monthly change in the
absolute value of the TIPS–Treasury mispricing index on lagged, contemporaneous,
and leading changes in the absolute values of these two ﬁxed-income arbitrages. By
using the change in the absolute value, a positive regression coeﬃcient has the clear
interpretation that the arbitrage and TIPS–Treasury mispricing are widening and
narrowing together.
Table 5 shows that there is a signiﬁcant relation between changes in TIPS–
Treasury mispricing and changes in the other two arbitrages. For the CDS arbitrage,
the contemporaneous change is highly signiﬁcant with a t-statistic of 3.64. The
coeﬃcient value of 0.3270 implies that the TIPS–Treasury arbitrage widens by about
a third of a basis point as the CDS arbitrage widens by a basis point. The adjusted
R2 for this regression is 0.386. For the CDX arbitrage regression, the ﬁrst and
second lagged changes as well as the contemporaneous change are signiﬁcant (at
the ten-percent level) in explaining changes in the TIPS-Treasury arbitrage. The
adjusted R2 for the regression is 0.289.
These results have several important implications. First, they demonstrate
that the forces that allow arbitrages to exist in the CDS/corporate-bond markets
may also be at work in the TIPS–Treasury market. Second, ﬁnding that both the
CDX and CDS arbitrages are related to the TIPS–Treasury arbitrage argues against
the view that arbitrages are due exclusively to slow-moving capital. This follows
from the fact that the CDX arbitrage requires relatively little capital to implement,
while the opposite is true for the CDS arbitrage. Third, the evidence that lagged
CDX arbitrages are predictive for subsequent TIPS–Treasury arbitrages raises the
interesting possibility of cross-momentum in diﬀerent types of arbitrages.
7.2 Hedge Fund Returns
To provide an alternative perspective, we also explore whether TIPS–Treasury mispricing is related to the returns for hedge funds that specialize in arbitrage strategies. In particular, we obtain the monthly returns for the CS/Tremont ﬁxed-income
arbitrage, convertible-bond arbitrage, and merger arbitrage indexes. We regress
changes in the TIPS–Treasury mispricing on lagged, contemporaneous, and leading
24

returns for these hedge funds.
Table 6 reports the results from the regressions. The contemporaneous returns
for both the ﬁxed-income and convertible bond arbitrage hedge funds are both
highly statistically signiﬁcant. In addition, the second lagged returns for these hedge
funds are signiﬁcant at the ten-percent level. We note that the correlation of the
ﬁxed-income and convertible bond arbitrage hedge fund returns is 91 percent, which
may explain why their relation with TIPS–Treasury mispricing is similar. Although
there is no signiﬁcant contemporaneous relation between the merger arbitrage hedge
fund returns and the TIPS–Treasury mispricing, the ﬁrst lagged value of the merger
arbitrage returns is signiﬁcant at the ten-percent level. Thus, all three of these hedge
fund return series has some degree of correlation with changes in TIPS–Treasury
mispricing.
Table 6 also shows that all three of these types of hedge funds have negative
coeﬃcients for the contemporaneous returns (although only the ﬁrst two are signiﬁcantly negative), indicating that the TIPS–Treasury arbitrage tends to narrow
as arbitrage hedge funds experience positive returns. There are two possible interpretations of this result. First, the negative coeﬃcients are consistent with a
scenario in which positive hedge fund performance increases the amount of capital
available to these hedge funds to arbitrage away mispricing. Thus, TIPS–Treasury
mispricing decreases as the assets under management of these hedge funds increase.
Second, the negative coeﬃcient could also be consistent with a scenario in which
arbitrage-related hedge funds proﬁt as arbitrages converge towards zero, and vice
versa.
8. THE TIPS ISSUANCE PUZZLE
We have shown that Treasury bonds are almost invariably too expensive in relation
to TIPS. Our ﬁndings have important government ﬁnance implications. The Treasury could reduce the dollar market value of outstanding debt by buying back TIPS
and issuing nominal Treasury bonds instead. To make this a risk-free proposition
would involve a large transaction in the inﬂation-swap market. This transaction
might not be feasible. Without the inﬂation swap leg of the transaction, the Treasury is exposed to deﬂation risk: unanticipated deﬂation increases the real debt
burden faced by the Treasury. However, if one takes the view that the Federal Reserve can avoid deﬂation, then the Treasury does not bear any risk of unanticipated
deﬂation.
The upside of this swap of TIPS for Treasury bonds, even without the inﬂation
swap, is that it restores the option of reducing the real value of its outstanding
debt. Bohn (1988), for example, argues that nominal debt provides valuable insur25

ance against the budgetary eﬀects of economic ﬂuctuations. Nominal debt may be
a desirable form of funding because of the covariance of inﬂation with government
spending: high government spending tends to go with high inﬂation. Since nominal bonds pay poorly in real terms when inﬂation is unexpectedly high, nominal
debt has some of the characteristics of government-issued contingent debt. In their
seminal paper, Lucas and Stokey (1983) point out that tax smoothing through the
issuance of state-contingent debt is desirable from a welfare point of view.17
Historically, these considerations seem much more relevant. Figure 7, which
plots U.S. inﬂation rates during the 20th Century, shows that U.S. seems to have
used the inﬂation option repeatedly, mainly to help ﬁnance war expenditures. These
war episodes are informative because the triggers are truly exogenous ﬁscal shocks.
During World War I, there was a substantial run-up in the rate of inﬂation. It
peaked at an annualized rate of 20.4 percent in 1918. Similarly, towards the end of
World War II, inﬂation increased dramatically and it peaked in 1946 at an annualized rate of 18.1 percent. Finally, there was another run-up in inﬂation during the
Korean War when inﬂation reached 6 percent in 1951.
So, overall, our ﬁnding that Treasury bonds provide much cheaper ﬁnancing for
U.S. Federal deﬁcits than TIPS is remarkable. Treasury bonds include an option to
reduce the real value of outstanding debt. Obviously, the Treasury would be willing
to pay extra for this option to inﬂate debt away. Instead, the Treasury gets this
option for free in ﬁnancial markets. Moreover, when it issues TIPS, it gives up this
free option.
9. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we study the relative pricing of TIPS and Treasury bonds. A simple
no-arbitrage argument places a strong restriction on the relation between the prices
of these securities. We show that this no-arbitrage relation is frequently violated
in the markets. To our knowledge, this arbitrage, which can exceed $20 per $100
notional amount, represents the largest arbitrage ever documented in the literature.
Furthermore, the sheer magnitude of this mispricing in markets as deep and actively
traded as the Treasury bond and TIPS markets presents a serious challenge to
conventional asset pricing theory.
Using a regression framework, we explore the determinants of TIPS–Treasury
17

Clearly, indexed debt does not allow for this type of state contingency, except by
trying to span the ﬁscal shocks through large long and short positions in indexed
debt of various maturities (Angeletos, 2002). Buera and Niccolini (2004) point out
that this seems to involve implausible trading strategies.
26

mispricing. The results strongly point to supply-related factors as key drivers of the
mispricing. In particular, we ﬁnd that TIPS–Treasury mispricing narrows signiﬁcantly whenever the Treasury auctions either Treasury bonds or TIPS. In contrast,
the mispricing widens signiﬁcantly when primary dealers have diﬃculties in obtaining Treasury securities and experience increased levels of repo failures. These
results argue that the supply of securities in the market may play a much greater
role in determining prices than classical asset pricing models indicate.
Recent theoretical work suggests that slow-moving capital or funding frictions
may represent a common denominator in explaining the deviation of market prices
from fundamentals. Motivated by this, we examine whether there is evidence of
commonality in a variety of ﬁxed-income arbitrages. We ﬁnd that TIPS–Treasury
mispricing and several major CDS-related arbitrages are strongly correlated. Furthermore, we ﬁnd that ﬁxed income arbitrage hedge fund returns are signiﬁcantly
related to TIPS–Treasury mispricing. These results provide empirical support for
the implications of this recent theoretical work.
Finally, our results point out that the ongoing issuance of TIPS by the Treasury
is in itself a puzzle. This is because the Treasury not only gives up a ﬁscal hedging
option by issuing TIPS, it also leaves billions of dollars on the table by issuing
securities that are not as highly valued by the market as nominal Treasury bonds.

27

APPENDIX
This appendix describes the details about how we compute the size of the TIPS–
Treasury arbitrage. In addition to the pricing data for TIPS, Treasury bonds,
and STRIPS issues, we also download daily closing prices of inﬂation swaps with
maturities of 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12, 15, 20, 25 and 30 years for the period
from July 23, 2004 to November 19, 2009 from the Bloomberg terminal. Inﬂation
swaps are identiﬁed on the Bloomberg system by the ticker USSWITn, where n
denotes the maturity of the swap. For a few of these swaps, inﬂation swap data are
missing for several days. In these cases, we replace missing data points by the last
available observation.
To implement the arbitrage strategy, we set the notional amount of each inﬂation swap to match the corresponding semiannual coupon payment (before inﬂation
adjustment) on the TIPS issue which we designate s. At date t, the inﬂation swap
t
pays a cash ﬂow of s (1 + ft ) − sIt , where It is the indexed leg and ft is the ﬁxed
inﬂation swap rate for maturity t.
Implementing the arbitrage strategy requires interpolating the quoted inﬂation
swap rates for all maturities ranging from 0 to 30 years. Furthermore, seasonal
patterns in inﬂation must be taken into account for swap maturities that include
fractional years (e.g. 2.3 years). To interpolate the inﬂation swap rate curve, we
ﬁrst ﬁt a standard cubic spline through the quoted maturities using a grid size of
one month. Let the interpolated swap rates be denoted by fi,j , i = 1, 2, . . . , 30, j =
1, 2, . . . , 12, where the ﬁrst index refers to the year and the second to the month.
We then estimate seasonal components in inﬂation from the monthly nonseasonally adjusted U.S. CPI index (CPI-U NSA) series between January 1980 and
October 2009 by estimating an OLS regression of monthly log changes in the CPI
index on month dummies. More speciﬁcally,

ΔCPIt ≡ log

CPIt
CPIt−1


=

12


βi di + εi ,

(A1)

i=1

where t is measured in months. The month dummies di , i = 1, 2, . . . , 12 are deﬁned
as

di =

1,
0,

for month i,
otherwise.

(A2)

and d1 =January, d2 =February, . . . , d12 =December. We obtain an estimate ofthe
1
seasonal eﬀect in month i by subtracting the average of the coeﬃcients β̄ = 12
β̂i
28

from the estimated coeﬃcients β̂i , i = 1, 2, . . . , 12. Let this estimate be denoted by
b̂i = β̂i − β̄, i = 1, 2, . . . , 12.
Next, we construct monthly forward rates Hi,j , i = 1, 2, . . . , 30, j = 1, 2, . . . , 12
from the interpolated swap rate rates fi,j . Then, we normalize the seasonal factors
b̂i so that their product is unity. Let the normalized
monthly adjustment factors
12
be denoted by m̂i , i = 1, 2, . . . , 12, where i=1 m̂i = 1. We then multiply the
forward rates Hi,j by the corresponding adjustment factor m̂j , j = 1, 2, . . . , 12 to
obtain seasonally adjusted forward rates H̃i,j , i = 1, 2, . . . , 12, j = 1, 2, . . . , 12. By
construction, there will be no seasonal eﬀects for full-year swaps. In the last step,
we obtain the seasonally adjusted inﬂation swap curve by converting the forward
rates H̃i,j into inﬂation swap rates f˜i,j , i = 1, 2, . . . , 30, j = 1, 2, . . . , 12. We do not
interpolate or adjust maturities smaller than one year, but use the one-year swap
rate instead, because the interpolated rates are sensitive to short-term inﬂation
assumptions in that case. We set f˜0j = f1 , j = 1, 2, . . . , 12.
With the inﬂation swap curve, we can now implement the TIPS–Treasury arbitrage strategy and compute the size of the mispricing in the following way. First,
we take a position in a TIPS issue with a coupon rate of s and maturity T for a
price of V . Each period, the TIPS issue pays coupons of sIt and makes a principal
payment of 100IT at maturity.
Next, we enter into an inﬂation swap for each coupon payment date t =
1, 2, . . . , T with notional amount of s for t < T and s + 100 for the ﬁnal principal payment at time T . Let ft denote the ﬁxed rate on the inﬂation swap for
date t = 1, 2, . . . , T obtained from the interpolated inﬂation swap curve. At each
t
coupon payment date t, the inﬂation swap pays a cash ﬂow of s (1 + ft ) − sIt and
T
(s + 100) (1 + fT ) −(s + 100) IT at maturity T. The sum of the cash ﬂows at date t
t
from the TIPS issue and the inﬂation swap is constant, since sIt + s (1 + ft ) − sIt =
t
T
s (1 + ft ) . Similarly, at maturity (s + 100) IT +(s + 100) (1 + fT ) −(s + 100) IT =
T
(s + 100) (1 + fT ) . This converts all of the indexed cash ﬂows from the TIPS bond
into ﬁxed cash ﬂows.
Let P and c denote the price and the semiannual coupon payment for the
Treasury bond, respectively. To match the cash ﬂows c from the Treasury bond
exactly, the replicating portfolio must include a small long or short position in
Treasury STRIPS for each coupon payment date t and the maturity date T , such
t
T
that s (1 + ft ) + xt = c and (s + 100) (1 + fT ) + xT = c + 100, where xt denotes
the notional amount of STRIPS for date t = 1, 2, . . . , T . This step converts the
indexed bond into a synthetic security with ﬁxed cash ﬂows that exactly replicate
the magnitude of the cash ﬂows from the Treasury bond. Given the ﬁxed cash ﬂows
and the value of the replicating portfolio, we then calculate the yield to maturity
for the replicating portfolio.
29

In the last step, we use the yield to maturity for the replicating portfolio to
determine the price of a synthetic Treasury bond with the same maturity, coupon
rate, and cash ﬂows as the matched Treasury bond. The diﬀerence between the
prices of the synthetic Treasury bond and the matched Treasury bond represents
the TIPS–Treasury mispricing.

30

REFERENCES
Acharya, Viral, and Lasse H. Pedersen, 2005, Asset Pricing with Liquidity Risk,
Journal of Financial Economics 77, 375-410.
Adrian, Tobias, and Hao Z. Wu, 2009, The Term Structure of Inﬂation Expectations,
Working paper, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Amihud, Yakov, and Haim Mendelson, 1991, Liquidity, Maturity, and the Yields on
U.S. Treasury Securities, Journal of Finance 46, 1411-1425.
Amihud, Yakov, Haim Mendelson, and Lasse H. Pedersen, 2005, Liquidity and Asset
Pricing, Foundations and Trends in Finance 1, 269-364.
Angeletos, George-Marios, 2002, Fiscal Policy with Noncontingent Debt and the
Optimal Maturity Structure, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 117, 1105-1131.
Arora, Navneet, Priyank Gandhi, and Francis A. Longstaﬀ, 2010, Counterparty
Credit Risk and the Credit Default Swap Market, Working paper, UCLA.
Ashcraft, Adam, Nicolae Gârleanu, and Lasse H. Pedersen, 2010, Two Monetary
Tools: Interest Rates and Haircuts, Working paper, New York University.
Bardong, Florian, and Thorsten Lehnert, 2004, TIPS, Break-Even Inﬂation, and
Inﬂation Forecasts, The Journal of Fixed Income 14, 15-35.
Barr, David G., and John Y. Campbell, 1997, Inﬂation, Real Interest Rates, and
the Bond Market, Journal of Monetary Economics 3, 361-383.
Barro, Robert, 1997, Optimal Management of Indexed and Nominal Debt, NBER
Working Paper 6197.
Beber, Alessandro, Michael W. Brandt, and Kenneth A. Kavajecz, 2008, Flight-toQuality or Flight-to-Liquidity? Evidence from the Euro-Area Bond Market, Review
of Financial Studies, forthcoming.
Bohn, H., 1988, Why Do We Have Nominal Government Debt?, Journal of Monetary Economics 21, 127-140.
Boudoukh, Jacob, and Robert F. Whitelaw, 1991, The Benchmark Eﬀect in the
Japanese Government Bond Market, Journal of Fixed Income 1, 52-59.
Boudoukh, Jacob, and Robert F. Whitelaw, 1993, Liquidity as a Choice Variable:
A Lesson from the Japanese Government Bond Market, Review of Financial Studies
6, 265-292.

31

Brunnermeier, Markus, and Lasse H. Pedersen, 2009, Market Liquidity and Funding
Liquidity, Review of Financial Studies 22, 2201-2238.
Buera, Francisco, and Juan Pablo Nicolini, 2004, Optimal Maturity or Government
Debt Without State Contingent Bonds, Journal of Monetary Economics 51, 531554.
Buraschi, Andrea, and Alexei Jiltsov, 2005, Inﬂation Risk Premia and the Expectations Hypothesis, Journal of Financial Economics 75, 429-490.
Cammack, Elizabeth B., 1991, Evidence on Bidding Strategies and the Information
in Treasury Bill Auctions, Journal of Political Economy 99, 100-130.
Campbell, John Y., 1995, Some Lessons from the Yield Curve, Journal of Economic
Perspectives 9, 129-152.
Campbell, John Y., Robert Shiller, and Luis Viceira, 2009, Understanding InﬂationIndexed Bond Markets, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (Spring), 79-120.
Cornell, Bradford, and Alan C. Shapiro, 1990, The Mispricing of U.S. Treasury
Bonds: A Case Study, Review of Financial Studies 2, 297-310.
Daves, Philip R., and Michael C. Ehrhardt, 1993, Liquidity, Reconstitution, and
the Value of U.S. Treasury Strips, Journal of Finance 48, 315-329.
Duarte, Jeﬀerson, Francis A. Longstaﬀ, and Fan Yu, 2007, Risk and Return in Fixed
Income Arbitrage: Nickels in Front of a Steamroller?, Review of Financial Studies
20, 769-811.
Duﬃe, Darrell, 2010, Asset Price Dynamics with Slow-Moving Capital, Journal of
Finance, forthcoming.
Duﬃe, Darrell, and Ming Huang, 1996, Swap Rates and Credit Quality, Journal of
Finance 51, 921-950.
Duﬃe, Darrell, Lasse H. Pedersen, and Kenneth J. Singleton, 2003, Modeling
Sovereign Yield Spreads: A Case Study of Russian Debt, Journal of Finance 58,
119-159.
Duﬃe, Darrell, and Kenneth J. Singleton, 1997, An Econometric Model of the Term
Structure of Interest Rate Swap Yields, Journal of Finance 52, 1287-1321.
Evans, Martin D., 2003, Real Risk, Inﬂation Risk, and the Term Structure, The
Economic Journal 113, 345-389.
Fostel, Ana, and John Geanakoplos, 2008, Collateral Restrictions and Liquidity
Under-Supply: A Simple Model, Economic Theory 35, 441-467.
32

Giesecke, Kay, Francis A. Longstaﬀ, Stephen Schaefer, and Ilya Strebulaev, 2010,
Corporate Bond Default Risk: A 150-Year Perspective, Working paper, UCLA.
Gongloﬀ, Mark, 2010, TIPS Given the Cold Shoulder, Wall Street Journal, April
27, p. C8.
Gorton, Gary B., and Andrew Metrick, 2009, Haircuts, Working paper, Yale University.
Grinblatt, Mark, and Francis A. Longstaﬀ, 2000, Financial Innovation and the Role
of Derivative Securities: An Empirical Analysis of the U.S. Treasury’s STRIPS
Program, Journal of Finance 55, 1415-1436.
Gürkaynak, Refet S., Brian Sack, and Jonathan H. Wright, 2010, The TIPS Yield
Curve and Inﬂation Compensation, American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics
2, 70-92.
Han, Bing, Francis A. Longstaﬀ, and Craig Merrill, 2007, The U.S. Treasury Buyback Auctions: The Cost of Retiring Illiquid Bonds, Journal of Finance 62, 26732693.
Hinnerich, Mia, 2008, Inﬂation-Indexed Swaps and Swaptions, Journal of Banking
and Finance 32, 2293-2306.
Huang, Jennifer, and Jiang Wang, 2008, Market Liquidity, Asset Prices, and Welfare, Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.
Jarrow, Robert, and Y. Yildirim, 2003, Pricing Treasury Inﬂation Protected Securities and Related Derivatives Using an HJM Model, Journal of Financial and
Quantitative Analysis 38, 409-430.
Jordan, Bradford, Randy Jorgensen, and David Kuipers, 2000, The Relative Pricing
of U.S. Treasury STRIPS, Journal of Financial Economics 56, 89-123.
Kamara, Avi, 1988, Market Trading Structures and Asset Pricing: Evidence from
the Treasury Bill Markets, Review of Financial Studies 1, 357-375.
Kamara, Avi, 1994, Liquidity, Taxes, and Short-Term Treasury Yields, Journal of
Financial and Quantitative Analysis 29, 403-417.
Kerkhof, Jeroen, 2005, Inﬂation Derivatives Explained, Fixed Income Quantitative
Research, Lehman Brothers (July), 1-80.
Krishnamurthy, Arvind, 2002, The Bond/Old Bond Spread, Journal of Financial
Economics 66, 463-506.
Liu, Jun, and Francis A. Longstaﬀ, 2004, Losing Money on Arbitrages: Optimal
33

Dynamic Portfolio Choice in Markets with Arbitrage Opportunities, Review of Financial Studies 17, 611-641.
Liu, Jun, Francis A. Longstaﬀ, and Ravit Mandell, 2006, The Market Price of
Risk in Interest Rate Swaps: The Roles of Default and Liquidity Risks, Journal of
Business 79, 2337-2360.
Longstaﬀ, Francis. A., 1992, Are Negative Option Prices Possible? The Callable
U.S. Treasury Bond Puzzle, Journal of Business 65, 571-592.
Longstaﬀ, Francis A., 2004, The Flight to Liquidity Premium in U.S. Treasury Bond
Prices, The Journal of Business 77, 511-526.
Longstaﬀ, Francis A., 2009, Portfolio Claustrophobia: Asset Pricing in Markets
with Illiquid Assets, American Economic Review 99, 1119-1144.
Longstaﬀ, Francis A., Sanjay Mithal, and Eric Neis, 2005, Corporate Yield Spreads:
Default Risk or Liquidity? New Evidence from the Credit Default Swap Market,
Journal of Finance 60, 2213-2253.
Longstaﬀ, Francis A., Jun Pan, Lasse H. Pedersen, and Kenneth J. Singleton, 2010,
How Sovereign is Sovereign Credit Risk?, American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, forthcoming.
Longstaﬀ, Francis A., and Arvind Rajan, 2008, An Empirical Analysis of the Pricing
of Collateralized Debt Obligations, Journal of Finance 63, 509-563.
Longstaﬀ, Francis A., Pedro Santa-Clara, and Eduardo S. Schwartz, 2001, The
Relative Valuation of Caps and Swaptions: Theory and Empirical Evidence, The
Journal of Finance 56, 2067Lucas, Robert E., and Nancy L. Stokey, 1983, Optimal Fiscal and Monetary Policy
in an Economy Without Capital, Journal of Monetary Economics 12, 55-93.
Lustig, Hanno, Christopher Sleet, and Sevin Yeltekin, 2008, Fiscal Hedging with
Nominal Assets, Journal of Monetary Economics 55, 710-727.
Mitchell, Mark, Lasse H. Pedersen, and Todd Pulvino, 2007, Slow Moving Capital,
American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings 97, 215-220.
Pan, Jun, and Kenneth J. Singleton, 2008, Default and Recovery Implicit in Options: Evidence from an Integrated Time-Series Study, Journal of Finance 63, 23452384.
Roll, Richard, 1996, U.S. Treasury Inﬂation-Indexed Bonds: The Design of a New
Security, Journal of Fixed Income (December), 9-28.

34

Roll, Richard, 2004, Empirical TIPS, Financial Analysts Journal 60 (Jan-Feb), 3153.
Seppälä, Juha, 2004, The Term Structure of Real Interest Rates: Theory and Evidence from UK Index-Linked Bonds, Journal of Monetary Economics 51, 1509-1549.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny, 1997, The Limits of Arbitrage, Journal of
Finance 52, 35-55.
Tucker, Matthew and Stephen Laipply, 2010, Understanding Bond ETF Premiums
and Discounts: A Conceptual Framework, Investment Insights: The Investment
Research Journal from Blackrock 13 (April), 1-20.
Vayanos, Dimitri, 2004, Flight to Quality, Flight to Liquidity, and the Pricing of
Risk, Working paper, London School of Economics.
Vayanos, Dimitri, and Jean-Luc Vila, 1999, Equilibrium Interest Rate and Liquidity
Premium with Transaction Costs, Economic Theory 509-539.
Vayanos, Dimitri, and Pierre-Oliver Weill, 2008, A Search-Based Theory of the
On-the-Run Phenomenon, Journal of Finance 63, 1361-1398.
Yu, Fan, 2006, How Proﬁtable is Capital Structure Arbitrage?, Financial Analysts
Journal 62 (Sep-Oct), 47-62.

35

10
9
8
Dollar Mispricing

7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

Figure 1. TIPS–Treasury Mispricing. This ﬁgure plots the time series of the
weighted-average TIPS–Treasury mispricing, expressed in units of dollars per $100
notional, across the pairs included in the sample, where the average is weighted by
the notional amount of the TIPS issue.

180
160

Basis−Point Mispricing

140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

Figure 2. Weighted Average TIPS–Treasury Mispricing in Basis Points.
This ﬁgure plots the time series of the average TIPS–Treasury mispricing, measured
in basis points, across the pairs included in the sample, where the average is weighted
by the notional amount of the TIPS issue.

60

Billions of Dollars

50

40

30

20

10

0

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

Figure 3. Total Dollar Amount of TIPS–Treasury Mispricing. This ﬁgure
plots the total dollar amount in billions of TIPS–Treasury mispricing, where the
total is calculated using all 33 pairs of TIPS issues outstanding during some portion
of the sample period and the corresponding matching-maturity Treasury bonds.

1.8
1.6

Billions of Dollars

1.4
1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

Figure 4. Total Cost to the Treasury from Issuing TIPS Rather than
Treasury Bonds. This ﬁgure plots the total cost to the Treasury (measured in
billions of dollars) of issuing TIPS rather Treasury bonds for each of the TIPS
auctions during the sample period.

2

Inflation Swap Rate (in Percent)

1
0
−1
−2
−3
−4
−5
−6

0

2

4

6

8
Years

10

12

14

16

Figure 5. Implied Inﬂation Swap Curve that Reconciles TIPS–Treasury
Mispricing. This ﬁgure plots the actual inﬂation swap curve for December 30, 2008
(solid curve) and the implied inﬂation swap curve (dotted curve) for the same date
that would reconcile the pricing of the Treasury bond with maturity date February
15, 2025 and the corresponding TIPS issue.

10
9
8
Dollar Mispricing

7
Announcement
6
5
1st TIPS Purchase

4
3
2

2nd TIPS Purchase

1
0

03/2009

04/2009

05/2009

06/2009

07/2009

Figure 6. Treasury Purchase Program and TIPS–Treasury Mispricing. This ﬁgure plots key dates in the Treasury Purchase Program along with
the weighted-average TIPS–Treasury mispricing measured in units of dollars per
$100 notional.

20

15

Percent

10

5

0

−5

−10
1910

1930

1950

1970

1990

2010

Figure 7. Annualized Inﬂation Rate from 1900 to 2010. This ﬁgure plots
the annualized inﬂation rate from 1900 to 2010 as reported by the Bureau of Labor
Statistics.

Table 1
Cash Flows from the Treasury Bond and the Synthetic Treasury Bond Replicating Strategy. This table shows the cash flow generated
each period from the indicated positions. P denotes the price of the Treasury bond with coupon c, V denotes the price of the TIPS bond with the
same maturity date as the Treasury bond and a coupon rate of s, and D(t) denotes the price of a Treasury STRIP with a maturity of t. Ft denotes the
fixed payment on a zero-coupon inflation swap of maturity t (calculated as (1 + f)t , where f is the corresponding inflation swap rate). The inflation
index It denotes the ratio of the CPI-U index at time t divided by the CPI-U index at time zero.
0

1

2

3

...

T

Buy Treasury

−P

c

c

c

...

c + 100

Buy TIPS

−V

sI1

sI2

sI3

...

(s + 100)IT

Inflation Swap1
Inflation Swap2
Inflation Swap3
..
.

0
0
0
..
.

s(F1 − I1 )
0
0
..
.

0
s(F2 − I2 )
0
..
.

0
0
s(F3 − I3 )
..
.

...
...
...

0
0
0
..
.

Inflation SwapT

0

0

0

0

...

(s + 100)(FT − IT )

STRIPS1
STRIPS2
STRIPS3
..
.

(c − sF1 )D(1)
(c − sF2 )D(2)
(c − sF3 )D(3)
..
.

c − sF1
0
0
..
.

0
c − sF2
0
..
.

0
0
c − sF3
..
.

...
...
...

0
0
0
..
.

STRIPST

(c + 100)D(T )−
(s + 100)FT D(T )

0

0

0

...

(c + 100)−
(s + 100)FT

—————

—————

—————

————————–

c

c

...

c + 100

Strategy

Total Cash Flow

——————————
T
i=1 (c − sFi ) D(i) +
100(1 − FT )D(T ) − V

—————
c

Table 2
A Specific Example of the Synthetic Treasury Bond Replicating Strategy. This table shows the
cash flows associated with the 7.625 percent Treasury bond with maturity date February 15, 2025 and the
cash flows from the replicating strategy using the 2.375 percent TIPS issue with the same maturity date
that replicates the cash flows of the Treasury bond. The example is based on market prices for December
30, 2008. Cash flows are in dollars per $100 notional. It denotes the realized percentage change in the CPI
index from the inception of the strategy to the cash flow date. Date designates the number of the semiannual
period in which the corresponding cash flows are paid.

Date

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33

Treasury

TIPS

Inflation Swaps

STRIPS

Total

−169.4793
3.8125
3.8125
3.8125
3.8125
3.8125
3.8125
3.8125
3.8125
3.8125
3.8125
3.8125
3.8125
3.8125
3.8125
3.8125
3.8125
3.8125
3.8125
3.8125
3.8125
3.8125
3.8125
3.8125
3.8125
3.8125
3.8125
3.8125
3.8125
3.8125
3.8125
3.8125
3.8125
103.8125

−101.2249
1.1875 I1
1.1875 I2
1.1875 I3
1.1875 I4
1.1875 I5
1.1875 I6
1.1875 I7
1.1875 I8
1.1875 I9
1.1875 I10
1.1875 I11
1.1875 I12
1.1875 I13
1.1875 I14
1.1875 I15
1.1875 I16
1.1875 I17
1.1875 I18
1.1875 I19
1.1875 I20
1.1875 I21
1.1875 I22
1.1875 I23
1.1875 I24
1.1875 I25
1.1875 I26
1.1875 I27
1.1875 I28
1.1875 I29
1.1875 I30
1.1875 I31
1.1875 I32
1.1875 I33

0
1.1856 − 1.1875 I1
1.1638 − 1.1875 I2
1.1480 − 1.1875 I3
1.1467 − 1.1875 I4
1.1307 − 1.1875 I5
1.1376 − 1.1875 I6
1.1566 − 1.1875 I7
1.1616 − 1.1875 I8
1.1630 − 1.1875 I9
1.1773 − 1.1875 I10
1.1967 − 1.1875 I11
1.2095 − 1.1875 I12
1.2248 − 1.1875 I13
1.2466 − 1.1875 I14
1.2683 − 1.1875 I15
1.2866 − 1.1875 I16
1.3058 − 1.1875 I17
1.3304 − 1.1875 I18
1.3556 − 1.1875 I19
1.3792 − 1.1875 I20
1.4009 − 1.1875 I21
1.4225 − 1.1875 I22
1.4427 − 1.1875 I23
1.4635 − 1.1875 I24
1.4806 − 1.1875 I25
1.4979 − 1.1875 I26
1.5126 − 1.1875 I27
1.5277 − 1.1875 I28
1.5407 − 1.1875 I29
1.5548 − 1.1875 I30
1.5676 − 1.1875 I31
1.5823 − 1.1875 I32
135.9861 − 1.1875 I33

−45.6367
2.6269
2.6487
2.6645
2.6658
2.6818
2.6749
2.6559
2.6509
2.6495
2.6352
2.6158
2.6030
2.5877
2.5659
2.5442
2.5259
2.5067
2.4821
2.4569
2.4333
2.4116
2.3900
2.3698
2.3490
2.3319
2.3146
2.2999
2.2848
2.2718
2.2577
2.2449
2.2302
−32.1736

−146.3786
3.8125
3.8125
3.8125
3.8125
3.8125
3.8125
3.8125
3.8125
3.8125
3.8125
3.8125
3.8125
3.8125
3.8125
3.8125
3.8125
3.8125
3.8125
3.8125
3.8125
3.8125
3.8125
3.8125
3.8125
3.8125
3.8125
3.8125
3.8125
3.8125
3.8125
3.8125
3.8125
103.8125

Table 3
Summary Statistics for TIPS–Treasury Mispricing. This table reports summary statistics for TIPS–Treasury mispricing for the 29 pairs of
TIPS and Treasury bonds shown. Days denotes the maturity mismatch of the pair. The left central panel reports summary statistics for the mispricing
measured in dollars per $100. The right central panel reports summary statistics for the mispricing measured in basis points. The sample period is
from July 23, 2004 to November 19, 2009.

TIPS

Jan-15-07
Jan-15-08
Jan-15-09
Jan-15-10
Apr-15-10
Jan-15-11
Apr-15-11
Jan-15-12
Apr-15-12
Jul-15-12
Apr-15-13
Jul-15-13
Jan-15-14
Apr-15-14
Jul-15-14
Jan-15-15
Jul-15-15
Jan-15-16
Jul-15-16
Jan-15-17
Jul-15-17
Jan-15-18
Jul-15-18
Jan-15-19
Jul-15-19
Jan-15-25
Jan-15-26
Jan-15-27
Jan-15-29

3.375
3.625
3.875
4.250
0.875
3.500
2.375
3.375
2.000
3.000
0.625
1.875
2.000
1.250
2.000
1.625
1.875
2.000
2.500
2.375
2.625
1.625
1.375
2.125
1.875
2.375
2.000
2.375
2.500

Trsy

Dec-31-06
Dec-31-07
Jan-15-09
Jan-15-10
Apr-15-10
Jan-15-11
Mar-31-11
Jan-15-12
Apr-15-12
Jul-15-12
Mar-31-12
Jun-30-13
Dec-31-13
Mar-31-14
Jun-30-14
Feb-15-15
Aug-15-15
Feb-15-16
Jun-30-16
Feb-15-17
Aug-15-17
Feb-25-18
Aug-15-18
Feb-15-19
Aug-15-19
Feb-15-25
Feb-15-26
Feb-15-27
Feb-15-29

3.000
4.375
3.250
3.625
4.000
4.250
4.750
1.125
1.375
1.500
2.500
3.375
1.500
1.750
2.625
4.000
4.250
4.500
3.250
4.625
4.750
3.500
4.000
2.750
3.625
7.625
6.000
6.625
5.250

Days

Mean

SDev

Min

Max

ρ

Mean

SDev

Min

Max

ρ

N

15
15
0
0
0
0
15
0
0
0
15
15
15
15
15
31
31
31
15
31
31
31
31
31
31
31
31
31
31

0.18
0.34
0.67
0.85
1.09
1.32
1.67
1.84
1.42
1.66
2.19
4.02
4.38
1.76
3.01
3.36
3.61
4.01
3.76
4.27
4.43
5.00
5.38
5.32
3.94
4.27
4.90
5.30
6.84

0.39
0.34
0.46
0.59
0.65
0.71
0.70
0.75
0.41
0.37
1.18
1.83
1.50
0.30
0.48
2.04
2.18
2.29
0.59
2.35
2.34
2.51
2.62
2.08
0.78
3.57
3.16
3.46
3.49

−0.76
−0.25
−0.34
−1.05
−1.18
−0.03
−0.37
0.79
0.62
0.94
−1.07
1.77
2.30
1.07
2.04
1.22
1.54
1.63
2.46
1.51
1.70
2.13
1.78
2.56
2.40
−0.89
−0.06
0.54
1.68

1.10
1.26
2.56
4.69
4.51
4.94
5.03
4.64
2.32
2.89
6.37
9.36
7.86
2.58
4.04
12.52
13.24
13.14
4.99
12.56
11.20
12.05
12.31
10.14
5.09
23.06
18.49
18.53
15.22

0.97
0.96
0.95
0.91
0.93
0.92
0.91
0.96
0.91
0.86
0.95
0.98
0.98
0.85
0.95
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.98
0.98
0.97
0.98
0.98
0.99
0.99
0.98
0.97
0.97
0.98

34.57
53.82
72.54
55.14
58.25
50.24
56.13
72.32
54.11
60.25
55.44
96.27
103.66
41.24
67.20
55.48
56.39
59.66
62.34
58.22
57.29
65.33
65.78
68.36
47.98
29.40
36.85
36.42
48.43

92.03
66.57
135.34
71.91
57.84
33.67
33.04
24.20
14.90
12.44
28.02
39.99
30.32
6.97
9.76
37.53
36.45
35.41
9.63
31.97
29.83
31.57
29.84
24.60
9.44
23.45
21.96
22.03
23.69

−255.56
−80.99
−25.55
−64.47
−69.20
−1.07
−15.24
31.10
21.83
35.72
−24.54
49.04
59.34
23.77
46.45
15.62
22.68
22.46
40.75
18.92
20.51
26.99
21.72
33.66
29.05
−5.51
−0.50
3.70
12.22

357.23
270.41
723.29
420.39
316.69
231.07
213.25
163.04
90.97
104.19
156.69
212.92
173.67
56.82
88.47
214.11
207.57
206.56
82.58
166.06
143.82
147.04
137.22
123.37
62.51
138.97
118.59
108.12
103.74

0.98
0.96
0.98
0.97
0.96
0.94
0.94
0.95
0.90
0.83
0.95
0.97
0.97
0.85
0.93
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.98
0.98
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.99
0.99
0.98
0.96
0.96
0.98

506
502
1109
1215
1161
971
736
215
154
91
395
353
225
143
101
1204
1079
950
101
698
573
446
320
194
68
1342
961
709
205

Table 4
Results from Regression of Monthly Changes in Average Basis-Point Mispricing on Systemic, Credit, Confidence, Supply, and
Liquidity Factors. This table reports the Newey-West t-statistics for the coeﬃcients in the indicated regressions. VIX denotes the change in the
VIX index. Super Senior denotes the change in the spread of the on-the-run 15–30 CDX index tranche. CDX denotes the change in the on-the-run
CDX Investment Grade Index. Conf denotes the change in the Consumer Conﬁdence Index. Flows denotes the change in the total assets held by
money market mutual funds. TIPS Issue denotes the total notional amount of TIPS issued during the month. Trsy Issue denotes the total notional
amount of Treasury notes and bonds issued during the month. Trade Ratio denotes the ratio of total monthly TIPS trading volume by primary
dealers to total monthly Treasury note and bond trading volume by primary dealers. Fails denotes the total notional amount of repo failures reported
by primary dealers. The superscript ∗∗ denotes signiﬁcance at the ﬁve-percent level; the superscript ∗ denotes signiﬁcance at the ten-percent level.
The sample period is June 2004 to November 2009.

Systemic

VIX

Super
Senior

1.97∗
1.78∗
0.95
0.84

Credit
Swap
Spread

Conﬁdence

CDX

−0.16

0.95
0.95
0.30
0.42
1.21
1.28
0.81
0.75

Conf

−0.32
−0.17

1.57
1.55
0.20
0.41

−0.42

Flows

−0.83
−0.59
−1.00
−0.78

Supply

Liquidity

TIPS
Issue

Trsy
Issue

−1.86∗
−1.86∗
−1.90∗
−1.89∗
−1.58
−1.64
−1.81∗
−1.80∗

−1.80∗
−1.93∗
−2.00∗∗
−2.11∗∗
−1.52
−1.72∗
−1.97∗
−2.16∗∗

Trade
Ratio

0.33
0.37
0.38
0.38
0.14
0.23
0.28
0.27

Fails

2.86∗∗
4.02∗∗
2.05∗∗
3.07∗∗
4.82∗∗
5.77∗∗
3.31∗∗
8.28∗∗

R̄2

0.135
0.138
0.124
0.124
0.151
0.161
0.121
0.121

Table 5
Results from the Regression of Monthly Changes in the Absolute Value of TIPS–Treasury Mispricing on Monthly Changes in the
Absolute Value of Alternative Arbitrages. This table reports the coeﬃcients and Newey-West t-Statistics from the regression of the monthly
changes in the absolute value of TIPS–Treasury mispricing on the lagging, contemporaneous, and leading changes in the indicated explanatory
variables. The superscript ∗∗ denotes signiﬁcance at the ﬁve-percent level; the superscript ∗ denotes signiﬁcance at the ten-percent level. The sample
period is June 2004 to November 2009.
t+2

Δ Mispricing = α +
βi Arbi + .
i=t−2

Coeﬃcient
Explanatory
Variable

CDS Arbitrage
CDX Arbitrage

t-Statistic

α

Arb t−2

Arb t−1

Arb t

Arb t+1

Arb t+2

α

0.7018
0.8579

−0.0621
−0.4227

−0.0952
0.4362

0.3270
0.2662

0.0004
−0.0439

-0.0371
0.2325

0.44
0.59

Arb t−2

Arb t−1

−1.34
−1.25
−2.74∗∗
1.98∗

Arb t+1

Arb t+2

R̄2

3.64∗∗
0.00
1.90∗ −0.18

−0.55
1.11

0.386
0.289

Arb t

Table 6
Results from the Regression of Monthly Changes in TIPS–Treasury Mispricing on Monthly Hedge Fund Index Returns. This
tables reports the coeﬃcients and Newey-West t-statistics from the regression of monthly changes in TIPS–Treasury mispricing on the lagging,
contemporaneous, and leading monthly returns on the indicated hedge fund indexes. The superscript ∗∗ denotes signiﬁcance at the ﬁve-percent level;
the superscript ∗ denotes signiﬁcance at the ten-percent level. The sample period is June 2004 to November 2009.
t+2

βi Returni + .
Δ Mispricing = α +
i=t−2

Coeﬃcient
Hedge Fund
Index

Fixed Income Arb Return
Convertible Arb Return
Merger Arb Return

α Ret t−2

0.0102
0.0149
0.0465

Ret t−1

Ret t

t-Statistic
Ret t+1 Ret t+2

1.9364 −0.5506 −2.2664 −0.6103 0.0279
1.1255
0.1022 −3.0779
0.3795 -0.1268
2.6145 −5.8550 −0.5706 −3.8181 0.4253

α Ret t−2 Ret t−1

0.66
0.96
3.47∗∗

Ret t Ret t+1 Ret t+2

1.93∗ −0.50 −3.62∗∗ −0.52
1.90∗
0.11 −2.80∗∗ 0.61
1.30 −1.79∗ −0.26 −1.51

0.04
−0.15
−0.24

R̄2

0.141
0.182
0.141

