                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   THE EFFECTS OF COLLEGE COUNSELING ON HIGH-ACHIEVING, LOW-INCOME
                              STUDENTS

                                         Christopher Avery

                                        Working Paper 16359
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16359


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2010




This project would not have been possible without financial support from the Andrew Mellon Foundation
and the Jack Kent Cooke Foundation and the energetic participation of the counselors who worked
with students as part of the study. The Harvard Admissions Office and the College Board Search Service
provided lists of students for possible participation in the study. Connie Chung, Bernadette Doykos,
Sarah Kwon, and especially Travis St. Clair provided outstanding research assistance. Brad MacGowan
and Arvin Shapiro led training sessions for participating counselors and the Steinhardt Institute for
Higher Education Policy provided generous logistical support for the training session at New York
University. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Christopher Avery. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
The Effects of College Counseling on High-Achieving, Low-Income Students
Christopher Avery
NBER Working Paper No. 16359
September 2010
JEL No. I2,I22,I23

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper reports the results of a pilot study, using a randomized controlled trial to provide college
counseling to high-achieving students from relatively poor families. We followed 107 high school
seniors through the college admissions process in 2006-2007; we selected 52 of these students at random,
offering them ten hours of individualized college advising with a nearby college counselor. The counseling
had little or no effect on college application quality, but does seem to have influenced the choice of
where the students applied to college. We estimate that students offered counseling were 7.9 percentage
points more likely than students not offered counseling to enroll in colleges ranked by Barron’s as
“Most Competitive”, though this effect was not statistically significant. More than one-third of the
students who accepted the offer of counseling did not follow through on all of the advice they received.
Going beyond the framework of the randomized experiment, our statistical analysis suggests that
counseling would have had approximately twice as much effect if all students matched with counselors
had followed the advice of the counselors.


Christopher Avery
Harvard University
John F. Kennedy School of Government
79 John F. Kennedy Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
chris_avery@harvard.edu
Introduction

In the past fifty years, selective colleges have transformed themselves by opening their
gates to women, minorities, and many other students who could not have enrolled under
the old boy system that prevailed through World War II (Karabel, 2005, Lemann 1999).
But though their admission practices have become decidedly more egalitarian1, these
selective colleges still enroll relatively few students from poor families. If anything, the
representation of students from working class families has declined at Ivy League and
comparable colleges in past decades. For example, 10% of students enrolling in
Harvard’s class of 1970 were from families living below the poverty line (Karabel, p.
288). By contrast, a recent study of 28 institutions that are part of the Consortium on
Financing Higher Education (COFHE) indicates that only 10% of the students enrolled in
these colleges in 2001-2002 come from the bottom 40% of the income distribution, with
only about 5% falling below the poverty line2 (Hill, Winston, and Boyd, 2004).


The hallmark of the admissions process at selective colleges is “holistic review,”
evaluating each applicant on a comprehensive profile created from all the materials
submitted by that applicant.3 While this system enables colleges to admit students with a
variety of outstanding qualities in addition to numerical credentials, it may also favor
relatively wealthy students, who have the financial means and the savvy to craft college
applications that highlight their skills and minimize their flaws.4 It seems ironic that an



1
  See Karabel (2005) for detailed discussion of the historical shift in admissions practices. Two main
results of this shift have been the dramatic increase in applications to highly selective colleges along with a
corresponding increase in the concentration of high ability students at the most prestigious colleges. For
example, Frank (2001) observes that 43% of the students who scored above 700 on the SAT verbal section
in 1989 enrolled in one of the 33 colleges rated as “most competitive” by Barron’s, whereas only 33% of
students in this category did so in 1979. See also Hoxby (1997) for further evidence of the growing
concentration of high scoring students at the most selective colleges.
2
  Carnevale and Rose (2004) were among the first to publicize this phenomenon; the title of their paper
solidified the use of the term “low-income” to describe students from families with below-median income.
3
  In 2003, The Supreme Court upheld the affirmative action practices of the University of Michigan for
Law School admission (Grutter vs. Bollinger), but ruled that its affirmative action practices for
undergraduate admission violated the equal protection clause of the 14th Amendment (Gratz vs. Bollinger),
in part because the undergraduate admissions process did not constitute “holistic review”.
4
  In fact, holistic review was originally introduced in the 1920s to help justify the strong ties between Ivy
League colleges and elite preparatory schools; in 1930, a set of twelve preparatory schools provided one-
quarter of the students at Harvard, Princeton, and Yale (Karabel, 1984).
admissions system that is designed to identify the most interesting students may in fact be
implicitly biased in favor of those from the most privileged backgrounds.


Motivated by these facts, this paper reports the results of a randomized controlled trial of
the effects of college counseling for students from low-income backgrounds. The trial
was conducted as a pilot study with a relatively small number of participants, and the
goal of assessing the feasibility and desirability of a more ambitious study. With the help
of the College Board, we followed 100+ high school seniors through the college
admissions process in 2006-2007. All of these students lived in neighborhoods with
relatively low average incomes and attended high schools that tended not to have many
graduates enrolling in highly selective colleges. Just under half of the students were
offered the opportunity to receive ten hours of individualized advising from an
experienced college counselor, and most accepted this offer.


The small sample size for this pilot study dramatically limits the power of statistical
analysis of study data. For example, with a binary outcome measure (such as “enrolled at
college ranked ‘Most Competitive’ by the Barron’s Guide”) and a sample of 100
students, students offered counseling would have to enroll at a rate at least 20 percentage
points higher than those not offered counseling for a simple comparison of the outcomes
for the two groups to produce statistically significant results. The main goals of this pilot
study are to learn about the aspirations and choices of students in depth and to produce
some broad brush assessments of the (potential) value of expert counseling for highly-
qualified, low-income students. A related goal of the pilot study is to provide guidance
towards the design of future randomized trials with larger samples of students.


The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides a literature review, further explaining
the motivation for the study. Section 3 describes the logistics of the project and data used
in the study. Section 4 provides descriptive statistics and qualitative information about
the qualifications and college choices of the students. Section 5 provides formal
quantitative analysis of the results of college counseling in the study. Section 6 discusses
the implications of the results. Section 7 concludes.
II. Literature Review


There are several broad classes of explanations for the limited numbers of low-income
students at selective institutions. The first explanation is that there is a “pipeline
problem” – that there are disproportionately few low-income students who are qualified
to succeed at selective colleges (Winston and Boyd, 2005, Owings et al, 1995). A second
explanation is that financial constraints may limit the ability of some students to attend
selective colleges. Although these first two classes of explanations are undoubtedly of
practical importance, a series of recent studies indicate that highly-qualified low-income
students are disproportionately unlikely to enroll at selective colleges by comparison to
affluent peers with similar credentials (Winston and Hill, 2005). This disparity in
enrollment patterns even extends to highly selective public colleges (Pallais and Turner,
2007), a phenomenon that is unlikely to be the result of financial constraints.


This paper focuses on a third possibility, that talented students from low-income families
may not have enough information and expertise to navigate the college admission process
and enroll at the (selective) colleges that match their qualifications and interests. For
example, the initial results of Harvard’s Financial Aid Initiative supports the hypothesis
that talented low-income students do not realize that they can afford to attend selective
colleges.5 Harvard’s program actually represented a relatively small change in policy,
but was widely publicized and resulted in a large increase in applications for students
who qualified for it (Avery, Hoxby, et al., 2006).




5
  Past research suggests that most high school seniors in city public schools have aspirations for completing
a postsecondary degree and understand the economic value of a four-year degree (Dominitz and Manski,
1996, Avery and Kane, 2004, Rouse, 2004), but does not address the students’ knowledge about selective
colleges and financial aid programs at those colleges.
College Counseling
This project targets high achieving students at public high schools that send few
graduates to selective colleges. Counseling problems for these students are threefold: (1)
their schools lack counseling resources; a recent study by the National Center for
Education Statistics estimates an average of 315 students per full-time counselor;6 (2)
their counselors are overburdened with responsibilities other than college counseling;7 (3)
the counselors lack experience in advising students who are competitive candidates for
selective colleges. By contrast, even in cases where public schools in relatively wealthy
districts have large ratios of students per counselor, they also can implicitly rely on
outside resources to ensure that all of their graduates receive high quality counseling.8


The Independent Educational Consultants Association estimates that 22% of students
applying to competitive colleges receive one-on-one counseling beyond their high school
guidance system. Academic research confirms the presumption that “students who use
private counselors are economically privileged, have higher SAT scores and high school
academic records than the average college-bound students, and in general, are advice
seekers” (McDonough, 1997, p. 119; see also McDonough, Korn, and Yamasaki, 1997).
Based on market demand, the services of private college counselors are very valuable.
McDonough (1997) cited average prices between $25 and $125 per hour for private
counselors. At the upper extreme, some families pay thousands of dollars for the best-
known private counselors.9

6
  “High School Guidance Counseling,” National Center for Education Statistics, (2003). This figure is
remarkably consistent with a widely cited estimate from the early 1980s of 323 students per counselor in
the public schools (Coleman, Hoffer, Kilgore, 1982).
7
  Approximately one-third of the public schools in the National Center for Education Statistics study report
that their counselors devote more than 20% of their work time to “School attendance, discipline, and other
school and personal problems” (Table 14 of the report). In addition, 17% of public schools with less than
50% of graduates who are college-bound report that their counselors devote more than 10% of their work
time to “Non-guidance activities” including hall/lunch duty, substitute teaching, and bus duty.
8
  Nadella (2004) interviewed fifteen high school seniors from Newton North High School in suburban
Boston and found that five of them had hired outside counselors, while others were advised by well-
informed relatives and peers.8 As a result, the school counselors were able to focus their efforts on the few
students whose parents were “completely unfamiliar with the process”.
9
  “Before College, Costly Advice on Getting In,” (New York Times, July 19, 2009) cites counselors who
charge families up to $40,000 for their services
http://www.nytimes.com/2009/07/19/education/19counselor.html?pagewanted=all. See also “Seeking
College Admissions Help with Pricey Counselors. NPR Morning Edition, October 27, 2005,
http://www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?storyId=4976703.
There are two obvious ways that counseling could improve college application outcomes
for students. First, the counselor could offer suggestions to improve their decisions about
when and where to apply to college. Advice on colleges that best match their interests
may be of particular importance to low-income students (e.g. because their parents are
relatively unlikely to have graduated from college). Consistent with this view,
McDonough et al. (1998) find that low-income students are most likely to cite the US
News and World Report college rankings as an important source of information about
colleges, suggesting that these students lack other sources of information about colleges.


On a more advanced, strategic level, the counselor can help students choose a better
portfolio of applications. McDonough (1997) found that students at the least competitive
high school applied to many fewer colleges than the other students in her study.
Similarly, Avery and Turner (2009) find that low-income students in Virginia
disproportionately apply only to schools that they deem as “safety schools”. These
students clearly could have benefitted from expert strategic advice on where to apply.


The second obvious way that counseling can improve college application outcomes is by
improving the quality of a student’s application, generally by helping the student to craft
more compelling essays. As Ann Hulbert observed from her experience with the College
Summit program, many low-income students have wonderful stories to tell, but do not
realize that these stories would be of interest in a college application.10 Similarly, Avery
and Kane (2004) found that a number of qualified low-income students in their study did
not complete college applications, primarily because they were daunted by the prospect
of writing the application essay.




10
  “The New College Try,” Ann Hulbert, Slate.com, September 12, 2005
http://www.slate.com/id/2125147/.
III. Logistics of the Project
A. Selection of Participants
We selected students from the “Search File” of potentially qualified applicants provided
by the College Board to the Harvard Admissions Office.11 More than 60,000 students
nationwide appeared in the Harvard Search File for the high school graduating class of
2007. In the summer of 2006, we used the Harvard Search File to identify high school
seniors who live in relatively poor neighborhoods and who attend public high schools
that were not identified as likely “feeder schools” to most selective colleges.


Table 1 summarizes the steps by which we identified these high school seniors to invite
to participate in the study. First, we used geocoding software to produce estimates of
family income based on the data for the census blocks corresponding to the home
addresses of the students. We restricted eligibility for the project to students who attend
public high schools and who lived in census blocks with median income of $60,000 or
less and average income of $70,000 or less.
               Table 1: The Number of Possible Participants in the Project
        Participation Restrictions                            Number of Eligible Students
Students in CT, MA, NY, RI and in                                       8,475
Harvard Search File
  AND Matched to US Census                                                   8,310
  AND Public School                                                          6,185
  AND Low Income Neighborhood                                                1,265
  AND Not Attending Feeder School                                             853
  AND in CT, MA, RI, Brooklyn,                                                559
    Manhattan, Queens
  AND Minimum Estimated Income,                                               214
    One or Two Students per High School.

Based on past records from the Harvard Admissions office and consultation with
participating guidance counselors in each state, we excluded students from forty high-
performing public high schools. To simplify logistics, we excluded students in New

11
   We received this list directly from the Harvard Admissions Office with prior authorization from the
College Board. This list consists of high school seniors who are deemed as competitive applicants for
admission to Harvard based on their PSAT or SAT scores, self-reported grades, academic interests and
other demographic information. The minimum standard for inclusion in the list, as set by the Harvard
Admissions Office, varies by student demographics and academic interests, and cannot be easily
summarized.
York state except those in four areas of New York City: Bronx, Brooklyn, Manhattan,
and Queens. This left 559 students as potential participants in the project. Finally, we
selected 214 students to invite to participate based on minimum estimated income and a
self-imposed restriction to include no more than two students per high school (to limit
idiosyncratic effects related to particular schools).


We mailed introductory information about the project along with a self-addressed
stamped return envelope and a parental consent form in September 2006 to each of these
214 students. Each student was offered a $100 stipend for participation. The
introductory information included full information about the series of interviews and
surveys that participants would be asked to complete, but did not mention that some
students would be chosen on a randomized basis and offered individualized college
counseling. A total of 202 eligible students received invitations to participate in the
project.12 110 students returned the parental consent form, and were formally included in
the project. Of these 110 participants, all but three completed the study.13


Table 2 summarizes participation by state. A total of 49 male and 58 female students
participated in the project, with 23 of the male and 29 of the female students also
receiving offers individualized of college counseling.


              Table 2: Participation in the Research Project by State
        State     Number of Students Who               Number of Students
                     Agreed to Participate             Offered (Accepting)
                                                Individualized College Counseling
Connecticut                    18                              9 (8)
Massachusetts                  42                             22 (18)
New York                       39                             17 (16)
Rhode Island                    8                              4 (3)
TOTAL                         107                             52 (45)



12
   Two of these students proved to be ineligible for the project: one is delaying high school graduation and
another actually attends a school that we had excluded from the project. We had incorrect addresses for an
additional ten students; these students never received the invitation to participate in the project.
13
   Two students made formal requests to be withdrawn from the study. A third provided incorrect contact
information and never returned any study materials.
As students returned their consent forms, we matched them into pairs who lived relatively
close to each other and in neighborhoods with similar median incomes. We then
randomly selected one student in each pair to be offered ten hours of individualized
college counseling with an experienced local counselor. We stopped selecting students
for counseling once we had consent forms from (approximately) 100 students. Using this
process, we offered college counseling to 52 students and 45 of them accepted the offer.14

Although not all students who were offered counseling accepted the offer and met with a
counselor, we evaluate the effect of the counseling throughout the paper based on “Intent
to Treat” (i.e. proceeding as if everyone who was offered the chance to receive
counseling actually did so). Otherwise we would never be able to disentangle the
connection between the choice to participate in counseling sessions and the value of the
counseling for individual students.

B. The College Counseling Curriculum

Twenty-eight experienced college counselors worked with students as part of the project.
With one exception, these counselors were all employed in full-time college counseling
positions at well-known high schools at the time of the study.15 Each counselor worked
with one or two students matched with them by geography. One additional counselor
served as “Lead Counselor” for the study, devising a standardized curriculum and
organizing training sessions to ensure uniformity across meetings with students.


The counseling curriculum focused on the choice of where to apply to college (sessions 1
to 4) and the details of completing application forms and essays (sessions 5 to 8). The
final two sessions in the spring were devoted to understanding financial aid and choosing
a college. This curriculum emphasized the importance of helping students to make
informed choices; participating counselors were given no information about how the


14
   We invited at most two students per high school to participate in the project. For schools with two
participants, we decided that both students should be offered counseling or neither student should be
offered counseling. Apart from this complication, students were chosen for counseling on a simple
randomized basis.
15
   The counselors were compensated $50 per hour for their work with students for the study – which they
conducted above and beyond the requirements of their regular jobs.
results of the counseling would be evaluated. In particular, the counselors were never
directed to recommend applications to selective colleges. There was no mention of the
Barron’s or any other college rankings in the training sessions


The counselors began meeting with students in October, 2006. Most of the meetings took
place at public places, such as libraries, near the students’ homes, though some meetings
took place by prior arrangement at either the student’s or the counselor’s school. The
counselors deviated from the curriculum to some degree at the request of students to
focus on the areas of greatest need. In some cases, the counselors and students agreed to
truncate their set of meetings, especially during the spring in instances where the student
had an obvious choice of college and did not need further support.


C. Data and Empirical Approach
The study consisted of a series of three phone interviews and two written surveys over
the course of the academic year. Nearly all participants completed all three phone
interviews, and most, though not all, completed both written surveys. In addition, we
asked all participants to submit a copy of a completed college application to us; we
recruited three of the participating guidance counselors with college admissions
experience to evaluate these applications. A total of 80 students provided sufficient
information for their applications to be evaluated.16


Participating guidance counselors provided written reports of their meetings with
students. We also interviewed them at length about their interactions with each student
over the course of the year.


We rely, for the most part, on the Barron’s college rankings for the purposes of
evaluating the admissions and enrollment decisions of students in the study. These
rankings classify colleges into broad categories of selectivity, thereby avoiding some of
the well-known pitfalls of numerical ranking schemes such as those used by US News

16
  Some students had to send piecemeal components of their application rather than a formal completed
application because they did not realize that the Common Application website deletes accounts from the
previous year in early June.
and others. In particular, the Barron’s rankings are quite consistent from year to year,
and are not generally affected by machinations designed to influence the US News
rankings. We focus on the top tier of colleges, designated “Most Competitive” in the
Barron's rankings, and we use the 2007 Barron’s rankings throughout the analysis.
IV. Descriptive Statistics and Results from Qualitative Interviews

The goal of the project is to learn about the nature of the college application process for
students who are 1) high achievers; 2) attending high schools that do not ordinarily send
graduates to selective colleges; 3) from disadvantaged backgrounds (e.g. first-generation
to college and/or from low SES background). Our interviews and surveys revealed that
the students do indeed have these characteristics.

            Table 3: Numerical Qualifications for Subgroups of Students
                               Offered Counseling        Not Offered Counseling
 Average SAT Combined                 1294.2                      1289.8
          Scores*
        Class Rank*                   95.2%                        95.7%
Neither Parent Graduated              45.4%                        40.4%
       from College*
Very Rare for Graduates               45.6%                        63.5%
    from HS to Attend
  Selective Colleges **
  Took SAT-2 Test(s)*                 82.7%                        78.2%
   Fee Waivers for All                41.7%                        36.0%
     Applications ***
   Initial First Choice               75.0%                        69.1%
      College Ranked
 “Most Competitive” **
* Computed from information provided by students in the fall survey (#1 of 2 surveys).
** Computed from information provided by students in the fall interview (#1 of 3 interviews).
*** Computed from information provided by students in the winter interview (#2 of 3 interviews).


A. Academic Credentials:
The students who participated in the study are indeed high achievers. As shown in Table
3, they scored well on the SAT, with mean combined math and critical reasoning score of
1290. Perhaps even more impressive, the average class rank of these students was in the
95th percentile of their high school classes; nearly half of the students were in the 99th
percentile of their high school cohort in class rank.


B. Parental Income and Education
We did not ask the students directly about their family finances. Just under 40% (38 of
98 who responded to this interview question) of participants reported that they received
formal fee waivers for (almost) all of their applications.17 The official criterion for a fee
waiver is based on the federal poverty level and translates to a family income of
approximately $30,000 / year.18 With some conspicuous exceptions, our interviews
suggested that the vast majority of participants come from families with relatively low
incomes. Along these same lines, several of the counselors described situations of clearly
disadvantaged students.
         His mother is doing custodial work and his father [who lives abroad] won’t
         contribute anything.19

         Her mom was working temp jobs …Her father is down south – he hasn’t been
         seen in years.

         Her dad left the family and her mother was a crack addict. She was shipped off to
         relatives in the south until high school when her mother was deemed well enough
         to have her back.

         Before [working with this student], I thought I knew what poverty was, but I was
         wrong.

Similarly, nearly half of the students come from families where neither parent has a
college degree. Just more than one-quarter of the students come from families where
both parents hold college degrees; nine reported that both parents hold graduate degrees.


We asked students to report their “Expected Family Contribution” (EFC) from the
completion of FAFSA forms on the second written survey completed in the spring of the
study. Eighty-eight students completed this survey and sixty-two of them provided
information about the EFC. More than half (51.6%) of these respondents reported an
EFC indicated an EFC less than $5,000, roughly corresponding to family income of
$50,000 to $60,000 or less.20 Students who did not apply for federal financial aid would
not be able to respond to this question about the level of EFC. This suggests a non-

17
   A much greater percentage of students reported that they had received a fee waiver from one or two
specific colleges, but these fee waivers did not seem to be based on family incomes.
18
   In several cases, our interviews suggested that students who did not receive fee waivers might well have
qualified for them, and also that some students who did receive fee waivers probably did not meet the
official guidelines.
19
   Quotations from qualitative interviews with counselors are italicized to differentiate from quotations
from qualitative interviews with students.
20
   There is not a direct correspondence between family income and EFC because the EFC varies with
family composition and the number of children in the family who are currently enrolled in college.
response bias in estimating the number of poor families based on the EFC results, but
some students had yet to learn their EFC when they completed the survey. There are also
other reasons that students would not be able to answer this question (e.g. a POSSE
scholarship winner might not need to complete federal aid forms).21


C. High School Rigor and Peer Networks
We systematically excluded low-income students from high schools where we knew that
many of the graduates attend selective colleges. A student at one of these schools whose
family is unfamiliar with college admissions will likely be able to make up this deficit
through informal advising from sophisticated classmates. Not surprisingly given this
selection rule, the majority of participants attended schools that they perceived to be
relatively weak, as they explained in their interviews.
        My high school … is being taken over by the state or already has been.

        I have a school profile. Let me get it out… The graduation rate is 66%. The
        dropout rate is 22.9%. The percent that go to college is 36%. Those are the four-
        year colleges. The ones that go to two-year is [about] 24%. … Have you seen the
        movie “Lean on Me”? It’s kind of like that.

        When my class entered in 2003, there were 350 kids in our class. Now, we just
        got ranked. They only ranked 243 kids. Somewhere we lost 110 kids.

These schools tend to offer few advanced courses, holding back the participants, who
could clearly take on greater academic challenges.

        It’s not very good academically, I won’t lie. They offer two AP courses, AP Calc
        and Art. There are 9 or 10 honors classes, but the requirements aren’t too hard.

        I guess in comparison to other high schools in the state, it’s a pretty good high
        school. There’s not many fights or anything like that. We don’t have AP courses
        or anything like that.

        Since it’s a [technical] school, they don’t really have good academics. … I
        haven’t had math in two years. I haven’t had foreign language at all since I had
        foreign language in junior high. I didn’t have science last year or English because
        it interfered with my major. I haven’t had math in two years.

21
  Among all participants, 43.6% of those who reported an EFC also stated that they had received
application fee waivers, while 31.8% of those who did not report an EFC stated that they had received
application fee waivers. This suggests that students who did not report an EFC come from somewhat
poorer families, but not dramatically poorer families than those who did report a value for the EFC.
We asked the participants in the project about the percentage of graduates from their high
schools who attend four-year colleges and separately about the number of graduates who
attend selective or out-of-state colleges. More than half indicated that it is very rare for
graduates from their high schools to attend selective colleges.
       You’ve got the people who are going to community colleges for nursing, there’s
       another level that wants to go to U Mass Boston. And then there are people
       applying to Holy Cross and Boston U.

       People are surprised that I’m trying for those kind of [selective] schools, most
       people would expect you to go to a public school or Bristol Community College.

       Most of my friends, not to be rude, are not as smart as me, so I don’t think they
       have such high aspirations. My best friend is considering Temple, just because he
       has connections in Philly. My other friends are considering community college,
       which is not something I want to do.

D. Information from High School Guidance Counselors

The motivation for the study was the presumption that the students targeted for the
project suffer from limited access to counseling. Consistent with this view, many
students explained that they had very limited useful contact with their school counselors.
       The college advisor at my school – he has 243 kids to talk to. Unfortunately I just
       had my college meeting with him. It was like 10 minutes, filling out a
       questionnaire. It’s going to take us 4 months to get through everyone. Also we
       have to turn in our college applications by Nov 13th.

       I was kind of apprehensive of getting information from him because he had
       messed up other people’s applications.

       If we walked into guidance, you would find not much, only in-state schools.
       Nothing that I would call competitive. For all that stuff, you had to go online and
       it was just harder to get information.

        They told me to go to collegeboard.com. … They said, ‘Do your own research’
        because we don’t have the things you need that meet your GPA and SAT score.
Just less than one-quarter of the students cited their guidance counselors as their most
important source of information about college admissions. Most of these students
described fruitful interactions where they received sensible advice.
       She basically helps you in every conceivable way: the SATs, how to choose
       courses and how it will look like to colleges, helps you with your essay, your
       application, she makes sure that you’re looking at the right colleges, visiting
       them, doing everything you’re supposed to.

A handful of students explained that they had received extensive advice and supervision
from an outside program rather than from their guidance counselors.
       [I participate in] SEO – Scholars for Educational Opportunity – it’s helping
       minority kids get into or apply to selective colleges. We take essay writing
       classes so I learned to write my personal statement. They also helped set me
       up with my enrichment program over the summer. I went to Argentina, stayed
       with a family, did community service. … They take us on college visits. I
       feel that they’ve really been the most important thing.

Several counselors associated with the study commented that only very entrepreneurial
students would receive adequate attention from the guidance office at these schools.
       He is a little shy – one of those kids who could have gone on his own for a long
       time – for a while he was avoiding his counselor. He felt kind of nervous,
       apprehensive, not clear what the meeting would be about.

       The school didn’t even have free material – like SAT preparation. It’s not clear
       that the transcripts and letters of recommendation ever got sent up [to colleges].

Some counselors associated with the study felt that the students they were assisting had
been misdirected by their school counselors.
       I told him to make an appointment to talk with his guidance counselor about his
       letter of recommendation and she basically told him to write his letter of
       recommendation because she didn’t have time to write it. I edited his letter and
       his guidance counselor sent a different letter. She said that his letter was ‘way
       too long and that’s not what colleges are looking for.’ The letter that the
       guidance counselor produced was terrible – including nothing personal about
       him at all – it read like a form letter.

       Her counselor was telling her to go to community college.

       Her [high school] counselor told her not to apply early – that early applications
       were ‘for impatient kids who can’t wait for a decision’. She wanted to apply early
       to Harvard and was confused because I was encouraging her to do it. At the end
       … she added schools that didn’t make sense and never even applied to Harvard.
E. First Choice Colleges and College Enrollment
One explanation for the paucity of low-income students at selective colleges is that these
students, even the most qualified, are unlikely to apply to selective colleges. For the most
part, we find that this explanation does not apply to the participants in the study. Table 4
lists the popular colleges for students in the study, including each college that was the
initial first choice or that ultimately enrolled three or more participants in the study.


There was surprising consensus among participants. More than 60% of the students
listed one of six colleges - five Ivy League schools and MIT – as their initial first choice.
Almost all of the students in the New York area had visited or were applying to Columbia
and/or NYU, and almost all of the Massachusetts students were applying to selective
colleges in Boston. Although many students were not accepted at their first-choice
colleges, they were still quite successful in admissions outcomes. A total of 18 students
are attending one of the six colleges that were initially most popular and three additional
students are attending Ivy League colleges (one each at Dartmouth, Penn, and Princeton).

                  Table 4: Popular College for Study Participants
           College               First Choice College at      Number of Students
                                    Outset of Study *             Enrolling *
       Harvard College                 22 (21.6%)                  6 (5.7%)
    Columbia University                11 (10.8%)                  2 (1.9%)
     Cornell University                 10 (9.8%)                  3 (2.8%)
             MIT                         8 (7.8%)                  1 (1.0%)
       Yale University                   6 (5.9%)                  3 (2.8%)
      Brown University                   5 (4.9%)                  4 (3.8%)
   Northeastern University               4 (3.9%)                  3 (2.8%)
       Boston College                    3 (2.9%)                  2 (1.9%)
    New York University                  3 (2.9%)                  3 (2.8%)
  University of Connecticut            3 (2.9 %%)                  2 (1.9%)
 University of Massachusetts,            2 (2.0%)                  3 (2.8%)
           Amherst
      Boston University                  1 (1.0%)                  6 (5.7%)
       Tufts University                  1 (1.0%)                  4 (3.8%)
  University of Rhode Island             0 (0.0%)                  3 (2.8%)
            Other                    23 (22.5% each)              61 (58.1%)
* 102 students provided sufficient information in the fall interview to identify a first-choice college; 105
students provided sufficient information in spring survey and/or interview to identify their final choice of
college.
V. Evaluating the Effects of Counseling

The descriptive statistics in Table 3 indicate that the group of students who were offered
counseling were quite similar in characteristics to the group of students who were not
offered counseling.22 The largest disparity between the groups was that a substantially
higher proportion of students not offered counseling reported that it was very rare for
graduates of their high schools to attend selective colleges.


Since the two groups of students are similar for the most part, straightforward statistical
comparisons provide roughly equivalent results. One overarching pattern in the results is
that participants who identified an initial first-choice college ranked by Barron’s as “Most
Competitive” (75% of all participants) had substantially different patterns of applications
and college choices than did the remainder of the students. We report regression results
separately for (1) all students and (2) the subset of students with initial first-choice
colleges that were “Most Competitive”. Of course, some students who were offered
counseling may have altered their first-choice college as a result of initial meetings with
counselors, though we have no evidence of instances where this occurred.23 For this
reason, we exclude information about initial first-choice college from regression analysis
for the entire sample of students.


A. Choice of Where to Apply
Figure 1 demonstrates the average number of applications submitted by students offered
and not offered counseling. The calculations for this figure exclude seven participants,
including four who were offered counseling, who were admitted and enrolled through
Early Decision programs. These students either withdrew or did not submit any other
applications. Since they did not submit a full roster of applications, we exclude them



22
   The students were assigned at random in order to assure that each group would be similar in terms of
geographic location and average incomes for the neighborhoods where they lived, but there was no
assurance that this procedure would yield groups of students that would be similar in other characteristics.
23
   We identified “initial first-choice colleges” for each student from fall phone interviews; these interviews
were conducted when the students had met with the counselors (at most) a few times. There were no
instances where either a student or a counselor reported that their initial meetings caused the student to
change his or her first-choice college.
from the analysis in this section.24 Students offered counseling, particularly those who
had a “Most Competitive” first choice college, applied on average to more “Most
Competitive” colleges than did those who were not offered counseling, though this
difference in numbers is not statistically significant.

We divided the set of “Most Competitive” colleges into two groups:
         Most Competitive Group 1: The most selective among “Most Competitive”
colleges (the Ivy League Colleges, Cal Tech, Duke, MIT, Stanford, Williams)
         Most Competitive Group 2: All other “Most Competitive” colleges.


Across all students, as presented in the left two sets of bars in Figure 1, those offered
counseling submitted more applications overall and significantly more applications to this
“Most Competitive Group 2” colleges (an average of 1.77 applications for those offered
counseling vs. an average of 1.20 applications for those not offered counseling; this
difference is significant at the 10% level).


These differences in application patterns are more pronounced for students who had
initial first-choice colleges ranked “Most Competitive”, as presented in the right two set
of bars in Figure 1. Within this subgroup of ambitious students, those offered counseling
submitted an average of 2.23 applications to “Most Competitive, Group 2” colleges,
while those not offered counseling submitted an average of 1.38 applications to “Most
Competitive, Group 2” colleges (this difference is significant at the 5% level).25




24
    Five participants, all of whom were offered counseling, received special scholarships from either POSSE
or Questbridge that matched them with particular colleges. Four of them accepted this offer, but given the
timing of the offers, all but one of them applied and received admissions decisions from other colleges. We
exclude the one student who received a special scholarship and applied to only one college from analysis in
Figure 1 and throughout this section (as one of the seven students described as Early Decision admits in the
text).
25
   Interestingly, students offered counseling were somewhat more likely to have a first choice college
among the 13 most selective colleges in the “Most Competitive” category (34 of 38 vs. 29 of 37), so the
differences in application patterns do not seem to be a function of the particular first-choice college for
each student.
                              Figure 1: Average Number of Applications
     8



     7



     6



     5

                                                                                                           Overall
     4                                                                                                     "Most Comp"
                                                                                                           "Most Comp 2"

     3



     2



     1



     0
         Offered Counseling   Not Offered Counseling      Offered & First Choice =   Not Offered & First
                                                                    MC                 Choice = MC




The results in Figure 1 are consistent with comments from counselors, who indicated that
students were ambitious but not very sophisticated in forming their college lists.
            I knew that there might be a lack of information out there, but I was surprised that
            the gap was as big as it was.

            She had no idea of the Reach / Match / Safety categorization.

            She was focused on Harvard, but probably was not strong enough a candidate.

            She was thinking only in terms of Ivy League schools, but her scores were not
            high enough to be really competitive.

            Her initial list was just top tier schools.

            He was applying high, but didn’t know about the middle.

Of course, the counselors were not particularly oriented to “Most Competitive” colleges
in the Barron’s classifications.26 They did not always recommend that students should
apply to more colleges or focus on more selective colleges. Their main goals were for


26
     We provided counselors with no specific information about how we would evaluate their results.
students to identify colleges that matched their interests and qualifications and to create
sensible college lists. In the best cases, study counseling helped students to refine their
college lists to include only excellent matches and better strategic choices.
       As a result of working with her, I applied to colleges that fit me better and had
       what I wanted. As a result, I was able to write better about my interests in those
       colleges, and that improved my chances of being able to get in.

       When I came to her, I had a small list. I would have done myself a disservice had
       it stayed that way.

       He helped me find a balance between safety, match, and tough schools, rather
       than applying to all really tough schools.

       Because of her, I added University of Rochester, Dartmouth, and Michigan.
       [but] … she took out a few safety schools. I applied to the University of
       Pittsburgh Early Action [and was admitted early]. She asked me about a few
       safety schools -- would I rather go there or Pitt? I said I would rather go to Pitt,
       so there would be no point applying to those schools.

Only one student expressed any complaints about advice from the counselor.

       He was trying to convince me to apply to schools that I had researched and
       decided not to apply to. He would try to convince me to apply anyway. … I
       thought he was trying to make it seem more of his choice than my choice. I didn’t
       ask for his help as much as I should have because I thought he might not agree
       with all the decisions I was making.

Table A1 (see Appendix) presents regression analysis results to assess the effect of being
“offered counseling” on total number of applications and on the number of applications
submitted to colleges ranked by Barron’s as “Most Competitive”. Consistent with the
results of Tables 5, these regression results suggest a positive but statistically
insignificant effect of counseling on applications to “Most Competitive” colleges. The
results in columns (5) and (6), with applications to “Less Selective, Most Competitive”
colleges are on the borderline of statistical significance. For students with an initial first
choice college that was “Most Competitive”, the result in column (6) indicates a point
estimate of an increase of 0.66 applications per student to colleges in this category for
those offered counseling.
B. Application Quality and Admissions Decisions
College application essays take on almost mythical importance in the minds of high
school students. But the student participants in this project often have limited experience
or training in analytic writing, particularly about themselves, as exemplified by the
following comments from study counselors.
       She had so many strong points that she wasn’t addressing in the essay.

       Students think about these essays as more than they actually are, but you’re not
       going to get it published. He started out with a metaphorical, obscure essay.

       It was hard for him to be confident that someone would care about his voice.

Almost all of the study counselors reported that they had helped students with their
essays, giving editorial suggestions to help tighten the writing and strengthen the
students’ presentation of themselves. On a more basic level, several counselors felt that
helped to identify and eliminate unacceptable aspects from the essays.
       [I encouraged her] to reorient her essay from [focusing on] complaints about
       mother to about [emphasizing] her own business.

       Her [initial] essay was really dark.

       I think he would have left in disparaging remarks about his classmates in his
       essay [if I hadn’t advised him to remove them].

       He wasn’t aware that his essay could be perceived as offensive or that it included
       a lot of anger towards women.

Still, in several cases, the counselors explained that they were less than satisfied with a
student’s final application, because they wanted to make sure that the application
represented the student’s own work.
       She had strong SAT math scores, but her essay was extremely literal. Her writing
       was clear and grammatically correct, but very flat and factual. We discussed
       [and worked on] her essay, but it ended up lacking depth.

       She was limited in the end by her writing style.

       There is a fine line of providing assistance and maintaining student’s voice. [In
       the end] he is what he is.

       It [the final version] was not as tight as I would have liked, but it was all his.
In addition, some students were not always responsive to suggestions from their study
counselors about how to improve their essays.
         He didn’t have any sense of how to present himself in essays. We discussed a
         story of a racial incident at his school – I thought he was quite heroic – but he
         was reticent to write about it.

         They wanted to get the task done for essays, but not to the degree that I would
         have liked.

         I’m not sure how much he took my advice. [His essay was] fascinating, but too
         technical. I didn’t see his final application. He would only take so much help.

We asked three study counselors with extensive college admissions experience to assess
the essays and applications for the students they did not know. Eighty students provided
sufficient information to enable the counselors to rate their materials; almost all of them
were evaluated by two counselors. The counselors graded both the essay and the overall
quality of the application on a standard “A = 4”, “B = 3”, “C = 2”, “D = 1”, “F = 0” scale.


Figure 2 compares the average grades on essays and applications for students who were
matched with counselors to those for students who were not matched with counselors.
The average ratings for students offered counseling were slightly higher than for those
not offered counseling, but by small amounts that are not statistically significant.

                            Figure 2: Application Ratings for Participating Students

  4



 3.5



  3



 2.5


                                                                                                         Application Rating
  2
                                                                                                         Essay Rating


 1.5



  1



 0.5



  0
       Offered Counseling    Not Offered Counseling       Offered & First Choice   Not Offered & First
                                                                  = MC               Choice = MC
Table A2 presents regression analysis results to assess the effect of being “offered
counseling” on application and essay quality. None of the results are significant and in
three of four specifications, the point estimates for the effect of counseling are actually
negative (though close to zero). This suggests that counseling had little or no discernible
effect on application quality.

Admissions Outcomes

Table 5 summarizes the admissions outcomes for students in the study. Across all
students in the study, nearly two-thirds of applications resulted in positive outcomes of
admission. Further, Table 5 indicates that these students were very likely to be admitted
to all but colleges classified as “Most Competitive”. For example, among those offered
counseling, the only student to be rejected from “Very Competitive” or less competitive
colleges had an unusually low SAT math score of 420, more than 100 points below the
score for any other student in the study.


Given that we find very little effect of counseling on application quality, there is little
reason to anticipate an effect of counseling on admissions outcomes conditional on
applying. Not surprisingly, the admission results for the two groups of students, as
reported in Table 5 are quite similar.
           Table 5: Admissions Decisions and Barron’s College Ranking
 Barron’s College           All                Offered            Not Offered
  Classification                              Counseling          Counseling
 Most Competitive 45.0% (127 of 282)       47.3% (69 of 146)   42.6% (58 of 136)
      Highly         82.4% (136 of 165)    80.5% (62 of 77)     84.1% (74 of 88)
   Competitive
 Very Competitive     91.1% (72 of 79)     93.6% (29 of 31)     89.6% (43 of 48)
      Other          97.5% (116 of 119)    94.4% (51 of 54)     100% (65 of 65)
     TOTAL           69.9% (451 of 645) 68.5% (211 of 308) 71.2% (240 of 337)
* Based on responses to spring survey and interview. These tabulations include results for 100 students.
C. College Choices
Figure 3 compares the college choices for students, with the colleges classified by their
Barron’s ranking. Based on these results, the margin of interest in terms of enrollment is
between “Most Competitive” and “Highly Competitive” colleges in the Barron’s
rankings. Including all students in the study, those offered counseling were 9.3
percentage points more likely to enroll in “Most Competitive” colleges. Restricting
attention only to those students whose original first choice college was “Most
Competitive”, those offered counseling were 9.9 percentage points more likely to enroll
in “Most Competitive” colleges. Interestingly, students not offered counseling were
approximately 10 percentage points more likely to enroll in “Highly Competitive”
colleges. That is, if there was any effect of counseling, it promoted students from
“Highly Competitive” colleges to “Most Competitive” colleges.

                             Figure 3: College Choices of Students
 100%


  90%


  80%


  70%


  60%

                                                                                                Most Competitive
  50%                                                                                           Highly Competitive
                                                                                                Other
  40%


  30%


  20%


  10%


   0%
        Offered Counseling    Not Offered        Offered & First Choice   Not Offered & First
                              Counseling                 = MC               Choice = MC


The treatment effects suggested by the point estimates in Figure 3 are reasonably large in
magnitude, but are only about half as large as necessary for statistical significance given
the small sample size of the pilot study. Table A4 presents regression analysis results to
assess the effect of being “offered counseling” on admission and enrollment to “Most
Competitive” colleges. These regression results provide point estimates of a 1.6
percentage point increase in probability of admission to at least one “Most Competitive”
college and an 7.9 percentage point increase in probability of enrollment in a “Most
Competitive” college, (in Columns 1 and 3 of Table A4) though none of these results is
statistically significant.


Six counselors identified cases where they believed that their work with students clearly
resulted in the change in the student’s ultimate choice of college. In four cases, a student
enrolled at a college where he/she would not have applied without the advice of the
counselor.27 A fifth counselor indicated that the student dramatically improved her
application in their work together; he believes that the student would not have been
admitted to the college that she chose (Harvard) without counseling. A sixth counselor
explained that a student followed her advice that Amherst College was a better match
than Boston University, but would otherwise have chosen Boston University.


Qualitative interviews these six students suggest that three of them would not have
enrolled in “Most Competitive” colleges without counseling. These three students had
second-choice colleges that were not “Most Competitive”. Since 52 students were
offered counseling, the interviews suggest a lower-bound of 3 / 52 = 5.8% for the point
estimate of the effect of counseling on the number of students enrolling in “Most
Competitive” colleges. This lower-bound from qualitative interviews is generally
consistent with the tabulations in Table 9 and the regression results in Table A4.




27
  These colleges were Bates College, Case Western Reserve, Cooper Union, and Dartmouth College. Each
of these four students confirmed in separate qualitative interviews that they would not have applied to these
colleges on their own.
VI. Discussion

The results of this pilot study suggest several important observations about the effects of
individualized counseling. First, the nature and value of college counseling depends
critically on the geographic location of students. Given that the students in this study
were all located near Ivy League colleges, it is not surprising that the majority of students
(both those offered and not offered counseling) were ambitious in their choice of
applications. As described in Section 5, counselors in the study generally encouraged
students to consider and to apply to a wider range of schools just below the most
selective. But in a different geographical context, the counselors would likely have
shaped a different approach.28


Second, the study suggests that counselors are much more likely to influence student
outcomes through the choice of where to apply rather than by helping students to improve
the quality of their applications. In fact, counseling might have had even greater effect
on application strategies if the counselors had met with students before the fall of the
senior year of high school. Given the timing of the study, the counselors had little ability
to influence the choice of college visits and early application strategies for students.
Moreover, given the timing of the study, the counselors had no opportunity to advise
students on their academic and extracurricular choices during the course of high school.


Third, any positive effect of college counseling – at least for this targeted group of high-
achieving, low-income students - is likely to be incremental rather than dramatic. Even if
we take the point estimates for the effect of counseling as accurate (though they are
statistically insignificant for the sample size of the current study), the primary effect of
counseling for this group of students is to shift enrollment from “Highly Competitive” to
“Most Competitive” colleges. It is also possible that counseling helped students to enroll
at more suitable colleges within a given Barron’s classification level, but it is beyond the
scope of the study to identify such effects.

28
  Avery and Turner (2009) studied the application patterns for students in Virginia. Though the students in
the two studies had similar qualifications, those in Virginia submitted many fewer applications on average
and were much less likely to apply to “Most Competitive” colleges, even though two public colleges in
Virginia (University of Virginia and College of William and Mary) are ranked “Most Competitive”.
Fourth, the effect of counseling is limited by both the need of students for expert advice
and by the willingness of students to follow that advice. Among the 52 students offered
counseling, seven refused the offer. Six of these seven students are attending “Most
Competitive” colleges (Brown, Duke, Harvard (2), MIT, NYU),29 and did not need
counseling to be confident of a good outcome in the admissions process.


Of the 45 students who accepted the offer of counseling, more than one-third (35.6%) did
not always follow the advice of the counselors about where to apply. Four students
agreed to meet with counselors but never did so; they missed appointments and did not
respond to follow-up invitations from those counselors. Three of these students
originally identified a first-choice college that was “Most Competitive”, but none are
attending a “Most Competitive” college.


Among the 41 students who met with a study counselor, nearly 30% of the students did
not follow through on that advice, not applying to certain colleges that the counselors
viewed as critical to their success. In three cases, the counselor made fruitless
arrangements for visits to particular colleges.
           Initially he was interested in Brown. I suggested Wesleyan and Tufts and even set
           up an interview for him at Wesleyan, but he never applied [to any of these three].

           I got her late admission to a weekend for minority students at Holy Cross – where
           she would have done well – but she didn’t apply.

           He didn’t follow up on my arrangement for a free trip to Tufts. I was desperately
           trying to get him to apply to Tufts or Harvard, but he was worried about fee
           waivers and he wouldn’t do it.

The first two students referenced in the quotations above are not attending “Most
Competitive” colleges in the Barron’s list, but it seems at least reasonably likely that they
would be doing so if they had visited and applied to the colleges that were suggested by
study counselors. Similarly, one study counselor suggested particular “Most
Competitive” colleges to each of the two students he advised, but they did not apply and
ultimately enrolled at less selective colleges.


29
     The seventh student explained that he had already decided to enroll at the local community college.
       I pushed him towards Carnegie Mellon [for his interest in engineering] and he
       didn’t apply. He would have gotten in and I would have put him in touch with the
       minority recruiter, but it may have seemed too far away to him.

       I gave her a list of more competitive schools … She would have been a likely
       candidate at a lot of these schools since she is demographically interesting, but
       there was just no moving her on this. I sent a list of 15 colleges to her, but she
       didn’t apply to any of them.

Another student did not retake the SAT even though the study counselor clearly believed
that this would have dramatically enhanced his opportunities.
       It wasn’t that he hadn’t done so well – I just knew that he would do better. …
       Then I tried to talk him into the ACT, but he just wouldn’t do it.

We reviewed the cases of each student who was offered counseling but did not ultimately
enroll at a “Most Competitive” college, and classified them into six separate categories,
as represented in Table 6
                  Table 6 Results for Students Offered Counseling,
                     Not Enrolled at “Most Competitive” College
                     Category                            Number of Students
1. Received POSSE or Questbridge Scholarship                    2 (8%)
2. Admitted to “Most Competitive”, Did Not Enroll               2 (8%)
3. Applied to “Most Competitive”, Not Admitted                  7 (28%)
4. Did Not Apply to “Most Competitive”:                         2 (8%)
    First-Choice College in a Different Category

5. Did Not Meet with Counselor                                        4 (16%)
6. Met with Counselor, Did Not Follow Advice                          8 (32%)
                     TOTAL                                               25

Categories 1 through 4 in Table 6 include students who (probably) achieved the best
outcome possible given the advice of the study counselors. Categories 1 and 2 consist of
students who preferred their opportunities and generous scholarships at colleges not
ranked as “Most Competitive”. Categories 3 and 4 consist of students who were probably
not admissible or were poor matches for “Most Competitive” colleges, as reflected by the
fact that they followed the advice of counselors but did not apply or were not admitted to
“Most Competitive” colleges.
Combining categories 5 and 6, nearly half of the students who were offered counseling
and did not enroll in “Most Competitive” college either did not meet with a counselor or
did not wholly follow the counselor’s advice. In addition, six of these twelve students
identified an original first-choice college that was ranked “Most Competitive” by
Barron’s. It seems likely that at least some of these students would ultimately have
enrolled at “Most Competitive” colleges if they had been more receptive to the advice
that they were offered.


Table A4 extends prior analysis to provide speculative assessments of the effect of
counseling if all students who accepted the offer met with counselors and followed the
advice they received.30 In sum, our best assessment is that counseling would have been
approximately twice as effective if all students had followed the guidance offered by
study counselors.


The results in Table A4 are based on the same regression specification as in Table A3,
but with the addition of a single new independent variable – a dummy variable
identifying the 12 students who met with a counselor but did not follow the counselor’s
advice and the four additional students who accepted the offer of counseling but never
actually met with a counselor. Not following advice is estimated to have a large and
statistically significant effect, reducing the probability of enrollment at “Most
Competitive” colleges by 30.1 percentage points among all students and by 39.0
percentage points among students with an original first-choice college ranked by
Barron’s as “Most Competitive”. Correspondingly, counseling is estimated to increase
the probability of enrollment at “Most Competitive” colleges by 22.6% among students
with an original first-choice college that was “Most Competitive” and who follow the
advice of counselors; this estimate is significant at the 10% level.




30
   Since the choice not to follow advice of the counselor is endogenous to the randomized design of the
study, we intentionally did not incorporate this information into the regression frameworks in Tables A1
through A3.
Ideally, our evaluation of the effects of the counseling provided by the study would focus
on student contentment and the college and career opportunities that were available to
them at high school graduation. But since these concepts are quite nebulous, it is
necessary to adopt imperfect numerical measures (such as the Barron’s rankings) for the
purpose of evaluation. But adopting any external measure willfully ignores the
possibility that students would have preferences that clash with the measure rankings.
From the perspective of “Revealed Preference”, it is natural to conclude that when
students discarded the advice of a study counselor, that advice must not have been
suitable. Yet, at the same time, since we find the greatest effect of not following advice
for students who identified a “Most Competitive” college as their first choice, it is
implausible that it was truly in the self-interest for all of these students to ignore the
advice offered by study counselors.
VII. Conclusion

The qualitative and quantitative results of this pilot study provide suggestive evidence of
the value of individualized college counseling for high-achieving students from low-
income backgrounds. Specifically, the results of the study suggest that counseling can
have an important influence on the application patterns of these students. Though more
than 60% of the students in the study identified Ivy League colleges or MIT as a first-
choice college, they were typically not aware of slightly less selective colleges that would
be good matches for their interests and qualifications. As shown in Table 5, students
offered counseling submitted approximately fifty percent more applications to less
selective colleges within the group of “Most Competitive” colleges than did students not
offered counseling, producing a result on the borderline of statistical significance despite
the small sample size of the study. Primarily as a result of this difference in application
patterns, students offered counseling were approximately nine percentage points more
likely to enroll in “Most Competitive” colleges than students not offered counseling.


While these results provide suggestive evidence of the value of counseling, the study also
provides two broad reasons that counseling is not even more effective. First, though
qualitative interviews suggested that counseling helped students to improve their college
applications, the results in Table 6 suggest little or no difference in assessed quality of
applications for students offered and not offered counseling. Second, more than one-third
of the students who accepted the offer of individualized counseling either did not meet
with counselors or did not follow the advice that they were given. The results in Table
A4 suggest that counseling might have had about twice as much effect on student
outcomes if all students had followed advice.
References

Avery, Christopher and Caroline M. Hoxby, “Do and Should Financial Aid Packages
Affect Students’ College Choices?” in College Choices: The Economics of Where to Go,
When to Go, and How to Pay for It, Caroline M. Hoxby Ed., University of Chicago Press,
2004.

Avery, Christopher, Caroline M. Hoxby, Clement Jackson, Kaitlin Burek, Glenn Poppe,
and Mridula Raman, “Cost Should Be No Barrier: An Evaluation of the First Year of
Harvard’s Financial Aid Initiative,” working paper, National Bureau of Economic
Research, 2006.

Avery, Christopher and Thomas J. Kane, “Student Perceptions of College Opportunities:
The Boston COACH Program”, in College Choices: The Economics of Where to Go,
When to Go, and How to Pay for It, Caroline M. Hoxby Ed., University of Chicago Press,
2004.

Carneiro, Pedro and James J. Heckman, “Social Capital Policy,” working paper, National
Bureau of Economic Research, 2003.

Carnevale, Anthony P. and Stephen J. Rose, “Socioeconomic Status, Race/Ethnicity, and
Selective College Admissions,” in America’s Untapped Resource: Low-Income Students
in Higher Education, Richard D. Kahlenberg Ed., New York, The Century Foundation,
2004.

Coleman, James, Thomas Hoffer and Sally Kilgore, High School Achievement: Public,
Catholic and Private High Schools Compared. Basic Books: New York, 1982.

Dominitz, Jeffrey and Charles F. Manski, "Eliciting Student Expectations of the Returns
to Schooling," Journal of Human Resources, Winter 1996.

Frank, Robert, “Higher Education: The Ultimate Winner-Take-All Market,” working
paper, Cornell University, Center for the Study of Inequality, 1999.
http://inequality.cornell.edu/publications/working_papers/RobertFrank1.pdf

Griffith, Amanda and Kevin Rask, “The Influence of the US News Collegiate Rankings
on the Matriculation Decisions of High-Ability Students: 1995-2004,” working paper,
Cornell Higher Education Research Institute, 2005.
http://www.ilr.cornell.edu/cheri/wp/cheri_wp76.pdf

Hill, Catharine B., Gordon C. Winston, and Stephanie A. Boyd, “Affordability: Family
Incomes and Net Prices at Highly Selective Private Colleges and Universities.” Journal
of Human Resources 40(4): 769-790.

Hoxby, Caroline, “How the Changing Market Structure of US Higher Education Explains
College Tuition,” working paper, National Bureau of Economic Research, 1997.
Lemann, Nicholas, The Big Test: The Secret History of the American Meritocracy,
Farrar, Straus and Giroux, New York: 1999.

“High School Guidance Counseling: ED Tabs Report,” National Center for Education
Statistics, 2003. http://nces.ed.gov/pubs2003/2003015.pdf

Karabel, Jerome, “Status Group Struggle: Organizational Interests and Institutional
Autonomy: The Transformation of Harvard, Yale, and Princeton, 1918-1940,” Theory
and Society, 1984.

Karabel, Jerome. The Chosen: The Hidden History of Admission and Exclusion at
Harvard, Yale, and Princeton, Houghton Mifflin, New York, 2005.

McDonough, Patricia A. Choosing Colleges: How Social Class and Schools Structure
Opportunity. State University of New York Press. 1997.

McDonough, Patricia A, Jessica S. Korn, and Erika Yamasaki, “Access, Equity, and the
Privatization of College Counseling,” Review of Higher Education, 20: 297-317, 1997.

McDonough, Patricia, Anthony Antonio, MaryBeth Walpole, and L. X. Perez, “College
Rankings: Democratized College Knowledge for Whom?" Research in Higher Education
39: 513-537, 1998.

Nadella, Venu Aaare, “Navigating the College Application Process: The Role of Family,
Peers, and School in the Generation of Educational Inequality,” undergraduate thesis,
Harvard College, 2004.
Owings, Jeffrey, Marilyn McMillan, John Burkett, and Bruce Daniel, “Making the Cut:
Who Meets Highly Selective College Entrance Criteria,” National Center for Education
Statistics, 1995.

Pallais, Amanda and Sarah Turner, “Opportunities for Low Income Students at Top
Colleges and Universities: Policy Initiatives and the Distribution of Students,” National
Tax Journal 59(2): 357-386, 2006.

Vigdor, Jacob L., and Charles T. Clotfelter, “Retaking the SAT,” Journal of Human
Resources, (38)1, 2003.

Winston, Gordon C. and Catharine B. Hill, "Access to the Most Selective Private
Colleges by High-Ability, Low-Income Students: Are They Out There?," working paper,
Williams College Project on Higher Education, October 2005.
Table A1. Regression Results: Determinants of Number of Applications
                      (1)      (2)      (3)      (4)       (5)       (6)
                                                                                MC_2          MC_2
 Dependent Variable           Apps     Apps MC Apps MC Apps                       Apps         Apps
 Offered Counseling           -0.22     0.38      0.15     0.32                    0.39       0.66 *
                             (0.53)   (0.63)    (0.46)   (0.58)                  (0.30)       (0.39)
 SAT Verbal                 0.008 *    0.002 0.014 ** 0.012 **                0.006 **         0.005
                            (0.004) (0.005)   (0.004)  (0.004)                 (0.002)       (0.003)
 SAT Math                     0.002    0.005     0.002    0.003                 -0.003        -0.003
                            (0.005) (0.005)   (0.004)  (0.005)                 (0.003)       (0.003)
 SAT Missing                   4.55     4.12  9.35 **  9.07 **                     1.64         0.93
                             (3.29)   (4.06)    (2.87)   (3.73)                  (1.82)       (2.48)
 Male                       -1.10 * -1.38**       0.11    -0.08                    0.00        -0.03
                             (0.56)   (0.67)    (0.49)   (0.62)                  (0.31)       (0.41)
 “Very Rare” for HS
 Grad to Attend
 Selective College              0.61     1.15 *         0.08          0.47         0.10         0.45
                              (0.54)     (0.62)       (0.47)        (0.57)       (0.30)       (0.38)
 Neither Parent
 Graduated from Coll.          -0.23       0.51         0.56          0.23         0.17         0.18
                              (0.63)     (0.78)       (0.56)        (0.71)       (0.35)       (0.47)
 One Parent Has
 Graduate Degree              -0.39       0.67          0.69         0.45         0.36          0.32
                             (0.80)     (0.96)        (0.70)       (0.86)       (0.44)        (0.59)
 Used Fee Waivers           2.42 **    1.98 **       1.39 **      1.56**       0.73 **        0.70 *
                             (0.57)     (0.68)        (0.50)       (0.63)       (0.32)        (0.42)
 Constant                      0.41       1.65      -8.45 **      -7.09 *        -1.36         -0.29
                             (3.20)     (3.89)        (2.79)       (3.57)       (1.77)        (2.37)

 Only 1st Choice
  “Most Competitive”          NO          YES            NO          YES            NO          YES
 Observations                  98           69            98           69            98           69
 R-squared                   0.30         0.26          0.31         0.26          0.19         0.18
 Standard errors in parentheses
 * significant at 1%;
 **significant at 5%

Notes: Based on responses to qualitative interviews and written surveys. 105 students provided sufficient
information to be included in analysis; the results exclude seven applicants who were admitted through
formal Early Decision programs.
Table A2. Regression Results: Determinants of Number of Admissions
                      (1)      (2)      (3)       (4)      (5)                                (6)
                                                          MC          MC     MC_2       MC_2
 Dependent Variable          Admits Admits           Admits      Admits     Admits     Admits
 Offered Counseling            -0.39     0.21            0.08        0.13       0.31       0.46
                              (0.48)   (0.56)          (0.36)      (0.48)     (0.29)     (0.42)
 SAT Verbal                   -0.001    -0.05       0.008**         0.006      0.003      0.002
                             (0.004) (0.004)         (0.003)     (0.004)    (0.002)    (0.003)
 SAT Math                      0.004    0.008         -0.001      -0.000     -0.001     -0.001
                             (0.004) (0.005)         (0.003)     (0.004)    (0.003)    (0.003)
 SAT Missing                    2.98     3.30           4.09*        4.42       1.14       0.65
                              (2.97)   (3.61)          (2.21)      (3.08)     (1.77)     (2.51)
 Male                       -1.23** -1.71**              0.03       -0.22       0.10    0.02
                            (0.51)   (0.60)       (0.38)      (0.51)      (0.30)     (0.42)
 “Very Rare” for HS
 Grad to Attend
 Selective College            0.51      1.20**           0.06         0.42       -0.009         0.20
                              (0.49)     (0.55)        (0.36)       (0.47)        (0.29)      (0.38)
 Neither Parent
 Graduated from Coll.          0.24        0.91         0.42          0.22         0.25         0.16

                              (0.57)     (0.69)        (0.42)       (0.59)       (0.34)       (0.48)
 One Parent Has                                                                                 0.21
 Graduate Degree               -0.09     1.08            0.61         0.49      0.33
                              (0.72)     (0.85)        (0.54)       (0.73)       (0.43)       (0.59)
 Used Fee Waivers            1.10**        0.95          0.32         0.55         0.21      0.30
                              (0.52)     (0.61)        (0.39)       (0.52)       (0.31)       (0.42)
 Constant                       1.44       2.02         -3.41        -2.74        -0.95        -0.05
                              (2.89)     (3.46)        (2.15)       (2.95)       (1.72)       (2.40)

 Only 1st Choice
  “Most Competitive”          NO           YES          YES          YES            NO          YES
 Observations                  96            68           97           68            97           68
 R-squared                   0.14          0.24         0.17         0.10          0.08         0.05
 Standard errors in parentheses
 * significant at 1%;
 ** significant at 5%

Notes: Based on responses to qualitative interviews and written surveys. 104 students provided sufficient
information to be included in analysis; the results exclude seven applicants who were admitted through
formal Early Decision programs.
Table A3. Determinants of number of Admission and Enrollment at Most
Competitive Rank
                                (1)            (2)          (3)         (4)
                             Admitted to Admitted to    Enrolled at  Enrolled at
                               “Most         “Most        “Most        “Most
 Dependent Variable         Competitive” Competitive” Competitive” Competitive”
 Offered Counseling                0.016          0.027        0.079       0.112
                                 (0.108)        (0.117)      (0.104)     (0.121)
 SAT Verbal                     0.002**           0.001        0.001       0.001
                                 (0.001)        (0.001)      (0.001)     (0.001)
 SAT Math                          0.001          0.001        0.001       0.000
                                 (0.001)        (0.001)      (0.001)     (0.001)
 SAT Missing                    0.710**           0.424        0.675       0.376
                                 (0.103)        (0.106)      (0.153)     (0.293)
 Male                              0.017          0.009        0.064       0.095
                                 (0.114)        (0.126)      (0.110)     (0.128)
 Very Rare for HS Grad to
 Attend Selective College                      -0.127             -0.059             -0.056            -0.032
                                              (0.108)            (0.115)            (0.106)           (0.119)
 Neither Parent Graduated from
 Coll.                                          0.139              0.039              0.145             0.112
                                              (0.127)            (0.144)            (0.126)           (0.147)
 One Parent Has Graduate
 Degree                                        -0.023             -0.087              0.106             0.151
                                              (0.164)            (0.185)            (0.156)           (0.162)
 Used Fee Waivers                              -0.091             -0.084              0.031             0.005
                                              (0.115)            (0.126)            (0.115)           (0.133)
 Predicted Probability
 at X-Bar                                       0.538              0.695              0.472             0.624
 Only 1st Choice
  “Most Competitive”                               NO               YES                 NO                  YES
 Observations                                      106                76               106                    76
 Pseudo R-squared                                 0.19              0.06               0.21                 0.04
 Standard errors in parentheses
 * significant at 1%;
 ** significant at 5%

Notes: Based on responses to qualitative interviews and written surveys. 106 students provided sufficient
information to be included in analysis; the results exclude seven applicants who were admitted through
formal Early Decision programs.
Table A4. Regression Results with “Did Not Follow Advice” Included as
Independent Variable
                                  (1)           (2)
                              Enrolled at   Enrolled at
                                 “Most         “Most
 Dependent Variable          Competitive” Competitive”
 Offered Counseling                  0.186       0.234 *
                                   (0.119)       (0.132)
 Did Not Follow Advice             -0.314*     -0.409 **
                                   (0.134)       (0.181)
 SAT Verbal                          0.001         0.000
                                   (0.001)       (0.001)
 SAT Math                            0.001         0.000
                                   (0.001)       (0.001)
 SAT Missing                         0.636         0.295
                                   (0.216)       (0.442)
 Male                                0.082         0.137
                                   (0.122)       (0.132)
 Very Rare for HS Grad to
 Attend Selective College                      -0.035             -0.002
                                              (0.107)              0.122
 Neither Parent Graduated from
 Coll.                                          0.147              0.117
                                              (0.129)            (0.151)
 One Parent Has Graduate
 Degree                                         0.124              0.170
                                              (0.157)            (0.160)
 Used Fee Waivers                               0.048              0.040
                                              (0.117)            (0.136)
 Predicted Probability
 at X-Bar                                       0.467              0.629
 Only 1st Choice
  “Most Competitive”                               NO               YES
 Observations                                      106                76
 Pseudo R-squared                                 0.11              0.07

Notes: Based on responses to qualitative interviews and written surveys. 106 students provided sufficient
information to be included in analysis; the results exclude seven applicants who were admitted through
formal Early Decision programs.
