                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 IMPLICIT CONTRACTS: A SURVEY



                         Sherwin Rosen



                     Working Paper No. 1635




             NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                      Cambridge, MA 02138
                           June 1985




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                               NBER WORKING PAPER 41635
                                               June 1985




                         Implicit Contracts: A Survey


                                    ABSTRACT

          Implicit contracts resolve the distribution of uncertainty and

utilization of specific human capital between risk averse workers and less

risk averse firms. Incomplete contracts are required to yield involuntary

layoffs in contract markets: otherwise, contracts are efficient and pareto

optimal by construction. There is a close relation between contract theory

and neoclassical labor market theory. Contracts smooth consumption, but

increase the volatility of labor supply and labor utilization to demand dis-

turbances, because contractural insurance eliminates the income effects of

socially diversifiable risks. This result is similar to the intertemporal

substitution hypothesis. However, the price mechanism in a contract is sub-

stantially different. Contracts embody a nonlinear two—part pricing scheme.

The lump sum part allocates the income—consumption consequences of risks and

the marginal pricing part allocates production and labor utilization. This

implicit pricing mechanism is in all respects "flexible," though the observed

average hourly wage combines both parts and may give the outward appearance

of rigidity. Furthermore, the observed average wage rate in a contract does

not reflect marginal conditions necessary for structural econometric estima-

tion. Indivisibilities appear necessary to account for the split between

work—sharing and layoffs. Contracts with private information are also considered

in the nonlinear pricing context.



                                                            Sherwin Rosen
                                                            Department of Economics
                                                            University of Chicago
                                                            Chicago, IL 60637
I.   INTRODUCTION

           The ideas associated with implicit contracts originate in the work of

Martin Baily (19714), Costas Azariadls (1975) —— who apparently coined the term

—— and Donald F. Gordon (19714) though certain pre—Keynesian views of' the labor

market such as the remarkably enduring work of John R. Hicks (1932), and later

analyses by Armen Aichian (1969) and others are important predecessors. This

line of research has been extremely active in the past decade and is notable for

bringing rnicroeconomic theory to bear on the problem of unemployment and employ-

ment fluctuations. Forty years ago Franco Modigliani (191414) identified the

workings of the labor market as the weak link in understanding macroeconomic

fluctuations. The promise of implicit contract theory lies in taking a step

toward repairing that deficiency. Practical interest in this theory also has

been promoted by a search for alternatives to the Phillips' Curve approach to

labor market equilibrium, which was criticized for its inconsistencies with

microtheory by Milton Friedman (1968) and Robert Lucas (1973), and which failed

empirically in the inflationary environment of the 1970s.

           The speed with which the term implicit contracts has entered the

economics vocabulary is slightly astonishing, but perusal of the literature

reveals considerable controversy and strongly held differences of opinion on the

meaning of the term and its implications. It is natural enough that passions

tend to be aroused by any model purporting to analyze employment security and

stability, and professional disagreements in this area undoubtedly are not made

less intense by intellectual tensions in the field of macroeconomics today.

These debates will not be joined here. My goal is limited to presenting some

elementary versions of the theory with sufficient clarity to reveal its main

content and its relationship with more conventional ways of thinking about labor
                                     2


markets. For these reasons as well as the fact that research in this area is

proceeding at a rapid pace, it is inevitable that this survey is incomplete.

Additional material may be found in the surveys by Azariadis (1979), Azariadis

arid Joseph Stiglitz (1983), Oliver Hart (1983), Takatoshi Ito (1983) and Aba

Schwartz (1983), which differ in style and perspective from what is presented

here.

          The following serves as a summary and overview.

          (1) Viewing labor market exchange in terms of contracts represents an

interesting and novel methodological departure from conventional models in which

market wage rates decentralize impersonal and unilateral labor demand decisions

by firms on the one hand and labor supply decisions by workers on the other. In

contrast, contracts are inherently bilateral negotiations between partners that

are disciplined by external opportunities, making analysis of the labor market

more akin to the marriage market than to the bourse. Contract markets are

supported by frictions and specificity of employment relationships that tend to

insulate contracting parties from short—run external shocks and which take

current wage rates "out of competition" in allocating labor resources.

          (2) A contract is a voluntary ex—ante agreement that resolves the

distribution of uncertainty about the value and utilization of shared invest-

ments between contracting parties. The contract precisely specifies the amount

of labor to be utilized and the wages to be paid in each state of nature, that

is, conditional on information (random variables) observed by both parties.

Wage payments in a contract reflect both allocative production decisions and

risk—sharing and income transfer decisions jointly determined by both parties.
                                       3



           (3) Contract   theory neither resolves nor illuminates questions of

Keynesian unemployment based on nominal wage and price rigidities, money illu-

sion and nonmarket clearing. Explanations for "sticky" wages and prices that

impede efficient labor utilization must be sought in other quarters. Contracts

allocate resources through a subtle and "flexible" nonlinear pricing mechanism,

which sometimes gives the outward appearance of rigidities in observed real

wages and prices. But these observed rigidities signal little about market

failure.

           (ii)   The most important empirical implications of contract theory

follow from the hypothesis that contract wages embody implicit payments of

insurance premiums by workers in favorable states of nature and receipt of

indemnities in unfavorable states. Contractual income transfers smooth

consumption, which interacts with labor utilization by eliminating income

effects. The prominence of substitution effects promotes an elastic labor

utilization response to socially diversifiable external shocks. Contracts tend

to increase the volatility of employment, but these effects are difficult to

detect in structural econometric models because observed wages reflect more than

production/labor supply efficiency margins in contract markets.

           (5) Only socially diversifiable risks are contractually insurable.

Complete contracts and full risk—shifting imply that all ex post aspects of

contracts, including possible layoffs and unemployment, are "voluntary:" laid—

off workers in a firm are rio   worse off than those remaining employed, distinctly
non—Keynesian. Nondiversifiable and uninsurable risks, risk aversion of firms,

information asymmetries and other costs that make contracts incomplete are

needed to create ex post involuntary aspects into contract terms. Incomplete

risk shifting qualifies the main empirical implications of contracts because

income effects play a more prominent role under those circumstances:
                                    '4




Consumption varies more and labor utilization varies less in response to demand

shocks than when contracts are complete, similar to conventional theory.

         The paper is organized as follows: The next section presents some

background and contextual discussion of labor market contracts. An elementary

contract is analyzed in section III, where employment is modeled as an all—or—

nothing affair. This model has some simple properties, but its special features

obscure the relations between contract theory and conventional theories of labor

markets. Section IV presents a more familiar model which clarifies these

relationships. Section V takes up the distinction between layoffs and workshar-

ing viewed as choices at the extensive and intensive margins. Section VI

sketches some extensions to intertemporal problems and the relation between

contract theory and intertemporal substitution theory. The models in sections

h—Vu are based on common information assumptions. Much research in this area

has investigated asymmetric information models as sources of market failure.

Discussion of that work necessarily requires more advanced methods and appears

in section VII. Conclusions are found in section VIII.



II. BACKGROUND

          The first substantial treatment of the effects of unemployment on a

labor market is Adam Smith's discussion of equalizing wage differences on un-

employment risk. Smith recognized that workers exposed to such risks, e.g.,

bricklayers, would require higher wages while employed to compensate for less

regular work patterns and to sustain consumption during periods of slack demand.

An extra premium might be needed to compensate risk averse workers for bearing

earnings risk.
                                    5



         Refined development of this idea has occurred only in recent years,

beginning with the work of Michael Todaro (1969), John Harris and Todaro (1970),

Arnold Harberger (1971) and Jacob Mincer (1976), which is notable for analyzing

the effects of market controls and minimum wages on unemployment, viewed as an

equilibrium phenomenon. Workers array their search activities across markets to

equate expected earnings in each. If wages are constrained as a clearing

mechanism, something else must do the job and that is the probability of finding

employment. In equilibrium workers queue up for high wage jobs in the regulated

sector: greater unemployment and smaller job finding probabilities are observed

in those markets where wages are highest to enforce the equilibrium supply

condition. These models have had some success in explaining urban unemployment

in less developed economies.

          Robert Hall (1970) incorporated some novel inventory theoretic ideas

into models of this type to account for persistent spatial differences in

unemployment. Cities with greater equilibrium unemployment rates must pay wage

premiums to attract workers. Higher wages support longer unemployment spells

and more frequent transitions between jobs, and represent the implicit prices

that firms must pay for the privilege of drawing on an inventory of ready labor.

The advantage of this reserve army of the unemployed, as it were, lies in

greater flexibility and quicker responses of employment decisions by firms

facing shifting and uncertain demands. Robert Topel (19814) extended the argu-

ment to incorporate intermarket mobility and found evidence of equalizing dif-

ferences on local unemployment rates when unemployment insurance is properly

accounted for. A full market equilibrium analysis in this vein was attempted,

but incompletely realized by Hall (1979).
                                     6


          The most complete micro—analysis of equalizing differences in the

Smithian mode so far is by John Abowd arid Orley Ashenfelter (1981, 19814), based

on utility theory and rationing constraints on hours availability. This and

related work by Robert Hutchens (1983) and Stephen Bronars (1983) find small,

but persistent equalizing wage rate difference effects on average hours of work

restrictions and layoff rate differences among jobs, but insignificant, if not

perverse effects on the variability or risk elements. Small effects for mean

differences might be expected when the value of leisure is taken into account,

but the unsubstantial effects of risk are not consistent with this theory.

          The literature reviewed here concentrates much more on the contractual

features of labor market exchange than on implicit risk attributes of jobs.

However, an important link between the two is provided in an unpublished paper

by H. Gregg Lewis (1969) and more recently by Tomb Kinoshita (1985). Lewis

analyzed a deterministic market in which both employers and employees care about

hours worked per employee. The equilibrium that emerges out of this analysis

looks much different than that of a traditional market: a single wage does not

clear the market. Instead, each firm offers fixed wage—hours packages, insist-

ing that its employees work a fixed number of hours in exchange for a fixed

income or seek employment elsewhere. A nonlinear equalizing wage-hours locus

across firms serves as the equilibrium concept.     There is an important sense

in which implicit contract theory extends these ideas to incorporate uncer-

tainty, since a contract specifies wage—work package deals for each state of

nature.

          Professional interest in contract theory has been stimulated by a

number of recent empirical observations on labor market institutions. Many

features of labor markets bear little resemblance to impersonal Wairasian
                                     7


auction markets. Chief among them is the remarkable degree of observed worker—

firm attachment. Martin Feldstein's (1975) surprising finding that over 70

percent of layoffs are temporary, with most laid-off workers ultimately return-

ing to their original employers, was confirmed on similar aggregate data by

David Lllieri (1980) and by much different methods on micro—panel data in a

recent study by Lawrence Katz (1985). The typical adult male worker spends

twenty years or more on a single job (Hall, 1982) and the probability of job

turnover is a sharply declining function of job tenure (e.g., Mincer and Boyan

Jovanovic, 1981 and William Randolph, 1983). Most job changes in a worker's

life occur at younger ages, and a person who has persisted in the same job for a

few years is likely to continue employment in it for a long time to come. If

tenure is de jure In academia, it is de facto in much of the labor market at

large. These findings can be explained by search theory through "job shopping"

(William Johnson, 1979) or searching for the best "match" between a worker and a

firm (Jovanovic, 1979).

          The rationale for observed employment continuity ultimately rests on

Gary Becker's (19614) concept of firm—specific human capital, which formed the

basis of the earlier quasi—fixed cost theory of employment fluctuations

originated by Walter 01 (1962). Robert Hart (19814) presents an up—to—date

discussion and prior references. Quasi—fixed cost theory and implicit contract

theory share many of the same features and assumptions, as demonstrated in the

recent book by Arthur Okun (1981), who attempted an Integration of the two.

Charles Schultze (1985) pursues this line. Fixed costs, firm—specific invest-

ments or match—specific capital create the equivalent of market frictions that

render significant value to enduring employment relationships. Maintenance of

existing employment attachments creates shared rents which introduce a wedge
                                     8



between the value of a current job and outside opportunities. Rents relax

momentary arbitrage constraints between current wages, current fortunes of the

firm, and general labor market conditions, as in the economics of marriage

(Becker, 1973). Under these circumstances it is expected present values of

wages that matter to firms and workers, not necessarily the current wage. Wage

income is in part an installment payment on specific—investments (Hall, 1980.

J.R. Miller, 1971 presents an interesting early model along these lines which

deserves to be pursued).

           Fixed cost theory focuses on quantity adjustments of labor inputs to

changing demand conditions. Implicit contract theory potentially provides a

more complete description of wage adjustments as well. For if firm—specific

investments are an important component of labor market exchange, employment

specificity implies that the worker is effectively a partner in his enterprise.

But the return on specific capital embodied in workers is Inherently stochastic

and Its joint ownership raises deep questions of how this capital is utilized

and how its risks are shared. An ex ante agreement or contract resolves these

issues of utilization and risk sharing.

           Theoretical research on contracts has been propelled by recent

developments in the economics of uncertainty and information. Feldstein's

(1976) and Bally's (1977) analyses of the U.S. unemployment insurance system

showed the practical relevance of applying insurance principles to certain labor

market activities. Economists' increasing understanding of state—contingent

claims theory (Kenneth Arrow, 19614 and Gerard Debreu, 1959) has played its part

as well.

           However, the idea of implicit contracts goes back to Frank Knight's

s1921) views of the entrepreneur as a residual income recipient and bearer of
                                     9


risk.   Knight's entrepreneur makes contractual commitments to input suppliers

and earns a risky return on the difference between stochastic receipts and fixed

contractual and other costs (Friedman, 1962). Contracts with workers are sup-

ported by human capital specificity. Occupational selection suggests that

entrepreneurs are less risk averse than the average person (Richard Kihistrom

and Jean—Jacques Lafforit, 1979, 1983). Modern analysis also shows that entre-

preneurs shift some of these risks to the capital market. Nonetheless, a firm's

owners may have comparative advantage at risk management through portfolio

diversification, whereas a worker's main wealth is nonmarketable human capital.

Specialized human capital, and firm—specific human capital in particular, is not

diversifiable and does not collateralize consumption loans in modern economies.

Furthermore, there are practical limitations, from moral hazard and adverse

selection, on private unemployment insurance markets, because workers and

employers share employment and wage decisions in any state of nature. The

insurance features of contracts therefore manifest the gains from trade between

effectively more and less risk averse agents, and, since employment and earnings

decisions are internalized at the firm level, partially avoid direct monitoring

by third parties. It is these risk—shifting gains from trade that intermingle5

Insurance and productive efficiency considerations in observed contract wages,

and which determines how risks on shared investments are allocated.

           Casting employment arrangements in contractual terms leads to a fun-

damentally different analysis conceptually from that of a standard competitive

market. In traditional theory the worker is presented with a market—determined

wage and decides how much labor to supply to the market at large at that wage.

The firm decides how much impersonal labor services to buy. A contract

specifies, up front, exactly how much labor the worker must supply and exactly
                                     10



what the wage will be in various circumstances at some particular firm. When

the state of nature is actually realized there Is no further scope for free

choice at some external market—determined wage rate. Instead, the worker

supplies precisely the agreed upon quantity of labor (possibly none) at the

previously agreed—upon wage payment, even though he might ex post prefer some-

thing different. Sometimes the agreement even transfers the rights of employ-

ment and hours determination to the complete discretion of a specific employer.

These aspects of ex ante bilateral negotiation and agreement inherent in a

contract system have rio counterpart in an idealized decentralized competitive

market in which all decisions are impersonal and unilateral. This difference is

well expressed by Okun's (1981) felicitous characterization of a contract market

as the "invisible handshake" rather than the invisible hand.

          An employment relationship represents a complex interaction of

authority, delegation, personal interactions and monitoring, so complex that

remarkably few provisions are actually written down.1 Yet the economic analysis

of implicit contracts amounts to working out the details of an explicit contract

concerning wages and employment under uncertainty. Hence an implicit contract

must be interpreted in the "as if" sense of an explicit one, as a mutual under-

standing between worker and employer that the invisible handshake implies, as in

commercial contracts. At one level applying this as—if principle is no differ-

ent from most theorizing in economics. At another, we know that contracts do

not contain all contingencies because many of them cannot be foreseen and there

are so many possibilities that contracting costs are prohibitive. The extent to

which formal consideration of these costs and benefits affects any as—if model

which ignores them is an open question that can be answered only by the empiri-

cal usefulness of the simpler theory.
                                       11



III. CONTRACTS WITH LAYOFFS

            The literature on implicit contracts has introduced some new language

and technical paraphernalia that sometimes makes the fundamental ideas difficult

to grasp. This section sets out a simple one-period model aimed at clarifying

the essential concepts. Models of this timeless type were first introduced by

Azariadis (1975) and much of the subsequent literature has followed in this

vein.

            The basic set—up is this: The firm contracts with a group of workers,

for simplicity assumed to be identical in talents and preferences, and produces

an output with a production function that depends on the utilized labor of its

contract employees. This production function has conventional properties,

except that it is shocked by a random variable 0. The stochastic disturbance 0

is meant to reflect demand uncertainty and shocks to technology or other input

supplies that are produced by external forces not controlled by contracting

parties. The term "common knowledg&' refers to the assumption that all relevant

information is available to all parties. The probability distribution function

of 0 and the actual ex post realization of 0 is costlessly observed and agreed

upon by all contracting parties. This assumption carries great force, for it

implies that the contract can be conditioned on the realization, that is, on the

"state of nature" that actually materializes ex post.

            The contract is a set of conditions such as: "if e turns out to have

the value      then the worker agrees to supply exactly xxxx units of labor in

exchange for exactly xxxx dollars." Statements of this form cover every pos-

sible realization of 0. This, and the fact that information is complete means

that there is no economic rationale for any ex post renegotiation of terms (no

"new" information comes in). Of course, nature is random, so contracting
                                    12



parties might well regret certain ex post realizations, similar to the way a

poker player might have ex post regret, though there is nothing to be done about

it then. These informational assumptions seem severe, to be sure, but they are

exactly the same as the Arrow—Debreu contingent claims market model. Much work

has been and continues to be done on models in which information Is not common

In this sense. However, the basic Ideas are most easily seen in the simpler

common information models.

          The key simplifying assumption In Azarladis's model is specifying

worker preferences In the form u   U(C + mL), where C is consumption, L Is the

fraction of time devoted to leisure, and m is a constant. Normalize L so that

o < L < 1. The worker is assumed to be risk averse: U' > 0 and U" < 0. This

utility function has linear indifference curves: C and L are perfect substi-

tutes, with constant marginal rate of substitution m. Alternatively, imagine

the worker dividing his available unit of time between market work and the

production of an equivalent but nonmarketable good with production function mL.

Here m is the marginal product of time in producing nonmarket goods. In either

case, m is the unique reservation price of time supplied to market work. The

conventional labor supply problem has a very simple solution in this case:

either the worker supplies his entire endowment of time to the market or to

leisure. This feature carries over to a contract as well. It is natural to

identify a contractual provision which stipulates L =   1   in some state of the

world as a layoff in that state.

          The firm's production function is assumed to be of the form x = Of(N),

where N is utilized labor services and f'(N) > 0 and f"(N) < 0: positive and

decreasing marginal product of labor. Capital Is ignored. The random variable

0 is distributed with known distribution function G(e) and density function
                                                   13



G'(e)     g(e). Its mean is Ee — p, known at the time the contract is struck

(alternatively, p may be random, but the contract is conditioned on it). Since

the contract will specify either L - 0 or L •                 1    for workers with preferences

such as these, write N - pn, where n is the fixed number of workers under con-

tract, p is the proportion of them who work, and 1 — p is the proportion who

don't work or the layoff rate. Furthermore 0 < p < 1. Given some realization

of 0, the contract specifies a wage payment C1 to those employees instructed to

work and possibly a layoff payment C2 to those who are laid off. Work or non—

work assignments are drawn by lot, represented by the employment probability, p.

Thus, the contract specifies a set of three numbers (C1, C2, p) for each pos-

sible outcome 0. Another way to describe it is by three functions of the

outcomes: C1(0), C2(e) and p(8).

             An employed worker CL          0) receives no nonmarket goods and obtains

utility             under the contract. This occurs with probability p(0). A laid

off worker CL       1) produces in     units       of the nonmarket good and has contracted for

C2(0) of market goods, so utility is U(C2(0) +                    in).   This occurs with probability

(1 —    p(0)).   Therefore the ex ante expected utility of a worker in this firm is



                   Eu —                        +              + m)(1 —     p(O))]dG(O).    (1)
                           f[U(C1(0))p(e)           U(C2(0)


The contract {C1(e),C2(0),p(e)} maximizes the worker's expected utility (1)

subject to an expected profit or utility constraint for the firm. It is pareto

optimal by construction.2 In state 9 the firm produces output of value

Of(p(0)n) and incurs contractual costs of npCe)C1(0) paid to employed workers

and costs of n(1 —                     paid to laid—off workers. The managers of the
                          p(0))C2(0)
                                             14


firm   have utility function v(.) defined over profits, so the expected utility of

the firm is



                                     a                  —
                Ev a   fv(it(O))dG       Jv(ef(p(e)n)       np(O)C1(8)
                                                                         (2)

                                         — n(1 —
                                                 p(O))C2(O))dG(O)


The equilibrium contract maximizes (1) subject to Ev a v and corresponds to one

point on the Pareto frontier between Eu and Ev.

           Think of an economy composed of many such firms with the disturbance 0

independently distributed among them, so many in fact that the mean E0         i   is
realized with the probability 1 (the entire distribution G(0) Is realized across

firms ex post ——   otherwise   feasibility requires the contract to be conditioned

on the sample mean). To justify the solution of the constrained maximum problem

as a description of the observed contract, think of firms competing for contract

workers and making their joint investments (not modeled in this literature) at

the beginning of the period. Firms compete for workers by offering favorable

contract terms, given Investments, and in devising these terms manager/owners

diversify their risks by trading residual profit claims on an asset market.

Possible risk aversion of firms is justified by some incompleteness in risk

markets. For example, there may be bankruptcy possibilities or agency problems

between owners and managers that make complete managerial diversification

undesirable. If managers' reservation utility level is v and they are supplied

elastically, then the equilibrium contract transfers rents to workers and the

proposed solution follows as a competitive market equilibrium.
                                            15



          Associating a negative—valued multiplier A (from Pareto optimality)

with constraInt (2), setting up the Lagrarigian function and differentiating

yields the first order conditions for C1, C2, and p, respectively:3



                            —Anv'(ir)
                U'(C1)



                U'(C2 + in)     —Anv'(it)                                            (3)




                                                              —
                p(1 — p)[U(C1) — U(C2 + in) —Anv'(ir)(Bf'(pn)        C1
                                                                          +
                                                                              C2)]
                                                                                      =    0



The arguments C1, C2, p and ir (profits) in (3)        should be understood as functions

of 6, but this functional notation is supressed to save space. The term in

p(l — p) in the third condition takes care of the constraint 0 < p <             1.
           The first two conditions determine optimal risk sharing among risk

averse agents as in Karl Borch (1962), Arrow (1971), and Robert Wilson (1968):

marginal utilities between agents are proportional in all possible realizations;

or iJ'(C1(e))   U'(C2(e) +    in), which    in turn implies C1(O)   C2(e) + in and

U(C1(o)) — U(C2(e) +     in). Therefore,     when the firm provides layoff pay (C2)

contracts make no ex post utility distinctions between employed and unemployed

workers for any given value of 0. Of course workers attached to firms with

favorable realizations of 8 are better of f ex post than workers attached to

firms with unfavorable realizations of e (if the firm is risk averse and not all

risk is shifted), but all workers in the same firm get the same ex post utility

independent of employment status. Layoffs are voluntary in this sense, though

workers attached to a low 6 firm may envy those in a larger 6 firm ex post.

           The third condition in (3) determines p(0) according to
                                              16


                                                    —
                   p(0)(1 —   p(6))[Of'(p(6)n)          ml   0                          ('I)




since U(C1) —          + m)     0 arid C1 —        - m   from the first two conditions. If 0
                U(C2                          C2

is such that 0 < p < 1, then p(0) Is determined so that the marginal product of

a unit of labor equals its social opportunity cost: ef'(pn)                    rn.   However, this

marginal condition does not hold with equality at the corners. When 0 turns out

to be very large, the firm would like to employ a great deal of labor, but has

contracted with only n workers. In this case p =                 1   and Of'(n) > m. Similarly,

when 0 is small enough, the marginal value product of labor falls short of its

opportunity cost, in which case the firm shuts down its operations and

ef'(O) K m. This is illustrated in figure 1. The elbow shaped curve is the

firm's internal supply curve of contract labor. Labor utilization decisions

have a reservation property: for e > 0*, p is set equal to 1, and all of the

firm's workers are fully employed. 6* is defined by 0*f?(n) = m.                     For e < e,

the firm shuts down, and all workers are laid off. The condition O**f(O)

defines 6*. For e K 0 K 8*, some of the firm's workers are fully employed

and others are laid off. In this region the employment rate p(0) Is increasing

In 6, and the firm's layoff rate is decreasing in 0.

           Notice that the ex post marginal product of labor is not equated

across all firms in a contract market. It is equated only for the fraction

G(8*) —   G(8**)   which have a common shadow price of labor in.             The marginal

product of labor exceeds m for those firms experiencing outcomes more favorable

than 6*. This is not a sign of social Inefficiency because employment

specificity makes it too costly to move workers from one firm to another.
                                    17


         Nonetheless, those firms for which 8 > G have ex post demands for

temporary labor, and one might envision certain labor market institutions aris-

ing to take advantage of the situation. One possibility is a subcontract market

of temporary workers (Melvin Reder, 1962). The personal productivity of such

workers would not be as large as that of contract workers due to less specific

human capital, though movements across firms would help arbitrage differences in

marginal values of labor across firms. It has been claimed that the Japanese

labor market makes heavy reliance on this type of system, and perhaps guest

workers in European economies (and use of illegal immigrants in the U.S.) can be

partially explained in these terms. A temporary labor market for laid off

workers would also serve these purposes. Further, if workers differ in their

reserve price of labor m, it is straightforward to show that the firm rationally

contracts with several different classes of workers. Those with larger values

of m are used as reserves, and are called to work only in the most favorable

realizations, similar to the way a power pool brings relatively inefficient

generators on line only in periods of peak demand (Azariadis, 1976; Rosen,

1983). Finally, there may be incentives for firm mergers or product diver—

sification that more easily accommodate worker transfers between operating

units. The limits of the firm would then be determined by balancing the gains

of internal reassignments of workers against the usual diseconomies of scale and

lesser overall productivity of the firm's work force due to lesser labor

specialization among divisions. This point is related to the gains to flexi-

bility and adaptability in an uncertain environment (George Stigler, 1939).

          The implications of this model can be seen in an especially striking

manner when firms are risk neutral [v'(g)   1J. Then (3) implies complete

consumption insurance for all workers in all firms. In this case the first two

marginal conditions in (3) are independent of 0 because the term in v'(n(O))
                                          18



equals unity. Therefore C1(6) and C2(6) are constants for all values of 0,

given i.     All   employed workers in all firms receive the same incomes and so do

all unemployed workers. Furthermore, the ex post utility levels

           IJ(C2 + m)   are independent of 6 and the same for all workers. The labor
U(C1)
utilization condition in (14) remains unchanged. This case is in fact equivalent

to complete and costless contingent claims markets in which all socially insur-

able risks are diversified away, and is identical to the standard insurance

result that risk averse people are completely insured when premiums are actually

fair. It Is as If firms contracted with an actuarially fair insurance company,

turned over their entire output to the common fund and contracted to withdraw

pro-rata shares.

             To further clarify this strong result, write 0 = pc where c Is an

Idiosyncratic Independent and identically distributed firm-specific random

variable with distribution function Z(c) where Ec        1 and p Is a common economy—

wide aggregate shock which strikes all firms equally. In a one—period model p

is an undiversiflable risk (this is not necessarily true In a rnultlperIod

dynamic model —— see section VI). Given the information assumptions, all ex

ante contracts must be conditioned on p as well as on c because of social budget

constraints: feasible contracts cannot redistribute more market Income than is

actually produced.

             A larger value of p shifts the marginal value product curves to the

right in figure 1 for every possible value of c and a smaller p value shifts

these curves down and to the left. Substituting 0         pc Into (14), we see that

given some realization p, firms for which c > c* =      m/pf'(n)   fully utilize their

work force. The value of p for firms on the interior of (14) is also increasing

In p. Consequently the utilization rate of labor In the work force as a whole
                                         19


is   increasing in p and the aggregate unemployment rate is decreasing in p.

Finally, when v(lt) is linear, (2) defines the social budget constraint for

feasible contracts, given p, as



                                                                  —
                 pfcf(p(c/p)n)dZ(c) —
                                        nJ[C1p(c/p)
                                                       +
                                                           C2(1       p(c/1i))JdZ(c).
                                                                                    (5)
                                    —          +   mjp(c/p)dZ(c)]
                                        n[C2


National income per head (the left—hand side of (5) divided by n) is increasing

in p through its direct multiplicative effect and its indirect effect of

increasing p. Therefore C1(p) arid C2(p) are increasing in p.

            Diversifiable risk    is completely shifted in this complete contracts

case: consumption and utility are independent of local demand E,               suggestive   of

a form of "real wage rigidity" for these types of demand shocks. Laid off

workers are no worse off than employed workers, and layoffs are voluntary.

However, a contract market does not at all imply real wage rigidity for unin—

surable risks: the consumption and utility levels of workers, be they employed

or not, are strictly increasing functions of "aggregate demand" p. Everyone is

better off ex post when p is larger and worse off when p is smaller.5

            The model sketched above has the undesirable prediction that laid off

workers fare no worse than employed workers. It is the assumption that consump-

tion and employment risk can be shifted without transactions costs that accounts

for much of this result. By analogy, a person who can buy actuarial no—load

insurance buys enough to be indifferent to whether his house burns down or not.

But that is just a consequence of a simplifying assumption. Most people are

worse of f if their house burns because they are not fully insured. Incomplete
                                         20



insurance is rational when premiums are nonactuarial and when full insurance

implies moral hazard. This is also true of the insurance In an Implicit

contract. The point gains greater force in this context because workers and

firms jointly control layoff decisions, precisely the type of situation where

coinsurance Is known to be desirable. Therefore, incomplete insurance, or more

generally some Incompleteness In state contingent claims markets, is necessary

to get involuntary layoffs into these models. John Bryant (1978) was the first

to point this out; see also Thomas Sargent (1979), Sanford Grossman and Hart

(1981), and Bengt Holmstrom (1981). While the point has created much contro-

versy on the usefulness of common knowledge contract models, It seems to me that

considerable Insight is gained by analyzing actuarial cases, as in more conven-

tional Insurance problems.

          It Is by no means obvious how to incorporate nonactuarial elements

into a formal model. The most straightforward way is to interpret the contract

as a pooling arrangement with a risk—neutral mutual insurance company and add an

employment claims processing cost to the company's budget constraint, similarly

to the way load factors are calculated In conventional insurance premiums.

Space limitations preclude extended development here. Consider instead an

extreme case in which costs of providing private insurance to the unemployed are

so large that none is provided at all. This adds the constraint C2(O) = 0 to

the problem above and is exactly Azarladis's (1975) original formulation.

           The absence of Indemnities to unemployed persons means that unemployed

workers receive incomes of m alone, and the second marginal condition In (3) is

irrelevant. But the first one remains. All employed workers receive the same

wage C1 if the firm is risk neutral (v' = 1) and their consumption Is fully

Insured. The wage C1 paid to employed persons must exceed m or else no one
                                        21



would be inclined to work. Therefore U(C1) > U(m) and employed persons in the

same firm are better off ex post than the unemployed. Laid off workers have

drawn   the   losing hand and definitely prefer employment.6

              One might expect Incomplete Insurance to affect production efficiency.

The third condition in (3) verifies this intuition. Substituting for Any' from

the first condition in (3) and noting that           0 by assumption, we have, for

p>0

                   Of'(pn) > C1 - [U(C1) -   U(m)]/U'(C1).                  (6)




This condition holds with equality on the interior (0 < p < 1), and with

inequality for almost all firms whose workers are fully employed. It follows

directly from risk aversion (U" < 0) that the bracketed term on the right hand

side of (6) exceeds C1 — m, the difference in incomes between employed and

unemployed workers. The shadow price of labor is the entire expression on the

right hand and therefore falls short of m when insurance is incomplete.           The

horizontal portion of the internal supply curve in figure 1 now lies below m.

Of'(pn) is compared with a smaller supply price in determining p, and the firm

utilizes more of its contract labor compared with complete contracts. m is the

social opportunity cost for firms with 0 < p < 1. There is socially excessive

employment in the incomplete contract equilibrium and social output would be

greater if more people were unemployed!

              This surprising result is part of a more general proposition in the

economics of insurance. Availability of insurance promotes the undertaking of

socially beneficial risks by separating the average benefits of actions from

fear of risk. Risk averse persons act too cautiously and do not take enough
                                     22


good risks when insurance is unavailable. The only way a risk averse worker can

partially insure against the utility loss of layoff and unemployment in this

problem is by working In circumstances when it is socially inefficient to do so.

          One more comparison must be made before concluding this section, and

that is to a situation where employment relationships provide no insurance at

all. This state of affairs is sometimes called an "auction market." George

Akerlof and Miyazaki (1980) showed that an auction market can Imply more

unemployment than a contract market. The point Is easy to see in this model

when employers are risk neutral. Then workers In the firm must go it alone.

Any Incomes they receive must be distributed out of own firms' output, since

claims on other firm's outputs are unavailable by assumption. In making Its

collective employment decisions, the firm could then do no better than to com-

pare the marginal productivity of its own labor with the opportunity cost of its

workers' time, which Is m. Therefore, m again becomes the effective shadow

price of labor as in figure 1, employment decisions are socially efficient and

identical to the full contract model. However, these workers are bearing con-

sumption and wage risks, depending on their own realized value of 0, and some of

these are socially diversifiable. Though efficient in production decisions,

this solution is inefficient on risk sharing grounds. Clearly It is Inefficient

In the latter respect relative to a complete contract. However, it is not

obviously less efficient than the incomplete contract, which is inefficient on

the productivity account but possibly more efficient on the risk—sharing ac-

count. Therefore, no contracts at all may dominate an incomplete contract,

depending on the extent of worker risk aversion.
                                        23


IV. CONTRACTS AND LABOR SUPPLY

            The unusual and unattractive assumptions about worker preferences in

the model above conceals an intimate relationship between contract theory and

the familiar theory of labor supply. Contracts embody an implicit nonlinear

pricing mechanism that eliminates the income effects of insurable risks in the

traditional consumption—leisure choice problem. They thereby smooth consumption

which interacts with labor utilization and promotes elastic labor supply res-

ponses to external stimuli. Contracts suggest much more volatility of employ-

ment to insurable risks than conventional models do.

            To illustrate these important points in the most straightforward way,

worker preferences in section III are generalized, and the technology is simpli-

fied. Assume neoclassical worker preferences u =     U(C,L).   The indifference

curves of U(C,L) are strictly convex and the worker is risk averse. As in the

conventional labor supply problem, the quantity (1 —    L) is identified with time
worked, and remaining time L is associated with nonmarket production (partial

layoffs if one wishes). Assume that the firm consists of one worker (n        1)

with production function x     ef(i —   L) where e is the productivity shock. To
simplify even more, assume f(1 —   L) is linear. Then the production function is
x   0(1 —   L) and 0 has the ready interpretation of the marginal product of the
worker's labor, similar to a wage rate. Everything to be said here applies to a

concave function f(.), a refinement that only adds expository noise to the main

point.

            Consider first the conventional problem of labor supply under uncer-

tainty. Nature draws a ball out of the 0 urn, the worker observes 0 and makes

the optimal labor—consumption decision. If an external market does not allow

risks to be spread, the worker is constrained to consume out of own production
                                         24


(the   "auction market" of section III) and any source of nonearned income, say y.

So given 0, the budget constraint Is the standard one, C — 0(1 —    L) + y.   The

solution is described by the budget constraint and the first order condition

0   UL/IJC, which define demand functions C —   C(0, y) and L - L(8, y). Assume
that both C and L are normal goods and compare two alternative realizations of

0. A larger value of e increases C, but has ambiguous effects on L. The sub-

stitution effect tends to Induce greater labor supply (1 — L) but the income

effect works in the other direction and may cause labor supply to fall. Substi-

tuting the demand functions Into the utility function yields the indirect util-

ity function u(0, y). Indirect utility in Increasing in 0 (and y) irrespective

of the labor supply response because full income is Increasing in

             An economy with many persons opens possibilities for mutually advan-

tageous social arrangements that allow risk pooling. The conventional problem

strictly ties a worker's consumption to current production, but a contract

allows current consumption to be disassociated from current production for any

given person if risks are diversifiable. The simplest way to model this is to

replace the personal budget constraint with its expectation (over all workers),

precisely what an actuarially fair Insurance policy would do. Yet this is not

standard insurance: the contract specifies exactly how much the person has to

work for each possible realization of' 0 in order to eliminate adverse effects on

work incentives that consumption insurance implies.

           Assuming common knowledge, the contract specifies that the worker puts

forth (1 —   L(e))   hours of work in state 8 and that the wage payment or consump-

tion is C(o) in state e. Expected profitability of the firm is the difference

between expected output and expected wage (consumption) payments
                                               25


                J[x(o) — C(e)JdG(o) —
                                                       —
                                               J[e(i       L(e))     —
                                                                         C(o)JdG.   (7)




Complete contracts (given ii)    are analyzed in what follows, assuming risk—neutral
firms, to bring out the connections between conventional theory and contract

theory in the clearest possible way. Competition in the market for contracts

implies that the equilibrium contract solves:



                   max    $u(c(e), L(O))dG(O)                                       (8)
                L(e),C(e)



subject to



                      J[e(i —   L(e))    —
                                              C(e)]dG(o)     =   0   .              (9)


            The Lagrangian for this problem is



                J{U(C,L) — A[e(1 —       L)    — C]}dG                              (10)




            The first order conditions for L(e) and C(e) given 0 equivalent to (3)

above are



                         L(e)) =    —A                                              (11)




                UL(c(e), L(e))      —GA                                             (12)
                                        26


where A < 0 as before. C and L are solved as functions of B and A from equa-

tions (11) and (12). Then the expected income constraint is used to solve for A

and hence the optimum contract L(O) and C(8). Notice that the conventional

problem is completely nested in this one. It is feasible that C(O) —        x(O),   but

the contract surely will not specify equality of consumption and output for

every realization of 0. True, (11) and (12) imply            B ——   the   marginal

rate of substitution between leisure and consumption is equated with the mar-

ginal product of labor for •any 0 in a complete contract. However, now there is

an extra degree of freedom: the expected income constraint allows the marginal

utility of consumption to be equated in all states of the world (condition

(11)), the Borch-Arrow—Wilson risk—sharing condition when one of the agents is

risk neutral, equivalent to optimal choice of insurance in the actuarial, no—

load case.

             The properties of L(8) and C(0) in the contract are implicit in the

first order conditions (11) and (12). Since A does not depend on 0, comparative

statics on (11) and (12) directly show how C and L respond to 8 in the contract.

(11) and (12) define marginal utility constant demand functions (Ragnar Frisch,

1932), which prove useful when preferences are additively separable, as they are

across states—of—the—world here. Browning, et al. (forthcoming) contains an

elegant statement of the method and gives prior references. Differentiating

with respect to B yields



                 UccC'(O) + UCLL (e)    0




                 UCLC(e) + ULLL   (0)   —A
                                               27


with solutions



                 L'(e) —
                               —xU/                                                (13)




                 C'(e)         AUCL/                                               (ill)




where   -              —           > 0, by risk aversion.
            [UCCULL         ULJ
            From (13) we have L'(9) < 0, since              < 0 by concavity and A < 0.

d(1—L(o))/do     1 —       L'(e)   > 0. The implicit contract always specifies that the

employee works more hours in favorable states (larger values of e) and works

less in less favorable states. There is no ambiguity due to opposing income and

substitution effects in the optimal contract. Negativity of L'(e) is basically

a result of substitution effects. The worker is constrained by the expectation

of output, not by realized output itself. A favorable or unfavorable drawing of

o carries no income effects because the good fortunes of one firm are counter-

balanced by bad fortunes of another for diversifiable risks. Therefore, it 15

always efficient for the worker to work more when the marginal product of labor

is larger (to make hay when the sun shines) and to redistribute consumption by

insurance. If leisure is a normal good, contracts result in greater variance in

hours worked than standard models and intuition based on them suggest.

            Equation (11) shows that total wage payments ——          identified   with con-

sumption under the contract ——           are rising, constant, or falling in 0 as UCL         0.

Only when preferences are strongly separable in C and L is it true that

C'(e) — 0 and consumption is completely smoothed, as in the permanent income

hypothesis (Friedman, 1957). Nonzero cross derivatives UCL strongly link con-

sumption behavior with labor supply.8
                                           28



             That a contract with full insurance does not necessarily imply full

consumption smoothing suggests that the connection between complete insurance

and income effects is more subtle than usual. Full insurance does not stabilize

consumption except when preferences are strongly separable. More surprising, it

does not stabilize ex post utility when leisure is a normal good. In this

bivariate problem full insurance is completely described by condition (11) that

the marginal utility of consumption is equalized in all states of the world, not

necessarily total utility. Define u(8) as ex post indirect utility given B in

the optimal contract. Then



                  u'(e) UC' +     UL'
                                                                          (15)

                        =                  —
                            (Uc/Ucc)[UcL        (UL/UC)UCC]L'(e).


The second equality follows from (13) and (1'4). The bracketed term in (15) is

familiar. It determines the sign of the income effect in a conventional labor

supply problem. Ex post utility is completely assured by the contract only if

u' —   0,   and this happens only when the income effect is zero, or when U(C,

L) = U(C +    ip(L)) of which section III is a special case. But if' utility is
completely assured, consumption C(e) cannot be assured for it must compensate

for the variation in L. The contract does not assure utility if the income

effect is nonzero. u'(o) is negative when the income effect is positive.9

             A complete insurance contract makes a worker who has "suffered" an

adverse draw of an insurable risk better off ex post than a worker who draws a

more favorable value except when income effects are negative. Contracts under—

insure ex post utility levels only when leisure is an inferior good. This
                                        29



strong result is a result of strong assumptions. It is not necessarily true

when the firm is risk averse (then v(.) multiplies the right hand side of (11)

and (12) so that risks are shared and insurance is incomplete. Nor is it

necessarily true when information is private or when the shock Is undiversi—

flable. A nondiversifiable risk affects i, and has a powerful effect on the

total amount of consumption produced and redistributed. It changes the marginal

utility of consumption A. Ex post utility necessarily increases in p, as it did

In section III.

          The consumption smoothing and insurance aspects of contracts have

profound implications on the meaning of wage data in a contract market. Ob-

served wages do two things in a contract: they allocate labor and shift

risks.10 These roles are best described by thinking of the observed wage as the

outcome of a two—part variable tariff. The insurance aspect determines the

equivalent of nonearned income in a conventional labor supply problem, condi-

tional on the realized state 0. For risk pooling and insurance to have meaning,

It must be that workers experiencing favorable realizations of 0 subsidize those

with unfavorable realizations. Given these "lump sum" taxes and subsidies, the

contract allows workers to "choose" their optimal labor supply at the correct

"marginal wage" 0, the marginal product of labor.

          Define 5(0) as the worker's net debit position with the firm:

5(0)   C(e) — 8(1 —   L(e))   is the difference between the wage payment and output

In state 8. This equation is of the conventional budget form except that 8(0)

has replaced the usual nonearned Income term. A worker for whom s(0) > 0 is

effectively subsidized by the contract ex post and one for whom s(0) < 0 is

effectively taxed. Substituting 8(0) into the budget constraint (9) reveals

that these subsidies and taxes balance each other on average across all workers
                                           30


in an actuarial system. Differentiate s(8) with respect to 0 and substitute

from (13) and (114)




                s'(O)   —(1 —   L) — (L'/UCC)[UcL — (UL/UC)UccJ             (16)




so s(0) is decreasing in 0 if leisure is noninferior.

          The two—part tariff interpretation of contracts is shown in figure 2.

The first panel shows the solution to the conventional problem (assuming zero

nonearned income). Two budget lines are shown. The realized marginal product

01 is assumed to be larger than 021 and comparison of equilibrium points in-

volves the usual income and substitution effects. The second panel shows the

effects of a contract, assuming UCL < 0. For 01 above the mean we know from

(16) that the worker is taxed and s(0) < 0. For 2 below the mean the worker is

subsidized and 5(02) > 0. The contract acts as if it puts the 01 worker "in the

hole" by amount s(Oi) and lets him work out of it by choosing L at (marginal)

wage rate 01 along the altered budget constraint. The contract acts as if it

gives the 02 worker a subsidy of s(82) and then allows him to choose hours

worked at marginal wage rate 02• The heavy curve labeled CCL) is the locus of

(C,L) pairs satisfying marginal condition (11), and C'(L) < 0 when UCL < 0. The

familiar marginal condition UL/UC =    0    implied by (11) and (12) jointly is shown

by the tangencies with the contract budget constraints. It is these adjustments

in the "lump sum" portions of the two part tariff that ameliorate income ef—

fects, that promote consumption smoothing and elastic labor supply responses to

diversifiable risks.
                                         31



         Figure 2 is useful for studying the observable wage consequences of

contracts. The observed "average hourly wage rate" is measured by dividing

total earnings (equals C(e) in contracts) by hours worked:



               W(e) —   C(e)/(1—L(e)).                                 (17)




This is how wage rates are measured In virtually all available data. Dif-

ferentiating (17), and substituting from above yields



               w'(e)/w(e)     [_(UCL/CUCC) +   (1/(1—L))]L'(e).         (18)




The sign of this expression is unambiguous only when UCL > 0, in which case W(e)

is actually decreasing In e, given p. The sign of W'(e) is ambiguous when

UCL < 0 as in figure 2. Figure 3 illustrates the construction of W(e) for

preferences without income effects. Here C(L) coincides with an indifference

curve because utility is constant in the contract, from (15). The points marked

A and B correspond to large and small values of e respectively. The measured

everage hourly wage rate is given by the slope of the line connecting either

point with L   1 and C =    0, from (17). The two values of 0 have been chosen so
that the wage rate is the same, Illustrating nonmonotonicity of W(O). In this

case W(e) is U—shaped. It is decreasing for 0 sufficiently small and is in-

creasing for 0 sufficiently large.

          Two points follow from this:

          First, there is no presumption that the measured average wage in a

contract is positively correlated with the state 0, as the U—shaped pattern in

figure 3 shows, a possibility that could be confused with wage rigidity. This

statement refers to real average wage rates and to the diversifiable component
                                       32


of the state. If the economy experienced an adverse aggregate shock i,    the
contract would have to be recalibrated. The equilibrium indifference curve in

fIgure 3 would be shifted down and the average hourly wage at each hours worked

would be smaller than indicated. Average hourly wages rates should be posi-

tively correlated with noninsurable disturbances in a contract market.

          The behavior of average real wages over the business cycle has been

studied for many years. Manufacturing hourly wage rates show no obvious rela-

tionship with aggregate output (Salih Neftci, 1978). Joseph Altonji and

Ashenfelter (1980) suggest that the manufacturing real wage rate resembles a

random walk. However, panel and personal survey data indicate significant

responses of measured personal wage rates to local labor market conditions (John

Raisian, 1983; Mark Bus, 1985; and Topel, forthcoming). James Heckman and

Guilerrue Sedlacek (1981U show that BLS manufacturing numbers may contain selec-

tion bias, since less productive workers are less likely to be employed in

manufacturing during business cycle troughs, making measured wages fall less

than a properly weighted Index.

          Second, using measured wage rates may lead to misleading inferences

regarding unemployment or overemployment in personal surveys. Optimality of the

contract means that ex post Pareto-improving recontracts are not possible.

There is also no possibility of choosing hours worked ex post at some exoge—

nously determined wage. In figure 3 the worker is instructed to work (1 — L1)

hours In the    state. Total earnings of C1 go along with this, so the average

hourly wage is C1/(1—L1) = W.     If the worker could freely choose hours at an

hourly wage rate W he would work up to point C rather than stay at A. In the

state, the contract specifies point B. Here the worker would choose to work

more hours (point C) than the contract specifies if hours could be freely chosen
                                        33


at   wage rate W. A survey respondent might indicate constraints on hours worked

under these circumstances. The person who drew 02 might say that he would like

more work than he is getting at the 'tgoing" wage rate and that he is irivolunta—

rily underemployed. The worker who drew 01 might respond that work hours are

excessive and that he is involuntarily overemployed.

           All this points out a significant problem for empirical analysis.

Virtually all work on labor supply uses a model that assumes point C, that the

worker is free to unilaterally choose hours at the measured wage rate W, whereas

the insurance features of contracts disassociate the measured average wage rate

from both the marginal product of labor and from the marginal rate of' substitu-

tion. This point is conceptual and applies even if average wages were perfectly

measured, so econometric techniques for dealing with measurement error does not

dispose of it. This is not trivial because virtually all econometric work (in

this field and elsewhere) lives or dies by the assumption that measured prices

indicate efficiency margins. Contracts require that the data be adjusted for

the lump sum components 8(0) to impute marginal wage rates. Some recent studies

have attempted to include information on survey responses pertaining to whether

or not the worker is constrained in the choice of hours, but this is generally

viewed as a ration, not as an equilibrium phenomenon along contract lines

(Shelly Lundberg, 19814 gives references and a related discussion).

           This section concludes with an interesting and surprising comparative

static experiment. Complete contracts imply that an increase in diversifiable

risk increases expected utility of' risk averse workers.

           Following Michael Rothschild and Stiglitz (1970), parameterize the

density function as g(o)    F(e) +   ar(0),   where (o) is a density, a is a posi-

tive number, and r(8) is a step function with properties:
                                              3i4




               R(O) —       r(z)dz


               R(O)     R()        0

                                                                                (19)

               J0R(o)de — 0



               fR(z)dz > 0



Some reflection reveals that r(9) is positive for large and small values of 0

and is negative for intermediate values. Therefore an increase in a puts more

weight In the tails of g(0) and increases the spread of the distribution.

          Differentiating the Lagrangian of the maximum problem in (8) with

respect to a and using the envelope property gives



               aEu/a        fu(e)r(0)de — AJ[e(1 —          L)   —
                                                                     C]r(0)dO


This expression may be signed by integrating by parts (twice) and exploiting the

properties of (19) (Peter Diamond and Rothschild, 1978). Assuming g(0) has

bounded support, integration by parts gives



               3Eu/3a —     —J{u'(e)    + A[OL'(O) +       C'(e)]}R(e)d(o)


                                                    —
                                         +
                                             Af(1       L(O))R(e)de


                        =          —   L(e))R(e)do
                            AJ(1
                                        35


since   the first integral vanishes from first order conditions and (15).

Integrating by parts again gives



                 aEu/aa —
                            —AJ0J—L'(8)R(T)dTd8   .                     (20)



The sign of (20) is unambiguously positive because A < 0, L'(O) < 0, from (13),

and J0R(z)dz > 0, from (19). Greater diversifiable risk makes the worker better

off.

           This result is unexpected in light of the Smithian equalizing differ-

ences logic, but is easily explained. Full insurance eliminates the adverse

direct consequences of risk aversion on expected utility. Increasing spread

affords the worker superior opportunities of allocating work to the most favor-

able states and limiting losses of unfavorable outcomes by consuming more

leisure. The opportune substitution of work effort toward more productive

states has a value similar to that of an option: that less work is called for in

the less favorable states serves to truncate the lower tail of the 0 distri-

bution.



V. LAYOFFS OR WORKSHARING?

           Misconceptions about the nature of the price mechanism in contracts

has led to the impression that contracts somehow rationalize layoffs through

"sticky" wages and prices, and nonmarket clearing. This Impression is wide of

the mark because it confuses ex post contractual wages and prices with conven-

tional "auction" market prices. Section IV clearly demonstrates that resources

in contracts are really allocated by a sophisticated nonlinear price system.

This nonlinear scheme is as flexible as one ordinarily supposes in competitive
                                     36


market theory and allocates resources as efficiently as the completeness of

contingent claims markets permits. The true fact is that contracts per se have

little to say about the split between changes in hours per head and layoffs.

Contract outcomes fundamentally depend on preferences and technology, so the

question of layoffs must rest on these same primitives. Section III produced

layoffs by a peculiar assumption about preferences, that market and nonrnarket

goods are perfect substitutes. The conventional formulation in section IV is

not detailed enough to decide these issues.

         There are basically two ways of introducing layoffs in contract (or

any other) models. One links layoffs to capital utilization decisions based on

capital heterogeneity and limited ex post substitution between labor and capital

(Lief Johansen, 1972). The Idea is related to the 'tmarginal firm." Marginal

mines shut down completely when the price of ore falls because their quasi—rents

are driven to zero. Production in marginal operations might commence when

demand increases. Restricted ex post capital—labor substitution and fixed

operating costs create nonconvexities that make it advantageous to shut down

inefficient facilities rather than operate them at excess capacity. These ideas

could be extended to various divisions of a multiprocluct or multiplant firm.

The contract model must be extended to incorporate productivity differences

among firms, based perhaps on vintage capital ideas (Solow, 1960), differences

in site—specific factors or in entrepreneurial capacities. This line has not

been pursued much, and will not be developed here.

          The other possibility is to directly introduce hours and employees

(bodies) into the firm's technology (Feldstein, 1967; Rosen, 1968; Ray Fair,

1969; M. Ishaq Nadiri and Rosen, 1969; Ben Bernanke, 19814), which serves to link

the models of sections III and IV above. Miyazakl and Neary (1983) and Murry
                                             37


Brown and Elmas Wolfstet.ter (19814) have constructed contract models along these

lines.

             Extend the production function of section III to x       Of(pn, h), where

h is the intensity of work per employed person and f( ) is concave. Think of p

as the fraction of contract labor who are employed. Then 1 — p is the layoff

rate. Alternatively, maintain a timing convention in which the "periodt' is a

year. Then h can be regarded as the length of the work week when employed and p

as the fraction of the year (number of weeks) of employment. h           0 durIng

nonworking weeks spent on layoff. To simplify the presentation, I again assume

complete contracts (of course conditional on the mean p of 0) and risk neutral

employers.

             Writing the utility function in terms of h rather than L, an employed

worker receives contractual wage payment C1(o) and works h(e) In state 0,

receiving utility U(C1(e), h(9)). A laid off worker receives payment C2(0) and

h is zero, so utility is U(C2(e), 0). The probability of these events is p and

1 — p respectively, so



                 Eu —
                        f[U(C1,   h)p +
                                          U(C2,
                                                  0)(1 —   p)]dG(0)          (21)




The budget constraint is



                  f[ef(pn, h) — n(C1p + C2(1 — p))JdG(0) = 0.                (22)




             The equilibrium contract {C1(e), C2(O), h(0), p(0)1 maximizes (21)

subject to (22). First order conditions for C1 and C2 are familiar by now
                                                38



                  Uc(C1(e)i h(e))         Uc(C2(O), 0) — —An                             (23)




and imply that C2 is independent of B (because An is independent of e). C1

depends on B (unless Uch - 0) only if h does. The intensive margin h is (note

that Uh < 0)



                                       h(O))     —A8f2(p(O)n, h(e))                      (24)




or, substituting from (23) and rearranging, Of2 =                                   the marginal
                                                               (pn)(-Uh/UC):
product of h in state 0 equals its marginal cost, which is the shadow price

/U) per employed worker times the number employed. The extensive margin p is,

assuming p > 0 (the firm never closes)



                          h) —                               h) —         —
                                 U(C2,
                                         0) +
                                                An[8f1(pn,          (C1       C2)] > 0   (25)




so the shadow price of labor utilization p is

          (C1 —
                         —            h) —
                   C2)       [U(C1,          U(C2, O)]/Uc(Ci h).
          Further analysis of these conditions is neither elementary nor

illuminating. At this level of generality about all that can be said is that

dp/dO   0 and dh/dO > 0. Yet time—series data on employment and hours follow

systematic patterns. Aggregate hours and employment variations are positively

correlated with output growth rates (deviations about trend), and hours per week

show variation of less than two hours peak to trough. Employment fluctuations

account for the bulk of total labor utilization adjustments even in deep

recessions. Indivisibilities appear necessary to account for this (Mortensen,

1978; Kenneth Burdett and Mortensen, 1980).
                                           39


           Consider an example: Assume U(C, h) - U(C —          •(h))   where U" < 0 and

$(h) is an increasing convex function. Then (23) implies equal utility

in all states ——   there   are no income effects —— and C1(O) —
                                                                C2
                                                                            4(h(O)) —

For   production assume f(pn, h) -     F(pnl(h)),     where r(h) has the interpretation of

efficiency units of work hours. A long tradition of labor market research sug-

gests that 1(h) may have an ogive shape, due to set—up costs (Sidney Chapman,

1909; Arthur C. Pigou, 1920): productivity of a worker's time is small at small

values of h, rises rapidly after some threshhold is passed, and finally shows

diminishing returns when h is very large. Indivisibilities due to fixed costs of

market participation (John Cogan, 1980; Giora Hanoch, 1980) have similar implica-

tions. (Hanoch discusses including both hours worked and weeks worked as argu-

ments of utility functions, which generalizes (21)). Then (214) and (25) become



                 OY'(h)F'(.)     (h)
                                                                                 (26)

                        > [(h) —     4(0)J/1(h).


           When 0 < p < 1, the second condition in (26) holds with equality.

Dividing through by the first yields



                1'(h)/y(h) =    '(h)/[(h)       —
                                                    ,(O)J                        (27)




which gives a unique solution for h, say h*. At h —           h* we must have diminishing
returns, or y't(h*) < 0.     (27) is independent of both p and 0, so h(8) =        h*,   a

constant whenever any layoffs occur. Furthermore we have in this region
                                      110




               OF'(pnY(h*))   4?(h*)/y*(h*)      [(h*) —   (0)J/Y(h*),     (28)




so the shadow price of labor is [$(h*) -    •(0)J/Y(h*),   a constant independent of

e.   (28) defines p(0) when layoffs are positive, and implies that p(0) is

increasing in e. Fewer workers are laid off in more favorable states. Further-

more, wages C1(o) paid to employed workers are rigid and independent of 0 when-

ever layoffs are positive.

          Since p(0) is increasing, there must be some critical value 0* beyond

which p   1. The firm would like to hire more workers than it has contracted

with in states more favorable than this. Therefore, for 0 > 0* it is h that does

all the adjusting. In this range h(e) is defined by the first condition in (26)

with p set equal to one. The firm's shadow price of labor is '(h)/"(h) here

and is increasing in h on the assumptions above. Therefore h(e) is increasing

for 0 > 0*. C1(e) is Increasing here as well.

          The overall solution is pieced together in figure 1!.      The employment

rate does all the adjusting when 0 falls short of 0. h is rigidly set at h*

here and the shadow price of labor to the firm Is constant. For 0 > 0*, the

shadow price of labor is rising, p    1, and hours do all the adjusting.

Furthermore, the wage paid to employed persons is "rigid't downward: C1 is

constant for 0 < 0*. The internal supply price of labor would be smaller than

shown if contracts did not fully indemnify laid—off workers, and layoffs would be

involuntary, as above. In either case the layoff rate is decreasing in i          (the
undiversifiable risk) because 0* is decreasing in p.

          This example suggests the following interpretation of hours and

employment data. In normal times (the mean of 0 exceeds 0*) hours per worker

account for most total manhours variation (hours are a leading indicator).
                                    41



Workers are not laid off until conditions get sufficiently bad to pass beyond the

threshhold 8*, at which point hours per head show downward rigidity that puts

distinct limits on the use of worksharing.

          This type of model can account for some of the broader features of the

data, but recent international comparisons present interesting and Important

challenges. Robert J. Gordon (1982) compared the U.S. with Japan. Both coun-

tries exhibit about equal variance In total hours worked, but hours per worker

varies more in Japan than In the U.S. and employment varies more In the U.S. The

widespread use of bonuses makes for greater wage variability in Japan as well.

Models of this type account for these differences on the basis of differences in

preferences and technology and surely leave much unexplained. It appears as If

some consideration of differences in firm—specific human capital, labor mobility,

and quasi—fixed factor ideas are required to fully account for these differences

(Hashimot.o, 1979).




VI. INTEMPORAL CONTRACTS

          This survey follows the literature in expositing timeless single period

models. There Is a parallel Intertemporal formulation, following Baily (1974)

who suggested that contracts might exploit gains from trade due to capital market

imperfections. The firm's greater access to capital markets allows It to save

and dissave on the worker's behalf, and eliminates intertemporal uncertainty in

consumption (Brown, 1983) that the worker cannot accomplish on his own. The

contract again specifies consumption (wage payments) and labor utilization in

each state and each time period, conditional on information available in that

period. It mimics the solution to an intertemporal expected utility maximization

problem. Now the observed wage payments Intermingle elements of intertemporal
savings and dissavings as well as the usual productive efficiency considerations.

Nonetheless, the formal analysis has many features in common with the one—period

model. Under complete information the contract specifies (Ct,Lt) pairs condi-

tional on the history of state realizations 0 up to the present time t. In the

leading model the worker has an intertemporally separable utility function of the

form EU(Ct, Lt)Dt, where D is the rate of time preference, similar to (8), and

the firm is risk neutral. The budget constraint at time t equates the expected

present value of future consumption to the expected present value of future

production, conditional on the observed sequence (01 at t, similar to (9).

          The precise solution depends on the properties of (Ut} and the extent

to which capital consumption allows intertemporal diversification of aggregate

disturbances (Richard Cantor, 1983). Consider the simplest case in which 0 is

independently distributed over agents with a constant mean (Grossman and Laurence

Weiss, 1981). Then the insurance of section IV is achieved by a consumption loan

market subordinated through firms. Those with adverse realizations borrow on

their worker's behalf and those with favorable realizations are lenders. The

loan market is cleared at a rate of interest equal to the rate of time preference

(to satisfy intertemporal marginal conditions) and the analysis of section IV

carries through intact. Here the 5(0) terms of figure 2 are the savings and

dissavings components of observed earnings of workers, personal consumption is

smoothed and personal labor supply is accentuated by substitution effects.

"Capital market imperfections" introduce ex post involuntary elements in contract

terms, as above.

          More generally, write               Then the contract is conditioned on

the history of the aggregate shock as well as on local disturbances. These

aggregate shocks are undiversifiable if there are no stores of nonhuman wealth.
                                     J43




An unanticipated adverse aggregate disturbance increases the demand for consump-

tion loans. The rate of interest rises to ration reduced supply. Smaller

aggregate consumption Is redistributed out of the diversifiable risks as before,

but observed consumption and employment contain elements of Keynesian income

effects. The optimal program embodies forecasts of permanent wealth to the

extent that the j—process is serially correlated and persistent. These redistri-

bute planned consumption and labor supply over time through direct wealth effects

and indirectly through their anticipated effects on interest rates. In the most

general formulation, capital allows the aggregate disturbance to be partially

diversified through capital accumulation in favorable aggregate conditions and

through decumulation In unfavorable circumstances (Truman Bewley, 1980; William

Brock, 1982). These intertemporal trading possibilities reduce the income and

wealth effects of aggregate shocks on consumption and employment behavior and

accentuate pure substitution effects.11

          This discussion makes clear that intertemporal contract models are

closely related to the intertemporal substitution hypothesis (Lucas and Leonard

Rapping, 1970). A substantial practical difference is the role of measured wage

rates in uncovering the structure of preferences and technology from actual data,

because average wage rates do not index the true marginal product of labor or the

marginal rate of' substitution between C and L in contracts (section IV). This

point is important because almost all empirical studies of intertemporal substi-

tution assumes that measured wage rates fully reflect both margins in the data.

Two notable exceptions are Brown (1983), who attempted to estimate the optimal

program directly on functional form restrictions, and Abowd and David Card

(forthcoming), who attempt to estimate the fraction of workers for whom wage

rates reflect marginal conditions. The methods of Finn Kydland and Edward
                                       1414




Prescott   (1982) also rest heavily on functional forms and avoid the use of market

price and wage data. But on the conventional assumption, most recent estimates

of iritertemporal substitution on microdata are negligible for prime-age males

(MaCurdy, 1981; Joseph Altonji, 1982); but much larger for those classes of

workers, such as married women, who exhibit regular labor force transitions

(Heckman and MaCurdy, 1980). It is worth pointing out that in light of the

greater labor force and (contractual) job attachments traditionally exhibited by

men the maintained assumption that observed wage rates index marginal conditions

is less likely to apply to them.

           Studies by Kydland and Prescott (1982), Robert Barro and Robert King

(1982), Kydland (19814), and Jisoon Lee (19814) conclude that the conventional

intertemporal model cannot explain certain comovements in aggregate time—series

data. The preferred specification is controversial and may require non—separable

preferences and technology. However, contract theory does not depend on these

special assumptions. A contract can be written for any preferences and technol-

ogy, but always divorces measured wage rates from the production efficiency

conditions of the optimum program that it embodies.



VII. CONTRACTS WITH PRIVATE INFORMATION

           As noted above, it is difficult to Incorporate transactions costs and

incomplete insurance in contract models. Interest In asymmetric Information

models has been sustained by their potential for doing this in an analytically

tractable manner. The problem Investigated most thoroughly so far is identical

to that of section IV with one bit of information removed: the firm is assumed to

observe the realization of 0 but the worker doesn't observe it (Guillermo Calvo

and Edmond Phelps, 1977; Hall and LIlien, 1979). Recent work by Russell Cooper
                                               15


(1981) and John Moore (19811) consider two—sided private information models and
cannot be reviewed here. Readers are forewarned that this section is more tech-

nically demanding than the rest of this survey. However, it may be skipped

without significant loss of continuity.

             The contract cannot be conditioned on 0 because the worker cannot

observe it, and since any rational employment decision must depend on the

marginal product of labor, that decision must be delegated to the agent with the

information, namely the firm. The contract takes the following form (Jerry Green

and Charles Kahn, 1983): the worker and firm agree ex ante on a compensation

schedule C(L) (equivalently C(1 —           L)).    The firm observes B and instructs the

employee to work (1 —   L) units of time in exchange for contractual compensation
C(L). Market competition takes the form of offering attractive compensation

schedules C(L), so the competitive contract maximizes expected utility of the

worker subject to expected firm utility (or profit) and information constraints.

The nonlinear contract pricing schedule C(L) is closely related to the multipart—

tariffs of section IV. In fact the solution of the problem Is formally Identical

to the theory of nonlinear pricing (Michael Mussa and Rosen, 1978; Eric Maskin

and Riley, 19814).

             Given any schedule C(L), the firm observes 0 and chooses L to maximize

profit. The firm's ex post profit is ir(O, L) = 0(1 —             L)   —   C(L) so given CCL) and

0, L is chosen to satisfy




                 - = —o   —
                              C'(L)   = 0                                             (29)




so long as
                                             146




                   2
                       — —C"(L) < 0




The firm chooses L in (29) so that the marginal product of labor equals its

marginal cost to the firm. Write the solution to (29) as L(e). Comparative

statics reveals



                  L'(O)    —i/c" < 0



The worker is always instructed to work more in favorable states and less in

unfavorable states. Define C(e) =          C(L(e)).     Then C'(O) = —OL'(O) > 0, and

compensation unambiguously increases in 0 independently of worker preferences.

          The method of solution follows an idea of Mirrlees (1971). Given C(L),

the firm exploits its information through (29), which holds for every possible

realization e. Therefore (29) may be regarded as a differential equation

dC/dL   —0, or dC = —OdL.      Integrating by parts yields



                  C(0) — C(0) =   —OL +                                          (30)
                                           JL(v)dv

which is a convenient way of representing the information constraint (29)

          The competitive equilibrium contract maximizes the worker's expected

utility subject to the firm's expected utility, as before, and to the firm's

exploitation of its information (30). Define the transformation z(0) =             JL(v)dv.
Then z'(8) =   L(e)    and (30) becomes



                  C(o) = C(0) —   ez'(e)    +   z(8)   .                         (31)
                                             117



                                                       —
Furthermore (note: assuming f(1 —       L)   -     1       L simplifies the presentation without

affecting essentials)



                71(0)   max w(8, L) — max 0(1 —                  L(0))      —
                                                                                 C(0)
                         L             L



                        0 —    8z' — C(0) + Oz'            —    z     e —       C(O)    —   z(0)


Now the contract can be described as a variational problem in z and z'. Recal-

ling that Eu    5U(C, L)dG, and substituting for C from (31), we seek a function

z(0) and real numbers A and C(O) that maximize



          J U(C(0) — Oz' +     z,   z')dG + A[V —              Jv(e   —   z — C(O))dG]                (32)




where v(.) is the utility function of the firm. Once z'(O) =                                  L(e) has been
found, (30) is used to calculate C(e). Eliminating 0 from these two expressions

implies C(L).

          Two marginal conditions and a boundary condition characterize the

solution. Differentiating (32) wIth respect to C(O) yields:



                SoUcdG =      Af0vtdG
                                         .                                                            (33)



The average marginal utility of consumption for the worker is proportional to

average marginal utility of the firm. Marginal utilities are not necessarily

equated state—by—state. An Euler equation gives the margin for z:
                                             148




                                                   —
                   (Uc
                         +   Av')g(e)       (U         eU)(e)      .                (314)




Denote the upper and lower limits of e in G(e) by e and 0 respectively. Then

multiplying (314) through by d9 integrating and exploiting (33)            yields


                  UL(O) — eU0(e)        UL(o) —        eUCe)   .                    (35)


The boundary condition sets (35) to zero, so the contract is production efficient

(e =            in the best and worst states (Cooper, 1983 gives an intuitive ex-
       UL/UC)
planation in terms of the revelation principle: the firm cannot overstate the

most extreme realizations to the worker if the distribution G(O) is bounded and

the bounds are common knowledge). Using this fact and integrating (314) yields

the fundamental condition



                  J•(Uc +      Av')g(e)de   (UL —       eu)g(e)        .            (36)


            (36) nicely Illustrates the tension between insurance and efficiency

under private information. The contract cannot be production efficient for

8 < 0 < B unless there is efficient sharing of risks in the Borch—Arrow sense for

each state. In addition the solution generally depends on G(0). For example, it

can be shown (Mussa and Rosen, 1978; Kahn and Jose Scheinkman, forthcoming) that

the firm may choose the same work hours 1 — L for a closed interval of states.

The contract certainly doesn't achieve first—best efficiency in these regions.

            Much effort has gone into analyzing the sign of the inefficiency

implied by (36). The interpretation plays heavily on a notion of contractual

commitment and enforcement that doesn't arise in the common information case.
                                          "9

For suppose the contract implies production inefficiency in some state. The

worker and the firm have agreed to contractual terms C(L) ex ante. When this

state materializes, the worker generally can infer the realized value of 0 by his

implicit knowledge of (29) (the production function and utility function are

common knowledge in this formulation; Schwartz, 1983 questions how this knowledge

becomes common). At that point there are unexploited gains from trade and both

parties could benefit by recalibrating L so that 0             UL/iJe ex post. However, if

recontractirig is allowed, the contract must unravel, because it is written under

the assumption that both parties bind themselves to its ex ante terms. The

extent to which private information models produce "involuntary" unemployment and

overemployment depends on how these ex ante commitments can be enforced ex post.

While some authors are careful to recognize this important point (especially

Hart, 1983), a convincing description of labor market institutions that embody

this enforcement mechanism in implicit contracts has not been forthcoming.

          Three special cases of (36) have been analyzed. The method of proof is

established by Green and Kahn (1983), to which the reader Is referred for de-

tails. Denote the left hand side of (36) as a function of 8, say r(8). The sign

of C(o) is established by calculating its derivatives and ascertaining whether it

achieves a local maximum or minimum for some interior value of 0, using boundary

conditon (35). The results are sensitive to the nature of risk aversion and to

income effects in worker preferences.

          Case 1 (Hall and Lilien, 1979). Assume firms are risk neutral, workers
                                                                              -— no income
are risk averse and have preferences of the form u = U(C +            p(L))
effects. Then the left hand side of (36) turns out to be identically zero, and

the contract specifies 0 =           for every 8. There is furthermore complete and
                             UL/UC
optimal risk shifting: u(0) is constant and the firm eats all risks. Here the
                                       50



CCL) schedule coincides with an indifference curve, as in fIgure 3 of section IV.

Private   and common knowledge contracts are identical in this case.

           Case 2 (Grossman and Hart, 1983; Azariadis, 1983). Maintain the same

assumptions about workers as case 1, but let the firm be risk averse. Here Green

and Kahn's proof may be extended to show that the left hand side of (36) is

negative for almost all 8. Therefore UL/UC < 0 and the marginal social cost of'

labor is less than its ex post marginal product. The worker would like to

recontract for more employment ex post in practically every state, and there is

involuntary underemployment in the sense qualified above. Furthermore, the

worker bears consumption risk and u(0) is increasing in 8.

           Case 3 (Green and Kahn, 1983; V.V. Chari, 1983). The firm Is risk

neutral, the worker Is risk averse and has a positive income elasticity of demand

for leisure (as in section IV). Now the integral in (36) is positive for almost

all 0. Therefore UL/UC > 0, and the marginal cost of labor exceeds its marginal

product. The contract leads to "Involuntary overemployment" and the worker would

like to recontract ex post for less work than the firm chooses. Here u(0) Is

decreasing in 0 and the worker is worse off in the more favorable states, as in

section IV.

           The nature of these contracts is altered if workers have means to

disassociate current consumption decisions from current earnings. Thus, consider

the third case and assume that the worker can self—insure (Topel and Finis Welch,

1983), for example by borrowing and lending in a perfect capital market in the

Intertemporal context. Then the worker's self—insurance activities imply U

for each 8. Since the firm is risk neutral, the left side of (36) vanishes and

the asymmetric information contract Is perfectly effIcient. Its employment and

consumption properties duplicate that of section IV. Hart (1983) adds the
                                     51



assumption that the firm is risk averse and gives an Ingeneous argument for the

relevance of case 2. Risk neutral stockholders would be reluctant to provide

full insurance to the firm's management on moral hazard grounds. However, they

would not be so reluctant to contract for consumption insurance with workers1

because workers' labor supply is delegated through the manager in private infor—

rnation contracts and there are no direct moral hazards. Hence these third

parties could conceivably enforce the U =   —A   condition for workers. But then

risk aversion of managers Cv" < 0) implies that the left side of (36) must be

negative for bad realizations, or involuntary underemployment. This argument is

a very delicate one, for it implies that the effect of third party insurance to

workers is partially subverted by workers intermediating it and providing partial

insurance to managers (because workers become effectively risk neutral). Income

risks to managers are reduced by making the contractual C(L) function steeper

than when third party insurance is available. In favorable states the marginal

cost of labor to the firm is increasing too rapidly in (1 — L) and the firm does

not employ as much labor as is socially desirable. In unfavorable states the

marginal cost of labor is falling too fast and too much labor is released.



VIII. CONCLUSION

          Not all marriages are made in heaven. Firms go bankrupt, demand shifts

to other locations, supply shifts to other countries, products become obsolete

and relative demands for goods have been known to change over time. Contracts

call for permanent dissolutions when quasi—rents on firm specific human capital

fall to zero. Serious critics of contract theory have built their case on the

observation that quits rise noticably during business cycle expansions (Herschel

Grossman, 1977, 1979). Contracts break down if workers opportunistically accept
                                     52



insurance payments in bad times and renege on premium payments by skipping out in

good times. How much of observed voluntary turnover reflects opportunism and how

much is it the rational outcome of moving workers from lower to higher valued

uses?

          These Issues occupy much attention in current research, which is pro-

ceeding in a number of different directions too disparate to be usefully reviewed

here. However, these problems are important for delimiting the scope for self—

enforcing contracts that the at—will labor market contracting Institution re-

quires, and for pointing out potential reasons why contracts might be incomplete.

The common knowledge framework illustrates some of these ideas. Under these

circumstances the contract would specify the conditions and terms of its dissolu-

tion up front.

          A suitable reinterpretation of the model in section III clarifies the

point. Think of 0 as a permanent disturbance that permanently affects the for-

tunes of the firm, and interpret niL as the value of the worker's time in an

alternative job in another market.12 Then p has the interpretation of the

probability of a permanent separation.    The solution is exactly the same as

shown above. The complete contract stipulates a severance payment C2 to those

workers who depart when 0 falls short of 0*. Turnover is efficient if the

severance payment offers complete insurance, but is inefficient if severance

payments are constrained and workers are not fully protected against permanent

separations. For the same reasons as before, there is insufficient turnover In

these latter circumstances (see especially Ito, 1984; also Hercules Polemarchakis

and Weiss, 1978; Arnott, Arthur Hosios and Stiglltz, 1983; John Geanakopolus and

Ito, 1982; Barry Nalebuff and Richard Zeckhauser, 19814).
                                     53


          The need for interfirrn mobility in a well functioning labor market

suggests important reasons why contracts might be incomplete. A worker's knowl-

edge and perception of outside opportunities do not materialize out of the blue.

Information gathering and job search activities are costly and cannot be a matter

of common knowledge by the idiosyncratic nature of job—worker matches. A worker

must bear some residual job finding risks because of the moral hazard effects of

personal actions on success probabilities (Steven Shavell and Weiss, 1979).

Furthermore, the nature of searchers' interactions gives rise to externalities

that have only recently begun to be understood (Diamond, 1982; Christopher

Pissarides, 19814). A contract must embody a delicate balance of encouraging

mobility in response to permanent changes in demands and discouraging it for

temporary shocks. Full insurance discourages mobility by subsidizing leisure and

reducing job search intensity (Bronars, 1983; Mortensen, 1983b; Ito, 19814). This

is undesirable when severance is economically warranted, but not when demand and

supply disturbances have a more transient character. Since inferences on the

permanent—temporary decomposition of disturbances is itself uncertain, it appears

as If contracts cannot provide complete insurance. We are driven back to conven-

tional models to the extent this is true. The practical importance of contract

thkeory for understanding employment behavior depends on the extent to which

risks are socially diversifiable over space and time.
                                      51j



                                   FOOTNOTES




          *1 am indebted to Moses Abramovltz, Oliver Hart, Charles Kahn, Robert

Lucas, John Pencavel, Robert Topel and Yoram Weiss for comments and criticism.

They do not necessarily concur with my interpretations. The National Science

Foundation provided financial support.

          The common law doctrine of at—will governs employment contracts

(Clive Bull, 1983; Richard Epstein, 19814) and allows termination without fault

at the will of either party at any time. Union contracts and certain Equal

Opportunity legislation are major exceptions to at—will contracts. Both stipu-

late for—cause provisions and extensive adjudication procedures.

          2The origins of this problem lie in Wassily Leonteif (19I6). Contract

curve approaches to trade union bargaining recently have been developed by Ian

McDonald and Robert Solow (1981), Thomas MaCurdy and John Pencavel (forthcoming)

and Orley Ashenfelter and James Brown (forthcoming). Implicit contract theory

substantially differs from these in resolving the uncertainty in the distribu-

tion of utility between parties using the theory of optimal risk sharing.

          3The method may be unfamiliar. Think of the integrals in (1) and (2)

as the limits of sums across a large number T of discrete possible realizations

of 0 (the relation between a histogram and a continuous density). The discrete

formulation is a gigantic multivariate optimization problem which, by the logic

of the contracts, associates specific values of the C's and p with each possible

realization. These 3T marginal conditions are compactly written as (3) in the

limit. For the third equation in (3), note that a p is associated with each

value of 0 and that is why there are no integrals in these conditions. Some of
                                      55



the literature works with the dual problem, but the solution is equivalent by

pareto optimality.

          Something equivalent to U—shaped average cost curves Is required to

determine n. Contract theory adds no insights to the determination of firm size

and this Issue is Ignored here. Hajime Miyazaki and Hugh Neary (1983) determine

n as in a worker—managed firm. Rosen (1983) does It by a local public goods

argument. These papers and one by Dale Mortensen (1983) further elaborate

models of this type.

          5Nor do contracts imply nominal wage rigidity because the price level

would be a conditioning variable. Fixed duration nominal contracts (John

Taylor, 1980; Stanley Fisher, 1977; and Joanna Gray, 1976) must be rationalized

on some other grounds, such as contracting costs and lags and errors in observ-

ing nominal price levels.

          6Perceptive readers may have noticed that the complete contract could

have been equivalently implemented by having all employees work p percent of the

time and consume leisure (1 — p) percent of the time rather than having a frac-

tion p fully employed and a fraction (1 — p) completely unemployed. These same

possibilities arise in the incomplete contract, but are definitely not equiva-

lent. The virtue of work sharing does not seem to have been noticed in this

connection. Some factor that gives value to continuity of a worker's employment

time over the period is necessary to avoid pure worksharing solutions. See

below.

          7lncreasing the spread of the distribution function G(e) does not

necessarily make the worker worse off, and Smithian risk compensation is more

complex than would appear on the surface. Riskier distributions decrease wel-

fare on risk aversion grounds, but have benefits in allowing workers to choose
                                        56


labor   supply most advantageously in more probable high productivity states.

John Hey (1979) summarizes this approach to uncertainty. Nonearned income is

Ignored In what follows because those Issues are better treated in an intertem—

poral context.

           8Notlce that consumption Is positively correlated with labor supply

only when UCL < 0 from (114). The sign of UCL is determined by the degree of

risk aversion as well as by the usual curvature restrictions In demand theory.

A richer specification of nonmarket production yields more interesting implica-

tions. For example, those on short work schedules would substitute nonmarket

goods production for market goods (Gilbert Ghez and Becker, 1975). Michael

Grossman (1973) and Daniel Hamermesh (1982) find these types of predictable

differences In consumption (e.g., food prepared away from home) between the

employed and the unemployed.

           9This result Is formally identical to a paradox found by James

Mirrlees (1972) in an optimum spatial equilibrium problem. Mirrlees' paradox

arises because of the nonconvexity that a person can occupy only one location

(Richard Arnott and John Riley, 1977). The "nonconvexity" here Is that non—

market production must be self—consumed. If it were possible to trade leisure

on a competitive market then u(O) Is nondecreasing.

           °The emerging literature on efficiency wages (see the survey by

Stiglitz, 19814) also rests on the proposition that the wage performs more than

one economic function. Multi—part pricing would allocate resources efficiently

in these models (e.g., a lump—sum bond as well as a marginal wage rate in Carl

Shapiro and Stlglltz's, 19814 shirking problem), but two—part pricing is ruled

out by assumption. Involuntary unemployment results because some margin is not

satisfied when there are not enough prices available to perform all functions.
                                      57


Involuntary layoffs in contracts result from imperfections in st.ate-claim5

markets, which is a different way of saying that there are not enough prices.

          11This general framework strongly links consumption and labor supply

behavior unless one period preferences are strongly separable. Recent research

has found excess volatility of consumption relative to permanent income and

interest rates, but the extent to which this volatility can be explained by

interactions with labor supply has not been studied.

          12Holmstrom (1983) analyzes an offer-matching equilibrium when the

outside opportunity is stochastic. Hall and Edward Lazear (1981$) discuss two—

sided uncertainty in which the bargaining costs preclude ex post renegotiation.

Turnover is socially excessive in this case.
                                         58


                                     REFERENCES

Abowd, John and Ashenfelter, Orley. "Anticipated Unemployment and Compensating
      Wage Differentials," in Studies in labor markets. Ed.: Sherwin Rosen.
      Chicago: U. of Chicago Press for NBER, 1981, pp. 1141—170.

________  "Compensating Wage and Earnings Differentials for Employer Determined
      Hours of Work," U. of Chicago, 19814.

Abowd, John and Card, David. "Intertemporal Substitution in the Presence of
      Long—Term Contracts," Working Paper 166, Industrial Relations Section,
      Princeton U., 1983.

Akerlof, George and Miyazaki, Hajime. "The Wage Bill Argument Meets the
      Implicit Contract Theory of Unemployment," Rev. Econ. Stud. 1980, 147,
      pp. 321—38

Alehian, Armen. "Information Costs, Pricing and Resource Unemployment," Western
      Econ. J. 1969, 7(2), pp. 109—28.

Altonji, Joseph G. "The Intertemporal Substitution Model of Labor Market
      Fluctuations: An Empirical Analysis," Rev. Econ. Stud. 1982, 119, pp. 783
      82I.

            and Ashenfelter, Orley. "Wage Movements and the Labour Market
      Equilibrium Hypothesis," Economica. 1980, 147, pp. 217'145.

Arnott, Richard and Riley, John B. "Asymmetrical Production Possibilities, the
      Social Gains from Inequality and the Optimal Town," Scan. J. Econ. 1977,
      79(3), pp. 301—11.

Arnott, Richard, Hosios, Arthur and Stiglitz, Joseph E. "Implicit Contracts,
      Labor Mobility and Unemployment," Princeton U., 1983.

Arrow, Kenneth J. "The Role of Securities in the Optimal Allocation of Risk
      Bearing," Rev. Econ. Stud. 1961$, 31, pp. 91—96

________•    Essays in the theory of risk bearinS. Chicago: Markham, 1971

Ashenfelter, Orley and Brown, James. "Testing the Efficiency of Employment
      Contracts," J. Pout. Econ. forthcoming.

Azariadis, Constantine C. "Implicit Contracts and Underemployment Equilibria,"
      J. Polit. Econ. 1975, 83(6), pp. 1183—1202.

_______•     "On the Incidence of Unemployment," Rev. Econ. Stud. 1976, 113(1),
      pp. 115—25.

        •  "Implicit Contracts and Related Topics: A Survey," in The economics
      of the labour market. Eds.: Z. Hornstein, et al. London: HMSO, 1979.

________•  "Employment with Asymmetric Information," Quart. J. Econ. 1983,
      98 (supplement), pp. 157—73.
                                                 59



_________ and Stiglitz, Joseph E. "Implicit Contracts and Fixed Price
      Equilibria," Quart. J. Econ. 1983, 98(supplement), pp. 1—22.

Baily, Martin H. "Wages and Employment Under Uncertain Demand," Rev. Leon.
      Stud. 19714, 141(1), pp. 37—50.

________       "On the Theory of Layoffs and Unemployment," Econometrlca. 1977,
      145(5),     pp.     10143—10614.

Barro, Robert and King, Robert G. "Time—Separable Preferences and
      Intertemporal—Substitution Models of Business Cycles," Ii. of Rochester,
      1982.

Becker, Gary S. Human capital. NY: Columbia U. Press for NBER, 19614.

________      "A Theory of Marriage, Part I," J. Pout. Leon. 1973, 81(14), pp. 813
      146.


Bernanke, Ben. "An Equilibrium Model of Industrial Employment, Hours and
      Earnings, 1923—39," Graduate School of Business, Stanford U., 1983.

Bewley, Truman F. "The Permanent Income Hypothesis and Long—Run Economic
      Stability," J. Econ. Theory. 1980, 22(2), pp. 377—914.

Bus, Mark. "Real Wages over the Business Cycle: Evidence from Panel Data," J.
      Pout. Econ. (forthcoming).

Borch, Karl. "Equilibrium in a Reinsurance Market," Econometrica. 1962, 30(3),
      pp.    14214—1414



Brock, William A. "Asset Prices in a Production Economy," Economics of
      information and uncertainty. Ed.: J. J. McCall. Chicago: U. of Chicago
      Press, 1982, pp. 1—147.

Bronars, Stephen. "Compensating Wage Differentials and Layoff Risk in U.S.
      Manufacturing Industries," Ph.D. dissertation, U. of Chicago, 1983.

Brown, James N. "How Close to an Auction Is the Labor Market?" Res. Lab. Econ.
      1982, 5, pp. 182—235.

Brown, Murray and Wolfstetter, Elmar. "Underemployment and Normal Leisure,"
      Econ. Letters. 19814, 15(1—2), pp. 157—63.

Browning, Martin; Deaton, Angus, and Irish, Margaret. "A Profitable Approach to
      Labor Supply and Commodity Demands Over the Life—Cycle," Econometrica.
      forthcoming.

Bryant, John. "An Annotation of 'Implicit Contracts and Underemployment
      Equilibria," J. Polit. Leon. 1978, 86(6), pp. 1159—60.

Bull, Clive. "The Existence of Self—Enforcing Implicit Contracts," C.V Starr
      Center, NYU, 1983.
                                        60



Burdett, Kenneth and Mortensen, Dale T. "Search, Layoffs and Labor Market
      Equilibrium," J. Pout. Econ. 1980, 88(11), pp. 652—72.

Calvo, Guillermo A. and Phelps, Edmond S. "Employment Contingent Wage
      Contracts," J. Monet. Econ. 1977, 5, pp. 160—68.

Cantor, Richard. "Long—Term Labor Contracts, Consumption Smoothing and
      Aggregate Wage Dynamics," Ohio State U., 1983.

Chapman, Sidney J. "Hours of Labour," Ecori. J. 1909, 19(3), pp. 3514—79.

Chari, V.V. "Involuntary Unemployment and Implicit Contracts," Quart. J. Econ.
      1983, 98(supplement), pp. 107—22.

Cogan, John. "Labor Supply With Costs of Market Entry," in Female labor supply.
      Ed.: J.P. Smith. Princeton, NJ: Princeton U. Press, 1980.

Cooper, Russell. "Risk—Sharing and Productive Efficiency in Labor Contracts
      Under Bilateral Asymmetric Information," U. of Pennsylvania, 1981.

           "A Note on Overemployment/Underemployment in Labor Contracts Under
      Asymmetric Information," Econ. Letters. 1983, 12(1), pp. 81—87.

Debreu, Gerard. The theory of value. Cowles Foundation Monograph 17. New
      Haven: Yale U. Press, 1959.

Diamond, Peter. "Aggregate Demand Management in Search Equilibrium," J. Pout.
      Econ. 1982, 90(5), pp. 881—911.

________ and Rothschild, Michael. Uncertainty in economics. NY: Academic
      Press, 1978.

Epstein, Richard A. "In Praise of the Contract at Will," Univ. Chicago Law Rev.
      19814, 51(11), pp. 956—82.

Fair, Ray C. The short run demand for workers and hours. Amsterdam: North—
      Holland Publishing Company, 1969.

Feldstein, Martin. "Specification of the Labor Input In the Aggregate
      Production Function," Rev. Ecori. Stud. 1967, 314, pp. 375—86.

________   "The Importance of Temporary Layoffs: An Empirical Analysis,"
      Brookings Pap. Econ. Act. 1975, pp. 725—1414.

________   "Temporary Layoffs in the Theory of Unemployment," J. Polit. Econ.
      1976, 814(5), pp. 937—58.

Fischer, Stanley. "Long Term Contracts, Rational Expectations and the Optimum
      Money Supply Rule,t' J. Pout. Econ. 1977, 85(1), pp. 191—205.

Friedman, Milton. "The Role of Monetary Policy," Amer. Econ. Rev. 1968, 58(1),
      pp. 1—17.
                                             61




________    Price   theory: A provisional text. Chicago: Aldine Publishing Company,
      1962.

           A theory of the consumption function. Princeton, NJ: Princeton U.
      Press, 1957.

Frisch, Ragnar. New methods of measuring marginal utili. Tubigen: J.C.B.
      Mohr, 1932.

Geanakoplos, John and Ito, Takatoshi. "On Implicit Contracts and Involuntary
      Unemployment," Cowles Foundation Discussion Paper No. 6140, 1982.

Ghez, Gilbert and Becker, Gary S. Allocation of time and goods over the life
      cycle. NY: Columbia U. Press for NEER, 1975.

Gordon, Donald F. "A Neoclassical Theory of Keynesian Unemployment, Econ.
      Inquiry. 19714, 12(14), pp. 1431—59.

Gordon, Robert J. "Why U.S. Wage and Employment Behavior Differs from That In
      Britain and Japan," Ecori. J. 1982, 92(1), pp. 13—1414.

Gray, Joanna A. "Wage Indexation: A Macroeconomic Approach," J. Monet. Ecori.
      1976, 2(2), pp. 221—36.

Green, Jerry and Kahn, Charles M. "Wage Employment Contracts," Quart. J. Econ.
      1983, 98(supplement), pp. 173—88.

Grossman, Herschel. "Risk Shifting, Layoffs and Seniority," J. Monet. Econ.
      1978, 14(14),   pp.   661—86.

________   "Risk Shifting and Reliability in Labor Markets," Scand. J. Econ.
      1977, 79(2), pp. 187—209.

Grossman, Michael. "Unemployment and Consumption," Amer. Econ. Rev. 1973,
      68(1), pp. 208—13.

Grossman, Sanford J. and Hart, Oliver D. "Implicit Contracts, Moral Hazard and
      Unemployment, Amer. Econ. Rev. (Papers and Proceedings). 1981, 71(2), pp.
      301—07.

________      "Implicit
                     Contracts Under Asymmetrical Information," Quart. J. Econ.
      1983, 71(supplement), pp. 123—57.

Grossman, Sanford J. and Weiss, Laurence. "Saving and Insurance," Bayesian
      models in economic theory. Eds.: M. Boyer and R. E. Kihlstrom. NY:
      Elsevier, 19814.

Hall, Robert E. "Why Is the Unemployment Rate So High at Full Employment?"
      Brookings Pap. Econ. Act. 1970, (3), pp. 369—1402.

        •  "The Importance of Lifetime Jobs in the U.S. Economy," Amer. Econ.
     Rev. 1982, 72(14), pp. 716—214
                                       62



________• "A Theory of the Natural Unemployment Rate and the Duration of
      Employment," J. Monet. Econ. 1979, 5(2), pp. 153—69.

________• "Employment Fluctuations and Wage Rigidity," Brookings Pap. Econ.
      Act. 1980, (1), pp. 91—123.

________• "Labor Supply and Aggregate Fluctuations," Carnegie-Rochester
      Conference Series on Public Policy. 12, 1980, pp. 733.

________ and Lazear, Edward P. "The Excess Sensitivity of Layoffs and Quits to
      Demand," J. Lab. Econ. 19811, 2(2), pp. 253—58.

_________ and Lilien, D.M. "Efficient Wage Bargains Under Uncertain Supply and
      Demand," Amer. Econ. Rev. 1979, 69(5), pp. 868—79

Hamermesh, Daniel. "Social Insurance and Consumption," Amer. Econ. Rev. 1982,
      72(1), pp. 101—13

Hanoch, Giora. "A Multivariate Model of Labor Supply: Methodology and
      Estimation," in Female labor supply. Ed.: James P. Smith. Princeton,
      NJ: Princeton U. Press, 1980.

Harberger, Arnold C. "The Social Opportunity Cost of Labor," mt. Lab. Rev.
      1971, 103(6), pp. 559—79

Harris, John R. and Todaro, Michael P. "Migration, Unemployment and
      Development: A Two-Sector Analysis," Amer. Econ. Rev. 1970, 60(1), pp.
      126—42.

Hart, Oliver D. "Optimal Labour Contracts Under Asymmetric Information: An
      Introduction," Rev. Econ. Stud. 1983, 50(1), pp. 335.

Hart, Robert A. The economics of non—wage labour costs. London: George Allen
      and Unwin, 19814.

Hashimoto, Masanori. "Bonus Payments, On—the—Job Training and Lifetime
      Employment in Japan," J. Pout. Econ. 1979, 85(5), pp. 1086—11011.

Heckman, James J. and MaCurdy, Thomas. "A Life—Cycle Model of Female Labor
      Supply," Rev. Econ. Stud. 1980, 117(1), pp. l47—714

Heckman, James J. and Sedlacek, Guilermo. "An Equilibrium Model of the
      Industrial Distribution of Workers and Wages," U. of Chicago, 19811.

Hey, John D. Uncertainty in microeconomics. NY: NYU Press, 1979.

Hicks, John R. The theory of wages. London: Macmillan, 1932.

Holmstrom, Bengt. "Contractual Models of the Labor Market," Amer. Econ. Rev.
      (Papers and Proceedings). 1981, 71(2), pp. 308—13.

________   "Equilibrium  Long Term Contracts," Quart. J. Econ. 1983,
      98(supplement), pp. 23—514.
                                          63


Hutchens, Robert H. "Layoffs and Labor Supply," mt. Econ. Rev. 1983, 214(1),
      pP. 37-55.

Ito, Takatoshi. Implicit Contract Theory: A Critical Survey," U. of Minnesota,
      1982.

________      "Labor Contracts With Voluntary Quits," U. of Minnesota, 19814.

Johansen, Leif. Production functions. Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing Co.,
      1972.

Johnson, William R.     "A Theory of Job Shopping," Quar. J. Econ. 1978, 92(2), pp.
      261 —77

Jovanovic, Boyan. "Job Matching and the Theory of Turnover," J. Pout. Econ.
      1979, 87(1), pp. 972—90.

Kahn, Charles M. and Scheinkman, Jose. "Optimal Employment Contracts With
      Bankruptcy Constraints," J. Econ. Theory. (forthcoming).

Katz, Lawrence. "Layoffs, Uncertain Recall and the Duration of Unemployment,"
      MIT, 19814.

Kihistrom, Richard E. and Laffont, Jean—Jacques. "A General Equilibrium
      Entrepreneurial Theory of Firm Formation Based on Risk Aversion," J.
      Pout. Econ. 1979, 87(14), pp. 719—148.

________   "Implicit Contracts and Free Entry," Quart. J. Econ. 1983,
      98(supplement), pp. 55—106.

Kinoshita, Tomio. "Working Hours and Hedonic Wages in the Market Equilibrium,"
      Musachi U., 1985.

Knight, Frank H. Risk, uncertainty and profit. Boston: Houghton Mifflin and
      Co., 1921.

Kydland, Finn E. "Labor Force Heterogeneity and the Business Cycle," Carnegie—
      Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy. Autumn, 19814, 20, pp.

________ and Prescott, Edward C. "Time To Build and Aggregate Fluctuations,"
      Econometrica. 1982, 50(6), pp. 13145—70.

Lee, Jisoon. "A Rational Expectations Model of Labor Supply," Ph.D. Thesis, U.
      of Chicago, 19814.

Leontief, Wassily. "The Pure Theory of the Guaranteed Annual Wage Contract," J.
      Pout. Econ. 19146, 56(1), pp. 76—79.

Lewis, H. Gregg. tEmployer Interests in Employee Hours of Work," U. of Chicago,
      1969.

Lilien, David. "The Cyclical Pattern of Temporary Layoffs in United States
      Manufacturing," Rev. Econ. Stat. 1980, 62(1), pp. 214—31.
                                             614




Lucas, Robert E., Jr. "Some International Evidence of Output—Inflation Trade
      Offs," Amer. Econ. Rev. 1973, 63(2), pp. 326—314.

________ and Rapping, L.A. "Real Wages, Employment and Inflation," in
      Microecononile foundations of employment and inflation Theory. Eds.: E.
      Phelps, et al. NY: W.W. Norton, 1970.

Lundberg, Shelly. "Tied Wage Hours Offers and the Endogeneity of Wages," NBER
      Working Paper 1431, 19814.

MaCurdy, Thomas E. "An Empirical Model of Labor Supply in a Life—Cycle
      Setting," J. Pout. Ecori. 1981, 89(6), pp. 1059—86.

         and Pencavel, John. "Testing Between Competing Models of Wage and
      Employment Determination in Unionized Markets," J. Pout. Econ.
      (forthcoming).

McDonald, Ian M. and Solow, Robert M. "Wage Bargaining and Employment," Amer.
      Econ. Rev. 1981, 71(5), pp. 896—908.

Maskin, Eric and Riley, John. "Monopoly With Incomplete Information," Rand J.
      Econ. 19814,   15(2), pp.   171—96.

Millar, James R. "A Theory of On—the—Job Training." U. of Toronto, 1971.

Mincer, Jacob. "Unemployment Effects of Minimum Wages," J. Pout. Econ. 1976.
      814(14, part 2), pp. S87—S1014.

         and Jovanovic, Boyan. "Labor Mobility and Wages," in Studies in labor
      markets. Ed.: Sherwin Rosen. Chicago: U. of Chicago Press for NBER, 1981,
      pp. 21—614.

Mirrlees, James. "An Exploration in the Theory of Optimum Income Taxation,"
      Rev. Econ. Stud. 1971, 38(1114), pp. 175—208.

_______       "The Optimum Town," Swedish J. Econ. 1972, 714(1), pp.    1114—35


Miyazaki, Hajime and Neary, Hugh M.         "The Illyrian Firm Revisited," Bell J.
      Econ. 1983, 114(1), pp. 259—70.

________      "Output, Work Hours and Employment in the Short—Run of a Labor-
      Managed    Firm," Stanford U., 1983.
Modigliani, Franco. "Liquidity Preference and the Theory of Interest and
      Money," Econornetrica. 191414, 12(1),        pp.   14588.

Moore, John. "Contracting Between Two Parties with Private Information," London
      School of Econ., 19814.

Mortensen,    Dale T. "On the Theory of Layoffs," Northwestern U., 1978.

________• "A Welfare Analysis of Unemployment Insurance: Variations on Second
      Best Themes," Carnegie—Rochester Series on Public Policy. Autumn, 1983a,
      19,    pp. 67—98.
                                       65


_______     "Labor Contract Equilibria in an 'Island' Economy," Northwestern U.,
      1983b.

Mussa, Michael and Rosen, Sherwin. "Monopoly and Product Quality," J. Ecori.
      Theory. 1978, 18(2), 301—07.
Nadiri, M. Ishaq and Rosen, Sherwin. "Interrelated Factor Demand Functions,"
      Amer. Econ. Rev. 1969, 59(1), pp. I57—71

Nalebuff, Barry and Zeckhauser, Richard. "Involuntary Unemployment
      Reconsidered: Second—Best Contracting with Heterogeneous Firms and
      Workers," Harvard Univesity, 1984.

Neftci, Salih N. "A Time—Series Analysis of the Real Wages-Employment
      Relationship," J. Pout. Econ. 1978, 86(2), pp. 281—92.

Oi, Walter Y. "Labor as a Quasi—Fixed Factor," J.   Pout.   Econ. 1962, 70(6), pp.
      538—5 6.

Okun, Arthur. Prices and quantities, Washington, D.C.: The Brookings
      Institution, 1981.

Pigou, Arthur C. The economics of welfare. London: Macmillan, 1920.

Pissarides, Christopher A. "Search Intensity, Job Advertising and Efficiency,"
      J. Lab. Econ.,19811, 2(1), pp. 128—3.

Polemarchakis, Hercules N. and Weiss, Laurence. "Fixed Wages, Layoffs,
      Unemployment Compensation and Welfare," Amer. Econ. Rev. 1978, 68(5), pp.
      909—17.

Raisian, John. "Contracts, Job Experience and Cyclical Labor Market
      Adjustments," J. Lab. Econ. 1983 1(2), pp. 152—70.

Randolph, William C. "Employment Relationships: Till Death Do Us Part?" Ph.D.
      dissertation, SUNY, Stony Brook, 1983.

Reder, Melvin W. "Wage Structure Theory and Measurement," Aspects of labor
      economics: A conference of the Universities—National Bureau Committee for
      Economic Research. Princeton, NJ: Princeton U. Press, 1962, pp. 257—318.

Rosen, Sherwin. "Short-Run Employment Variation on Class—I Railroads in the
      U.S.," Econometrica. 1968, 36(3), pp. 51129.

________   "Unemployment and Insurance," Carnegie—Rochester Conference Series on
      Public Policy. Autumn, 1983, 20, pp. 549.

Rothschild, Michael and Stiglitz, Joseph E. "Increasing Risk: I. A
      Definition," J. Econ. Theory. 1970, 2(3), 225—43.

Sargent, Thomas J. Macroeconomic theory. New York: Academic Press, 1979.

Schultz, Charles. "Microeconomic Efficiency and Nominal Wage Stickiness," Amer.
      Econ. Rev. 1985, 75(1), pp. 1—16.
                                            66


Shapiro, Carl and Stiglitz, Joseph E. "Equilibrium Unemployment as a Worker
      Discipline Device," Amer. Econ. Rev. 1984, 74(3), pp. 24334hI.

Shavell, Stephen and Weiss, Laurence. "The Optimal Payment of Unemployment
      Insurance Benefits Over Time," J. Pout. Econ. 1979, 87(6), pp. 137—62.

Smith, Adam. The wealth of nations, Modern Library Edition, NY: Random House,
      1947.

Solow, Robert M. "Investment and Technical Progress," Mathematical models in
      the Social sciences. Eds.: Kenneth J. Arrow, S. Karlin and P. Suppes.
      Stanford: Stanford U. PLress, 1960.

Stigler, George J. "Production and Distribution in the Short—Run," J. Polit.
      Econ. 1939, 117(3), pp. 305—27.

Stiglitz, Joseph E. "Theories of Wage Rigidity," Princeton U., 19811.

Schwartz, Aba. "The Implicit Contract Model and Labor Markets: A Critique," Tel
      Aviv U., 1983.

Taylor, John. "Aggregate Dynamics and Staggered Contracts," J. Pout. Econ.
      1980, 88(1), pp. 1—23.

Todaro, Michael P. "A Model of Labor Migration and Urban Unemployment In Less—
      Developed Countries," Amer. Econ. Rev. 1969, 59(1), pp. 138148.

Topel, Robert E. "On Layoffs and Unemployment Insurance," Amer. Econ. Rev.
      1983, 83(11), pp. 5141—59.

________      "Local   Labor Markets," J. Polit. Econ. forthcoming.

        and Welch, Finis. "Self—Insurance and Efficient Employment Contracts,"
     U. of Chicago, 1983.

Wilson, Robert. "The Theory of Syndicates," Econometrica. 1968, 68(1), pp.
      119—32.
</ref_section>
Marginal
 Product




                   \

      m


           \\                             N
                                              N O*f' (pri)
                                   (pn)
                O**f' (pn)



                                                       pn
                                     n


                       FIGURE 1:
C                         C



    )

        I
                              \



                                  \\
                                   1\
                                       \
                                           \\       L




            FIGURE   2:                         \
C




        A

            \
    6           \\\
                      C




                          \\
                           62
                                \
                                                  L
                                            1.0




            FIGURE 3; Neasured Wage Rates
Shadow
Prices

                               I (b)/' (&




                                       2




                                       (h)
                     ny (h *



         FIGURE 4:
