                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        AUCTIONS WITH RESALE WHEN PRIVATE VALUES ARE UNCERTAIN:
                    EVIDENCE FROM THE LAB AND FIELD

                                         Andreas Lange
                                          John A. List
                                         Michael K. Price

                                       Working Paper 16360
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w16360


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2010




This paper is a significantly revised version of NBER Working Paper No. 10639: Auctions with Resale
When Private Values Are Uncertain: Theory and Empirical Evidence. Larry Ausubel, Peter Cramton,
Glenn Harrison, Liesl Koch, and Tigran Melkonyan provided useful suggestions on an earlier version
of this study and during the discovery process. Seminar participants at several universities provided
comments that improved the manuscript. Andreas Lange gratefully acknowledges funding by the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) under grant LA 1333/2-1. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Andreas Lange, John A. List, and Michael K. Price. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Auctions with Resale When Private Values Are Uncertain: Evidence from the Lab and Field
Andreas Lange, John A. List, and Michael K. Price
NBER Working Paper No. 16360
September 2010
JEL No. C9,C91,D03,D44

                                            ABSTRACT

Auction theory represents one of the richest areas of research in economics over the past three decades.
Yet, whether, and to what extent, the introduction of secondary resale markets influences bidding
behavior in sealed bid first-price auctions remains under researched. This study begins by examining
field data from a unique data set that includes nearly 3,000 auctions (over 10,000 individual bids) for
cutting rights of standing timber in British Columbia from 1996-2000. In comparing bidding patterns
across agents who are likely to have resale opportunities with those who likely do not, we find evidence
that is consistent with theory. Critical evaluation of the reduced-form bidding model, however, reveals
that sharp tests of the theoretical predictions are not possible because several other differences may
exist across these bidder types. We therefore use a laboratory experiment to examine if the resale
opportunity by itself can have the predicted theoretical effect. We find that while it does have the
predicted effect, a theoretical model based on risk-averse bidders explains the overall data patterns
more accurately than a model based on risk-neutral bidders. Beyond testing theory, the paper highlights
the inferential power of combining naturally occurring data with laboratory data.


Andreas Lange                                      Michael K. Price
University of Maryland                             Department of Economics
2200 Symons Hall                                   515 Stokely Management Center
College Park, MD 20742                             University of Tennessee, Knoxville
and University of Hamburg, Germany                 Knoxville, TN 37996
and also NBER                                      mprice21@utk.edu
alange@arec.umd.edu

John A. List
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 East 59th
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
jlist@uchicago.edu
I. Introduction
        Auctions have a long and storied history. From the human slave auctions carried out in

ancient Egypt to the marriage auctions for brides in Asia Minor to the Praetorian Guard

auctioning off the Roman Empire in A.D. 193, auctions have been used to allocate goods and

services. While auctions have certainly served an important purpose throughout the history of

mankind and are now used to sell almost anything one can imagine – vintage wines, Treasury

bills, pollution permits, baseball cards, etc. – economists have only recently begun to explore

rigorously the theoretical underpinnings of various auction formats (see Klemperer (1999) for a

nice review).

        A recent set of studies in the literature explores cases when individual valuations are not

known with certainty at the time of the auction.1 Haile’s (2003) work goes a step further by

introducing secondary (resale) markets, creating an environment that represents many naturally-

occurring settings:       U.S. Forest Service timber auctions, the procurement of governmental

contracts, estate auctions, art auctions, FCC auctions and the like all fit in this general class of

allocation mechanisms.2          Unlike the traditional auction literature that assumes independent

private values (IPV) that are known with certainty, when bidders have ex ante uncertainty about

independent private values and anticipate resale opportunities, equilibrium bidding strategies are

dependent upon option values conveyed from the secondary market. Intuitively, bidder behavior

in this case is linked to the existence and structure of potential resale markets.

1
  For example, it is well established in the literature that when bidders receive multi-dimensional or uncertain
signals, auctions may generate inefficient allocations (Pesendorfer and Swinkels (2000), Jehiel and Moldovanu
(2001), Goeree and Offerman (2003)). Efficiency and bidding strategies in such an environment are dependent upon
the weight individual bidders assign to both the private and common value components of a signal and upon the
number of participants in a given market. Other studies that relax the assumption of known valuations include the
work of Schwarz and Sonin (2004) and Haile (2000).
2
  There is a growing theoretical literature that examines the impacts of such resale opportunities on bidder behavior
and a seller’s optimal choice of auction format (see, for example, Bikhchandani and Huang (1989), Gupta and
Lebrun (1999), and Garratt and Troger (2006)). Experimentally the impact of resale opportunities on bidder
behavior has been examined in the context of English auctions (Georganas, 2009) and in auctions with asymmetric
bidders (Georganas and Kagel, 2009).
        Our study attempts to make empirical advances in this area. The empirical investigation

begins by making use of naturally-occurring data drawn from nearly 3,000 timber auctions (over

10,000 individual bids) from the Small Business Forest Enterprise Program (SBFEP) for the

interior region of British Columbia (BC) for the period 1996-2000. While our results are

consonant with theory, a number of caveats and strong assumptions are necessary to identify the

resale effect under our reduced-form modeling approach.

        One way to approach this quandary is to make use of a laboratory experiment. By

studying artificial markets that differ only in whether a secondary market is available, we are

permitted a unique glimpse into whether the resale market by itself can lead to such predicted

consequences. Keeping an eye toward designing a laboratory setting that resembles naturally

occurring markets while maintaining a strong theoretical link, we designed an experiment using

the first-price auction with both a second stage optimal auction (OA) as well as an English

auction (EA) continuation game of complete information.3 Given that this is the first controlled

experimental test in this area, our approach of using the extremes for the division of surplus on

the secondary market is apropos since it allows a controlled test of existing theory and provides a

useful benchmark for making inference from field data.

        The lab results are broadly in line with theoretical predictions.                  First, we find that

experimental subjects submit bids that are significantly higher in markets with resale organized

by an optimal auction than in those without such opportunity (or with secondary markets

organized by an EA). This result is intuitively appealing as one would expect subjects to bid

more aggressively when winning an auction is more valuable. Second, we find differences in


3
 Our use of the optimal and English auction terminology follows Haile (2003) and reflects the extremes for the
division of surplus on the secondary market. Under an OA continuation game, the resale seller receives maximal
gains from secondary market trade. In contrast, the resale buyer receives maximal gains under the EA continuation
game.
baseline bids and those in our EA treatment that are consonant with theory: over lower (higher)

ranges of the signal space bids in the EA treatment are greater than (less than) those submitted in

our baseline no resale markets. This comparison represents a demanding test of theory, as it

requires subjects to recognize and consider differences in the option values conveyed by resale

over the signal space. Finally, an interesting data pattern not anticipated by extant theory is that

over lower ranges of the signal space, realized bids are less than the risk-neutral theoretical

predictions, while over higher ranges of the signal space, realized bids are greater than the risk-

neutral theoretical predictions. Yet, these tendencies are consonant with a theory with risk-

averse bidders.

        We view our study as contributing to our understanding of the effect of adding resale

opportunities to auctions, and more generally furthering our knowledge concerning how

secondary market structure affects bidder behavior. In addition, the study provides empirical

evidence of behavior in such markets that can aid in the design and implementation of efficient

mechanisms for the allocation of goods and services. Methodologically, our paper showcases the

benefits of combining lab and field data to test economic theory and provide policy advice.

        The remainder of the paper is crafted as follows. Section II provides an overview of the

SBFEP auction market and our strategy for identifying resale differences using reduced-form bid

functions. Section III discusses the laboratory experiment and results. Section IV concludes.

II. The SBFEP Auction Market

The SBFEP Auction – Background and Predictions

        Our naturally occurring data are drawn from nearly 3,000 timber auctions (over 10,000

individual bids) from the Small Business Forest Enterprise Program for the interior region of

British Columbia for the period 1996-2000. During our sample period, SBFEP auctions in BC
were used to allocate standing timber of less than 50,000 metric board feet cubed (mb3) to small

logging companies and contractors. These auctions are subdivided into two types: Category 1

and Category 2, where Category 1 auctions include only market loggers. Category 2 auctions are

open to both registered market loggers and registered owners of processing facilities.

        Category 1 bidders purchase timber cutting rights and sell harvested timber to end users.

In the interior of BC almost all harvested timber is sold to either major forest license holders or

local sawmills. Ex ante, bidders contract with a prospective buyer to arrange an agreement in

principle to sell/buy if they win the auction. The bidders then submit bids and the winner

consummates the agreement in principle and chooses to lock in the stumpage price he bid.

Category 2 bidders purchase timber cutting rights to obtain raw materials for their processing

operations. Bidders either process harvested timber or trade it to obtain needed materials. 4

        Since processing facilities are actively engaged in the ex post buying and selling of

harvested logs whereas loggers contract ex ante to deliver all harvest to a given buyer, resale

might enter into the bidding strategies of the former but not the latter.                     Intuitively, since

processing facilities have an outside option to sell logs on a spot market whereas loggers do not

have such an option, one would expect that processing facilities would provide an upper

envelope on the observed bids of loggers from the interior. To identify whether this effect holds,

we rely upon cross sectional variation.5

Identifying Resale Effects from Reduced-Form Bid Functions


4
  Throughout the empirical analysis we assume that firms are symmetric. Since participation in the SBFEP is
limited to loggers who do not own processing facilities and small sawmills, bidder asymmetry is less likely than in
timber auctions in the United States (see e.g., Athey et al., 2004). Our identification strategy relies upon the
symmetry assumption, and we should note that models which allow bidder asymmetry may generate different
comparative static results.
5
  In this sense, our identification strategy is much different from Haile (2001), who analyzes individual bids from
the U.S. timber auctions and makes use of the temporal variation in the imposition of federal regulations by
examining bids prior to the onset of the regulations that effectively prohibited resale and comparing them to bids
after the regulations took effect.
        Haile (2003) highlights two opposing effects of resale on bidder valuations and hence

strategies – the resale seller effect (the option value of selling in the resale market) and the resale

buyer effect (the option value of buying in the resale market). Intuitively, whenever the resale

seller effect dominates, the expected value of winning any auction is a combination of an agent’s

private use value and the expected profits of selling on the secondary market. Provided that the

expected profit of resale is non-zero, this option value leads to higher overall bids. Given the

structure of secondary market exchange we expect the resale seller effect to be more pronounced

amongst Category 2 bidders.

        To identify this comparative static, we employ a general approach that is in the spirit of,

for example, Porter and Zona (1993, 1999). We employ reduced-form methods to infer the

nature of resale effects by differences in bidding patterns across subsets of firms facing different

outside options.6 As the true equilibrium bidding function is unknown in practice, we consider

two different specifications to approximate observed bidding behavior given by:

                                                    Pij  X ij    Di   ij                                 (1)

                                        Pij  Di  X ij 1   1  Di   X ij  0    ij              (1’)

where Pij is the ith bidder’s total bid in auction j. Xij is a set of regressors underlying the ith

firm’s valuation for tract j, Di is a dummy variable that equals one for any bid placed by a mill in

a Category 2 auction; ij = i + uij; E[i] = 0, E[i2] = 2, E[ik] = 0 for i  k; i and uij are

orthogonal for all i and j. i is a random effect assumed to capture heterogeneity that would be




6
  An alternate approach to identifying resale effects would be to employ structural methods similar to those
developed in Laffont et al. (1995) or Guerre et al. (2000). However, to use these methods, we would have to specify
the structure of the resale market which is based upon bilateral exchange between mills that is unobserved in our
data. Without being able to specify the nature of secondary market exchange, we could not identify the first-order
conditions defining optimal bids which are fundamental to these structural methods.
left uncontrolled in a standard cross-sectional model and uij represents private information such

as idiosyncratic shocks to the expected valuation for firm i in auction j.

        Specification (1) indicates that the effect of resale acts only as an intercept shift for mills

in Category 2 auction, while (1’) permits the resale effect to enter both the slope and intercept

terms. Theoretically, if the resale seller effect dominates for Category 2 bids, then we would

expect that ˆ  0 and ˆ1  ˆ0 . In particular, we should observe that the estimated comparative

static effect of competition (and any other covariate that is positively related with a bidder’s

private use value) on observed bids is smaller for interior Category 1 auctions than it is for

otherwise equivalent Category 2 auctions generating predicted bids that are greater for the latter

subset of auctions.

The SBFEP Auction Data - Empirical Results

        We observe 2,671 SBFEP sealed-bid tender first-price auctions conducted in the interior

of British Columbia for the period January 1996 through December 2002.7 These auctions

provide more than 10,000 individual bids, from which we eliminate any bids submitted in

auctions with only a single bidder, any bids submitted in an auction with an estimated net cruise

volume of less than 1,000 m3, any bids submitted in an auction employing a format other than a

first-price sealed tender, and any bids submitted by a bidder that participates in both Category 1

and Category 2 auctions. This results in a sample of nearly 1,250 firms that submit nearly 5,500

bids.

        To generate the data for the empirical model, we combine information from a number of

sources. First, a list of all bidders currently registered to participate in SBFEP timber auctions



7
 This is the identical data set that BC is using to test a new pricing approach under the changed circumstance
agreement for the U.S.-Canadian softwood lumber dispute. See List, Millimet, and Price (2008) for a more detailed
discussion of the trade dispute and the new pricing approach.
was provided by the Ministry of Forests (MOF) in BC. This listing was used to generate unique

identification codes for each bidder in the data set. Second, the MOF provided bid sheets for

each auction that provides information on (i) the regional office holding and date of the auction,

(ii) the estimated net cruise volume of timber on the plot, (iii) the announced upset rate for the

auction, and (iv) the identity and bonus bid per m3 for each participant in the auction. Finally,

the MOF provided a database that contains detailed information on the characteristics of each

plot and the required deadline to complete the harvest of the specified timber.             Table 1

summarizes these data.

       To condition behavior on observed auction characteristics in tests for resale effects, we

estimate a series of reduced-form bid functions.       Specifically, we assume that equilibrium

bidding behavior follows the linear specification in equation (1), and therefore estimate

                               Pij  X ij   ij ,                                             (2)

where all variables are as defined above. Auction covariates included in the vector of regressors

include:

      UPSET RATE: announced reservation price per m3

      NCV: estimated net cruise volume (divided by 1000)

      VPH: estimated volume of trees per hectare (divided by 1000)

      LNVPT: log of estimated volume per tree

      LSPI: the average selling price index for timber harvested

      DC: deflated development costs (divided by NCV)

      SLOPE: weighted average slope

      BWDN: estimated percent of volume blown down

      BURN: estimated percent of volume burned
      CY: estimated percent of volume to be extracted via cable

      HP: estimated percent of volume to be extracted via helicopter

      HORSE: estimated percent of volume to be extracted via horse

      UTIL: estimated capacity utilization for firm i – ratio of current backlog of timber

       contracts in m3 to maximum backlog of timber contracts in m3

      CYCLE: estimated cycle time for harvested timber

      LNB: natural log of the number of bidders.

    Category 2: indicator variable that equals one for any bidder that only participates in

       Category 2 auctions

    Distance: The distance in km from the bidder’s city of residence to the center of the

       auctioned plot.

Table 2 provides parameter estimates for equations (1) and (1’) estimated for different subsets of

the 5,524 observations. We should note that the number of bidders in SBFEP auctions is likely

an endogenous measure.       Taking the number of bidders as an exogenous measure is thus

somewhat problematic. However, we are unaware of any method to solve for endogenous entry

using an instrumental variables approach since n affects bids directly through the level of

expected competition in the primary auction market and the expected division of surplus on the

secondary market.

       Empirical results presented in Table 2 suggest an important difference in the behavior of

mills versus loggers that are consistent with resale possibilities for the former set of bidders.

First, the indicator variable for Category 2 bidders (mills) in both columns 1 and 2 suggests that

such agents submit bids that are ceteris paribus $1.47 - $1.68 greater than those submitted by a

registered logger in a Category 1 auction with this difference statistically significant at the p <
0.05 level. Second, measured at the sample means and using parameter estimates from Columns

4 and 5, the estimated marginal effect of adding an additional bidder in a Category 2 auction is

$2.11 (4.4% increase in the predicted bid) as opposed to $0.91 (2.01% increase in the predicted

bid) for a Category 1 auction.

           Equilibrium bidding strategies in auctions with resale are conditioned upon information

related to other bidders in the market that is absent in the strategy of a firm bidding in a market

without resale. Hence, we would expect greater competition in the former case when the

secondary market institution is an OA continuation game of complete information (or a similar

analog), as we assume for the Category 2 mills. This finding is consonant with the predictions

and analysis employed by Haile (2001). Combined with other results in Table 2 (e.g., the

estimated increase in predicted bids for Category 2 auctions), we take the evidence to suggest

that resale opportunities influence bidding in the direction that theory would predict.

III. Experimental Design and Results

           Given the vast number of caveats and assumptions that we must make to our reduced

form approach, however, we are skeptical that observed differences across bidder types can be

attributed solely to resale and the possibility of secondary market exchange.8 This skepticism

induces us to focus more exclusively on studying artificial markets that differ only in whether a

secondary market is available. In doing so, we present a first experiment that examines whether

the resale market by itself can lead to predicted consequences.

Experimental Design

           A total of 90 subjects participated in our laboratory experiment, which was conducted

during the Fall 2003 and Spring 2004 semesters at the University of Maryland in College Park.

Each session consisted of two experimental parts: a first-price auction market with or without
8
    Yet we should note that we find evidence in line with Haile’s (2001) findings.
resale opportunity and the Holt and Laury (2002) experimental procedure to elicit the risk

preference of each participant. Each part of the laboratory experiment is described below.

Part I: The Auction Market

       Each subject’s experience typically followed four steps: (1) consideration of an invitation

to participate in an experiment, (2) learning the auction rules, (3) actual market participation, and

(4) conclusion of the experiment and completion of the Holt and Laury (2002) risk-aversion

experiment. In Step 1, undergraduate students from the University of Maryland were recruited

using e-mail solicitations and flyers hung in academic buildings across the campus. Once the

prerequisite number of subjects had responded, a second e-mail was sent to each participant

inviting them to participate in an experimental session to be held at a given date/time. After

subjects were seated in a room, in Step 2 a monitor thoroughly explained the experimental

instructions and auction rules (included in Appendices A and B).

       Before proceeding, a few key aspects of the experimental design should be highlighted.

First, all bidders were informed that earnings from the auction experiment would be added to

earnings from a second, unrelated experiment to determine total earnings for the session.

Second, individuals were informed that they would be bidders in the experiment. In each of the

12 rounds (2 practice and 10 that count towards earnings), they would be given a bidder’s card

that contained a number, known only to that bidder, representing a signal of the value of one unit

of the fictitious commodity. Importantly, all agents were informed that this information was

strictly private and that both signals and use values would change each round. They were also

informed about the number of other bidders in the market (4), that they would bid against the

same four bidders for all ten rounds, and that agents may have different signals (use values).
       Third, the monitor explained how signals were determined in each market period and

how these signals related to the agent’s final reservation (use) value. Subjects were informed

that in each period, they would receive a signal from the interval [$0, $50]. These signals were

determined by adding a random integer generated from a uniform distribution on the interval [-

$10, $10] to the agent’s final use value which was itself an integer value randomly drawn on the

uniform interval [$10, $40]. Several examples illustrated the relationship between a given use

value and the range of signals that the bidder could receive in the first stage, and vice versa.

       Fourth, the monitor explained how earnings were determined. In the baseline, no resale

treatment, the highest bidder earns the difference between their end use value and their bid. All

other bidders earn zero. In the resale treatment with OA continuation game, the bidder who

submits the highest bid earns the difference between the highest use value of all bidders and the

winning bid. All other bidders earn zero. In the resale treatment with EA continuation game, the

bidder who submits the highest bid receives the maximum of her use value and the second

highest use value of all participants minus her winning bid. The bidder who does not submit the

high bid but has the highest use value receives the difference between this value and the second

highest use value of all other participants. All other bidders earn zero for the round. Total

earnings for each treatment are computed by summing the earnings across the 10 periods.

       In the resale treatment with OA continuation game, it was publicly announced that

following the completion of each round, ownership of the good would be sold to the agent with

the highest use value in the group at a price equal to her value. In the resale treatment with EA

continuation game, it was publicly announced that following the completion of each round,

ownership of the good would be sold to the agent with the highest use value in the group at a
price equal to the second highest use value of all agents in the group.9 In the baseline no-resale

treatment, several examples were provided that illustrated the irrationality of bidding more than

$10 above a received signal. In the resale treatments several examples were provided that

illustrated the workings of the resale market and how prices for resale exchange and earnings for

each bidder would be determined.10 Fifth, individuals participated in 2 practice rounds of

bidding to gain experience with the auction market and rules.

        In Step 3, subjects participated in the market. Each market consisted of 10 rounds of

bidding that lasted about 3 minutes each. After each 3-minute period, a monitor privately

gathered each subject’s bidder card and gave the bidder a second card containing the subject’s

final use value that was within [-$10, $10] of the original signal. Once all bidder cards were

collected, a monitor publicly announced all bids and awarded the good to the highest bidder.

Final use values were publicly announced and, in the resale treatment, ownership of the

commodity transferred to the agent with highest use value.

        It should be noted that throughout each session careful attention was given to prohibit

communications between bidders that could induce collusive outcomes. Step 4 concluded the




9
   Two important features of our experimental design that we should highlight include: i) our choice to limit
participation on the secondary market to bidders from the primary auction market and ii) our decision to execute
trades on the secondary market at the theoretical benchmarks for both the OA and EA game of complete
information. We elected to limit participation on the secondary market and execute trades at the theoretical
benchmarks to maintain consistency with our conceptual model. As a first experimental test, it is apropos to focus
the analysis on first-stage bidding strategies rather than secondary market exchange. Allowing the endogenous
determination of prices on the secondary market would surely have an influence on bidding strategies, as it is likely
that rents would not be divided on the secondary market as predicated by theory. Anticipating this, bidders would
adjust first-stage bidding strategies. We hope that future work analyzes behavior in markets where prices are
endogenously determined on the secondary market and new participants are allowed to enter the second-stage
continuation game.
10
   An important consideration in designing our auction markets was the issue of bankruptcy and bidder behavior.
Theoretically, bankruptcy was not an issue if subjects played the risk-neutral Nash equilibrium. However,
equilibrium payouts in a number of the periods were low enough to raise concern if subjects determined bids with a
degree of error. For reasons outlined in Hansen and Lott (1991), we decided to employ an unlimited liability rule
and allow subjects to have negative earnings for Part I of the experiment.
experiment – after subjects completed the Holt and Laury (2002) experiment (described in Part II

of this section), they were paid their earnings in private.

        This simple procedure was followed in each of three treatments, which are summarized in

Table 3. Table 3 can be read as follows: row 1, column 2 of Table 3 contains treatment NR,

denoting a no-resale auction market with 5 bidders, who each have unit demand for the good.

Table 4 presents buyer induced values and signals for each market period. All signals were

drawn and assigned using the following procedure. We first drew 50 integer numbers on the

uniform distribution between [$10, $40] using Excel’s random number generator. We added an

integer drawn on the uniform distribution [-$10, $10] to this number to obtain signal values.

These values were then assigned so that unbeknownst to bidders, in each session (i) every bidder

received the highest signal twice, (ii) each bidder received the highest use value but a lower

ordered signal, and (iii) resale trade was potentially profitable in half of the periods.

Part II: The Holt-Laury Risk Experiment

        Upon completion of Part 1 of the session, instructions and a decision sheet were handed

out for the second part of the experiment. This second part was designed to elicit subjects’ risk

preferences. In this part of the session, the low-payoff treatment of Holt and Laury (2002) was

used (see Appendix B for instructions).11 The treatment is based on ten choices between paired

lotteries. The payoff possibilities for Option A, $2.00 or $1.60, are much less variable than those

for Option B, $3.85 or $0.10, which was considered the risky option. The odds of winning the

higher payoff for each of the options increased with each decision, and the paired choices are

11
   We elected to use the low-payoff treatment of the Holt and Laury (2002) experiment to measure risk preference
since the domain of earnings because this treatment [$0.10 to $3.85] approximates the equilibrium domain of per
period earnings for our auction markets. We also collected data for a higher-payoff treatment of the Holt and Laury
(2002) experiment, where the domain of earnings [$0.40 to $15.40] approximates the equilibrium domain of
earnings at the session level in our auction markets. In what follows, we report only the empirical results for risk
preference based upon individual response to the low-payoff Holt and Laury (2002) design. However, all tests and
results are robust to the use of response to the higher-payoff experiment.
designed to determine degrees of risk aversion. Holt and Laury (p. 1649) provide a table that

will be used to categorize subjects’ CARA risk preference levels based on their ten decision

choices.

       After the instructions were read and questions were answered, the subjects were asked to

complete their decision sheets by choosing either A or B for each of the ten decisions. The

subjects were instructed that one of the decisions would be randomly selected ex post and used to

determine their payoffs. Part of a deck of cards was used to determine payoffs, cards 2-10 and

the Ace to represent “1”. After each subject completed his or her decision sheet, a monitor

would approach the desk and randomly draw a card twice, once to select which of the ten

decisions to use, and a second time to determine what the payoff was for the option chosen, A or

B, for the particular decision selected. After the first card was selected, it was placed back in the

pile, the deck was reshuffled, and the second card was drawn. For example, if the first draw was

an Ace, then the first decision choice would be used. Suppose the subject selected A in the first

row. The second draw would then be made. If the Ace was drawn, the subject would win $2.00.

If a card numbered 2-10 was drawn, the subject would win $1.60. The subjects were aware that

each decision had an equal chance of being selected.

       After all the subjects’ payoffs were determined, they combined their payoff from Part 1

with that of Part 2 to compute their final earnings. The final payoffs were then verified against

records maintained by a monitor, and subjects were paid privately in cash for their earnings.

Each of the sessions lasted approximately 75 minutes and average earnings were roughly $13.

Theoretical predictions for the laboratory auction markets

       Figure 1 provides theoretical predictions for risk-neutral bidders in our experimental

markets conditioned on the signal. Across all but the lowest level of the signal space ($0.00),
bidders in markets with resale opportunities represented by an OA continuation game are

predicted to submit bids that are higher than those submitted by an equivalent bidder in a market

without resale options. These differences range from mere pennies for signals less than $5.00 to

a maximum of about $3.40 for bids submitted in the signal range around $23.12 For signal

ranges above $40.00 or below $20, the predicted differences in bids between the no-resale and

resale treatments are less than $2.75.

           In resale treatments represented by an EA continuation game, risk-neutral bidders are

predicted to submit bids that are on average higher than those submitted by an equivalent bidder

in a market without resale at ranges of our signal space of less than $27.00. For signals larger

than $27.00, risk-neutral bidders in our resale treatment with EA continuation game are predicted

to submit bids that are on average less than those submitted by an equivalent bidder in the no-

resale treatment. These differences range from a maximum of $0.70 at a signal of approximately

$20.00 to a minimum of $-0.56 at a signal of approximately $46.00.

Experimental Results

           Table 5 provides summary statistics for the experimental data. Entries in Table 5 are at

the period level and include average bid level and its standard deviation, the average winning bid

and its standard deviation, and the average resale price. Table 5 can be read as follows: on

average, in period 1 of the No Resale treatment, subjects submit a bid of $20.84 (standard

deviation = 9.32) and the average winning bid is $30.77 (standard deviation = 3.17). Perusal of

the data summary in Table 5 leads to our first two results:

       Result 1: Bids in a first-price auction followed by resale exchange in an OA continuation
       game are greater than those submitted in equivalent markets without resale.



12
     The optimal bid functions were derived numerically. The algorithm is available upon request.
    Result 2: Bids in a first-price auction followed by resale exchange in an OA continuation
    game are greater than those submitted in equivalent markets with an EA continuation game.

These results can be seen most directly by examining both per period average and winning bids

across our three laboratory treatments. Across each of the ten market periods, both average and

winning bids in the resale treatment with OA continuation game are greater than bids in both the

baseline (no resale) treatment and the resale treatment with EA continuation game.

         Our last piece of evidence to support Results 1 and 2 comes from a random effects bid

equation of the following form:

                                        Bit = Zitβ+ it,                                         (5)

where Bit is the bid of the ith buyer in period t. Vector Zit includes treatment dummy variables,

the induced signal received by the agent and to maintain consistency with our theory the square

of the signal. Session fixed effects are also included, and we model it = i + uit; E[i] = 0,

E[i2] = 2, E[ij] = 0 for i  j; i and uit are orthogonal for all i and t. The random effects i

capture important heterogeneity across agents that would be left uncontrolled in a standard cross-

sectional model.

         Column A in Table 6 presents regression results which provide support for our first two

results. For example, parameter estimates in column A suggest that average bids in the OA

treatment are $5.85 higher than average bids in the baseline treatment (the omitted categorical

variable) with this difference statistically significant at the p < .05 level. Furthermore, using a

Chow test of coefficient equality, we find that OA bids are larger than EA bids at the p < .05

level.    As column B of Table 6 shows, these differences are robust across empirical

specifications that allow the treatment effects to differ over lower (higher) ranges of the signal

space – i.e., over signals less than (greater than) $26.00.
         Empirical results in Table 5 suggest that baseline bids and EA treatment bids are

isomorphic. Yet, when bids are analyzed over ranges of signals less than (greater than) $26,

where our theory hypothecates that bids from the EA treatment are greater than (less than) those

submitted in the baseline treatment, we find evidence consonant with the theory. Over lower

ranges of the signal space, bids from the EA treatment are $2.73 larger than those from the

baseline treatment, a statistically significant difference at the p < 0.05 level.13 Over higher

ranges of the signal space, bids from the EA treatment average $2.07 less than those from the

baseline treatment, with these differences statistically significant at the p < 0.05 level. These

data patterns lead to the next result:

     Result 3: Over lower (higher) signal ranges, bidders in a first-price auction followed by an
     EA continuation game submit bids that are higher (lower) than those submitted by agents in
     an equivalent baseline market without resale opportunity.

Empirical estimates in Table 6 provide regression results which highlight this result.                           For

example, parameter estimates from Column A suggest that over the entire signal domain, there is

little discernable difference between bids – the estimate on the indicator for our EA treatment is

not significant at any meaningful level. However, when we examine behavior over different

ranges of the signal space, as in Column B, we observe significant differences across our EA and

baseline treatments. Over lower ranges of the signal space, bids from the EA treatment are

approximately $2.38 greater than the bids from our baseline auction markets. And, at a higher

range of the signal space, the bids from the EA treatment are approximately $2.08 less than the

average bids from our baseline market. Both of these differences are statistically significant at

the p < 0.05 level using a Chow test of coefficient equality.

Departures from Risk Neutral Predictions: The Role of Risk Aversion

13
   Statistical significance is evaluated using the Mann-Whitney test of significance evaluated at the session level.
These are demanding exercises since test statistics are based upon a comparison of average bid levels for signals less
than (greater than) $26 in each of our six EA sessions versus comparable averages from our six baseline sessions.
        Having found support that bidders respond to changes in the option value conveyed by

resale, we now examine more closely the predictions of the theory. Figure 2 provides an

illustration of average bids (by signal) in our baseline no-resale market relative to the theoretical

predictions for risk-neutral equilibrium bids. As can be seen from the figure, risk-neutral point

predictions do not fit the data well. Over lower ranges of the signal space, realized bids are less

than the risk-neutral theoretical predictions while over higher ranges, realized bids are greater

than risk-neutral theoretical benchmarks.            Similar patterns, albeit less pronounced, arise in

Figures 3 and 4 which plot average bids (by signal) for both the OA and EA treatments

        This raises two important questions for evaluating bidder behavior in auction markets.

First, to what extent can such behavior be explained by the underlying risk preference of

bidders? There has been considerable debate over the ability of traditional theory to account for

observed patterns of bidding in experimental first-price, private value auctions.14 A number of

studies have attempted to recover and infer the level of risk-aversion that rationalizes the

observed bids of subjects in controlled laboratory environments (i.e., Cox and Oaxaca (1995);

Cox et al. (1985); Goeree et al. (2002)). In this study, we take a different route and directly elicit

individual measures of risk posture and use this information as a control in estimating observed

bidding behavior. As such, we are able to correlate differences in observed bids with variations

in risk preference across agents.15

        Second, to what extent is the coherence of hypothesis tests affected by the specification

of underlying bidder risk preference? Lange et al. (2004) develop a theoretical model which

highlights that the effect of resale on bidding strategies is attenuated by risk aversion.


14
  See Kagel (1995) for an overview of this debate.
15
   Of course, unlike our experimental treatments risk posture should not be regarded as something we can
exogenously impose on subjects. Thus, we exercise caution when interpreting the data in that risk posture could be
systematically related to individual-specific unobservables that cause the data patterns discussed below.
Incorrectly assuming the risk-preference of agents can thus impact the magnitude of estimated

resale effects.

        To evaluate the impact of risk preference on observed bids, we augment equation (5) by

including an interaction of an individual’s risk preference with his/her signal, the signal squared,

and the treatment dummies.16 Empirical estimates from this model are contained in column C of

Table 6. We obtain the following insight from these results:

     Result 4: Over all but the lowest range of signals, risk-averse agents submit bids that are
     greater than their risk-neutral counterparts, with this difference increasing in the level of
     individual risk-aversion.

Support for Result 4 can be garnered by examining the marginal effect of our risk proxy on

realized bids. For example, in Column C of Table 6 the estimated marginal effect of risk

preference on realized bids in the baseline treatment is given by [-2.94 + 0.20*Signal –

0.002*Signal2]. This marginal effect is strictly positive for any signal greater than $15. For any

signal greater than $15 in the baseline treatment, the bid of a risk-averse agent should exceed that

of a risk neutral counterpart receiving the same induced signal. Similar patterns arise for both

the EA and OA treatments. In the EA (OA) treatment, risk-averse agents submit bids that are

greater than a risk-neutral counterpart for any signal above $19 ($21). Our data thus suggest a

direct correlation between over-bidding and individual risk preference.

        Having found evidence that risk-aversion is correlated with observed patterns of bidding

in our auctions, we now turn to examining the influence of individual risk preference on our

estimated treatment effects. Our theoretical model suggests that increased risk aversion serves to



16
   To proxy each agent’s risk posture, we use the number of safe choices “Lottery A” selected by the agent in the
Holt-Laury experimental design. An increase in the number of safe choices represents an increase in the
individual’s implied risk posture. For example, an agent who selects option A for the first four choice occasions is
considered risk neutral whereas an agent who selects option A for the first six choice options has CARA risk
preference of approximately 0.5. Figure 5 provides the frequency distribution of the implied CARA preference (by
treatment) for the 90 subjects in our experiment auctions.
attenuate the effect of resale. Empirical support for this conjecture follows from a comparison of

estimated treatment effects in model specifications that control for individual risk preference

(Columns C and D) with those that do not condition behavior on risk preference (Column A).

For example, the estimated treatment effect on the OA dummy variable is at least $7.21 greater

in models that explicitly control for individual risk preference with this difference statistically

significant at the p < 0.05 level. Hence failing to account for individual risk posture, will tend to

underestimate the impact of resale opportunities on observed bids.

       The above discussion treats risk posture as if it is homogenous across agents. However,

subjects in our experiment and in many other settings demonstrate heterogeneities in risk

posture. An important question is thus how such variations affect the observed behavior of

agents. To address this issue, we calculate the average risk preference for subjects in each

session and augment equation (5) by including an interaction of the average risk preference with

induced signal and an interaction of these values with a measure of individual risk preference.

Empirical estimates from this model are contained in column D in Table 6. We obtain the

following insight from these results:

   Result 5: Bids are decreasing (increasing) in the average risk posture of competitors over
   lower (higher) ranges of signals.

       Although we are unaware of any theoretical model that examines heterogeneous risk

posture in auctions with resale, Result 5 is consistent with intuition. Over lower ranges of

signals, bids of opponents are decreasing in their level of risk-aversion. Responding to this, an

individual can also decrease his bids. Over higher signal ranges, however, an increased risk-

aversion of opponents leads to increased bids. Faced with such a more competitive environment,

an individual might react by also increasing his bids.
        Support for Result 5 is gained by examining the marginal effect of average risk

preference at the session level (Mean Risk) on realized bids. For example, in column D of Table

6, the estimated marginal effect of mean risk on realized bids is given by:

                     bid NR
                                 1.61  0.12  Signal  0.01  Ind _ Risk  Signal
                   Mean _ Risk

which is positive for any induced signal greater than twenty for a risk-neutral agent – i.e., an

agent who selects Option A in the Holt-Laury experiment for the first four choice occasions. In

fact, for any agent who selects Option A fewer than nine times, this expression is positive over

some range of the induced signal space.

Departures from Theoretical Benchmarks: The Role of Speculation

        Having explored the role of risk posture on departures from theoretical benchmarks, we

now examine whether resale possibilities introduce speculative motives that could explain

observed over-bidding. Across all three of our experimental treatments, only those bidders

receiving the highest signal in a particular round should win an auction. Table 7 explores this

conjecture by summarizing the frequency with which the winning bid is submitted by those who

received signal of different rank order. As noted in Table 6, the bidder who receives the highest

signal in our baseline treatment wins 80 percent of all auctions. In contrast, such bidder wins

only 51.7 percent (43.3 percent) of the auctions in our corresponding OA (EA) treatment. This

leads to a final result:

    Result 6: Resale introduces speculative motives for bidding. Bidders receiving the highest
    signal (lower ordered signals) are less (more) likely to win auctions in treatments with
    resale.


Statistical support for Result 6 is contained in Table 8 which examines the likelihood with which

bidders that receive the highest (Column A) or lower ordered (Column B) signals win our
auctions. As noted in Column A, the bidder with the highest signal is significantly less likely to

win an auction when we introduce resale possibilities organized by either an OA or EA

continuation game of complete information. In contrast, bidders that receives lower ordered

signals are significantly more likely to win an auction in these treatments than are counterparts in

our baseline, no resale treatment.

V. Conclusions

       Auctions are ubiquitous. Yet whether and to what extent the introduction of secondary

resale markets influences bidding behavior when private values are uncertain remains largely

unknown. We begin by exploring a novel data set that provides insights into the importance of

the resale effect. Reduced-form empirical estimates suggest that bidding patterns are consistent

with theoretical predictions. Yet, akin to many empirical exercises with naturally-occurring data,

the strength of inference is attenuated when one considers the set of maintained assumptions

needed to generate confident conclusions from these data.

       Our approach to this problem is to make use of a laboratory experiment. Such an effort

gives up much of the realism associated with field data, but it permits us to investigate whether

the resale market by itself can lead to such predicted consequences. We find that extant theory

has considerable predictive power, but the accuracy of the theory is enhanced if we control for

individual risk preferences. Besides their obvious importance normatively, these results have

practical policy significance as well.       For example, a necessary condition to lift the

countervailing duty and anti-dumping ruling against Canadian softwood lumber exporters (who

export to the U.S.) is that their auction markets be robust and not influenced unduly by collusion.

Without a proper understanding of the resale opportunities of the various bidders, the modeler
may very well earmark bidding disparities among certain bidder types as evidence of collusion

when it is in fact due merely to secondary market considerations.
                                        References

Athey, Susan, Jonathan Levin, and Enrique Seira, “Comparing Open and Sealed Bid Auctions:
        Theory and Evidence from Timber Auctions,” working paper Stanford University, 2004.
Bikhchandani, Sushil and Chi-fu Huang, “Auctions with Resale Markets: An Exploratory Model
        of Treasury Markets,” The Review of Financial Studies (1989), 2(3), pp. 311-339.
Cox, James and Ronald Oaxaca, “Inducing Risk-Neutral Preferences: Further Analysis of the
        Data,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty (1995), 11(1): pp. 65-79.
Cox, James, Vernon Smith and James Walker, “Experimental Development of Sealed-Bid
        Auction Theory: Calibrating Controls for Risk Aversion,” American Economic Review
        (1985), 72(2): pp. 160-165.
Garratt, Rod and Thomas Troger, “Speculation in Standard Auctions with Resale,” Econometrica
        (2006), 74: pp. 753-769.
Georganas, Sotiris, “English Auctions with Resale: An Experimental Study,” working paper
        University of Bonn, 2009.
Georganas, Sotiris and John Kagel, “Asymmetric Auctions with Resale: An Experimental
        Study,” working paper University of Bonn, 2009.
Goeree, Jacob, Charles Holt, and Thomas Palfrey, “Quantal Response Equilibrium and
        Overbidding in Private-Value Auctions,” Journal of Economic Theory (2002), 104(1):
        pp. 247-272.
Goeree, Jacob and Theo Offerman, “Competitive Bidding in Auctions with Private and Common
        Values,” The Economic Journal (2003), 113(July): pp. 598-613.
Guerre, Emmanuel, Isabelle Perrigne and Quang Vuong, “Optimal Nonparametric Estimation of
        First-Price Auctions,” Econometrica (2000), 68(3): pp. 525-574.
Gupta, Madhurima and Bernard Lebrun, “First Price Auctions with Resale,” Economics Letters
        (1999), 64(3-4): pp. 181-185.
Haile, Philip, “Partial Pooling at the Reserve Price in Auctions with Resale Opportunities,”
        Games and Economic Behavior (2000), 33: pp. 231-248.
Haile, Philip, “Auctions with Resale Markets: An Application to U.S. Forest Service Timber
        Auctions,” American Economic Review (2001), 99: pp. 399-427.
Haile, Philip, “Auctions with Private Uncertainty and Resale Opportunities,” Journal of
        Economic Theory (2003), 108(1): pp. 72-110.
Hansen, Robert and John Lott, “The Winner’s Curse and Public Information in Common Value
        Auctions: Comment,” American Economic Review (1991), 81(1): pp. 347-361.
Holt, Charles and Susan Laury, “Risk Aversion and Incentive Effects”. American Economic
        Review, (2002), 92: 1644-1655.
Jehiel, Phillippe and Benny Moldovanu, “Efficient Design with Interdependent Valuations,”
        Econometrica (2001), 69(5): pp. 1237-1259.
Kagel, John, “Auctions: A Survey of Experimental Research,” in J.H. Kagel and A.E. Roth
        (eds.), The Handbook of Experimental Economics, Princeton: Princeton University Press
        (1995).
Klemperer, Paul, “Auction Theory: A Guide to the Literature,” Journal of Economic Surveys,
        (1999), 13(3): pp. 227-286.
Laffont, Jean-Jacques, Herve Ossard and Quang Vuong, “Econometrics of First-Price Auctions,”
        Econometrica (1995), 63(4): pp. 953-980.
Lange, Andreas, John A. List and Michael K. Price, “Auctions with Resale when Private Values
        are Uncertain: Theory and Empirical Evidence,” NBER Working Paper 10639, (2004).
Pesendorfer, Wolfgang and Jeroen Swinkels, “Efficiency and Information Aggregation in
        Auctions,” American Economic Review (2000), 90(3): pp. 499-525.
Porter, Robert and Douglas Zona “Detection of Bid Rigging in Procurement Auctions,” Journal
        of Political Economy (1993), 101: pp. 518-538.
Porter, Robert H. and Douglas Zona, “Ohio School Milk Markets: An Analysis of Bidding,”
        Rand Journal of Economics (1999) 30: 263-288.
Schwarz, Michael and Konstantin Sonin, “The Variable Value Environment: Auctions and
        Actions" (May 2001). Harvard Institute of Economic Research Paper No. 1918.
Table 1: Summary Statistics – SBFEP Auction Data
                            All Data           Loggers Only                                    Mills Only
Deflated Bid                  45.69                45.51                                         48.26
                             (17.39)             (17.53)                                        (14.95)
Upset                         33.45                33.22                                         36.60
                             (14.97)             (15.04)                                        (13.67)
LSPI                         115.23               114.91                                        119.75
DC                             1.48                1.48                                           1.47
VPH_1000                       0.27                 0.27                                          0.28
NCV_1000                       8.99                9.03                                           8.45
Slope                         16.10               15.78                                          20.58
LNVPT                          -0.79               -0.80                                          -0.71
Bwdn                           0.02                0.02                                           0.01
Burn                           0.01                 0.01                                          0.02
Cy                             0.07                 0.06                                          0.10
Horse                          0.07                0.07                                           0.01
Cycle                          3.86                 3.89                                          3.37
LNB                            1.68                 1.71                                          1.30
                              (0.52)              (0.51)                                         (0.41)
Util2                          0.24                 0.24                                          0.20
                              (0.34)              (0.34)                                         (0.34)
Distance in km from          150.22               149.67                                        163.76
Plot
Note: Cell entries are mean values for the various covariates included in our regression models. Associated
standard deviations are in parentheses.
Table 2: Random Effects Regression Estimates: Interior SBFEP Auction Data
                        Model (1)           Model (1)             Model (1’)         Model (1’)           Model (3’)
                        Only Bid in         Only Bid in          Pooled Data        Loggers Only          Mills Only
                         Cat 1 or 2          Cat 1 or 2
    Constant               4.40**             6.84**               5.65**               5.90**                 1.55
                           (1.15)              (1.33)               (1.17)               (1.19)              (5.31)
      Upset                0.87**             0.85**               0.82**               0.82**              0.74**
                           (0.01)              (0.01)               (0.01)               (0.14)              (0.05)
      LSPI                0.04**              0.05**               0.06**               0.06**              0.11**
                           (0.01)             (0.009)               (0.01)               (0.01)              (0.03)
       DC                 -0.13**             -0.23**              -0.18**              -0.26**             0.97**
                           (0.05)              (0.06)               (0.05)               (0.05)              (0.20)
   VPH_1000                4.07**               2.52*              5.20**               5.02**                 8.13
                           (1.07)              (1.13)               (1.07)               (1.08)              (5.32)
   NCV_1000                 -0.02              -0.05*                -0.01               -0.01                -0.06
                           (0.02)              (0.02)               (0.02)               (0.02)              (0.06)
      Slope                0.06**               0.04*              0.03**               0.04**                -0.06
                           (0.02)              (0.02)              (0.015)               (0.02)              (0.06)
     LNVPT                 1.52**             1.83**               1.85**               1.86**                 0.22
                           (0.30)              (0.33)               (0.30)               (0.31)              (1.19)
      Bwdn                  -0.79                0.66               -1.93*               -1.49               -10.91
                           (1.16)              (1.37)               (1.16)               (1.17)              (6.93)
      Burn                 -3.22*               -0.65              -3.86**              -3.19**            -11.50**
                           (1.36)              (1.15)               (1.33)               (1.40)              (4.23)
        Cy                -2.88**             -2.55**              -3.20**              -3.22**               -1.03
                           (0.74)              (0.83)               (0.73)               (0.78)              (2.37)
      Horse               -2.49**             -3.20**              -3.93**              -3.67**              -10.81
                           (0.66)              (0.77)               (0.65)               (0.66)              (7.15)
      Cycle               -0.41**             -0.41**              -0.53**              -0.53**               -0.33
                           (0.08)              (0.09)               (0.08)               (0.08)              (0.43)
      LNB                  5.63**             5.54**               5.22**               5.18**              7.81**
                           (0.24)              (0.26)               (0.24)               (0.25)              (1.29)
      Util2               -2.70**             -2.25**              -2.69**              -2.62**             -2.86**
                           (0.36)              (0.40)               (0.36)               (0.36)              (1.49)
   Category 2              1.68**             1.47**
                           (0.68)              (0.49)
 Distance in km                              -0.005**
   from plot                                  (0.001)

Buyer Random                Yes                  Yes                 Yes                  Yes                 Yes
    Effects
  # of Firms                1245                 683                1245                 1105                 140
   # of Obs                 5524                4325                5524                 5148                 376
Log Likelihood            -20537.2            -20423.5            -19632.7             -18225.7             -1371.3

 Predicted Bid                                                      45.69                45.51               48.25
                                                                   (16.02)              (16.19)             (13.22)
** (*) Denotes statistical significance at the p < 0.05 (p <.10) level; Cell entries provide parameter estimates for a
linear random effects regression with the associated standard errors in parentheses.
Table 3: Experimental Design – Laboratory Markets

             Resale Structure                                  Market Summary

                                                                       NR
                    No Resale                                       5 bidders
                                                                      N=30
      Resale – OA Continuation:                                       ROA
     Resale price = High use value                                  5 bidders
                                                                      N=30
      Resale – EA Continuation:                                       REA
   Resale price = Second highest use                                5 bidders
                 value                                                N=30
Notes: Each cell represents one unique treatment in which we gathered data in different sessions.
For example, “NR” in row 1, column 2, denotes that the no-resale treatment had 30 subjects in
groups of 5 competing in auction markets where ex post resale of the commodity was prohibited.
No subject participated in more than one treatment.


Table 4: Bidder Signals and Use Values (in dollars)

            Pd. 1      Pd. 2     Pd. 3     Pd. 4     Pd. 5     Pd. 6      Pd. 7     Pd. 8     Pd. 9     Pd. 10

 Buyer        36          9       25        36         14        14        44        32         40        23
   1         (29)       (19)     (26)      (37)       (13)      (21)      (39)      (24)       (33)      (17)

 Buyer        17          4       14        42         36        10        25        29         32        44
   2         (27)       (12)     (19)      (32)       (38)      (14)      (34)      (22)       (24)      (40)

 Buyer        19         41       20        32         39        32        22        25         22        26
   3         (18)       (36)     (12)      (29)       (31)      (39)      (23)      (17)       (22)      (34)

 Buyer        12         34       38        26         29        34        18        29         21        23
   4         (10)       (26)     (37)      (20)       (28)      (34)      (22)      (39)       (17)      (25)

  Buyer       37        25         33        6         25          24        23       38        35         28
     5       (36)      (33)       (34)     (13)       (21)        (28)      (14)     (33)      (40)       (23)
Notes: Each cell entry represents the signal received by the bidder in a given period and her induced use value (in
parentheses). For example, buyer #1 received a signal of $36.00 and an induced use value of $29.00 in market
period 1 (column 2, row 2). Each buyer received the high signal in 2 of the market periods and the high use value in
2 of the market periods. In five of the market periods (4, 5, 6, 8, and 9) we would ex ante predict resale exchange, as
the agent who received the high signal did not receive the high induced use value.
Table 5: Mean Performance Measures—Lab Markets
              Pd       Pd        Pd        Pd       Pd        Pd       Pd       Pd       Pd       Pd
              1         2         3         4       5          6       7        8        9        10
No Resale
 Avg. Bid   $20.84   $20.07    $24.31    $26.42    $27.68   $22.35    $24.80   $29.51   $28.03   $28.31
            (9.32)   (12.74)   (7.13)    (10.02)   (8.12)   (8.89)    (9.56)   (3.40)   (6.17)   (7.36)
 Win Bid    $30.77   $36.63    $33.00    $35.55    $35.47   $32.23    $37.77   $34.10   $34.15   $37.25
            (3.17)    (3.07)   (3.87)     (1.58)   (0.82)   (2.64)    (1.52)   (2.14)   (1.21)   (2.27)
   Resale    N/A       N/A      N/A        N/A      N/A      N/A       N/A      N/A      N/A      N/A
    Price

OA
Avg. Bid    $26.97   $25.86    $30.24    $29.10    $31.80   $30.64    $32.47   $35.57   $33.75   $34.39
            (7.49)   (9.38)    (5.46)    (9.97)    (6.98)   (7.25)    (5.38)   (2.86)   (7.58)   (5.41)
 Win Bid    $35.68   $37.18    $36.92    $36.73    $38.68   $36.55    $38.02   $37.87   $38.15   $39.30
            (4.94)   (2.55)    (3.94)    (2.47)    (1.22)   (2.06)    (1.91)   (1.52)   (1.66)   (1.08)
   Resale    $36      $36       $37       $37       $38      $39       $39      $39      $40      $40
    Price

EA
 Avg. Bid   $24.06   $21.55    $24.11    $26.26    $26.69   $22.11    $26.51   $29.63   $26.77   $26.96
            (9.72)   (12.47)   (10.48)   (9.31)    (7.78)   (10.99)   (7.86)   (6.53)   (7.63)   (9.27)
 Win Bid    $35.48   $36.25    $35.25    $36.27    $33.52   $32.00    $34.68   $36.35   $33.17   $34.67
            (2.94)    (3.97)    (4.37)   (3.34)    (1.54)    (3.74)   (3.25)   (3.48)   (1.75)   (3.22)
   Resale    $29       $33       $34      $32       $32       $34      $34      $33      $33      $34
    Price

Note: Entries in the table provide mean performance measures across our three experimental treatments. The data
are summarized by period and can be read as follows: in period 1 of the No Resale treatment the average bid was
$20.84 with a standard deviation of $9.32. The average winning bid for the round was $30.77 with a standard
deviation of $3.17.
Table 6: Random Effects Regression – Lab Bid Levels
                                           Model A            Model B             Model C             Model D

Constant                                   21.93**            16.58**             16.44**              8.72*
                                            (1.02)             (0.97)              (1.68)              (4.98)
OA Treatment                               5.85**                                 13.54**             13.06**
                                            (0.92)                                 (1.44)              (1.41)
EA Treatment                                 0.23                                  6.28**             5.48**
                                            (0.92)                                 (1.44)              (1.48)
EA Treatment and Signal < $26.00                               2.38**
                                                               (1.06)
OA Treatment and Signal < $26.00                               8.47**
                                                               (1.06)
NR Treatment and Signal ≥ $26.00                              12.69**
                                                               (0.74)
EA Treatment and Signal ≥ $26.00                              10.61**
                                                               (1.08)
OA Treatment and Signal ≥ $26.00                              15.70**
                                                               (1.08)
Risk_Signal                                                                        0.20**               0.14**
                                                                                    (0.02)              (0.03)
Risk_Signal2                                                                       -0.001             -0.001**
                                                                                  (0.0003)            (0.0003)
OA_Risk_Signal                                                                    -0.06**              -0.05**
                                                                                   (0.008)             (0.008)
EA_Risk_Signal                                                                    -0.04**              -0.04**
                                                                                   (0.008)             (0.008)
Signal_MeanRisk                                                                                        0.12**
                                                                                                        (0.01)
Risk_Signal_                                                                                           -0.01**
MeanRisk                                                                                               (0.005)
Individual Risk                                                                   -2.94**
                                                                                   (0.33)
MeanRisk                                                                                               -1.61*
                                                                                                       (0.96)

Period Fixed Effects                         Yes                Yes                 Yes                  Yes

Bidder Random Effects                        Yes                Yes                 Yes                  Yes
# of Bidders                                 90                 90                  90                   90

Number of Observations                       900                900                 900                  900

Sigma_U                                      2.51              3.06                  4.49                3.24
Sigma_E                                      7.93              6.26                  5.65                5.32
Log Likelihood                             -3171.53          -2983.21             -2924.98             -2851.86
                                                           ** Denotes statistical significance at the p < 0.05 level
                                                            * Denotes statistical significance at the p < 0.10 level

Note: Cell entries indicate the marginal effect of model covariates (see text for description of covariates) on
recorded bid level. For example, in row 2 of Column A the estimated marginal effect of being in the OA treatment
is an increase of $5.85 on bids, ceteris paribus.
Table 7: Signal and Bid Order – All Rounds
                              Highest Bid       2nd Highest         3rd Highest        4th Highest        Lowest Bid
                                                    Bid                 Bid                Bid
No Resale
         Highest Signal           80%              18.3%                1.7%                0%                 0%
      nd
    2 Highest Signal             13.3%             46.7%               26.7%               10%               3.3%
     3rd Highest Signal           6.7%             26.7%                55%               8.3%                3.3%
     4th Highest Signal            0%               6.7%               11.7%               50%               31.7%
         Lowest Signal             0%               1.7%                 5%               31.7%              61.7%
OA Treatment
         Highest Signal          51.7%              25%                13.3%               8.3%               1.7%
    2nd Highest Signal            20%              31.7%               16.7%              21.7%               10%
     3rd Highest Signal          11.7%             21.7%               33.3%              21.7%              11.7%
     4th Highest Signal          11.7%             8.3%                23.3%              28.3%              28.3%
         Lowest Signal             5%              13.3%               13.3%               20%               48.3%
EA Treatment
         Highest Signal          43.3%             31.7%               13.3%               5%                 6.7%
    2nd Highest Signal            30%              28.3%               21.7%              11.7%               8.3%
     3rd Highest Signal           15%               20%                31.7%              23.3%               10%
     4th Highest Signal           10%              11.7%               23.3%              31.7%              23.3%
         Lowest Signal            1.7%              8.3%                10%               28.3%              51.7%
Note: Cell entries are frequencies and can be read as follows – in our baseline treatment the bidder with the highest
signal submits the highest bid 80% of the time.

Table 8: Signal Order and the Likelihood of Winning the Auction
                                              Probability of Winning                     Probability of Winning
Constant – Baseline Treatment                         0.74**                                    -1.57**
                                                      (0.20)                                     (0.13)
Indicator for OA Treatment                           -0.70**                                     0.39**
                                                      (0.27)                                     (0.17)
Indicator for EA Treatment                           -0.91**                                     0.49**
                                                      (0.27)                                     (0.16)

Signal Order                                    Highest Signal Only                   2nd Highest to Lowest Signal
Session Random Effects                                  Yes                                        Yes

# of Observations                                       180                                        720
Log Likelihood                                        -115.04                                     -239.7
                                                                ** Denotes statistical significance at the p < 0.01 level

Note: Cell entries are parameter estimates from a random effects probit model examining the factors that influence
the likelihood of submitting the winning bid. Standard errors are in parentheses. Column A restricts the sample to
only those bidders who received the highest signal in the auction. Column B restricts the sample to only those
bidders who received higher order signals – i.e., the second highest to the lowest signal.
                40




                35




                30




                25
 Bid (in $'s)




                                                                                         NoResale Theory
                20                                                                       OA Theory
                                                                                         EA Theory


                15




                10




                 5




                 0
                     0            10          20                     30   40       50
                                                   Signal (in $'s)




Figure 1: Risk-Neutral Predictions for Bids


                40

                35

                30

                25

                20

                15

                10

                     5

                     0
                         0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50



Figure 2: Average Bid by Signal – Baseline Treatment
  40
 37.5
  35
 32.5
  30
 27.5
  25
 22.5
  20                                                                   OA_Pred
 17.5
                                                                       OA
  15
 12.5
  10
  7.5
    5
  2.5
    0
         0       5   10    15     20      25     30   35    40    45    50


Figure 3: Average Bid by Signal – OA Treatment

   40
  37.5
   35
  32.5
   30
  27.5
   25
  22.5
   20
                                                                       EA_Pred
  17.5
                                                                       EA
   15
  12.5
   10
   7.5
     5
   2.5
     0
             0   5   10    15     20     25      30   35   40    45    50



Figure 4: Average Bid by Signal – EA Treatment
                      0.35




                       0.3




                      0.25
 Observed Frequency




                       0.2
                                                                                           Baseline
                                                                                           OA
                                                                                           EA
                      0.15




                       0.1




                      0.05




                        0
                             -0.6   -0.4   0      0.1           0.2      0.5   0.7   1.1
                                               Implied CARA Preference


Figure 5: Frequency Distribution of CARA Preferences by Treatment
Appendix A: Experimental Instructions – OA Resale Treatment

Welcome to Lister’s Auctions! You have the opportunity to bid in a series of experimental
auctions today and you can earn cash by participating.

Auction Rules:
In this auction you will bid against four (4) other people and the person with the highest bid is
the winner, and pays the amount of their bid for the “fictitious” commodity. The auction is a
sealed bid auction so you don’t know the bids of the other participants. We will repeat the
auction for 10 rounds. At the end of the session, your earnings from this experiment and another
unrelated experiment will be summed and paid to you in cash.

There are six steps in the auction process, each of which is explained in detail below. The six
steps include: (i) determining your signal of the value of the fictitious commodity, (ii)
determining your bid, (iii) determining your use value for the fictitious good, (iv) determining
the winner, (v) the resale market, and (vi) determining your payouts for the round.

   1. Determining your signal of the good’s value: At the beginning of each period, a
   monitor will hand you a card numbered from zero dollars ($0) to fifty dollars ($50) in one
   dollar ($1) increments. The value on the card handed to you will be a signal of your use
   value for the fictitious good. The other bidders in your auction will have their signals
   determined in exactly the same way. Signals are private and independent across buyers, and
   your signal will change across rounds.

       Signals and Use Values

       Use values, V, in each round are drawn from a uniform distribution on the interval [10,
       40]. That is, every dollar value between 10 and 40 is equally likely to be drawn as your
       use value. These values are independently drawn for each subject and will differ across
       periods.

       The signal you will receive is determined by adding a random number drawn on the
       interval [-10, 10] to your use value. Again, each dollar value between -10 and 10 is
       equally likely to be drawn and added to your use value. Your first-stage signal, S, is
       hence given by:

                                         S  V  random number

       Your signal, S, is thus distributed on the interval [$0, $50].

       Given your signal, you can compute the expected use value. For example, if you were to
       receive a signal of $30 in the first stage, you know that your final use value must lie
       somewhere in the interval [$20, $40]. Since each of these values is equally likely to have
       been selected as your use value, on average your use value is $30. However, any value in
       this range could have been assigned as your use value.
   2. Determining your bid value: After receiving your signal, you will choose your bid
   value for the fictitious good. In order to choose your bid, consider how your earnings for
   each period are calculated. If you are the person with the highest bid you are the winner of
   the auction. Your earnings are equal to your use value minus your bid amount if you have
   the highest end use value:

                        Earnings = your good’s use value (V) – your bid

   If you are the person with the highest bid but do not have the highest use value, your earnings
   are equal to the highest use value of all participants minus your bid amount:

                             Earnings = highest use value – your bid

   If you are not the high bidder in a round, your earnings for the period are zero. If there is a
   tie, the winner will be determined by the flip of a coin (if more than two people tie we will
   draw a card to determine the winner). Your bid can be any amount in the range from zero
   ($0) to forty dollars ($40) in ten cent ($0.10) increments.

   3. Determining your use value: Once all bids have been received, a monitor will hand you
   a second slip of paper numbered from ten dollars ($10) to forty dollars ($40) that gives your
   final use value, V. Your use value will lie within  $10 of your signal, S.

   4. Determining the auction winner: All bids will be publicly announced and recorded by a
   monitor on the blackboard. Your bid will be compared with those of the four other
   participants in the auction. The person with the highest bid amount is the winner.

   5. The resale market: In the resale market, each participant can see the use values for all
   other participants. The highest bidder in the auction market will sell the “fictitious”
   commodity to the individual with the highest use value. In this experiment this happens
   automatically. The payoff for the winner is the highest use value of all participants minus
   his/her bid amount. If you did not win the auction, your payout for the period will be zero.
   The payout for the auction winner can be positive even if your bid was greater than your use
   value.

   6. Determining your payouts: If you are the auction winner, you will receive the
   difference between the highest use value and your bid. If you did not win the auction, you
   receive zero for that period. Your total earnings for this experiment are the sum of your
   earnings for each of the 10 periods.

Do you have any questions about the auction process?
Appendix B: Experimental Instructions for Risk Aversion Experiment

        Record your subject number from the previous part on your decision sheet. Your
decision sheet shows ten decisions listed on the left. Each decision is a paired choice between
OPTION A and OPTION B. You will make ten choices and record these in the final column,
but only one of them will be used in the end to determine your earnings. Before you start
making your ten choices, please let me explain how these choices will affect your earnings for
this part of the experiment.
        We will use part of a deck of cards to determine payoffs; cards 2-10 and the Ace will
represent “1”. After you have made all of your choices, we will randomly select a card twice,
once to select one of the ten decisions to be used, and a second time to determine what your
payoff is for the option you chose, A or B, for the particular decision selected. (After the first
card is selected, it will be put back in the pile, the deck will be reshuffled, and the second card
will be drawn.) Even though you will make ten decisions, only one of these will end up
affecting your earnings, but you will not know in advance which decision will be used.
Obviously, each decision has an equal chance of being used in the end.
        Now, please look at Decision 1 at the top. OPTION A pays $2.00 if the Ace is selected,
and it pays $1.60 if the card selected is 2-10. OPTION B yields $3.85 if the Ace is selected,
and it pays $0.10 if the card selected is 2-10. The other decisions are similar, except that as you
move down the table, the chances of the higher payoff for each option increase. In fact, for
Decision 10 in the bottom row, the cards will not be needed since each option pays the highest
payoff for sure, so your choice here is between $2.00 or $3.85.
        To summarize, you will make ten choices: for each decision row you will have to
choose between OPTION A and OPTION B. You may choose A for some decision rows and B
for other rows, and you may change your decisions and make them in any order. When you are
finished, we will come to your desk and pick a card to determine which of the ten decisions will
be used. Then we will put the card back in the deck, shuffle, and select a card again to
determine your money earnings for the OPTION you chose for that decision. Earnings for this
choice will be added to your previous earnings, and you will be paid all earnings in cash when
we finish.
        So now please look at the empty boxes on the right side of the record sheet. You will
have to write a decision, A or B in each of these boxes, and then the card selection will
determine which one is going to count. We will look at the decision that you made for the
choice that counts, and circle it, before selecting a card again to determine your earnings for this
part. Then you will write your earnings in the blank at the bottom of the page.
        Are there any questions? Now you may begin making your choices. Please do not talk
with anyone else while we are doing this; raise your hand if you have a question.
