                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              PRICES ARE STICKY AFTER ALL

                                         Patrick J. Kehoe
                                         Virgiliu Midrigan

                                       Working Paper 16364
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w16364


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2010




We thank Kathy Rolfe and Joan Gieseke for excellent editorial assistance. Kehoe thanks the National
Science Foundation for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, the Federal Reserve System, or
the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Patrick J. Kehoe and Virgiliu Midrigan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Prices are Sticky After All
Patrick J. Kehoe and Virgiliu Midrigan
NBER Working Paper No. 16364
September 2010
JEL No. E24,E3,E32

                                              ABSTRACT

Recent studies say prices change every four months. Economists have interpreted this high frequency
as evidence against the importance of sticky prices for the monetary transmission mechanism. Theory
implies that if most price changes are regular, as they are in the standard New Keynesian model, then
this interpretation is correct. But, if most price changes are temporary, as they are in the data, then
it is incorrect. Temporary changes have two striking features: after a change, the nominal price returns
exactly to its pre-existing level, and temporary changes are clustered in time. Our model, which replicates
these features, implies that temporary changes cannot offset monetary shocks well, whereas regular
changes can. Since regular prices are much stickier than temporary ones, our model, in which prices
change as frequently as they do in the micro data, predicts that the aggregate price level is as sticky
as in a standard model in which micro level prices change once every 12 months. In this sense, prices
are sticky after all.


Patrick J. Kehoe
Research Department
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
90 Hennepin Avenue
Minneapolis, MN 55480-0291
and NBER
pkehoe@res.mpls.frb.fed.us

Virgiliu Midrigan
Department of Economics
New York University
19 W. 4th St.
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
virgiliu.midrigan@nyu.edu
       A widely held view in macroeconomics is that monetary policy can be e¤ective primar-
ily because aggregate prices are sticky; when monetary policy changes, the aggregate price
level cannot respond quickly enough to o¤set the intended real e¤ects. This price stickiness
is clearly at the heart of the widely used New Keynesian analysis. In standard New Keyne-
sian models, the degree of aggregate price stickiness is determined by the frequency of price
changes at the micro level: if individual good prices change rarely, then the aggregate price
level is highly sticky and cannot o¤set monetary shock e¤ects, whereas if good prices change
often, then the aggregate price level is not sticky and can. In this model, in other words, the
frequency of micro price changes has a one-to-one relationship with the degree of aggregate
price stickiness.
       Until recently, micro level prices have been assumed to be quite sticky— changing
relatively infrequently, only about once a year and, hence, aggregate prices have been assumed
to be highly sticky. Recently, however, researchers have examined large micro price data series
and determined that individual good prices change much more frequently than previously
thought, about once every 4.5 months (Bils and Klenow 2004). According to these studies,
that is, prices are quite ‡exible at the micro level. Interpreted through the lens of the standard
New Keynesian model, this evidence implies that aggregate prices are quite ‡exible too, so
monetary policy cannot have large real e¤ects.
       We dispute this interpretation. Although it is true that this interpretation follows
logically from a standard New Keynesian model, that model is grossly inconsistent with the
pattern of price changes in the micro data. We build a simple extension of the standard
model that is consistent with the micro data. We show that in this extension of the model,
aggregate prices are, in fact, quite sticky and monetary policy has large real e¤ects.
       The major shortcoming of standard New Keynesian models is their inability to simul-
taneously account for the pattern of high-frequency price ‡exibility and low-frequency price
stickiness that we document using two sets of micro data. The pattern shows up in a simple
example displayed in Figure 1, where we plot a fairly typical micro price series, decomposed
into two parts: a trend and temporary deviations from trend. In this series, prices often
temporarily move away from a slow-moving trend line, which tends to change rarely. We call
the trend line the regular price and the deviations the temporary price.1 Notice that most
price changes in this series are temporary and have two distinctive features: after a temporary
change, the nominal price returns exactly to its pre-existing level, and temporary changes
are clustered in time— for example, a change in one direction is usually followed quickly by
another change in the opposite direction. These two distinctive features imply that for indi-
vidual price series, even though there is a great deal of high-frequency price ‡exibility (in that
actual prices change frequently), there is also a great deal of low-frequency price stickiness
(in that the trend price changes infrequently).
       Standard New Keynesian models have only one type of price change and thus have no
hope of generating the pattern of price stickiness observed in the micro data. In particular,
these models can generate either highly ‡exible prices at both high and low frequencies or
highly sticky prices at both high and low frequencies. What they cannot generate is what
we see in the data: highly ‡exible prices at high frequencies and very sticky prices at low
frequencies.
       We extend the standard model to allow …rms to temporarily deviate from a sticky
pre-existing price. We quantify our model and show that it reproduces the empirical micro
pattern of regular and temporary price changes. We then study our model’s implication for
the degree of aggregate price stickiness in response to monetary policy shocks. It is quite
di¤erent from that of a New Keynesian model. Unlike that model, our model, which is
consistent with the micro data pattern, still implies large real e¤ects from monetary shocks.
       The key prediction of our model is that temporary micro price changes cannot o¤set
monetary shocks well, whereas regular changes can— but they do so only infrequently because
regular prices are much stickier than temporary prices. To measure how sticky our model
says aggregate prices are, we translate its results into those of a standard model. Our model,
in which micro prices change as frequently as they do in the data, predicts that the aggregate
price level is as sticky as it is in a standard model in which micro prices change once every
12 months. Aggregate prices, the model says, are sticky after all.
       Our study is based on the salient features of the micro price data. To document
these features, we study two sets of data: monthly price data from the U.S. Bureau of Labor
Statistics (BLS) and weekly data from a chain of grocery stores, Dominick’s Finer Food retail
chain. Our primary focus is on the statistics from the larger, more comprehensive BLS data


                                                2
set, but we use the Dominick’s data to demonstrate the robustness of that analysis. We
…nd that the Dominick’s data set is also informative, despite its limited coverage, because
these data are collected weekly and thus can better measure high-frequency price movements
than the monthly data of the BLS. Moreover, the Dominick’s data include quantities sold as
well as prices, so that we can examine the extent to which temporary changes account for a
disproportionate amount of goods sold.
       We document in both data sets the two types of micro price changes and quantify
their distinctive features. Recall that one of two key features of temporary price changes is
that after such a change, the nominal price typically returns exactly, to the penny, to its level
before the change. In the Dominick’s data, this event occurs 80% of the time; in the BLS
data, 50% of the time. In contrast, in both data sets, regular price changes almost never
return the nominal price to its pre-existing level. The other key feature of temporary price
changes is that they are clustered over time. In both data sets, for example, the probability
that a temporary price spell ends in any particular period is about 50%. This means that
a temporary change in one direction is often quickly followed by a change in the opposite
direction.
       Consider now the intuition for our main result that the aggregate price level is sticky
even though micro prices change frequently. The model produces price series for individual
goods similar to that in Figure 1. In the model, therefore, prices change frequently, but most
of those changes re‡ect temporary deviations from a much stickier regular price. When a
…rm changes its price temporarily in a given period because of an idiosyncratic shock, it is
also able to react to changes in monetary policy. These responses are, however, short-lived.
And whenever the price returns to the old price, it no longer re‡ects the change in monetary
policy. Moreover, since temporary price changes are highly clustered in time, they are less
able to o¤set persistent changes in monetary policy. For example, a …rm that changes its
prices four times in January and not at all the rest of the year is less able to respond to
persistent money supply changes than a …rm that also changes its prices four times a year,
but spreads those changes out over the year to, say, once a quarter. For these two reasons,
even though micro prices change frequently, the aggregate price level is sticky. Our key insight
is that what matters for how the aggregate price level responds to low-frequency changes in


                                               3
monetary policy is the degree of low-frequency micro price stickiness. Since in the data there
is substantial low-frequency price stickiness, the aggregate price level is sticky as well.
       Our model of temporary and regular price changes is motivated by evidence on the
pricing practices of actual …rms. In particular, Zbaracki et al. (2004, 2007) provide evidence
that pricing is done at two levels: upper-level managers (at headquarters) set list prices, while
lower-level managers (at the store level) choose the actual transaction (posted) prices. These
researchers …nd that the managerial costs of changing list prices are much greater than the
physical costs of changing posted prices. Moreover, lower-level managers must e¤ectively pay
a time cost to be allowed to depart from the regular price set by the upper-level managers.
This interaction between lower- and upper-level managers is illustrated, for example, in the
following quotation from an interview with a sales manager (Zbaracki et al. 2004, p. 524):

      I was a territory manager so I had no pricing authority. The only authority I had
      was to go to my boss and I would say, "OK, here is the problem I’ve got." He
      would say "Fill out a request and we will lower the price for that account." So
      that is how the pricing negotiations went. At that time I went up the chain to
      make any kind of adjustments I had to make . . . . My …ve guys have a certain
      level [of discount] they can go to without calling me. When they get to the certain
      point they have to get my approval.

       We model this two-level decision-making process in a simple, reduced-form way. We
assume that retailers set two prices: a list price and a posted price. The posted price is
the price at which goods are sold. In our model, the list price matters because charging a
posted price other than the list price entails a …xed cost. We think of this cost as standing in
for the cost of the lower-level manager obtaining approval from the upper-level manager for
temporarily charging a price that deviates from the list price. Changing list prices themselves
entails another …xed cost, the managerial cost of upper-level decision making. We assume
that the cost of changing posted prices is zero. (We also solved a version of the model with a
…xed cost of changing posted prices and got results nearly identical to those presented here.
For simplicity, we focus on the model without such costs.)
       Our model is purposely chosen to be a parsimonious extension of the standard menu

                                                4
cost model of, say, Golosov and Lucas (2007) and Midrigan (2007). Our extension has a
di¤erent technology for changing prices, as we have described, and the addition of temporary
shocks, which give a motive for temporary price changes. Speci…cally, in our model, …rms are
subject to two types of idiosyncratic disturbances: persistent productivity shocks and transi-
tory shocks to either the cost or the elasticity of demand for the …rm’s product. The latter
shocks are meant to capture in a simple way an idea popular in the industrial organization
literature: that …rms face demand for their products with time-varying elasticity. Our simple
extension allows the model to produce patterns of both temporary and regular price changes
that are similar to those in the data.
       A sizable literature in industrial organization has suggested explanations for the tem-
porary price discounts (or sales) which account for the majority of temporary changes in
the data.2 Unfortunately, all of these explanations are about real prices and, hence, can-
not explain a striking feature of the data: that the nominal price, after a temporary price
discount, often returns exactly to the nominal pre-existing price. Indeed, this feature is the
subtle low-frequency price stickiness which is at the heart of our results. Namely, even though
there is a large amount of high-frequency variation in prices associated with temporary price
changes, there is much less low-frequency variation, which is ultimately what matters for how
aggregate prices respond to low-frequency variation in monetary policy.
       On the empirical side, our work here is most closely related to that of Bils and Klenow
(2004) and Nakamura and Steinsson (2008). As we have noted, Bils and Klenow show that
the frequency of all price changes is fairly high, about once every 4.5 months in the BLS
data. Nakamura and Steinsson study the same data and show that once temporary price
cuts are removed, prices change infrequently, about every 8–11 months. The implicit ratio-
nalization for removing temporary price cuts is that they are somehow special and, to a rough
approximation, can be ignored when determining the amount of price stickiness in the data.
       Some may interpret our results as providing a theoretical rationale for removing tem-
porary price cuts from the data, as Nakamura and Steinsson (2008) and Golosov and Lucas
(2008) have done. Thus, here we brie‡y use our theory to evaluate a similar procedure—
discarding all temporary changes in favor of just regular prices. We …nd that compared to
our model, this regular price procedure only slightly overstates the degree of aggregate price


                                              5
stickiness.
         Our work is also related to the empirical work of Hosken and Rei¤en (2004) and
Eichenbaum, Jaimovich, and Rebelo (forthcoming), who document that there is signi…cant
low-frequency price stickiness in the micro data despite the large high-frequency price varia-
tion.
         On the theory side, Guimarães and Sheedy (forthcoming) o¤er an alternative explana-
tion for temporary price discounts (sales) arising from …rms pursuing mixed-price strategies.
Finally, Rotemberg (forthcoming) o¤ers another explanation for why temporary prices return
to their previous level. His work shows how costs to the …rm of changing list prices— costs
that act similarly to menu costs— can arise from the preferences of consumers.

1. The Pattern of Price Changes in the U.S. Data
         We begin by documenting how prices change in our two U.S. data sets: the BLS
monthly data and the Dominick’s weekly data. Here we describe several regularities, or facts,
that we see in these data. These facts help clarify the distinction between temporary and
regular price changes and illustrate their properties. We use these facts to motivate our
model.

A. The Data Sets
         The BLS data set is the CPI Research Database used by Nakamura and Steinsson
(2008). This data set contains prices for thousands of goods and services collected monthly
by the BLS for the purpose of constructing the consumer price index (CPI) and covers about
70% of U.S. consumer expenditures. For our use in this work, Emi Nakamura and Jon
Steinsson kindly computed statistics for us by applying an algorithm we devised (which we
describe in the appendix) to the CPI Research Database. These statistics are available in
their forthcoming work.
         The Dominick’s data set includes nine years (1989–97) of weekly store-level reports
from 86 stores in the Chicago area on the prices of more than 4,500 individual products,
organized into 29 product categories. The products available in this data base range from
nonperishable foodstu¤s (for example, frozen and canned food, cookies, crackers, juices, so-
das, and beer) to various household supplies (for example, detergents, fabric softeners, and


                                              6
bathroom tissue) as well as pharmaceutical and hygienic products. (For a detailed description
of the data and Dominick’s pricing practices, see the work of Hoch, Drèze, and Purk (1994),
Peltzman (2000), and Chevalier, Kashyap, and Rossi (2003).)

B. Categories of Price Changes
       To identify a pattern of price changes in the data, we wrote a simple algorithm which
categorizes each change as either temporary or regular. We de…ne for each product an arti…cial
series called a regular price series. This price is essentially a running mode of the original
series. Given this series, every price change that is a deviation from the regular price series is
de…ned as temporary, whereas every price change that coincides with a change in the regular
price is de…ned as regular.
       An intuitive way to think about our analysis is to imagine that at any point in time,
every product has an existing regular price that may experience two types of changes: tempo-
rary changes, in which the price brie‡y moves away from and then back to the regular price,
and much more persistent regular changes, which are changes in the regular price itself. Our
algorithm is based on the idea that a price is regular if the store charges it frequently in a
window of time adjacent to that observation. The regular price is thus equal to the modal
price in any given window surrounding a particular period, provided the modal price is used
su¢ ciently often in that window. The algorithm is somewhat involved, so we relegate a formal
description to the appendix.

C. The Facts
       In Figure 2, we illustrate the results of applying our algorithm to several particular
price series from the Dominick’s data. On each of the four graphs, for each of the four
products, the dashed lines are the raw data (the original posted prices), and the solid lines
are the regular price series constructed with our algorithm. Just a glance at these graphs
makes several facts about price changes clear: across the board, price changes are frequent and
large, but most of them are temporary, and most temporary prices return to the pre-existing
regular price.
       Table 1 reports statistics summarizing the facts about price changes that result from
applying the algorithm. The …rst column of data is statistics from the BLS data set, in which

                                                7
all statistics are computed at a monthly frequency. We report revenue-weighted averages of
the corresponding statistics at the level of product categories. (The product level statistics
are available from Nakamura and Steinsson (forthcoming).) The second column of data in
Table 1 is statistics from the Dominick’s data set, in which all statistics are computed at a
weekly frequency and each good weighted by its revenue share. The third column is statistics
constructed by us from the Dominick’s data by sampling the weekly data at a monthly
frequency; here, as with the BLS data, we do not weight individual products by their revenue
share.
         Among the monthly BLS data statistics, we highlight some of the key features that
motivate our model. First, most price changes in the data are temporary: 72% of price changes
are temporary, with an average duration of about two months (1/.53). Second, about 50% of
the time, the nominal price after a temporary price change returns to the exact nominal level
it had before the change (the old regular price). Because of this feature of the data, although
overall the frequency of price changes is large (22% of all prices change every month, so the
average duration is 4.5 months), the frequency of regular price changes is much smaller, 7%
per month, with an average duration of about 14.5 months.3
         The feature of the data that will become especially signi…cant to this analysis is that
micro prices have a subtle type of low-frequency price stickiness. For example, the table shows
that 75% of the time during a year, …rms charge exactly the same price for a good, namely,
its annual mode. (Note that this statistic does not depend on our algorithm for identifying
regular price changes.) When we combine that fact with the fact that …rms change prices
once every 4.5 months, we see that prices tend to come back often to the same nominal level.
We will show, using our model, that it is this feature of the data that allows monetary shocks
to have sizable e¤ects despite the high frequency of price changes.
         Consider now the second data column in Table 1, where we report similar statistics
for the Dominick’s weekly data. The basic patterns evident in the BLS data are even more
evident here. Nearly all price changes are temporary (94%), and after such changes, 80%
of these prices come back to the pre-existing price. As a result, even though prices change
relatively frequently, once every 3 weeks, the regular price changes occur much less often,
once every 8 months. Unlike the BLS data, the Dominick’s data also contain information


                                                8
on quantities. Using those data, we …nd that a disproportionate fraction of goods are sold
during periods of temporary prices: even though temporary price changes occur only about
a quarter of the time, almost 40% of goods are sold during these periods.
        When comparing the Dominick’s data to the BLS data, note that some of the di¤erence
is coming from the frequency of sampling: Dominick’s data are sampled weekly; the BLS
data, monthly. To illustrate the role of sampling, we also sampled the Dominick’s data at
the monthly frequency and report the results in the third data column of Table 1. Doing
so dramatically lengthens the implied duration of price spells, from 3 weeks (1/.33 weeks)
in the weekly data to nearly 3 months (1/.36 months) in the monthly data. This di¤erence
illustrates our contention that, at least with Dominick’s data, the monthly sampled prices
miss many of the high-frequency movements in prices that are reversed within a month.

2. A Menu Cost Model with Temporary Price Changes
        Now we build a menu cost model with temporary price changes and use it to evaluate
the relationship between the frequency of micro price changes and the degree of aggregate
price stickiness. Here, we describe the model, quantify it, and demonstrate that it does a
much better job of reproducing the pattern of changes in the data than the standard model
does.
        Our model is a simple extension of the standard menu cost model of Golosov and
Lucas (2007). To account for the pattern of temporary and regular price changes in the data,
we make two additional assumptions.
        First, motivated in part by the work of Zbaracki et al. (2004) on the pricing practices
of …rms, we assume that …rms choose two prices for each good: a list price PLt as well as a
posted price Pt that the consumer faces. Intuitively, we think of the list price as the price
set by the upper-level manager and the posted price as the price actually charged to the
consumer. The posted price will equal the list price unless the lower-level manager takes a
costly action to make it di¤er. Formally, the list price is relevant because every time the …rm
posts a price that di¤ers from the list price, the …rm must incur a …xed cost : As a result, the
posted price will deviate from the list price infrequently, only when the bene…t from doing so
exceeds the …xed cost. We assume that changing list prices is costly and entails a …xed cost


                                               9
 . (For simplicity, we set the cost of changing the posted price to zero and in an appendix
available on request show that allowing for such a cost has virtually no e¤ect on our results.)
        Second, we allow for both transitory and permanent idiosyncratic productivity shocks.
The transitory and permanent shocks will help the model deliver the temporary and regular
price changes in the data. As Golosov and Lucas (2007) do, we think of these shocks as a
stand-in for all the idiosyncratic forces that make changing prices optimal for …rms.

A. Setup
        Formally, we study a monetary economy populated by a large number of in…nitely lived
consumers and …rms and a government. In each time period t, this economy experiences one
of …nitely many events st: We denote by st = (s0 ; : : : ; st ) the history (or state) of events up
through and including period t. The probability, as of period 0, of any particular history st
is (st ). The initial realization s0 is given.
        In the model, we have aggregate shocks to the economy’s money supply and idiosyn-
cratic shocks to a …rm’s productivity. In terms of the money supply shocks, we assume that
the (log of) money growth follows an autoregressive process of the form


(1)     (st ) =   (st 1 ) + " (st );


where     is money growth,        is the persistence of   , and " (st ) is the monetary shock, a
normally distributed i.i.d. random variable with mean 0 and standard deviation               : We
describe the idiosyncratic shocks below.

 Consumers and Technology
        In each period t, the commodities in this economy are labor, money, a continuum
of intermediate goods indexed by i 2 [0; 1]; and a …nal good. The …nal good is used for
consumption and investment as well as for materials used in production by intermediate
good …rms.
        In this economy, consumers consume, trade bonds, work, and hold real money balances.
They also own the capital stock and rent it to intermediate good producers. The consumer
problem is to choose consumption c(st ); nominal labor l(st ); investment x(st ); nominal money


                                                 10
balances M (st ); and a vector of bonds fB(st ; st+1 )gst+1 to maximize utility



       X
       1 X
                                        M (st )
                      t   t           t
(2)                       s U     c s ;     t
                                                ; l st
                                        P (s )
       t=0   st


subject to the budget constraint


                  "                                                    #
                                                    t
                                               x (s )
                                                           2                          X
       P st           c st + x st +                            k(st 1 ) + M (st ) +          Q st+1 jst B st+1
                                          2   k(st 1 )
                                                                                      st+1


       6 W st l st +               st + M (st 1 ) + B st + R st k st ;

where P (st ) is the price of the …nal good, x (st ) = k (st ) (1            ) k (st 1 ) is investment, W (st )
is the nominal wage,            (st ) are nominal pro…ts, and R (st ) is the rental rate of capital. Note
that capital is subject to adjustment costs, the size of which is determined by : Here we
have complete, contingent, one-period nominal bonds. We let B(st+1 ) denote the consumers’
holdings of such a bond purchased in period t and state st with payo¤s contingent on some
particular state st+1 in t + 1. We let Q(st+1 jst ) denote the price of this bond in period t and
state st .
        Consider, next, the technology for the intermediate good producers. The producer of
intermediate good i uses the technology

                                                                   1
(3)    yi (st ) = ai (st )zi st     ki st     li (st )1   m i st       ;


where yi (st ) is the output of good i, ki (st ) is the amount of capital it rents, li (st ) is the
labor input, and mi (st ) is the amount of materials used in the production process. The
good-speci…c productivity has two components: a transitory one, zi (st ) ; and a permanent
one, ai (st ): The transitory component follows a Markov process. The permanent component
evolves according to


(4)    log ai (st ) = log ai (st 1 ) + "i (st );


                                                          11
where "i (st ) is an i.i.d. shock (or innovation) to the permanent part of productivity with a
distribution that we describe below. To keep the model stationary, we assume that interme-
diate good …rms exit with probability                                e   and are replaced by …rms with ai (st ) = 1: Below we
describe the problem that the intermediate good …rms solve.
       Consider, last, the …nal good producers. These …rms, who are perfectly competitive,
purchase a continuum of intermediate goods and sell a …nal good to consumers and intermedi-
ate good …rms. The problem of a …nal good …rm is to choose the amount of each intermediate
good yi (st ) to purchase in order to maximize
                                  Z    1
             t       t
      P s y s                              Pi st yi st di
                                   0


subject to the …nal good production function,

                     Z                               1
                                           1
         t
      y(s ) =            yi (st )              di        :


We de…ne P (st ) as the price of the …nal good, Pi (st ) as the price of good i purchased from
an intermediate good …rm, and                                as the elasticity of substitution among intermediate inputs.
The solution to this problem is, then,

                         Pi (st )
(5)   y i st =                                  y st ;
                         P (st )

which will be the demand function faced by the producer of intermediate good i: Here,

                         Z    1                              1
                                                                 1

             t                             t 1
      P s        =                Pi s              di
                          0


is the minimum cost of producing one unit of the …nal good and, because of perfect compe-
tition, the …nal good’s price.

The Intermediate Good Firm Problem
       Consider, now, the problem of an intermediate good …rm in this economy. The …rm
has a …xed cost, measured in units of labor, of changing its list prices. We refer to this cost


                                                                             12
as a menu cost. Let PL;i (st 1 ) denote the …rm’s list price from the previous period. This
list price is a state variable for the …rm at the subsequent state st : The …rm has two sets of
pricing decisions. It can leave the list price unchanged at no cost, or it can pay a …xed cost
  and change the list price to PLi (st ). A …rm can then either pay nothing and charge the list
price Pi (st ) = PL;i (st ) or pay              and charge any price other than the list price. (We think of
as an upper-level managerial cost of changing the list price and                                     as the cost of a lower-level
manager deviating from that list price, say, by o¤ering a temporary discount.)
        In our model, …rms face a mixture of idiosyncratic shocks— permanent and transitory.
Here …rms typically use a list price change to respond to the more permanent shocks and
temporarily deviate from this list price in order to respond to transitory shocks.
        To write the …rm’s problem formally, …rst note that the …rm’s period nominal pro…ts,
excluding …xed costs at price Pi (st ); are


      D(Pi (st ); st ) = (Pi (st )             Vi (st ))yi (st );


where

                                                 1                  1
                              R (st ) W (st )            P (st )
(6)   Vi st =
                                     ai (st ) zi (st )

is the nominal cost of producing one unit of intermediate good i and yi (st ) is given by (5),
where is a constant that depends on the parameters of the production function. The present
discounted value of pro…ts of the …rm, expressed in units of period 0 money, is given by

      XX
(7)                      Q(st )(1    e)
                                       t
                                           [D(Pi (st ); st )     W (st )(                 t
                                                                                    L;i (s )   +   T;i (s
                                                                                                            t
                                                                                                                ))];
        t      st


                     t
where       L;i (s       ) is an indicator variable that equals one when the …rm changes its list price
(PL;i (st ) 6= PL;i (st 1 )) and zero otherwise, and                               t
                                                                             T;i (s )   is an indicator variable that equals one
when the …rm temporarily deviates from the list price (Pi (st ) 6= PL;i (st )) and zero otherwise.
In expression (7), the term W (st )                         t
                                                      L;i (s )   is the labor cost of changing list prices, which we
think of as the menu cost, and W (st )                           t
                                                           T;i (s )      is the cost of deviating from the list price.



                                                                        13
Equilibrium
           Consider, now, this economy’s market-clearing conditions and the de…nition of equi-
librium. The market-clearing condition on labor,
                       Z
             t
         l(s ) =             li (st ) +        L;i (s
                                                        t
                                                            )+         t
                                                                 T;i (s )   di;
                         i


requires that the sum of the labor used in production and the costs of making both list and
temporary price changes equals total labor. The market-clearing condition for the …nal good
is

                                                                  2                   Z   1
                 t            t                x (st )                      t 1
         c s +x s +                                                   k s         +           mi st di = y st :
                                     2        k (st 1 )                               0


Note, for later use, that real output (value-added) at base period prices can be written as
                                    Z     1
                 0           t
         P (s ) y s                           mi st di :
                                     0


The market-clearing condition on bonds is B(st ) = 0:
           An equilibrium for this economy is a collection of allocations for consumers fci (st )gi ,
M (st ), B(st+1 ); k (st ) ; x (st ) ; and l(st ); prices and allocations for …rms fPi (st ); yi (st ), li (st ),
ki (st ), mi (st )gi ; and aggregate prices W (st ); P (st ); and Q(st+1 jst ); all of which satisfy the
following conditions: (i) the consumer allocations solve the consumers’ problem; (ii) the
prices and allocations of …rms solve their maximization problem; (iii) the market-clearing
conditions hold; and (iv) the money supply processes satisfy the speci…cations above.
           For convenience, we write the equilibrium problem recursively. At the beginning of
st ; after the realization of the current monetary and productivity shocks, the state of an
individual …rm i is characterized by its list price in the preceding period, PL;i (st 1 ); its
permanent productivity component, ai (st ); and the transitory productivity component, zi (st ):
We normalize all of the nominal prices and wages by the current money supply and let
             t
pL;    1;i (s )      = PL;i (st 1 )=M (st ) and vi (st ) = Vi (st )=M (st ) and use similar notation for other
prices. With this normalization, we can write the state of an individual …rm i in st as
(pL;          t        t        t
        1;i (s ); ai (s ); zi (s )      ):

                                                                            14
       Let (st ) denote the measure over all …rms of these state variables. The only aggregate
uncertainty is money growth, and the process for money growth is autoregressive; therefore,
the aggregate state variables are [ (st ); (st )]: Dropping explicit dependence of st and i;
we write the state variables of a …rm as (pL; 1 ; a; z) and the aggregate state variables as
S = ( ; ): Let the static gross pro…t function, normalized by the current money supply M;
be denoted by


(8)   d(pi ; ai ; zi ; S) = (pi   v (ai ; zi ; S) )y(pi ; S);


where v (ai ; zi ; S) is the unit cost of producing good i and y(pi ; S) is the quantity demanded
                    0
of good i. Let          =    ( ; S) denote the transition law on the measure over the …rms’state
variables.
       Because of discounting, …rms never change a list price in a given period without selling
at that price during that particular period. In any period, therefore, a …rm has three relevant
options: leave its old list price unchanged and pay 0 to charge a price equal to its list price
(N ), leave its old list price unchanged and pay                to charge a price di¤erent than its list price
(T ), or pay     to change the list price and sell at that new list price (L).
       In any period, the value of a …rm that does nothing (N )— does not change its price
and sells at its existing list price— is
                                                                       "                                                   #
                                                                           X
      V N (pL; 1 ; a; z; S) = d(pL; 1 ; a; z; S) + (1           e )E            Q(S 0 ; S)V (pL; 1 ; a0 ; z 0 ; S 0 )ja; z) :
                                                                           S0


(Here the expectations are taken only with respect to the idiosyncratic shocks a and z: Since
these shocks are idiosyncratic, the risk about their realization is priced in an actuarially fair
way. Of course, our formalization is equivalent to having an intertemporal price de…ned over
idiosyncratic and aggregate shocks and then simply summing over both of those.)
       The value of a …rm that charges a temporary (T ) price pT 6= pL;                            1   is
                                                                                "                                               #
                                                                                    X
  T                                                                                          0                 0   0   0
V (pL; 1 ; a; z; S) = max [d(pT ; a; z; S)           w(S)]+(1          e )E              Q(S ; S)V (pL; 1 ; a ; z ; S )ja; z) ;
                            pT
                                                                                    S0




                                                         15
and that of a …rm that changes its list (L) price is
                                                                      "                                              #
                                                                          X
      V L (a; z; S) = max [d(pL ; a; z; S)     w(S)] + (1      e )E            Q(S 0 ; S)V (pL ; a0 ; z 0 ; S 0 )ja; z) ;
                          pL
                                                                          S0


where V (pL; 1 ; a; z; S) = max V N ; V T ; V L :
         Inspection of the value function V T makes clear that the optimal temporary price is
static and is chosen so that the marginal gross pro…t dp (p; a; z; S) = 0; so that the optimal
temporary price is simply


(9)     pT;i =            vi (S):
                      1

Note that this temporary price is a simple markup over the nominal unit cost of production
and is the frictionless price, that is, the price which a ‡exible price …rm would charge when
faced with such a unit cost. In contrast, if the list price is changed, then the optimal pricing
decision for the new list price, pL ; is dynamic. In particular, pL will not typically equal pT .
         As (9) makes clear, if a price is changed temporarily, then the inherited list price pL;                        1

does not a¤ect the temporary price, so we can write pT (a; z; S): Similarly, as inspection of
the value function V L makes clear, conditional on having a list price change, the inherited
list price pL;   1   is also irrelevant, so we can write pL (a; z; S):

The Workings of the Model
         Our model works di¤erently from existing menu cost models because of the ability of a
…rm in our model to use temporary price changes to respond to shocks. To provide intuition
for our model’s predictions, we now describe the …rm’s optimal decision rules— in particular,
when the …rm chooses to make a temporary price change and when it chooses to make a
list price change. Brie‡y, we show that …rms use changes in the temporary price primarily
to respond to temporary shocks and use changes in the list price to respond to permanent
shocks.
         Consider the …rm’s optimal decision rules in a quantitative version of the menu cost
model (the details of which will be described later). These rules are a function of the individual
states, namely, the normalized list price pL;        1   = PL; 1 =M , the permanent productivity level

                                                     16
a; and the transitory productivity level z; as well as the aggregate state variable— the money
supply growth rate— and the distribution of …rms .
       We illustrate the …rm’s optimal decision rules in Figure 3. This …gure shows two
decision rules in the (z; pL; 1 ) space for a given level of permanent productivity: the list
price pL (z); conditional on the …rm’s choice to change the list price, and the temporary
price pT (z); conditional on the …rm’s choice to set a temporary price. Note that since the
permanent productivity shock has a unit root, the list price and the temporary price are
nearly identical. Recall also that the temporary price is identical to the frictionless price, the
price that would prevail if prices were not sticky. This frictionless price decreases one-for-one
with productivity shock increases.
       Figure 3 also shows the regions of the state space in which the …rm optimally chooses
to make a list price change (L), to make a temporary price change (T ), or to not change
its price (N ). The …gure shows that if the current list price pL;      1   is close enough to the
frictionless price (that is, if the price lies in the region labeled N ), then the optimal decision
for the …rm is to forgo paying any costs and just charge the old list price.
       This …gure also shows that a …rm chooses to charge a temporary price when two
conditions are met: the temporary shock is either su¢ ciently high or su¢ ciently low, and
the old list price is close to what would be optimal when the temporary shock is at its mean.
This pattern of temporary price-setting arises from two features of our quantitative model:
the cost of changing the list price is not that much higher than the cost of deviating from the
list price, and temporary productivity shocks have high mean reversion. Brie‡y, if the list
price is far from the level that is optimal when the temporary shock is at its mean, then the
…rm realizes it will likely have to change its list price soon anyway, so it simply changes its
list price in order to respond to the transitory shock.
       Figure 4 shows a simulation of shocks and a …rm’s decision rules in our quantitative
model for 7 years (84 months). Panel A shows the three shocks. For convenience, we report
the inverse of the log of the permanent and transitory productivity shocks (so that these
shocks can be interpreted as percentage changes in costs) and the log of the money supply.
Panel B shows the posted and list prices. Comparing these two panels, we see that, for the
most part, …rms seem to change list prices in order to o¤set permanent productivity shocks


                                                17
and money shocks and temporarily deviate from the list prices in order to o¤set transitory
productivity shocks.
       Panel C shows how posted prices di¤er from frictionless prices in the model. Clearly,
even though posted prices change frequently, they do not o¤set all the money shocks. For
example, from month 50 to month 80, posted prices change 7 times. Even so, the posted
price at the end of this period is considerably above the frictionless price, and this di¤erence
is mostly due to a persistent decline in the money supply.
       Panel D makes clear that the regular prices constructed by our algorithm often agree
with the list prices from the theoretical model, although not always.

B. Quanti…cation and Prediction
       We want to use the facts about price changes that we have isolated in the two U.S.
data sets as the basis for our model and its evaluation. To do that, we must quantify the
model with values from U.S. data. Here we describe how we choose the model’s functional
forms and parameter values. We then investigate whether our parsimonious model can be
made to account for the facts about prices that we have documented. We …nd that it can.

Functional Forms and Parameters
       We set the length of the period in our model as one month and, therefore, choose a
discount factor of     = :961=12 : We assume that preferences are given by

                                                             1   !
               M                         1               M
      U      c; ; l   =         log !c       + (1   !)               l:
               P            1                            P

We choose      = :39 and ! = :94: As Chari, Kehoe, and McGrattan (2000) show, such a choice
of parameters is consistent with estimates from the money demand literature. We choose
the value of     ; the disutility of labor parameter, to ensure that without aggregate shocks,
consumers supply one-third of their time to the labor market. We set the depreciation rate
of capital     to be consistent with 10% annual depreciation. We choose the adjustment cost
on capital     so that the standard deviation of investment relative to that of output is equal
to 3, a number similar to that in the U.S. data.
       For the …nal good production function, we set ; the elasticity of substitution across


                                                    18
intermediate good inputs, to be 3: This number is in the middle of estimates of the elasticity
of substitution in the literature. (See, for example, Nevo 1997 and Chevalier, Kashyap, and
Rossi 2003.) For the intermediate good production function, we set      to be 1/3 and 1 v = :7:
These values imply that the capital share in value-added is 1/3 and the material share in
gross output is 47%. (Recall that to calculate the material share in gross output, we need to
divide 1       v by the markup =(       1):) These are consistent with the work of Basu (1995)
and Nakamura and Steinsson (forthcoming). We choose the exit rate of intermediate good
…rms     e   = 1:8%: Gertler and Leahy (2008) argue that this probability of exit is consistent
with the rate at which products are replaced in the Nakamura and Steinsson (2008) data.
         We would like to isolate the real e¤ects of exogenous monetary policy shocks as a
simple way of measuring the degree of nominal rigidity in the model. A popular way to do
so is as in the work of Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (2005) and Gertler and Leahy
(2008), who study the response of the economy to shocks in the money growth rate. We adopt
the interpretation of Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (2005), who extract the process for
the exogenous component of money growth that is consistent with the monetary authority
following an interest rate rule.4 In that spirit, we set the coe¢ cients in the money growth
rule by …rst projecting the growth rate of (monthly) M1 on current and 24 lagged measures of
monetary policy shocks.5 We then …t an AR(1) process for the …tted values in this regression
and obtain an autoregressive coe¢ cient equal to .61 and a standard deviation of residuals
of   m   = .0018. (We also redid the analysis in this paper using a Taylor rule and obtained
similar results that are available on request. We focused on the money growth rule because
the degree of aggregate price stickiness is easier to interpret under a money growth rule than
under an interest rate rule.)
         The rest of the parameters are chosen so that the model can closely reproduce the
salient features of the micro price data we have described: , the (menu) cost the …rm incurs
when changing its list price; , the cost of deviating from the list price; and the speci…cations
of the productivity shocks.
         Consider, …rst, the speci…cation of the permanent productivity shocks. The distribu-
tion of the innovations "i (st ) for these requires special attention. Midrigan (2007) shows that
when "i (st ) is normally distributed, a model like ours generates counterfactually low disper-


                                                19
sion in the size of price changes. Midrigan argues that a fat-tailed distribution is necessary
in order for the model to account for the distribution of the size of price changes in the data.
We …nd that a parsimonious and ‡exible approach to increasing the distribution’s degree of
kurtosis is to assume, as Gertler and Leahy (2008) do, that productivity shocks arrive with
Poisson probability                a   and are, conditional on arrival, uniformly distributed on the interval
[   ; ]: We follow this approach and assume that
                      8
                      <           t
                                       with probability
           t                  i (s )                      a
     "i (s ) =
                      :       0        with probability 1         a;


             t
where    i (s )   is distributed uniformly on the interval [ ; ]. The productivity process thus has
two parameters: the arrival rate of shocks                    a   and the support of these shocks :
        Paying special attention to the distribution of these shocks is necessary because this
distribution plays an important role in determining the real e¤ects of changes in the money
supply. Golosov and Lucas (2007) show, for example, that the e¤ects of monetary shocks are
approximately neutral when productivity shocks are normally distributed. But as Midrigan
(2007) shows, with a fat-tailed distribution of productivity shocks, shocks to the money supply
have much larger real e¤ects because changes in the identity of adjusting …rms are muted as
the kurtosis of the distribution of productivity shocks increases.
        Consider, next, the process for the transitory productivity shocks. To keep the model
simple, we assume that these shocks follow a Markov chain, with zt 2 f z; 0; zg referred to
as the low, medium, and high productivity values, with transition probabilities
     2                                        3
           s          1        s         0
     6                                        7
     6                                        7
     6     l      1       l        h      h   7:
     4                                        5
          0           1        s          s


Here, the subscripts l and h indicate the low and high productivity values. Hence,                          l   is the
probability of experiencing a decrease in productivity from 0 to                      z; and    h   is the probabil-
ity of experiencing an increase in productivity from 0 to z: Finally,                    s   is the probability of
staying in a non-medium state. Our parameterization of these shocks thus has four parame-


                                                                  20
ters fz;        s;   l;   h g:   Here,   l   and   h   govern the probability of temporary price increases and
decreases, while             s   determines the duration of temporary price changes.
              We choose these parameters to minimize the distance between 13 moments in the data
and the model listed in panel A of Table 2. These include the facts about temporary and
regular price changes, as well as other measures of the degree of low- and high-frequency
price variation in the BLS data we have discussed. These moments include the frequency of
monthly price changes (posted and regular), the fraction of price changes that are temporary,
the fraction of periods with temporary price discounts, the proportion of returns to the old
regular price, the probability of a temporary price spell ending, the fraction of prices at and
below the annual mode, as well as the size and dispersion of price changes (as measured by
the interquartile range, or IQR), both including and excluding temporary price changes.
              Panel B of Table 2 lists the parameter values that have allowed the model to best
match the moments in the data. The menu cost                         of changing a list price is 0.81% of a …rm’s
steady-state pro…ts, while the cost of deviating from this list price                        is 0.68% of a …rm’s
steady-state pro…ts. Permanent productivity shocks arrive with probability                           a   of 7:8% and
have an upper bound of                       = :184. For the transitory productivity shock, we choose z =
.143. The parameters governing the Markov transition matrix are                         s   = :52;   h   = :038; and

    l   = :026: Thus, the medium productivity state is most persistent, whereas …rms that are in
the low- or high-productivity states expect to return to the medium with high probability
1         s   = :48:

The Micro Moments in the Data and the Model
              Returning to panel A of Table 2, we see that our parsimonious extension of a standard
menu cost model can account well for the micro moments of the BLS data. Recall that in
the data we computed statistics about regular prices using our algorithm. We use the same
algorithm to construct statistics about regular prices in the model. (Recall that the regular
prices produced by our algorithm mostly, but not always, coincide with the list price in the
theory.)
              The frequency of posted price changes is high: 22% in both the data and the model;
the frequency of regular price changes is much lower: 6.9% in both the data and the model.


                                                                21
Most price changes are temporary: 72% in the data and 76% in the model. Temporary
prices often return to the regular price that existed before the temporary change: 50% in the
data and 70% in the model. We also see that temporary price changes are transitory: the
probability that a temporary price spell ends is equal to 53% in the data and 54% in the
data. Periods with temporary prices account for 10% in the data and 11% in the model, and
most of these periods are ones with temporary price declines (6% in both the data and the
model).
       So far we have used a speci…c algorithm to distinguish between temporary and regular
price changes. We think of these price changes as characterizing high- and low-frequency
price variation. We would like to argue that our broad conclusions carry through for other
ways of distinguishing high- and low-frequency price variation. Another way to see that there
is considerable low-frequency price stickiness is to consider the fraction of times a good’s price
is equal to the annual mode. (This alternative measure of low-frequency price stickiness has
been suggested by Hosken and Rei¤en (2004) and was also used recently by Eichenbaum,
Jaimovich, and Rebelo (forthcoming).) We apply this measure to both the data and the
model, and in both it is quite high: 75% in the data and 73% in the model. When prices are
not at their annual mode, they tend to be below the annual mode more often than above it
in both the data and the model (13% of the time in the data and about 17% in the model).
In sum, we see that our conclusions that the data exhibit considerable low-frequency price
stickiness are robust to alternative ways of examining the data.
       Following Golosov and Lucas (2007) and Midrigan (2007), we also examine the size
and dispersion of price changes. The mean size of all price changes and regular price changes
is high in both the data and the model (11% for all of them). So is the dispersion of these
changes as measured by the IQR: 9% for all price changes in both the model and the data
and 8% for regular price changes in both.

C. A Comparison with the Standard Model
       We next compare the patterns of low- and high-frequency price stickiness in the stan-
dard model which has one type of price change with the same patterns in our model. We
show that, unlike our model, the standard model cannot simultaneously reproduce the high-


                                               22
frequency price ‡exibility (that is, the low level of high-frequency price stickiness) of micro
price changes and the low-frequency price stickiness of micro price changes observed in the
data.
        To demonstrate that, we consider a sequence of standard menu cost models. In each of
these models, we vary the frequency of micro price changes and keep the size and interquartile
range of price changes equal to those in the data. We convert this frequency into months
and consider it a measure of the degree of high-frequency price stickiness. Then for each
model, we simulate a long price series and apply our algorithm to construct the regular price
series. We compute the frequency of these regular price changes, convert it into months, and
consider it a measure of the degree of low-frequency price stickiness.
        The results are displayed in Figure 5. The curve in panel A shows that if micro prices
are highly sticky in the standard model, then regular prices are too; the degrees of high-
and low-frequency stickiness match. This is not the pattern we have seen in the data. That
pattern— and the pattern produced by our model— is represented in panel A by a large dot.
In the BLS data and in our model, prices have a low degree of high-frequency stickiness, about
4.5 months, but they also have a high degree of low-frequency (regular) price stickiness, about
14.5 months.
        We also do an analogous experiment with the standard model for our alternative mea-
sure of low-frequency price stickiness, the fraction of prices at the annual mode. The results
of that experiment, displayed in panel B of Figure 5, are quite consistent with the results of
the regular price experiment. This consistency strongly suggests that our conclusions are not
dependent on the exact way in which we measure low-frequency price stickiness or the details
of our algorithm that de…nes regular prices.

3. The Degree of Aggregate Price Stickiness
        We have shown that our menu cost model with temporary price changes can reproduce
the main features of the BLS micro price data— and much better than a standard model can.
We now turn to analyzing what our model has to say about the e¤ectiveness of monetary
policy, in terms of aggregate price stickiness, relative to what the standard model says. Our
model’s main message is that despite the high frequency of micro price changes observed in


                                               23
the data— and despite what the standard model says— aggregate prices are quite sticky. We
attribute this result to the key features of temporary price changes that we have identi…ed.
And we evaluate one way in which researchers have tried to continue to use the standard
model despite its di¢ culty with temporary price change data.

A. A Measure of Aggregate Price Stickiness
       For this analysis, we must somehow measure the degree of aggregate price stickiness in
our model. We want a measure that captures how slowly the aggregate price level reacts to
a change in the money supply. The slower is this reaction, the greater will be the di¤erence
between the impulse response for the price level and the impulse response for the money
supply. Based on that logic, we choose as our measure of aggregate price stickiness the
di¤erence (actually, the integral of the di¤erence) between the impulse response of money
and prices to an innovation to the money supply relative to the average impulse response
of money (over the …rst two years following the innovation). Notice that our measure has
a one-to-one relationship with the real e¤ects of money, as measured by the integral of the
impulse response of output to an innovation in the money supply. To express our measure in
convenient units, we express it as the frequency of micro price changes in a standard model
(without temporary price changes) that produces this same di¤erence between the impulse
response of money and prices. We …nd this measure convenient because the units are in terms
of the key parameter of the standard New Keynesian model and is, thus, well understood.

B. Impulse Responses in Our Model
       We begin by examining the impulse responses to a monetary policy shock in our model.
In Figure 6, we show the impulse responses to a shock to the money growth rate in period 1
that, in the limit, produces a 5% increase in the level of the money supply. (All variables are
expressed as percentage deviations from the original steady state.)
       Panel A of Figure 6 displays the model’s responses of nominal variables: the money
supply, the price level, and the nominal marginal cost. Notice that because in this model
each intermediate …rm uses the …nal good as an input, the nominal marginal cost responds
slowly to the monetary shock. Hence, producers that set their prices based on the present
value of these marginal costs also respond slowly.


                                              24
       In panel B of Figure 6, we see that on the shock’s impact, the model implies that
output increases by about 6:8% and then declines, reaching half of its peak value in about
8 months. Consumption follows a similar pattern, although its response is only half that of
output. All other variables (investment, labor, use of intermediate inputs) have a similar
qualitative pattern, so are not reported here.
       The column in panel A of Table 3 labeled our model summarizes some of the key
properties of the model. The …rst entry reminds us that, at the micro level, prices are
‡exible, in that they change once every 4.5 months. The second entry quanti…es the degree of
aggregate price stickiness to be about 40%, measured, again, as the average di¤erence between
the impulse response of the money supply and the price level over the …rst 24 months after
the impulse divided by the average impulse response of the money supply during this period.
To get some sense of this number, note that if aggregate prices never moved after a monetary
shock, our aggregate price stickiness measure would be 100%; whereas if prices instantly
adjusted to the ‡exible price level, our measure would be 0%: The table’s last two entries
quantify how the aggregate price stickiness in our model manifests itself in output: it leads
to a sizable output response of about 3% and a half-life of that response of about 8 months.

C. A Comparison of the Degree of Price Stickiness in our Model with that in the
   Standard Model
       For some perspective on our model’s aggregate price implications, we now compare
them to those of the standard menu cost model used in the literature (as in, for example, the
work of Midrigan (2007) and Gertler and Leahy (2008)). The implications are very di¤erent.
       The standard model we use here is a special case of our model in which we eliminate the
option of temporary changes by setting    = 1: We also eliminate the transitory productivity
shocks to make our analysis parallel to the existing approaches, which use only one type of
idiosyncratic shock. We choose parameters governing the permanent productivity process
and the size of the menu cost so that the standard model matches the frequency, average size
(11%), and interquartile range of price changes (9%) in the data.
       In Figure 7 we report how the aggregate degree of price stickiness in the standard
model varies with the degree of micro price stickiness. The …gure shows that the standard
model implies a one-to-one relationship between micro price stickiness and aggregate price


                                                 25
stickiness. In particular, when micro prices change frequently, the degree of aggregate price
stickiness is low. Conversely, when micro prices change infrequently, the degree of aggregate
price stickiness is high.
       This is quite a contrast to the predictions of our model. In the data, prices change
every 4.5 months. When the standard model reproduces this high frequency of price changes,
as it does at point A in the …gure, this model implies small amounts of aggregate price
stickiness. In contrast, when our model produces this high frequency of price changes, as it
does at point B, it predicts much larger amounts of aggregate price stickiness (40% vs. 17%).
       We can also use Figure 7 to translate our measure of stickiness into more commonly
used terms. We ask, To reproduce the degree of aggregate price stickiness in our model,
what degree of micro price stickiness would a standard model require? Point C in the …gure
provides the answer: micro prices in the standard model would need to change about once
every 12 months.
       The impulse responses of the standard model that exactly match the degree of price
stickiness in our model are displayed in Figure 8. Clearly, the impulse responses of output
and prices in our model are nearly identical to those in a standard model with 12 month
micro price stickiness.
       In sum, even though our model is consistent with frequent micro price changes, it still
predicts a quite sticky aggregate price level.

D. Evaluating the Existing Approach in the Standard Model
       As we have emphasized, the micro data exhibit two types of price changes: regular
changes, which happen at a moderately low frequency, and temporary deviations from regular
prices, which happen at a high frequency. We have dealt with this phenomenon by building
a model that accounts for both types of price changes. Other researchers have chosen not
to explicitly model both but instead use a standard model with only one type. To deal
with temporary changes, these researchers discard all temporary price changes from the data
and set the frequency of price changes in the model to match the frequency of regular price
changes in the data. This approach, which we refer to as the regular price approach, can, at
best, only roughly approximate the data. Since the vast majority of quantitative exercises


                                                 26
use this approach, we …nd it informative to evaluate just how rough an approximation it
delivers.
       Returning to Figure 7, we see that a standard model using the regular approach
predicts a degree of price stickiness of about 46%, or about 1.15 times greater than in our
model. We conclude that the regular price approach only slightly overstates the degree of
price stickiness and the real e¤ects of monetary policy shocks. We thus …nd that the results
of Golosov and Lucas (2007), Midrigan (2007), and Nakamura and Steinsson (2008), who
have used the regular price approach in studying menu cost models, do not greatly overstate
the real e¤ects of monetary shocks.
       In work available upon request, we …nd a similar result for the regular price approach
in a Calvo model with a constant hazard of price changes: the regular price approach does
not greatly overstate the real e¤ects of monetary shocks.

E. Explanation
       The key prediction of our model is that temporary price changes, although very fre-
quent, do not allow the aggregate price level to react to monetary policy shocks. We now
provide some intuition for this result and argue that this phenomenon is explained primarily
by the distinctive features of temporary price changes that we have identi…ed. We also show
that strategic interactions emphasized by Guimarães and Sheedy (forthcoming) play no role
in our result.

Intuition
       We claim that the nature of temporary price changes does not allow the aggregate
price level to react to monetary policy shocks. To gain some intuition for that explanation,
let us walk through the model’s pricing process again.
       First, consider the response of the aggregate price level to a one-time change in the
log of the money supply equal to      m in period 1; assuming that each …rm’s desired posted
and list prices increase by this amount. For simplicity, assume that the probability that any
given …rm changes its list price in any given period is constant and equal to   L:   Similarly,
assume that the probability that any given …rm has a temporary deviation from its old list
price is constant and equal to   T:



                                              27
        The change in the aggregate price level can be written, to a …rst approximation, as
                    Z
            pt =              pit di;


where       pt is the change in the log of the aggregate price level and                                       pit ; the change in the
log of an individual …rm’s price. In any period after the shock, there are three types of …rms:
those that have already reset their list prices, those that currently have a temporary change,
and those that are still charging the list price in e¤ect prior to the change in the money
supply.
        The change in the aggregate price level is, therefore, equal to


            pt =        L;t         m+     T;t           m + (1          L;t       T;t )       0=(   L;t   +   T;t )     m;


where       L;t   is the measure of …rms that have reset their list price as of period t and                                               T;t   is
the measure of …rms that have a temporary change in period t: Clearly,                                                 T;t   =   T;   since the
measure of …rms that have a temporary price change is constant. To compute                                                        L;t ;   notice
that    L   …rms have reset their list prices one period after the shock,                                      L   + (1          L)   L   in the
second period (the …rms that have done so in the …rst period plus those that do so in the
                                                                     2
second period),               L    + (1     L)   L   + (1          L)        L   in the third period, and so on. So we have

                            X
                            t 1
                                            i                        t
          L;t   =       L          (1     L)    =1        (1       L)    :
                            i=0


        Consider now two extreme scenarios. Suppose …rst that all price changes are list price
changes, so that               L   is high and       T   = 0: If    L    is high, then the measure of …rms that have had
a chance to react to the monetary shock quickly increases with t: For example, if                                                     L   = 0:2,
the fraction of …rms that have reset their list price and permanently responded to the money
shock is equal to 89% after 10 periods. Hence, if all price changes are list price changes, the
aggregate price level is quite ‡exible.
        Now suppose, however, that all price changes are temporary. Since after temporary
changes, the nominal price reverts to the pre-existing list price, these changes only allow …rms
to temporarily react to a monetary policy shock. If                                        L   = 0 and     T   = 0:2; the measure of

                                                                         28
…rms that have responded to the monetary shock is the same, 20%; forever. Thus, if all price
changes are temporary price changes, the aggregate price level is quite sticky. Notice that our
example makes clear that a key di¤erence between temporary and list price changes is that
temporary changes are special: since they return the nominal price back to its pre-existing
list price, they allow …rms to only temporarily respond to a change in monetary policy.
        Finally, the second distinctive feature of temporary changes is their clustering. To
see the role of this feature, note that every episode of temporary deviation from a list price
involves two price changes: one that initiates the temporary change and another that reverses
it. Hence, if    T   = 0:2 and   L   = 0; the frequency of price changes is twice as high and equal
to 2   T:   The second round of price changes does not allow …rms to react to monetary policy
shocks and thus does not lower the stickiness of the aggregate price level (even though it does
lower the degree of micro price stickiness).

On the Unimportance of Strategic Interactions
        Based on recent work by Guimarães and Sheedy (forthcoming), some may conjecture
that the intuition for our results comes from strategic interactions in price-setting, interactions
that arise from our use of materials as a factor of production and from our use of capital
and interest-elastic money demand. In particular, some may think that the reason our model
predicts a large amount of aggregate price stickiness is that a given …rm that undertakes a
temporary price change in our model has little incentive to respond to a money shock. The
logic is that since this given …rm purchases inputs from other …rms with sticky prices, this
…rm’s input costs are sticky. We show that this conjecture is false: our results are not driven
by strategic complementarity in price-setting.
        To see this, consider an economy in which there is no such complementarity. In this
no strategic complementarities economy, we exclude materials and capital from production
and make money demand interest-inelastic by introducing money using a cash-in-advance
constraint. To see that these changes eliminate any strategic complementarities, note that,
given our log-linear preferences, the nominal unit cost of production is given by the nominal




                                                   29
wage that satis…es


(10) W st = P st c st = M st ;


where the second equality follows from the cash-in-advance constraint. Equation (10) makes
clear the precise sense in which the model has no strategic interactions in price-setting: the
desired price of any given …rm is a function of only an exogenously given process, the money
supply, and not of the actions of other …rms.
       We report the results from this economy in panel B of Table 3. As we did with
our original economies, we here consider two versions of the no strategic complementarities
economy: one with temporary price changes and one without them. Again we ask, What
degree of micro price stickiness in the economy without temporary changes reproduces the
degree of aggregate price stickiness in the model with temporary changes? Table 3 shows
that the answer is again about once every 12 months.
       We therefore conclude that the special nature of temporary price changes in our original
model, rather than general equilibrium considerations, accounts for our results. This stands
in sharp contrast to the results of Guimarães and Sheedy (forthcoming), who emphasize the
role of strategic substitutability of sales. In the variation of our model considered here, a
given …rm’s incentive to have a temporary price change is independent of the actions of other
…rms, and we nevertheless …nd that temporary price changes do not greatly contribute to the
‡exibility of the aggregate price level.

4. Robustness Exercises Using Dominick’s Data
       We now consider two extensions of our model that use statistics from the Dominick’s
data set rather than the BLS data set. Both extensions provide a check on the robustness
of our results. In one extension, we simply reparameterize our model to be consistent with
Dominick’s data. In the other, we also replace the transitory productivity shocks in our
model with transitory shocks to the elasticity of demand for the …rm’s product, leaving all
else unchanged. We …nd that our results based on the BLS data are robust to both of these
extensions.



                                                30
A. Weekly Data with Quantities
       Our use of the Dominick’s data is motivated by two concerns about the BLS data.
One concern is that because the BLS data are monthly, by construction, they miss much of
the high-frequency movements in prices that are reversed within a month (such as temporary
sales). Because the BLS data set misses these movements, when we use it to set parameters
in our model, the resulting model may vastly overstate the degree of price stickiness. Our
second concern is that since the BLS data set has no information on quantities, it leaves open
the possibility that almost all purchases are made when goods are on sale, so that the prices
when goods are not on sale, the regular prices, are essentially irrelevant. This possibility
might also imply that our exercise with BLS data, which is silent on the quantity facts,
vastly overstates the degree of price stickiness.
       The Dominick’s data set allows us to address both of these concerns. Since these data
are weekly (and since Dominick’s resets its prices only once a week), this data set does not
miss high-frequency movements in prices. Also, the quantity information in the Dominick’s
data set allows us to investigate whether the vast majority of purchases are made when a
good is on sale.

B. Model with Demand Shocks
       We have described the Dominick’s data set in detail earlier, so we begin this analysis
by describing our other extension: a modi…cation to our model to include a di¤erent kind of
shock, a demand shock.
       This extension is motivated by theory and data. The motivation from theory is that
a common explanation in the industrial organization literature for temporary price changes
is intertemporal price discrimination in response to time-varying price elasticities of demand.
In particular, the idea is that …rms willingly lower markups in periods during which a large
number of buyers of products happen to have high elasticities.
       The motivation from data to include a demand shock is based on two observations.
First, temporary price cuts are associated with reductions in price-cost margins. (See, for
example, the work of Chevalier, Kashyap, and Rossi (2003).) Second, as we have documented,
periods with temporary price cuts account for a disproportionately large fraction of goods


                                               31
sold. Taken together, these features suggest that, in the data, the demand elasticity that
…rms face is time-varying, and this feature leads …rms to have time-varying markups.
          Motivated by both theory and data, then, we introduce time-varying elasticities by
having consumers with di¤ering demand elasticities and by including good-speci…c shocks to
preferences. We assume the same preferences here as in the earlier model, so that utility is
still given by (2).
          Now our consumers belong to a two-member household. Speci…cally, each household
supplies labor as a single entity to the market, but now values consumption according to

                                                                         1
      c st =              (1            )1     c A st       c B st               ;


where cA (st ) and cB (st ) are composite goods given by

                          Z       1                1        1
          A       t
      c       s       =               cA
                                       i s
                                           t
                                                       di
                           0


                          Z       1                             1            1
                                               1
          B       t
      c       s       =               zi st        cA
                                                    i s
                                                        t
                                                                    di           :
                              0

Our interpretation of these preferences is that they represent a household with two members,
consumer A and consumer B; who jointly supply labor but have separate consumption bun-
dles. We suppose that consumer B has a higher elasticity of substitution across goods,     > .
Moreover, consumer B’s weight on the di¤erent goods, zi (st ) ; is a random variable. Note
that zi (st ) is speci…c to any particular good but common to all households. In this sense,
zi (st ) is a good-speci…c demand shock, i.i.d. across goods. We assume here, as earlier, that
zi (st ) is a Markov process (which we describe in detail below). This structure generates time-
varying elasticities of demand in a representative household environment. The general idea
of allowing for a type of heterogeneity while avoiding the complication of recording individual
state variables is similar to that of Lucas (1992).
          The household’s problem here is to choose how much consumption to allocate to each
consumer, as well as how much to invest, work, and purchase state-contingent securities
subject to the following budget constraint:


                                                                             32
       Z                                                                       "                                      #
              1                                                                                            2
                                                                                                 x (st )
                  Pi s t     cA  t   B
                              i s + ci s
                                         t
                                                             di + P F st           x st +                      k(st 1 )
          0                                                                                 2   k(st 1 )

                             X
       +M st +                      Q st+1 jst B st+1
                             st+1

       6 W st l st +                         st + M st           1
                                                                     + B st + R st k st ;

where P F (st ) is the price of the …nal good used for investment, and all other variables are as
de…ned in the earlier model.
          This problem yields the following consumer demand functions for the di¤erent varieties
of goods:

                                                                      1
                                 Pi (st )              P A (st )
(11) cA
      i s
          t
            =                                                             c st
                                 P A (st )              P (s)

                                                                                        1
                                                     Pi (st )             P B (st )
(12)   cB
        i         s   t
                          = (1      ) zi s   t
                                                                                            c st ;
                                                     P B (st )             P (s)
                                                                                        1
where the aggregate price index P (s) = P A (st ) P B (st )                                     and
          The producer of intermediate good i in this economy uses basically the same technology
as before:

                                                                           1
(13) yi (st ) = ai (st ) ki st                   li (st )1       m i st            :


One big di¤erence is that we eliminate the transitory productivity process and include only
the permanent component of the …rm’s productivity ai (st ) that, as earlier, evolves according
to (4).
          Consider, next, the …nal good …rms. These …rms are perfectly competitive and pur-
chase a continuum of intermediate goods from intermediate good …rms and sell a …nal good to
consumers (who use it as investment) and intermediate good …rms (that use it as materials).
The problem of a …nal good …rm is to choose the amount of each intermediate good qi (st ) to




                                                                          33
purchase in order to maximize
                                    Z    1
          F       t       t
      P           s q s                      Pi st qi st di
                                     0


subject to

                       Z      1               1        1
              t
(14) q s           =              qi st           di       ;
                          0


which yields the demand function

                       Pi (st )
(15) qi (st ) =                               q st :
                       P F (st )

Notice that, for simplicity, we have assumed that the elasticity of substitution for producing
the …nal good, , is the same as the elasticity of substitution for type A consumers.
       Now consider the intermediate good …rm’s problem. This type of …rm sells to type A
consumers, type B consumers, and …nal good …rms. The demand for the intermediate good
…rm’s goods is therefore given by


(16) cA   t     B  t       t
      i (s ) + ci s + qi (s );



where these functions are given by (11), (12), and (15).
       A useful feature of the resulting demand function is that it has time-varying elasticity.
Clearly, as the demand shock zi (st ) increases, so too does the relative demand for good i
coming from the high-elasticity (type B) consumers. Indeed, the total demand elasticity for
good i increases with zi (st ): A bit of algebra shows that this total demand elasticity increases
productivity, speci…cally with ai (st )                        and        > 0. Intuitively, then, we know that a
positive productivity shock leads the …rm to lower the price for its good and increases the
relative demand of the high-elasticity consumers.
       The assumptions about the technology of price adjustment are the same here as in the
earlier model. The problem of the intermediate good …rm is, too, except that its production
function is now given by (13) and the demand function is now given by (16).


                                                                     34
      The equilibrium de…nition for this economy is similar to that in our earlier model,
except that now the market-clearing condition for the …nal good is

                                               2                     Z       1
           t                x (st )                      t 1
(17) x s +                                         k s           +               mi st di = y st
                   2       k (st 1 )                                     0


and the market-clearing condition for each intermediate good is


(18) cA  t    B  t
      i s + c i s + qi s
                         t
                           = y i st :


Note, for later use, that real output (value-added) at base period prices can be written as
                                                                                           Z   1
       A       0   A   t         B     0   A       t         F       0                 t
     P (s )c (s ) + P (s )c (s ) + P                             s               y s               mi st di :
                                                                                           0


C. Quanti…cation and Prediction
      Now we have two variations of our model with temporary price changes, which we can
use to study the Dominick’s data. One variation, the productivity shocks model, is the model
we studied earlier with the BLS data; the other is the economy with transitory demand shocks
instead of transitory productivity shocks just described, the demand shocks model. We must
now parameterize both of these models in order to reproduce features of the Dominick’s data
before we can have them simulate responses to monetary shocks. In both models, we assume
that the length of a period is one week, the frequency with which the Dominick’s data are
sampled.
      In both models, we assign the same functional forms and parameters as earlier for the
production function, the rate at which capital depreciates, the rate at which …rms exit, and
                                                                                 1
so on. For example, we set                 =1               (1   0:01) 4 ; so that the monthly rate at which capital
                                                                             1
depreciates is 1%. We set              e   =1          (1    0:018) 4 ; so that 1.8% of …rms exit in any given month
(4 weeks). We adjust all other parameters, including the persistence and standard deviation
of money growth shocks, similarly. We calibrate the size of the capital adjustment costs to
again ensure that the standard deviation of investment relative to that of output is equal to
3, a number similar to that in the U.S. data. All of these parameters are reported in Table 4.
      The rest of the parameters are chosen so that the two models can closely reproduce

                                                                         35
the salient features of the Dominick’s data. We describe these separately for each model.

Productivity Shocks Model
       For the model with productivity shocks only, the key parameters are , the (menu)
cost the …rm incurs when changing its list price; , the cost of having a temporary deviation
from the list price; as well as the speci…cations of the transitory and permanent productivity
shocks. The moments we choose to pin down these parameters are the same moments we
used earlier with the BLS data. Here, we also ask the model to account for two quantity
facts: the fraction of goods that sold in periods of temporary price changes and the fraction
sold in periods with temporary price discounts. We compute these facts from the Dominick’s
data by applying an algorithm to that data set similar to the algorithm used with the BLS
data, in order to identify regular price changes.
       These values, as measured in the data and in the productivity shocks model, are nearly
identical. (See Table 5.) Recall that price changes are much more frequent in the Dominick’s
data than in the BLS data. The Dominick’s frequency of price changes is 33% per week (in
both the model and the data) compared to 22% per month in the BLS data. This higher
frequency of price changes re‡ects the much larger role that temporary price changes play
in grocery stores and at the weekly frequency: 94% of price changes are temporary in the
Dominick’s data (95% in the model). Notice also that regular price changes are much less
frequent here (2.9% per week in both the model and the data), an outcome of the fact that
most temporary price changes (80% in the data and 88% in the model) return to the old
regular price.
       Our productivity shocks model also reproduces well the other moments that describe
the pattern of low- and high-frequency price variation in the Dominick’s data. The fraction
of periods with temporary prices is high both in the model (24%) and in the data (25%),
and most of these are periods with temporary price discounts (20% in both the data and
the model). Although prices change very frequently, a substantial proportion of prices are
equal to the annual mode (58% in the data, 55% in the model). Deviations from the annual
mode are mostly downward (30% of prices are below the annual mode in both the model
and the data). Moreover, the model accounts well for the mean and dispersion of the size of


                                              36
price changes in the data. Notice that price changes are on average somewhat larger (17%
in absolute value in the model and in the data) than regular price changes (11% in both the
model and the data) and more dispersed.
       Notice, …nally, in the last two rows of Table 5, that this version of the productivity
shocks model does a good job of reproducing the quantity facts in the Dominick’s data. In
both the data and the model, periods with temporary price changes account for a dispropor-
tionate amount of goods sold. Even though prices are temporary 24% of the weeks in the
data and 25% of the time in the model, these periods account for 39% of the goods sold in
the data and 36%, in the model. Periods in which prices are temporarily below the regular
price account for the bulk of these sales: 35% of goods are sold during such episodes in the
model and 33% in the data. The reason the model does so well at reproducing these quantity
facts is that its demand elasticity ( = 3) is consistent with the price elasticities of demand
in the data.
       Again, Table 4 (panel A) reports the parameters that allow the productivity shocks
model to achieve this …t. Notice that now the cost of a regular price change (1.89% of the
…rm’s steady-state pro…ts) is roughly twice as high as the cost of temporarily deviating from
the list price (1.01% of the …rm’s steady-state pro…ts) and that both types of shocks are now
more frequent relative to those in the BLS experiments.

Demand Shocks Model
       For the model with demand shocks, we must choose the new parameters, those that
describe the new shocks.
       In this demand shock economy, the optimal markup of an intermediate good …rm is a
function za    : To reduce the dimensionality of the state-space, we assume that z~ = za
is a random variable that takes two values, z~t 2 f0; zg. (Essentially, this makes the z shock
correlated with a in a way that ensures that given z~t ; the optimal markup is not separately
a function of a.) Moreover, we normalize z = 1; since this parameter is not separately
identi…ed; it plays the same role as    ; the parameter determining the relative weight of




                                             37
consumers. Finally, we assume that the law of motion for z~t is given by
        2                 3
             1   h    h
        4                 5:
             1   s    s


Here,    h   is the probability that a …rm with z~t = 0 (a …rm that sells only to type A consumers)
will have z~t+1 = 1 next period (and thus sell to both types of consumers). Moreover,                  s   is a
parameter that governs the persistence of the high demand state.
        In addition to         h;   s;   we must also choose        ; the weight of type A (low-elasticity)
consumers, as well as           and , the demand elasticities of the two types of consumers. We
set     = 6; an upper bound of estimates of demand elasticity in the industrial organization
literature, and jointly choose ;            h;   s;   as well as the parameters determining the size of the
price adjustment costs and the evolution of permanent productivity shocks, in order to match
the size, frequency, and persistence of temporary price changes and the quantity facts in the
Dominick’s data set. The set of moments we use to parameterize the model with demand
shocks is thus the same as for the productivity shocks model.
        Returning to Table 5, we see that the model with demand shocks …ts the Dominick’s
data almost as well as does the productivity shocks model. Once again, this model reproduces
well the frequency of regular and all price changes and the size and dispersion of the two types
of price changes, as well as the fact that periods with temporary price changes account for a
disproportionate fraction of goods sold.
        Panel B of Table 4 lists the parameter values that produce this …t. Notice that the
weight on high-elasticity (type B) consumers, 1                     , is equal to 0.11, the value required to
account for the fact that as much as 39% of the output is sold in periods with temporary
price changes (which occur in the model mostly in states with z~t = 1; since this state is more
transitory). Moreover, a demand elasticity of                   = 2 for low-elasticity (type A) consumers is
necessary for the model to account for the average size of all price changes in the data of
17%.




                                                           38
D. The Degree of Aggregate Price Stickiness
       Finally, we study the degree of aggregate price stickiness in our Dominick’s models to
see whether our earlier results using BLS data are supported. We …nd that they are.
       We begin with the productivity shocks model, which simply uses our model and the
standard model with parameters chosen to mimic the Dominick data. We …rst shock money
growth in the models in the same way as in the models based on the BLS data: an innovation
that leads to an eventual increase of 5% in the money supply. We then calculate the degree
of aggregate price stickiness in our (reparameterized) model and …nd that a standard model
with a frequency of price changes of 6.2 months produces the same degree of aggregate price
stickiness as in our model. In panels A and B of Figure 9 and in Table 6, we display the
responses of prices and output in the two models.
       We get a similar result from the demand shocks model. Here, a standard model with
a frequency of price changes of 7.3 months produces the same degree of aggregate price
stickiness as does the demand shocks model. In panels A and B of Figure 10 and in Table 6,
we see that the responses of prices and output to a monetary shock are quite similar in the
two models.
       We thus conclude that the exact source of price changes (transitory demand or produc-
tivity shocks) does not matter much for our result: in both models, the degree of aggregate
price stickiness is fairly high— aggregate prices change only every 6 or 7 months— even though
micro prices in the Dominick’s data change much more frequently (every 3 weeks).
       These results are consistent with our earlier results using the BLS data. Since the
frequency of price changes in the Dominick’s data is much higher than in the BLS data (3
weeks vs. 4.5 months), we view this 6- to 7-month number as a conservative lower bound on
the degree of price stickiness in the economy as a whole. In this sense, as with the BLS data,
we conclude that prices are sticky after all.

5. Conclusion
       Standard New Keynesian models imply that if prices change frequently at the micro
level, then aggregate prices are not sticky. In the micro data, prices do change frequently,
but our models, which are consistent with the micro data, still imply that aggregate prices


                                                39
are sticky. How is this possible? The answer is that the one-to-one relationship between
the frequency of micro price changes and the degree of aggregate price stickiness breaks
down when there are two types of price changes, regular and temporary, as there are in
the data. Brie‡y, temporary price changes have two striking features that distinguish them
from regular changes: after a temporary change, prices tend to return to their pre-existing
levels, and temporary price changes are clustered in time. These features imply that even
though temporary price changes happen with high frequency, micro prices also have a type
of low-frequency price stickiness that generates stickiness in aggregate prices.




                                              40
6. Appendix: The Algorithm to Construct the Regular Price
       Here we describe, …rst intuitively and then precisely, our algorithm for constructing a
regular price series for each product in the data. We have applied this algorithm ourselves to
the Dominick’s data set and have asked Emi Nakamura and Jon Steinsson to apply it to the
BLS data set.
       Our algorithm is based on the idea that a price is a regular price if the store charges it
frequently in a window of time adjacent to that observation. We start by computing for each
period the mode of prices pM
                           t that occur in a window which includes prices in the previous

…ve periods, the current period, and the next …ve periods.6 Then, based on the modal price in
this window, we construct the regular price recursively as follows. For the initial period, set
the regular price equal to the modal price.7 For each subsequent period, if the store charges
the modal price in that period, and at least one-third of prices in the window are equal to the
modal price; then set the regular price equal to the modal price. Otherwise, set the regular
price equal to the preceding period’s regular price.
       We want to eliminate regular price changes that occur when the store’s posted price
does not change, but only if the posted and regular prices coincide in the period before or
after the regular price change. To do that, if the initial algorithm generates a path for regular
prices in which a change in the regular price occurs without a corresponding change in the
actual price, then we replace the last period’s regular price with the current period’s actual
price for each period in which the regular and actual prices coincide. Similarly, we replace
the current period’s regular price with the last period’s actual price if the two have coincided
in the previous period.
       Now we provide the precise algorithm we use to compute the regular price and describe
how we apply it.

  1. Choose parameters: l = 2 (= lag, or size of the window: the number of months before
      or after the current period used to compute the modal price. For the Dominick’s data,
      we set l = 5 weeks), c = 1=3 (= cuto¤ used to determine whether a price is temporary),
      a = :5 (= the number of periods in the window with the available price required in
      order to compute a modal price).
      We apply the algorithm below for each good separately:

                                               41
   Let pt be the price in period t; T; the length of the price series.

2. For each time period t 2 (1 + l; T        l);

        If the number of periods with available data in (t            l; :::; t + l) is   2al; then

          – Let pM
                 t = mode(pt l ; :::; pt+l ):

          – Let ft = the fraction of periods (with available data) in this window subject
            to pt = pM
                     t :

        Else, set ft ; pM
                        t = 0 (missing data).


3. De…ne the regular price in period t, pR
                                         t , using the following recursive algorithm:


        If pM                   R      M
            1+l 6= 0; then set p1+l = p1+l (initial value).

        Else, set pR
                   1+l = p1+l for t = 2 + l; :::; T:

          – If (pM                       M              R    M
                 t 6= 0 & ft > c & pt = pt ); then set pt = pt :

          – Else, set pR    R
                       t = pt 1 :


4. Repeat the following algorithm …ve times:

        Let R = ft : pR     R      R           R
                      t 6= pt 1 & pt 1 6= 0 & pt 6= 0g be the set of periods with regular

        price changes.

        Let C = ft : pR         R
                      t = pt & pt 6= 0 & pt 6= 0g be the set of periods in which a store

        charges the regular price.

        Let P = ft : pR
                      t 1 = pt     1   & pR
                                          t 1 6= 0 & pt   1   6= 0g be the set of periods in which a
        store’s last period price was the regular price.

        Set pR
             fR\Cg   1   = pfR\Cg : Set pR
                                         fR\Pg = pfR\Pg 1 :




                                                   42
                                                  Notes

      1
          We de…ne the regular price series precisely using an algorithm described in detail in
the appendix. Loosely speaking, the regular price series is a type of running mode of the
original prices, and the temporary prices are simply deviations from that running mode.
      2
          These explanations include, for example, search frictions (Butters 1977, Varian 1980,
Burdett and Judd 1983), demand uncertainty (Lazear 1986), thick-market externalities (Warner
and Barsky 1995), loss-leader models of advertising (Chevalier, Kashyap, and Rossi 2003),
and intertemporal price discrimination (Sobel 1984).
      3
          Note that this duration of 14.5 months is higher than the corresponding 8–11 month
number of Nakamura and Steinsson (2008), primarily because our algorithm takes out tem-
porary price increases as well as temporary price decreases, or sales, that Nakamura and
Steinsson focus on. Even though temporary price cuts account for most of the temporary
price changes, the number of price increases is large enough relative to the number of regular
price changes to in‡uence the resulting frequency.
      4
          Speci…cally, Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (2005) specify an interest rate rule in
their empirical work as Rt = f (       t)   + "t ; where Rt is the short-term nominal rate,    t   is an
information set, and "t is the monetary policy shock. They interpret the monetary authority
as adjusting the growth rate of money so as to implement this rule. They then identify the
process for money growth in their vector autoregression (VAR) which is consistent with this
interest rate rule. That process is well-approximated by an AR(1) similar to the one we use.
      5
          The results we report here use a new measure of shocks due to Romer and Romer
(2004), which is available for 1969–96. We have also used the measure of Christiano, Eichen-
baum, and Evans (2005) and get very similar results.
      6
          We do this calculation only if at least one-half of the prices in this window are available.
      7
          If in the window around this price more than half of the data is missing, then we set
the initial reference price equal to the actual price.




                                                    43
References
      Basu, Susanto. 1995. Intermediate goods and business cycles: Implications for pro-
ductivity and welfare. American Economic Review 85 (3, June): 512–31.
      Bils, Mark, and Peter J. Klenow. 2004. Some evidence on the importance of sticky
prices. Journal of Political Economy 112 (5, October): 947–85.
      Burdett, Kenneth, and Kenneth L. Judd. 1983. Equilibrium price dispersion. Econo-
metrica 51 (4, July): 955–69.
      Butters, Gerard R. 1977. Equilibrium distributions of sales and advertising prices.
Review of Economic Studies 44 (3, October): 465–91.
      Chari, V. V., Patrick J. Kehoe, and Ellen R. McGrattan. 2000. Sticky price models of
the business cycle: Can the contract multiplier solve the persistence problem? Econometrica
68 (5, September): 1151–79.
      Chevalier, Judith A., Anil K. Kashyap, and Peter E. Rossi. 2003. Why don’t prices
rise during periods of peak demand? Evidence from scanner data. American Economic
Review 93 (1, March): 15–37.
      Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles L. Evans. 2005. Nominal
rigidities and the dynamic e¤ects of a shock to monetary policy. Journal of Political Economy
113 (1, February): 1–45.
      Eichenbaum, Martin S., Nir Jaimovich, and Sergio Rebelo. Forthcoming. Reference
prices, costs, and nominal rigidities. American Economic Review.
      Gertler, Mark, and John Leahy. 2008. A Phillips curve with an Ss foundation. Journal
of Political Economy 116 (3, June): 533–72.
      Golosov, Mikhail, and Robert E. Lucas, Jr. 2007. Menu costs and Phillips curves.
Journal of Political Economy 115 (2, April): 171–99.
      Guimarães, Bernardo, and Kevin D. Sheedy. Forthcoming. Sales and monetary policy.
American Economic Review.
      Hoch, Stephen J., Xavier Drèze, and Mary E. Purk. 1994. EDLP, hi-lo, and margin
arithmetic. Journal of Marketing 58 (October): 16–27.
      Hosken, Daniel, and Daniel Rei¤en. 2004. Patterns of retail price variation. Rand
Journal of Economics 35 (1, Spring): 128–46.


                                              44
      Lazear, Edward P. 1986. Retail pricing and clearance sales. American Economic
Review 76 (1, March): 14–32.
      Lucas, Robert E., Jr. 1992. On e¢ ciency and distribution. Economic Journal 102
(411, March): 233–47.
      Midrigan, Virgiliu. 2007. Menu costs, multi-product …rms, and aggregate ‡uctuations.
Working Paper 2007/13, Center for Financial Studies, University of Frankfort.
      Nakamura, Emi, and Jón Steinsson. 2008. Five facts about prices: A reevaluation of
menu cost models. Quarterly Journal of Economics 123 (4, November): 1415–64.
      Nakamura, Emi, and Jón Steinsson. Forthcoming. Monetary non-neutrality in a
multi-sector menu cost model. Quarterly Journal of Economics.
      Nevo, Aviv. 1997. Measuring market power using discrete choice models of demand:
An application to the ready-to-eat cereal industry. Mimeo, Univ. of Massachusetts.
      Peltzman, Sam. 2000. Prices rise faster than they fall. Journal of Political Economy
108 (3, June): 466–502.
      Romer, Christina D., and David H. Romer. 2004. A new measure of monetary shocks:
Derivation and implications. American Economic Review 94 (4, September): 1055–84.
      Rotemberg, Julio J. Forthcoming. Fair pricing. Journal of the European Economic
Association.
      Sobel, Joel. 1984. The timing of sales. Review of Economic Studies 51 (3, July):
353–68.
      Varian, Hal R. 1980. A model of sales. American Economic Review 70 (4, September):
651–59.
      Warner, Elizabeth J., and Robert Barsky. 1995. The timing and magnitude of retail
store markdowns: Evidence from weekends and holidays. Quarterly Journal of Economics
110 (2, May): 321–52.
      Zbaracki, Mark J., Mark Ritson, Daniel Levy, Shantanu Dutta, and Mark Bergen.
2004. Managerial and customer costs of price adjustment: Direct evidence from industrial
markets. Review of Economics and Statistics 86 (2): 514–33.
      Zbaracki, Mark J., Mark Bergen, and Daniel Levy. 2007. The anatomy of a price cut:
Discovering the organizational sources of the costs of price adjustment. Mimeo. Univ.W.O.


                                            45
                       Table 1: Facts about price changes from two data sets



                                                       BLS                     Dominick's

Statistic                                             monthly         weekly                monthly



Frequency of all price changes, %                       22              33                    36
Frequency of regular price changes, %                   6.9             2.9                  10.6

Fraction of price changes that are temporary, %         72              94                    88
Fraction of returns to old regular price, %             50              80                    66
Probability that temporary price spell ends, %          53              46                    67

Fraction of periods with temp. prices, %                10              24                    22
Fraction of periods with price temp. down, %             6              20                    15

Fraction of prices at annual mode, %                    75              58                    67
Fraction of prices below annual mode, %                 13              30                    23

Fraction of output sold when temp prices, %             n.a.            39                    40
Fraction of output sold when price temp. down, %        n.a.            35                    35



n.a. = not available
                               Table 2: Parameterization of Economy with Temporary Price Changes



                                        A. Moments                                   B. Parameter Values



                                                  BLS Data   Model                          Calibrated

                                                                     Menu cost of regular price change, κ, % SS profits    0.81
Frequency of all price changes, %                    22       22     Cost of temp. price deviation, φ, % SS profits        0.68
Frequency of regular price changes, %                6.9      6.9
                                                                     Arrival rate of permanent shock, λa                   0.078
Fraction of price changes that are temporary, %      72       76     Upper bound of permanent shock, ν_bar                 0.184
Fraction of returns to old regular price, %          50       70
Probability that temporary price spell ends, %       53       54     Size of transitory cost shock, z_bar                  0.143
                                                                     Probability of return to medium state, 1-ρs           0.480
Fraction of periods with temp. prices, %             10       11     Probability of entering low state, ρl                 0.026
Fraction of periods with price temp. down, %         6         6     Probability of entering high state, ρh                0.038

Fraction of prices at annual mode, %                 75       73                            Assigned
Fraction of prices below annual mode, %              13       17
                                                                     Period length                                        1 month
Mean size of price changes, %                        11       11     Probability of exit                                    0.018
Mean size of regular price changes, %                11       11     Annual discount factor                                  0.96
                                                                     AR(1) growth rate of M                                  0.61
IQR of all price changes, %                          9         9     S.D. of shocks to growth rate of M, %                  0.18
IQR of regular price changes, %                      8         8     Elasticity of substitution                                3



IQR = interquartile range
                                   Table 3: Impulse responses to monetary shock

                                                                        A. Original BLS Economies


                                                            Our model:                           Standard model:
Statistic
                                                      With temporary changes                Without temporary changes


Micro price stickiness, months                                   4.5                                   11.8

Aggregate price stickiness, %                                    40.2                                  40.2

Average output response, %                                       3.01                                  3.01

Half-life of output response, months                             8.3                                    7.9




                                                     B. BLS Economies with no strategic complementarities


                                                            Our model:                           Standard model:
Statistic
                                                      With temporary changes                Without temporary changes


Micro price stickiness, months                                   4.5                                   11.8

Aggregate price stickiness, %                                    20.3                                  20.3

Average output response, %                                       0.95                                  0.95

Half-life of output response, months                             19.7                                  18.9


Note: The table reports the impulse response to a cumulative 5% increase in the money stock.
      Aggregate price stickiness is measured as the average difference between M and P responses, relative to the M response.
       Responses are computed for the first 2 years after the shock.
                                   Table 4: Parameter values for models using Dominick's data


                A. Productivity shocks                                                 B. Demand shocks



            Calibrated                                                          Calibrated

Cost of regular price change, % SS profits    1.89                  Menu cost of regular price change, % SS profits    1.73
Cost of temp. price change, % SS profits      1.01                  Cost of temp. price deviation, % SS profits        0.86

Arrival rate of permanent shock               0.043                 Arrival rate of permanent shock                   0.045
Upper bound of permanent shock                0.110                 Upper bound of permanent shock                    0.130

Size of transitory cost shock                 0.235                 Weight of type B consumers                        0.110
Probability of returns to median state        0.450                 Probability of returning to 0 demand state        0.450
Probability of entering low state             0.030                 Probability of entering 1 demand state            0.147
Probability of entering high state            0.125                 Demand elasticity of type A consumers             2.000

             Assigned                                                            Assigned

Period length                                1 week                 Period length                                     1 week
Probability of exit                          0.0045                 Probability of exit                               0.0045
Annual discount factor                         0.96                 Annual discount factor                              0.96
AR(1) growth rate of M                         0.88                 AR(1) growth rate of M                              0.88
S.D. of shocks to growth rate of M, %         0.032                 S.D. of shocks to growth rate of M, %              0.032
Elasticity of substitution                       3                  Elasticity substitution of type B agents              6
                          Table 5: Moments in economies using Dominick's weekly data

                                                                            Model


Statistic                                          Data   Productivity shocks       Demand shocks


Frequency of all price changes, %                  33             33                     33
Frequency of regular price changes, %              2.9            2.9                    2.9
Fraction of price changes that are temporary, %    94             95                     95
Fraction of returns to regular price, %            80             88                     88
Probability that temporary price spell ends, %     46             46                     46

Fraction of periods with temp. prices, %            24            25                     25
Fraction of periods when price temp. down, %        20            20                     24

Fraction of prices at annual mode, %                58            55                     56
Fraction of prices below annual mode, %             30            30                     34

Mean size of price changes, %                       17            17                     17
Mean size of regular price changes, %               11            11                     11

IQR of price changes, %                             15            18                     19
IQR of regular price changes, %                     8             6                      5

Fraction of output sold when temp. prices, %        39            36                     39
Fraction of output sold when price temp. down, %    35            33                     38
                                       Table 6: Impulse responses to monetary shock using Dominick's data




                                                              Productivity shocks                                     Demand shocks




                                                      Our model:            Standard model:               Our model:             Standard model:
Statistic
                                                     With temporary        Without temporary             With temporary         Without temporary
                                                        changes                 changes                     changes                  changes


Micro price stickiness, months                              0.7                    6.2                         0.7                     7.3

Aggregate price stickiness, %                              18.4                    18.4                        22.5                   22.5

Average output response, %                                 1.60                    1.62                        1.82                   1.88

Half-life of output response, months                        3.9                    3.4                         5.2                     4.0




Note: The table reports the impulse response to a cumulative 5% increase in the money stock.
      Aggregate price stickiness is measured as the average difference between M and P responses, relative to the M response.
       Responses are computed for the first 2 years after the shock.
                             Figure 1: Example of individual good price series
                                          (VT Bath Tissue, 2 ply)
        1.4
                                                                                 Actual price
                                                                                 Regular price
        1.3



        1.2



        1.1
price




         1



        0.9



        0.8



        0.7



         100                               150                  200                          250
                                                   week
  Source: Dominick's Finer Food Database
                  Figure 2: Examples of algorithm applied to price series in the Dominick's data

                          A. Angel Soft Bath Tissue, 4 ply                                        B. Green apple Bath Soap
            0.6                                                                       3


        0.55
                                                                                     2.5

            0.5
price




                                                                             price
                                                                                      2
        0.45

                                                                                     1.5
            0.4


        0.35                                                                          1
            0          20        40          60        80     100                     100   120        140           160     180   200
                                      week                                                                    week
                                                                    Actual price
                                                                    Regular price

                                                                                                        D. Sprite, 24/12
                      C. Omega II Laundry Detergent, 25 lb
            10                                                                       1.3

                                                                                     1.2
             9
                                                                                     1.1
             8
                                                                                      1
                                                                             price
    price




             7                                                                       0.9

             6                                                                       0.8

                                                                                     0.7
             5

                     40        60        80        100       120                      200   220         240          260     280   300
                                      week                                                                    week
            Figure 3: Firm's optimal decision rules in economy with temporary changes


          0.1
                  N



        0.05      L
pL,-1




           0
                      T
                                                     pL(z), pT(z)



        -0.05




         -0.1


          -0.15       -0.1        -0.05         0           0.05       0.1        0.15
                                               z
                                              Figure 4: Simulation of prices and shocks
                                  A. Shocks                                         B. Posted and list prices
               0.2                                                         0.2
                                                           Permanent
                                                           Transitory
               0.1                                                    0.1
                                                           Money
productivity




                                                                  prices
                 0                                                           0


               -0.1                                                        -0.1
                                                                                   Posted
                                                                                   List
               -0.2                                                        -0.2
                   0      20          40        60         80                  0    20       40          60         80
                                      month                                                  month

                       C. Posted and frictionless prices                            D. List and regular prices
               0.2                                                         0.2
                                                                                                              List
                                                                                                              Regular
               0.1                                                         0.1
                                                                  prices
prices




                 0                                                           0


               -0.1                                                        -0.1
                       Posted
                       Frictionless
               -0.2                                                        -0.2
                   0      20          40        60         80                  0    20        40         60         80
                                      month                                                  prices
                                                  Figure 5: Relationship between high- and low-frequency
                                                                  stickiness in standard model.

                                     A. Stickiness of regular prices, months                                         B. Fraction of prices at annual mode
                               16                                                                            0.85
                                         Data and Benchmark Model
                               15
                                                                                                              0.8    Data and Benchmark Model
                               14

                               13
stickiness of regular prices




                                                                                                             0.75




                                                                                   fraction at annual mode
                               12

                               11                                                                             0.7

                               10
                                                                                                             0.65
                                9                          Standard Model
                                                                                                                                       Standard Model
                                8
                                                                                                              0.6
                                7

                                6                                                                            0.55
                                 4       6          8       10        12      14                                 4     6         8        10        12      14
                                             micro price stickiness, months                                                micro price stickiness, months
                                      Figure 6: Impulse responses to a monetary shock of 5% in our model




                                            A. Nominal variables                       B. Output and consumption
                                 6                                                7
                                                                                                           Consumption
                                                                                                           Output
                                                                                  6
                                 5
% deviations from steady state




                                                                                  5
                                 4

                                                                                  4
                                 3
                                                                                  3

                                 2
                                                             Money                2
                                                             Price level
                                 1                           Marginal cost
                                                                                  1


                                 0                                                0
                                  0     5     10         15        20        25    0   5     10         15      20       25
                                            months after shock                             months after shock
                                      Figure 7: Aggregate price stickiness vs. Micro price stickiness
                                50
                                                                                            Regular price approach

                                          Our
                                45
                                          model

                                      B                                             C
                                40
Aggregate price stickiness, %




                                35



                                30
                                                                   Standard model

                                25



                                20
                                      A   4.5 months                                    11.8 months

                                15
                                  4           6           8              10            12             14         16
                                                          micro price stickiness, months
                                                Figure 8: Impulse responses in our model and
                                              in the standard model with 11.8-month stickiness


                                            Prices                                                                       Output
                                 6                                                                         8
                                                     Money supply
                                                                                                                                       Our model
                                                     Our model
                                                                                                                                       Standard model
                                                     Standard model                                        7
                                 5

                                                                                                           6
% deviations from steady state




                                                                           % deviation from steady state
                                 4
                                                                                                           5


                                 3                                                                         4


                                                                                                           3
                                 2

                                                                                                           2

                                 1
                                                                                                           1


                                 0                                                                         0
                                  0   5   10      15        20        25                                    0   5   10            15        20          25
                                            months                                                                       months
                                                  Figure 9: Impulse responses to a monetary shock
                                              in economy with productivity shocks using Dominick's data


                                                  A. Prices                                                                        B. Output
                                6                                                                                    8
                                                                                                                                   Standard with 6.2-month stickiness
                                                                                                                     7             Our model
                                5

                                                                                                                     6
% deviation from steady state




                                                                                     % deviation from steady state
                                4
                                                                                                                     5


                                3                                                                                    4


                                                                                                                     3
                                2
                                          Money
                                          Standard with 6.2-month stickiness                                         2
                                          Our model
                                1
                                                                                                                     1


                                0                                                                                    0
                                 0   20       40         60           80       100                                    0   20     40         60          80         100
                                            weeks after shock                                                                  weeks after shock
                                                  Figure 10: Impulse responses to a monetary shock
                                                in economy with demand shocks using Dominick's data

                                              A. Prices                                                                          B. Output
                                6                                                                                  8
                                                                                                                                 Our model
                                                                                                                                 Standard with 7.3-month stickiness
                                                                                                                   7
                                5

                                                                                                                   6
% deviation from steady state




                                                                                   % deviation from steady state
                                4
                                                                                                                   5


                                3                                                                                  4


                                              Money                                                                3
                                              Our model
                                2
                                              Standard with 7.3-month stickiness
                                                                                                                   2

                                1
                                                                                                                   1


                                0                                                                                  0
                                 0   20     40         60         80        100                                     0   20     40         60          80         100
                                          weeks after shock                                                                  weeks after shock
