                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               THE DOLLAR AND THE POLICY MIX: 1985




                         Jeffrey D. Sachs



                      Working Paper No. 1636




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                            June 1985




For presentation at the Brookings Panel meeting on April      1985.
This work is based on an on—going project of the author with Glues
Oudiz and Warwick McKibbin. I thank Warwick MicKibbin for
unflagging efforts in the face of tight deadlines, and for useful
comments throughout. I also thank Wing Woo for helpful discussion,
and for providing some of the data used in the empirical analysis.
The research reported here is part of the NBERts research programs
in Economic Fluctuations and International Studies and projects in
Government Budget and Productivity and Industrial Change in the
World Economy. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                               NBER Working Paper #1636
                                               June 1985




                 The Dollar and the Policy Mix; 1985



                                  ABSTRACT




     In   19T1, Robert Mundell proposed a stunning solution to the three problems

then affecting the U.S. econonr: high inflation and unemployment, and a weak

currency. Mundell suggested that the policy mix of fiscal expansion and mone-

tary contraction could work to raise output, reduce inflation, and strengthen

the currency at the same time. This policy mix has been pursued under the

Reagan administration since 1981. The paper investigates the contributions of

this policy mix to disinflation and output growth. It finds that the policy mix

has contributed as much as three percentage points of the reduction in inflation

during l981_8I, but that the gains against inflation due to the mix will likely

be lost, or more than lost, in the future.




                                                  Jeffrey D. Sachs
                                                  National Bureau of
                                                  Economic Research
                                                  1050 Massachusetts Ave.
                                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                      THE DOLLAR AND THE POLICY MIX: 1985


     In 1971, Robert Mundell proposed a stunning solution to the three

problems then affecting the United States economy: high inflation and

unemployment (by the standards of 1971!), and a weak currency. His essay

"The Dollar and the Policy Mix: 1971", from which I borrow my own title,

called for a policy of fiscal expansion and monetary contraction. Mundell

argued that this policy mix, which has more recently been derided as driving

with one foot on the brakes and one on the gas, is able to extract the

comparative advantage of the two instruments. In Mundell's view (formalized

in his famous "assignment problem" for policy instruments), fiscal policy

has a comparatively larger effect on output than on prices, compared with

monetary policy. Therefore, fiscal policy should be "assigned" to the

output target, and monetary policy should be assigned to the price level

target. Ostensibly, the policy mix of fiscal expansion and monetary

contraction can work to raise output and cut prices (or at least slow

inflation) at the same time. And both sides of the mix, asserted Mundell,

would act to strengthen the currency, by raising interest rates and drawing

in foreign capital. In 1971, it should be remembered, the dollar was tied

to other currencies through fixed exchange rates and was under strong

downward pressure, which eventually forced a devaluation in mid—year.

     Perhaps the most surprising assertion of the 1971 essay at the time was the

notion that fiscal expansion could strengthen the currency. After all, the
                                          —2--.




rates was a fiscal contraction, not expansion. Mundeli's own earlier work had

turned   this   idea upside down, at least as a short—run proposition. In his

famous essay "The Appropriate Use of Monetary and Fiscal Policy for Internal and

External Stability" (1962), Mundell pointed out that in a world of high capital

mobility, a fiscal expansion would raise home interest rates, and pull in more

than enough capital at the initial exchange rate to finance the current account

deficit caused by the fiscal expansion.3 Under fixed exchange rates the central

bank would gain foreign reserves, while under flexihie rates the currency would

appreciate. In Mundell's ndel, the traditional argument that fiscal expansion

weakens the currency in the short—run is correct only if at least one of the

following conditions holds: either there is low international capital mobility

or the fiscal expansion is money financed (in thich case the currency tends to

weaken even with high capital mDbility). Of course, Mundell's argument that

fiscal expansion would strengthen the currency has become commonplace in the

United   States in the policy debate of the past two years. It is still regarded
as dubious, however, by most European economists when applied to the effects of
fiscal expansion in their own economies.
       Mundell's policy advice was not pursued in 1911 or 1912, since the Fed
embarked   on   one of the n-cst agressively expansionary policy episodes in its
history. In the event the dollar was battered, losing 19% in value relative

to a basket     of currencies between July 1911 and March l9T3.' In the   last

four   years, however, Mundell's experiment has been tried, and with a
stronger   dose of fiscal expansion cum monetary restraint than he himself

probably envisioned. Since 1981, the Reagan Administration has pursued a
                                         —3—


course of large budget deficits, while the Federal Reserve Board has maintained

a   path of   generally declining money growth rates. The macroeconomic results

have in many ways been in accord with Mundell's analysis: a sharp rise in the

dollar, apparently caused by a capital inflow attracted to high U.S. interest

rates; a sharp drop in inflation; and an average rate of growth during l98l_81,

composed of a sharp recession in 1982, followed by a vigorous recovery. A major

side effect of the policy mix has been the worsening of the U.S. trade and

current account positions, with both measures of external deficits reaching a

proportion of GNP unprecedented in this century for the United States.

      This paper asks the following question: Has the macroeconomic

performance since 1981 vindicated the Mundell—Reagan mix of fiscal expansion

cum nDnetary contraction? And if so, what then are the implication for the

appropriate path of budget deficit reductions and rnetary policy in the

coming   years? The n.jor question to be asked is   whether the policy mix has

reduced   the   "sacrifice ratio", measured as the amount of GNP losses incurred in

order to reduce the inflation that the Reagan administration inherited in 1981.

To answer this question, I will look at the disinflation to date, as well as the

future prospects for inflation (especially in view of the likelihood of a dollar

depreciation).

      My own analysis of the policy mix will stress the differential effects of

monetary and fiscal policy on the value of the dollar, and thus on iurported

inflation. It is important to note, though, that there are many others reasons

wby monetary and fiscal policies might have different effects on inflation and

output that would justify the use of a particular    policy mix. Mundell,   in fact,
                                        — it—




had   additional mechanisms in mind in 1911, some in line with today's supply—
siders. He suggests that tax cuts stimulate output and reduce prices by
increasing   aggregate supply relative to aggregate demand. (He also argues that

money is, at best, neutral with respect to output except in the very   short   run;

at worst, a money expansion may be contractionary, Mundell argued, because of

non—neutralities in the tax system.) Thus the mechanism that I will stress is

based more on Mundell vintage 1962 than Mundell vintage 1911. There are other

mechanisms as well, ignored henceforth, that might argue in favor of the

Mundellian assignment of fiscal expansion cum monetary contraction in the pro-

cess of disinflation.5 All of the arguments in favor of a particular mix for

disinflation stand in contrast to the textbook case in which output levels and

past inflation alone determine current inflation. In those models, any mix of

monetary and fiscal policy that yields a given output level also has the same

inflationary consequences. Tobin   has labelled such nDdels as "funnel models,"
since   the macro policies are funneled into output without any direct or

differential effects on prices.

      In view of the stress on exchange rates, the following questions are

examined:

            (1) Has the strong dollar contributed to the disinflation, taking as

      given the overall level of GNP or unemployment in the econoirr, and if so,

      by a quantitatively important amount?

            (2) Can the policy mix plausibly explain the movements in the value

      of the currency?

            (3) Do expected future nvements in the value of the dollar (to—wit,
                                                —5—


       a large real depreciation to reverse the appreciation of the past four

       years) threaten to undo the benefits so far achieved via a strong dollar?

               (li) In view of expected future movements in value of the dollar,

       does the policy mix viewed from beginning to "end" (i.e. if and when the

       dollar     falls) make   sense as an anti—inflationary strategy?

              (5) Are the     side—effects on   the U.S. economy of the strong dollar (e.g.

       the   squeeze on tradeables, the rise in U.S.        foreign indebtedness) too

       costly     to justify the choice of policy mix?
              (6)   Are   U.S. gains from the policy mix balanced by losses in the rest
       of   the   world, so that the policies     are in   fact beggar—thy—neighbor?
       Questions     (3) and (n),   about the longer—term aspects of the policy mix, are

especially important in view of the fact that Mundell's arguments were based on

short—run     models that do not make allowance for the long—term effects of current

account      deficits and    budget deficits. Notably, Mundell's canonical model of

fiscal expansion under flexible rates allows for an "equilibrium" in which a

country     has an appreciated exchange rate and a current account deficit forever.
More recent de1s have shown that when the short—run effects of fiscal poiicy
include a currency appreciation, the long—term effects typically involve
depreciation.6 The weaker long—run value of the currency helps to generate a
trade account surplus that is used, in the long run,            to service the external

debt   accumulated in the period of currency appreciation. Given that the
benefits     of the strong      dollar may be lost over time, does the strategy make
sense when viewed over a reasonably long time horizon?
       To be clear about purposes, one disclaimer should be made at the
                                          —6—




outset.    Though I will analyze the U.S. policy mix from the point of view of

dynamic   policy    optimization, I do not want to pretend that the mix has been

designed primarily (or at all) with the exchange rate arguments in mind.

Indeed, the notion of inexpensive disinflation through currency appreciation

was rarely, if ever, explicitly stated in 1931 as an argument on behalf of the

Reagan tax cuts (though more recently the President has explicitly defended the

strong    dollar on these grounds). Supply—side advocates often rejected the
demand—stimulus arguments that form     the   basis of many   of   my later results.
My own view   of the "design" of the policy mix is more Darwinian. Tax—cut
advocates did      explicitly endorse the argument that a debt—financed fiscal

expansion need not be inflationary, but they probably did not anticipate the

enormous currency appreciation, and its anti—inflationary benefits, that would

follow from the policy. However, once the non—inflationary recovery got

underway, the short—term success of the policy mix became evident, and the

pressure to expand money or to contract the budget deficits was eliminated.

Even if the policymakers fell on to a desirable path accidently, the staying

power of the strater has resulted, at least, from the short—term (if not

long—term) benefits that it is yielding.

    The p'ain result of the paper is that the Mundell policy—mix reduces the

sacrifice ratio in the short run, but increases it in the long run. In the

U.S., the exchange appreciation has reduced U.S. inflation ly as much as three

percentage points as of l984. Given the strong likelihood of a depreciation of

the dollar, those inflation gains will.likely be lost, or more than lost, in the

future. Because of the foreign debt that the U.S. economy will accumulate in
                                             —T —




coming years, the eventual decline of the dollar, in real               terms, will likely
exceed   the   appreciation since 1980. As I discuss later, the welfare calculus

suggests that choosing a low sacrifice ratio          in    the short—term      for   a higher

long—run sacrifice ratio makes sense when there is a perceived need for a rapid

reduction of a high initial inflation, i.e. when inflation has rapidly rising

marginal social costs.

       The paper   is   organized in four sections. In the first, the pattern of'

dollar   appreciation is examined, and some estimates of its disinflationary

consequences    are made.       In the second section, the prospects for future

movements   In the doflar are studied, as       are projections of          future    inflationary

consequences from dollar depreciation. In the third section, a medium—scale

structural     model is   used to assess the linkages between movements of              the
dollar   and the   underlying policy mix. In that          section,   I examine the

arguments for and       against   the Mundellian strate,r from        the   point of view of

dynamic   policy optimization, first from the       narrow U.S.       point    of view, and then

from   world   econonr as a whole. In the fourth section, some of the risks in the

current situation are studied, particularly appropriate policy response to a

sharp depreciation of the dollar.



The Value of the Dollar and the Disinflation Process


       Figure 1 and     Table   1 document the remarkable movements in the value of

the   dollar in the past eight years. To        interpret the data, note the following
conventions for    exchange rates that are     used   here and throughout the paper. The
                  Table 1: Appreciation of the Dollar, 1977—198)4


                                            Nominal                 Real
Extent of Appreciation
to 198)4:14, since:                 1911:1       1980:14    1911:1     1980:14




Effective Rate                          314.14    50.0       28.8          378a

Countries

— Canada                                32.9      ll.4       16.0           1.5

— France                                87.8     111.8       50.0          51.8

— Germany                               26.8      59.7       51.3          50.2

— Italy                             ll4.2        ioR.6       329a          1429a

— Japan                             —16.2         16.8       12.6          29.3

— United Kingdom                        35.8      96.2        38a          585a


a198)4:3 is the period of comparison.

Source: All data are from the IFS. The data are averages for the quarter. The
         effective nominal rate is the MERE index. The effective real rate is
        the I'W measure of relative wholesale prices. The real bilateral rate
         is PE/P*, where P, P are WPI in the U.S. and abroad, E is units of
         foreign currency per dollar. S
                                           IJ!L1.J


       €i      •   •6   I.   L6   I.                 6L6   L

       .J..,

                                                                              —




                                                                                           1.




                                                                                      U

                                                                              —
                                                                                  U   I    I


                                                                              —
                                                                                  c   L.   I.




                                                                              —
                                                                                  U        L




                                                                              -   ';' I
                                                                              —
                                                                                  oc       I.



                                                                              -   '.       I


r:'j                         _,IL1) IEi)(IIi   ;i?L.Li         1.   iJtIL:j
                                             —8—




dollar   is measured    in   terms of the number of units of foreign currency that it

purchases (a rise in the index therefore indicates appreciation). "Effective"

rates indicate dollar values relative to a basket of currencies. "Real" exchange

rates are nominal rates multiplied by a U.S. price index and divided by a

comparable effective foreign price index. The real exchange rate may be thought

of as the price of U.S. goods relative to foreign goods, with both expressed in

a   coimnon currency. A      rise in U.S.   relative   prices is termed a real

appreciation    of   the dollar. As can be seen, the nominal effective exchange rate

appreciated by about 31t percent from 1917:1       to    l984:4, and by 50   percent from
l980:I   to l98)4:4, using the IMF's MERM—weighted effective exchange rate for the

U.S. dollar. The last quarter of 1980 will be             the   starting point for most of

the analysis, since it marks the coming to power of the Reagan Administration,

and the beginning of the Mundelliari policy shift. In real terms, the

appreciation has been as dramatic, with increases during l980:4—84:3 of about 38

percent   when measured by wholesale prices, 148        percent then measured by relative
unit labor costs, and 39         percent when measured by relative consumer price
indexes. (There has been another 10—15 percent real appreciation through April

1985, but the IMF      indices   are not yet available after l984:3.) Table 1 also

shows the changes relative to the major currencies. Note the sharp real

appreciation relative to European currencies and the smaller appreciation

relative to the Japanese Yen. In fact, the Yen itself has appreciated relative

to a basket of currencies since l980:4, a point that is sometimes ignored in

assertions that the Japanese authorities have unfairly caused a Yen

depreciation.
                                         —9—



        The upward movement in the dollar began almost precisely upon Reagan's

election victory in November 1980. Later, I will argue that the fiscal

expansion since 1981 (and anticipated after November 1980) has been a major

factor in the currency- appreciation. As is documented in the

Blanchard—Suimners BPEA   1984:2 stur of world real interest rates, the fiscal
expansion in the U.S.   has   been accompanied t a fiscal contraction in other OECD

economies. In the period since l980:4,     the   United States and   the   other six

large   OECD economies have had a major success in reducing inflation, but the
United States is the only country in the group to have reduced inflation and
to   have achieved a vigorous recovery from the 1982 recession. In the European

countries, the inflation reduction has been accompanied by a protracted and

serious rise in unemployment. The evidence suggests that the extent of

recovery (or the change in unemployment since 1982) has been     related     to the

extent of fiscal expansion. Of course other factors, such as the flexibility

in labor nE.rtet adjustment has also probably played a role in the

differential employment adjustment in the 1980s.

      Without question, a significant part of the U.S. disinflation can be

attributed to the sharp recession during 1981:3 to l982:i According to

Gordon's estimates in the BPEA 198)4:2, the currulative GNP gap (output loss

relative to potential) during the recession was 9.9 percent of GNP. Since

the end of the recession, the economy- has remained significantly below

Gordon's estinEtes in the BPEA 198)4:2, the cumulative GNP gap (output loss

relative to potential) during the recession was 9.9 percent of GNP. Since

the end of the recession, the economy has remained significantly below
                                       —10—


potential, with another 10.5 percent of cumulative GNP gap between 1982:3

and l98b:4. TJsing these estimates, we can make a rough measure of the

sacrifice rato in the recent disinflation. The inflation measure used is

the personal consumption deflator of the national income accounts. The

pre—Reagan inflation rate will he taken as the quarterly change in 1980:14 (at an

annual rate), specifically 9.6 percent. The current inflation rate is taken as

the quarterly rate for l984:14, to wit, 2.14 percent. The cumulative gap is taken

from Gordon's estimates of potential GNP, and is measured for 198 1:1 to 19814:4

to be 21.5 percent of output. The sacrifice ratio is the cumulative gap divided

by the slowdown in inflation, or 21.51(9.6 —   2.4),   which equals 3.0. A

similar measure is found if the slowdown in inflation is calculated using the

inflation rates of the entire years 1980 (10.2 percent) and 19814, (3.2 percent),

and the same 21.5 percent cumulative output loss.

     I-low does a sacrifice ratio of 3.0 compare with estimates that were made

before and during the disinflation of the past four rears? As Fischer has

recently summarized, the range of estimates of the ratio were surveyed by Okun

in l9T8, and were found to be in the range of 6 to i8.T Okun himself put the

best guess at 10. On this basis, the outcome to date has been significantly

better than forecasted. Note that this conclusion is not changed if we try to

measure the slowdown using a "core" rate of inflation, rather than a measure of

actual inflation. Using the change in average hourly earnings in non—fara

business (comparing 19814:4 with 1980:4), for example, we find an even larger

slowdown in inflation, and therefore a lower sacrifice ratio, equal to 2.9.

    One reason that the sacrifice ratio, using the GNP gap, has been lower than
                                                — ii.-


forecasted is that the relationship between the GNP gap and aggregate

unemployment has apparently shifted since 1980 (i.e. the coefficient in Okun's

law has changed). The cumulative "excess" unemployment since 1980:4 (using 6

percent as the t'ull-eiuployment level) has been 10.8 years, which is more than

pre—1930 Okun's Law equations would have associated with the 21.5 percent output

gap during the period since 1980:4.8 An unemployment—based sacrifice ratio

therefore yields 1.7, which is below but              close   to the band of 2 to 6 that Okun

surveyed in 1978. Thus, on one measure — the output gap ——                 the   disinflation

has been much more rapid than considered plausible in 1978, while on another

measure   ——   the unemployment rate — the        sacrifice ratio has been just below the

low    end of the suggested range.
       There are of course a large number of possible reasons for the favorable
disinflation of the past four years. Rational expectations theory stresses
that    sacrifice ratios      not   be stable, and indeed n.y         depend on the policy
regime.    Perhaps Voicker's non—accomodative policies generated a new found

credibility     for the Fed, along the lines urged by Cagan and Feliner in BPEA
1983:4.    In Perry's terns, the wage     norm        ny have shifted in a favorable
direction,     because of' Reagan's   resolve    in    firing PATCO workers, or his
apparent   willingness to countenance a deep recession in 1982, or other

reasons. I believe, however, that much of the reasons is more prosaic, and

not    so optimistic for the long run. Specifically,             the strong   dollar has
played a major role in the disinflation process. Gordon showed in his 1982
BPEA paper that allowing for international influences on the U.S. price
dynamics (exchange rate effects,       foreign price effects, food and oil prices)
                                          —12—


reduces the estimated sacrifice ratio for the GNP gap frori about 8.5      to   3,

equal to the recent experience. In the vector autoregressions in that study,

Gordon estimated the exchange rate appreciation effects to be the natural

consequence of tight monetary policies, and thereby foresaw the relatively low

cost to the recent disinflation. (His estimates do not, however, very

accurately capture the long ran depreciation of the dollar that may       now ensue.
Thus, while his estimates were accurate for the short term, they may prove too

optimistic over the longer ran, as discussed later.)

       How   plausible is it to assume that the strong dollar has played a major
role in the disinflation process? What is the best guess of its
quantitative     significance to date? To answer these questions, I consider

three types of evidence: first, the existing range of estimates regarding

the effects of exchange rate changes on prices; second, estimates of the

structural channels through which the exchange rate can influence prices; and

third, a simulation model of the    world economy, with a major block for the
U.S.    in which the general equilibrium effects of U.S. exchange rate changes

can    be considered.


Exchange Rates and Inflation in the TJnited States:
Existing Evidence
       In a very useful paper written in 1919, Hooper and Lowrey surveyed the
literature on the effects of a dollar depreciation on U.S. prices.9        In most

of   the   studies that they examine, a small model of wage and price   dynamics

is estimated, with wage and price inflation a function of output or
                                              —13—



unemployment,      lagged inflation, changes in the exchange rate,      and       foreign

prices. In some of the models, the dollar price of oil is held fixed when

the depreciation is simulated, while in others, the dollar price of oil is

modelled endogenously, and is therefore affected by exchange rate changes.

In most cases, the studies investigate how wages and prices are affected by

an exogenous change in the exchange rate,         taking    as given the path of output

and the local currency prices of manufacturing imports (e.g. the DM price of

Gernn exports, the Yen price of Japanese exports, etc.) This is a useful

framework for this paper, since we will want to see how inflation is

affected   by a change     in policy mix that alters      the exchange rate but does
not change                    limitation, however, that by taking as given
                output. It has the

local currency prices in the rest of the OECD, it ignores the linkages from                   the

U.S. exchange rate to local currency prices abroad and back            to U.S       import

prices. This is a factor that can be accounted for only in a global                  model,   as

presented later. In the partial          equilibrium   exercises that Hooper and Lowrey

analyze    it   is also cmcial to assume that whatever are the shocks altering the

exchange    rate   (e.g.   portfolio   shifts, change in mix   of fiscal and monetary
policy, etc.), these tre         fundamental changes have no direct effect on prices

except as they- work through output or the exchange rate itself.

     The study reaches the following conclusion:

     The consensus estimate we propose .          . .is
                                                a given 10 percent
     real dollar depreciation, on a multilaterally weighted
     average basis, will result in a 1—1/2 percent increase in
     consumer price level, assuming a (fixed GNP targeti if            oil
     import prices are not affected by the depreciation; and it
     will result in a l—3/4 percent increase if the oil import
     prices rise by the same proportion as nonoil prices in
     response to the depreciation. given the time frame of the
     various tmDdels considered, about half of the total impact              is
                                          —1)4—




      likely to take place within one year of the depreciation and
      the remainder within two to three years, although the timing
      of the oil price effects may be more variable because of the
      discontinuity of OPEC pricing decisions. (pp. 51—52)

In some of the studies, the price level effect of about 1—1/2 percent in

fact represents the two— or three—year effect, with greater effects present

if a longer time interval is examined. This is true when the level change

in the exchange rate gets built into a persistent change in inflation rate.

Note that persistent (even permanent) effects on inflation are   logically
possible   after a one—time level depreciation, since the policy authorities
are assumed to be   holding real GNP fixed, and are therefore assumed in the

experiment to be fully accommodating any     increases in the domestic price
level.
     The estimates then are that the inflation        rate is about .8 or .9

percentage points higher in each of the first two years after a 10 percent

depreciation (and equivalently, about .8 or .9 percentage points lower in

each year after a 10 percent appreciation), and perhaps somewhat higher in

later years as well. For purposes of illustration here, let us assume that

the   inflation rate is .3 percentage points higher in the third year, and
zero thereafter. Given the Hooper—Lowrey estimate of 1—31)4 points on the
CPI, divided evenly in the first two years, with a third—year effect of 0.3
added on, how important has the strong dollar been for inflation in the
period   since 1980, taking the   path of output as given? Using the same data
as in Figure 1, the effective nominal exchange rate appreciated 12.7 percent
in 1981, 11.7 percent in 1982, 5.8    percent     in 1983, and 7.9   percent   in 198)4.
                                         —15—


Applying the Hooper—Lowrey consensus (with the assumed third—year effect) we

find the following estimates of inflation with and without the appreciation

since 1980:

                                  1981   1982   1983   198)4

   Actual Inflation              8.'?'    5.9    3.7    3.2


   Exchange Rate Effect           1.1    2.1     1.9    1.6

   Inflation with fixed          9,8      8.0    5.6    )4.8
     Exchange Rate since
     1980


Thus, a substantial effect of the exchange rate is indicated, though by no

means has the appreciation been the decisive factor, according to these

estimates. My own estimates, later on, will show a larger effect, basically

because I find that the effect on inflation is more persistent than implied

here.

        Several more recent estimates have been developed, that also imply a

significant role for the exchange rate in the recent disinflation. I have

already mentioned that in a 1982:1 BPEA study of Gordon and King, who consider

the costs of disinflation under two alternative assumptions: (1) that the tight

monetary policy underlying the disinflation causes the dollar to appreciate, and

thereby causes import prices and food and fuel prices to fall relative to

baseline; or (2) that the exchange rate, import prices, and food and fuel

prices, are unchanged by the path of disinflation. In the first case, the

authors estimate a sacrifice ratio of 3.0, i.e. 3 percent loss in output for

each one percentage point reduction in inflation. In the case where the foreign
                                        —16—



variables   are exogenous, the sacrifice ratio rises to 8.)4!   Dornbusch and

Fischer (198J-) have recently offered some estimates of the role of the exchange

rate appreciation since 1980.10 Their study is novel in allowing for a direct

effect of exchange rate movements on wage settlements, above and beyond any

indirect effects via consumer prices or output. The argument is that a strong

dollar raises domestic labor costs relative to foreign labor costs, and thereby

increases the pressure on domestic firms in the tradeables sector to limit

costs. Sjnce thIs effect Is presumed to hold at a given level of total output

or employment, Dornbush and Fischer appear to be arguing that a weak

tradeables sector plus a strong non—tradeahies sector is less inflationary

than the reverse situation. They estimate that a 10% depreciation of the

dollar, at given aggregate output levels, causes a 2.1 percentage point effect

on prices over a two—year period. These estimates are higher than reported by

Hooper and Lowrey, perhaps because of the wage effect, though they might have

been higher still, since lJornbusch and Fischer do not allow for arr effect of

exchange rate changes on the rate of change of oil and gas prices.

     Finally, there are estimates from large—scale econometric idels, such

as LINK or the Federal Reserve Board's Multi—Country Model (MCM).     Recent
simulations   on the MCM yield much smaller estimates of the effects of the

exchange    rate appreciation. Note that the numbers shown below are for fourth
quarter over fourth quarter inflation rates:
                                1981   1982    1983

     Exchange Rate Effect       0.6    1.1     1.2

(From P. Hooper, "The Macroeconomic Effects of Exchange Rate Changes: Some
Quantitative Estimates", Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,
April 198)4)
                                             —17—



Structural   Estimates of' Exchange Bate Effects on Inflation

     I   now turn to nrjr   own   structural estimates of the role of the dollar
appreciation.    There are several possible channels through which exchange rate

changes may affect domestic wage and price formation. Most simply, at unchanged

foreign currency costs of production, an exchange rate change should affect

the domestic currency price of foreign imports. (I will term this the "direct"

effect). In turn, changes in foreign import prices will affect consumer prices

directly if the imports are consumer goods, or indirectly if the imports are

inputs into production of consumer goods. As many analysts have noted, however,

a change in exchange rates (for given levels of foreign wages and prices) may be

used by foreign producers to expand profit margins on sales to the U.S. (in

which case import prices in dollars do not change), instead of being used to cut

prices in dollar terms (which preserves an unchanged markup over foreign costs).

In general, a change in the exchange rate appears to cause a less than

proportional change in import prices in the short run, as foreign producers

react to the exchange rate change both by lowering prices and expanding their

markup over local currency costs.

     A second possible channel of effect comes as domestic producers react to

lower import prices by cutting their own prices and profit margins. Even at

unchanged domestic costs, domestic producers may cut prices (and be forced, by

reduced profit margins, to Lthdraw output supply), in view of lower

competitors' prices. If this effect is important, the size of the exchange rate

effect on consumer prices will be given not by the direct weight of imports in

the price index, but by the weight of all highly tradeable goods (including
                                          —18—



imports,    exports, and import-competing home goods) in the price index. I term

this channel the "competitiveness" effect.
       There are at least two areas where the competitiveness effect surely
applies.    The impact of changes in   world oil prices on the CPI is far higher
than    is indicated by the share of oil imports in consumption expenditure,

since    domestic producers must adjust their prices to shifts in world prices.
As the U.S. produces roughly half of its petroleum consumption, the impact of

changes in the world     price of oil on the CPI might be roughly twice as large
as   the import share. A second area where the effect applies is in food.
The CPI weight of food is of course far higher than the import component

alone,   since the U.S. produces the great bulk of its food consumption. Since

world market prices will importantly affect domestic food prices, a given

exchange rate change might show up in consumer prices with a far larger impact

than the direct import share of food would predict. I stress below, moreover,

that even though oil and many foods in international trade are priced in

dollars, exchange rate changes should still be expected to have a large effect

on dollar prices of those commodities. Where the competitiveness effect is

harder to observe is in the area of manufactured goods. Woo has recently argued

in BPEA l981:2 that for inanu'actured goods, competitiveness effects are small,

if not negligible. Others too have found small, though significant,

competitiveness effects for U.S. nianufacturing.ll

       The "direct" and "competitiveness" effects will have a large impact on

inflation   only if   changes in the CPI subsequently get built into wage

drnamics.    Merchandise imports are only about 9 percent   of GNP, and are probably
                                               —19—


about the same direct share in         the   CPI (including the pass—through of

imported intermediate product prices into final output). Even if we increase

this weight through competitive effects in food, fuel, and other goods enough to

get a 15 percent weight of foreign prices in the CPI (a little larger than the

estimate below), a 1O% appreciation of the dollar would not have over.ihelining

inflation consequences, especially when spread out over several years. Suppose

that each 1% appreciation results in a 0.75% drop in import prices (i our

estimates below). Then a 40 %          appreciation,   spread out over four years, causes

import price inflation to be about (            40/4 x .15) 7.5 percentage points higher
per year. With a CPI weight of .15, the inflation effect of the appreciation

would be about 1.1 percentage points per year. Since the overall reduction in

inflation has been about 7 percentage points by l984, the exchange rate role

would not have been large.

      However, if the changes in the CPI get built into wage inflation, we

can dramatically increase the inflation effect imputed to the dollar

appreciation. Suppose, for example, that wage inflation              =
                                                                         w.
                                                                              —
                                                                                  wi
(with wt the logarithm of wages) is a function of lagged consumer price

inflation and lagged output:
(1)              =         +


where       =
                p — p1,        and p is the (log) CPI. Suppose also that p is a

weighted average of wages and import prices p:

                 =
(2)
                     Xw + (1—X)p
(i—A might reasonably be expected to be between 0.1 and 0.15). Combining

(i)   and   (2) we have:
                                            —20—



(3)            =         +        ÷
                                      (i-A)ir


where      is the rate of import price inflation.

      Consider a baseline path for ir,      and   ask how that path will change

for a one—shot rise in import     price   inflation at t=0, denoted        We examine

the path holding fixed the baseline for output q. If               is the change in

inflation relative to the baseline path, we can easily see from (4)         that:

()          C = (lX)XtMm
In every subsequent period inflation is higher, by an amount that decays

geometrically.     Note that the total price level effect of the shock            is
given by              which simply equals         upon substitution of (5). In
other             percent fall in import prices eventually causes a
        words, a 10

10 percent fall in domestic prices, even if the direct weight of m          in c is

small.     (This is assuming that macroeconomic policy offsets any effects on
output). The feedback from m to pc to w, and back to           pC multiplies the

direct   effect of import prices severalfold.
      In this way, a )40 percent appreciation can plausibly have had a very large
effect   on U.S.   inflation even though the economr has a relatively small import
share.    Assuming that each 1 percent appreciation leads to a drop in import

prices of 0.75 percent within the year; and that the weight of tradeables in the

CPI is 0.15, the simple model just outlined delivers the following estimates of

the   exchange rate effect since 1980 (using the annual rates of exchange rate
appreciation   mentioned earlier):12
                                        —21—


                                      1981          1982      1983        198)4

           Exchange Rate Effect        1.4           2.5       2.8         3.3


      In this case, more than three percentage points of the inflation reduction

since 1980 can be attributed to the rise in the dollar. The main difference

between   this estimate and the Hooper—Lowrey based estimate that I derived
earlier is the third— and fourth—year effects of the exchange rate change on
inflation. (Note that the first two years here are slightly higher.) Earlier,
I assumed a 0.3 percentage point effect in     the third year following a 10 percent
appreciation; here, the effect is 0.T. And      the fourth—year effect is 0.6.
    As a preliminaiy step toward a structural model, it is useful to examine

the   composition of imports and consumption in the U.S. econony. The breakdown

of imports by- end—use is shown in Table 2. Merchandise imports in 198)4

accounted for 8.9 percent of GNP. Almost, one fifth of U.S. imports by value

were oil and another 18 percent were other primary or intermediate inputs to

industry. Food imports were 6.5 percent of the total. The remaining imports

were finished goods of various sorts. Taken together, imported       inputs (food,
fuel, and other   industrial supplies) accounted for )414 percent of total imports.

18 percent of imports were   non—automobile capital equipnnt for industry,
leaving only 18 percent of imports as non—auto consumer items. Automobile
imports accounted for 17 percent of the total. Of course, auto imports should
in principle be divided between consumer purchases and business purchases.
      These data are illuminating for several reasons. First, the direct
effect of lower prices on imported consumer items (other than food, fuel, and
                  Table 2: Composition of U.S. Imports, 1984


                                  Percent of Total         Percent of
Merchandise Imports                   Imports                  GNP

  Primary and Intermediate:

     Food, Feeds, Beverages             6.5                    0.6

     Fuels                             19.1                    1.7

     Non-Food, Non-Fuel                18.4                    1.6
       Industrial Supplies

  Finished:

     Capital Goods (ex—auto)           18.4                    1.6

    Consumption Goods (ex—auto)        18.4                    1.6

    Automobiles, parts                 16.9                    1.5

  Net Elsewhere Classified              2.4                    0.2


 Total                                100.0%                   8.9%



Source: Based on imports by end—use category, U.S. Department of Commerce,
       Bureau of Economic Analysis, Survey of Current Business.
                                         —22—



autos) is bound to be small. Such      imports   were   a mere 2.6   percent of total
personal consumption expenditure in 19814. And with respect to autos, any

potential sizable gains in auto prices during 1981814 were likely prevented by

the voluntary export restraints on Japanese autos, as I document below.

       Thus,   to the extent that there are sizable "direct" effects of lower
import prices on consumption prices, these will show up in significant extent as
reduced costs of industrial inputs and as lower food and fuel prices. Contrary
to    simple models of international trade which emphasize only trade in final

consumption goods, U.S. trade is heavily skewed to primary and interaediate

commodities, or to capital goods. Indeed, 62 percent of imports were of these

categories in 198)4, and no less than 6T    percent on average during 198O.814.
(Note that changes in capital goods prices should not be expected to have any
significant     effects on short—run pricing. There will be      a long—ran effect, of
course,   changes in capital goods prices will alter investment expenditures
          as

and thereby change unit variable costs in the future.) The low share of
significant non—food, non—fuel consumer imports probably accounts for much of
Woo's findings in BFEA 198)4:2 of small effects on consur prices of non—food,
non—oil import prices.
       There is little doubt that the exchange rate appreciation has affected
the prices of all categories of imports, except where trade barriers have
substantially insulated the domestic market from world price effects. The
price changes for a subset of the end—use categories are shown in Table 3, for
the   period of dollar appreciation (1980:)4—198)4—)4) and a preceding period of

dollar depreciation (1976:)4—1980:)4).   During the period of depreciation the
             Table 3: Price Changes During Appreciation and Depreciation
                               (annual rates of change)

                                   PERIOD OF                      PERIOD OF
ITEM                             DEPRECIATION                   APPRECIATION
                               (1976:4—1980:4)                 (1980:4—198)4:3)

Effective Exchange Rate             —2.7'                           10.6

Overall Import Price                ii.6                            —3.0
Deflator
Consumption Deflator                 8.4                             4.9

Import     Categories:

    Food imports                    12.1                            —3.0

    Fuel imports                    27.14                           _3.7

    Non—food, non—                  13.0                            —2.8
    fuel supplies for
    Industry, imports

    Consumer Goods,Imprtsa 7.8                                      —0.2
                         CPI         9.6                             3.9

       —   Autos,   Imports          NA                              3.8
                    CPI              7.2                             3.3

       —   Apparel,   Imports                                        3.14
                      CP1                                            2.0
       -   Furniture, Imports        NA                             -1.8
                         cpi         6.3                             3.7

       —   Appliances,   Imports     14.8                           14.6
                         CP1         4.8                             3•4

a   not including autos              b      commodities only         c 77:3:80:14

Sources: Effective exchange rate: IMF MERM Index
            Overall   Import    deflator:     NIPA
            Overall   consumption deflator: NIPA
            Consumer goods (overall), imports: Implicit price deflator, NIPA, not
               md.    autos
            Consumer goods (overall), CPI: consumer price index, all commodities
            Food, fuel, non—food and non—fuel industrial supplies: Implicit price
              deflators, NIPA, Table 7.17
            Autos, imports: import price index, BLS, SITC 781
                       CPI: consumer price index, urban, category 45
            Apparel, imports: import price index, BLS, SITC 814
                         CPI: consumer price index, urban, category 83200
                              (for both categories, footwear not included)
            Furniture, imports: import price index, BLS, SITC 82
                           CPI: consumer price index, urban, category 29
            Appliances, imports: import price index, BLS, SITC 775
                            CPI: consumer price index, wage earner, category 30
                                              —23—


import items rnse in price much more rapidly           than   did domestic prices (as

measured by the consumption deflator), while the opposite is true after 1980:14.

There are two categories of consumer goods that were subject to extensive trade

restrictions in the early       1980s:   textiles (governed by the multi—fiber

agreement) and autos (governed by the voluntary export restraints on Japanese

autos). It is noteworthy that those categories of imports show little

difference in pricing with domestic goods, while unprotected consumer items,

such as furniture and appliances, had import price increases far below the

overall price    increases for those      categories in the CPI index.

     The   breakdown of   consumption expenditure by category is shown           in
Table ,    together with data for consumer price increases in some of those cate-
gories. A striking feature of the table is that nearly half of consumption
expenditure is on services rather than commodities. Since the services have a
high input of nontraded goods (particularly for housing services, which are
about 30 percent of total consumption expenditure, and about 60 percent of total
services expenditure), we should expect a            significant exchange rate effect only

within   about half of the consumption basket. It is notable, indeed, that infla-
tion in services significantly outpaced inflation in             commodities   during
l98O:1_8)4:1, by 6.9 percent per year compared with 3.9            percent   per year. Fuel
prices, among the connuodities, increased particularly slowly during 1980:14814:14.
Consumer    food prices increased surprisingly rapidly in the period (3.6             percent

on average) in contrast    to the sharp drop in U.S. food import prices and (as we
shall    see) world prices of   primary    food products. Part of the discrepancy
results from the considerable processing of food that takes place between the
                  Table 14: Composition of Consumption Expenditure
                    (Urban Consumers, December 1983 CPI weights)


                                                            Change in Price,
                                                             1980: )4—19814
All Items                          Weight                    (annual rate)

  Commodities                       52.5

     Food, Beverages                19.8                             3.6

     Energy                          7.2                         —0.2

  Services                          147.5                            6.9

     Household                      30.3                             NA

      —   rent                      20.5                             NA

      —   other                      9.8                             NA

 Energy                              4.7                             NA
  (Services)

 All Items                         100.0




Source: Weights show the relative importance of category in the All Urban
         Consumer Price Index, December 1983.
                                            -2


farm and consumer level. As an example, part of the CPI food index includes

"food away from home", which includes a large service component, and as would be

expected, "food away from home" increased in price much more rapidly (5.2 per-

cent) than "food at home" (2.9 percent).

        Among commodities, about half of expenditures are accounted for by food,

beverages, and energy alone! Indeed, food and energy expenditures account for

about 30 percent of the total consumption basket. (Note that about one half

of energy consumption is categorized as energy commodities and the remainder

as energy services.) Thus, food and fuel effects will surely constitute an

important share of exchange—rate effects on the cost of living. We have already

noted    that direct imports of non—food, non—fuel consumer goods are a rather
small proportion of the consumption basket. From the consumption data alone we
cannot    determine much about the direct importance of non—food, non—fuel primary
conudities, which would play a role as inputs into the production of other
consumer    items.

        Our framework for measuring "direct" and "competitiveness" effects is as

follows.     We assume an   aggregate production function for domestically produced

consumer    goods, of the form Q = Q(L,R,E,F,K), where L, R, E, F, K are the
primary factor inputs:      labor,   raw materials (non—food, non—fuel), energy,
food,    and capital respectively. The first four inputs are treated     as
variable    in the short ran, while K is treated as pre—determined. Markup

pricing theory holds that the output price P should be a markup over standard

unit variable costs, with productivity measured at a normalized or standard

capacity level of output. In logs (using lower case variables), and ignoring

constants,
                                               —25—



                                    e +
(5)          p = a(w—) +        +                                        (++y+ =     i)
with i    = (log)    standard output per manhour. With a variable markup, as

suggested by competitive pricing, (5) is re—written with a term cq added on,

where    q log Q.
        To   obtain consumer prices, pC   we    assume that C     is   a weighted average of
p and import     prices of non—food, non—fuel consumer goods, pm:


(6)          Pc =   p+   (l_A)m

The role of m        comes through the two possible channels already         discussed.

First, direct       purchases of finished import goods by    consumers      should lead to a
weight    of m equal to the weight of such goods in the consumption basket (about

2.5 percent). Second, domestic producers may reduce profit margins relative to

the normal markup implicit in (5),        in   order to compete   with   foreign   suppliers.
In    the end, the consumer price is written as:


(7)
               C =
                     A(w—) + Ar + 1e + f +
        Extensive econometric experience with estimation of price equations has

shown that the link of pC to the input prices may involve lags in adjustment.
To allow for such lags, equation (T) is estimated allowing for polynomial
distributed lags for the right—hand—side variables. In the notation below,
PDL(x,a,b) signifies a polynomial distributed lag on variable x, of order a, and
length b. No end—point constants are imposed in any of the estimates.
       Equation (7)    is   estimated for the period l97O:l_l981:)4. Importantly,
e     and p' are measured    by world indexes for primary inputs of enerr and food
                                             —26—


 rather than as indices for consumption expenditure on enerr and food.13 As

already noted, €he consumption indices for energr and food already include a

great   deal of processing of the raw materials. For this reason, we should
expect the weight on energy and food in the p            equation   to be far below the
apparent   weight of food (.19) and energy (.11) in the overall consumption

bracket.

       Two estimates of (7) are shown below. The first equation is an O]IJS

estimate, allowing for first—order serial correlation in the residual, without

imposing the condition that the coefficients sum to 1.0. In the second

equation the long—run condition is imposed (the estimates also correct for

serial correlation). The sum of the weights for R, E, F, and M is shown below

each equation. Observe that we proxy for the log of labor productivity, , by a

time trend, and (time)2.



Estimated equations

Unconstrained version:

   =   0.78 + 1.08 PDL(w,3,8) +     0.OIL PDL
                                                (p,3,6)
       ('.oi) (r.)                 (2.I2)


       + 0.01   PDL (p,2,)4) + 0.03 PDL (p,3 6)

        (1.4)                   (2.3)
       + 0.06 PDL (p,3,6) — 0.02        time + .00008 (time)2

        (2.0)                   (6.7)           (10.8)
                   = 1.000      p = 0.5          d.w.    =   2.0
                Total   tradeables weight = 0.14

Const rained version: 14
                                                      —21—




p.
     =    0.49 + 0.88 PDL (w,3,B)
          (8.9)

          + 0.05    PDL
                          (p,3,6)   + 0.02 PDL (p,2,1)

            (2.9)                      (2.9)

          + 0.02 PDL (p.,3,6) + 0.03 PDL (p,3,6)

           (1.6)                       (0.8)

          — 0.01 time + 0.00001 (time)2

           (ii.1)              (p.3)

                       = 0.995                 p   = 0.83    d.w. + 2.O1

                   Total tradeables weight = 0.11


Note that the primary inputs plus foreign consumer prices represent a substan-

tial share of the consumption price, 0.14 percent in the first equation, and

0.11 percent in the second.

         Our next step is to determine the effects of exchange rate movements on

the primary input prices, and imported final goods. When e (the logarithm

of the effective exchange rate, measured as units of foreign currency per

dollar) changes, how much           will   the input prices move? This is a difficult

question, particularly- in view of the special features of the world markets for

food and energy. A good starting point, however, is to consider the effect on

the dollar price of a homogeneous commodity that trades freely, without

transport     costs   or trade impediments in world markets. As an idealization,

consider the raw          material B to be such a good.
         The Appendix derives an equation for the (log) dollar price r under the
                                                     —28—


assumptions that: (1) R is traded freely throughout the world, subject to the

law of one price; (2) the supply of R in each region is a positive function of

the local—currency price of B relative to the local—currency output price;

(3) demand for B is a negative function of the same relative price; and

() developing        countries outside of the OECD peg to a basket of OECD

currencies. The resulting equation has the form:

(8)          dp'   = dp +     dYw

where dp is the percentage change in an index of dollar output prices in the

OECD, i.e., each country's local currency- output price is converted to dollars

at the prevailing exchange rate, and then weighted in an overall OECD basket;

dyW is the percentage change in weighted average of real incomes throughout the

world and dPr is the percentage change in dollar price of B. The U.S.

has a weight of y in the average, and the rest of the OECD has a weight of 1 —y.

In change    form,

(9)         dp =     dp   +   (i—) (dp0— de)
Note that from (8)        and   (9), at given levels of real activity- and given
domestic output prices in the U.S.             (p)   and the ROECD (p0), an appreciation of
the U.S. exchange rate causes dPr to decline by               (1—i)de.

      The   expression for          is quite intricate, though the following rule    of

thumb applies. The larger the U.S. is in the OECD (in the production and

consumption of B), the smaller is (1—y), i.e. the smaller is the exchange effect

on r. If the U.S. is perfectly small (see the Appendix for technical

conditions) dp'7de = —1.            If the U.S. constitutes the entire world market for
                                               —29—



the   commodity, dp'7de       0.

      In   several studies the IMF has estimated commodity price equations of the
form in (8),     for   commodities including food, beverages, agricultural raw
materials,    and metals.15        The estimates for (i—y)   center   around 0.75,
suggesting that a one percent appreciation of the dollar leads to a fall in

commodity prices of 0.75 percent. Specifically, "the results indicate that an

appreciation of the U.S. dollar by 10         percent in a given quarter vis—a—vis
other major currencies reduces          the unit values by   somewhat less than 1.5   percent

during     the same quarter, and by      close to 7.5   percent within a year. "16
      It    is interesting to note that when we use a weight for the U.S. of 0.25

in (9), as suggested by the IMF studies, we can account for much, though by no

means all of the decline since l980:IL in the real prices of primary inputs on

the basis of the U.S. exchange rate movements alone. First, I construct an

ROECD index of consumer prices, p°, using MERM weights for 17 non—U.S. econo-

mies. Then I compute the change in real input prices in terms of U.S. goods,

ROECI) goods, and the OECD basket including U.S. goods and ECD              goods, with
weights    0.25 and 0.75 respectively. The decline in terms of U.S. goods is of

course always greater than the decline in terms of the OECD basket, the gap

being due to the U.S. real appreciation. About one half of the decline in real

commodity prices is due to the dollar appreciation, and the other half is due to

the fall in real commodity prices in terms of the overall OECD basket (see data

in the accompanying Table 5). Presumably the drop in real input prices

vis—a—vis the overall OECD basket is due to: continuing world recession,

particularly in Europe      and Latin America; high world real interest rates, which
           Table 5:   Change in Real Commodity   Prices,   19B0:1_198i4:3
                               (percent)



                                                   Real Price Decline
  Commodity           Cumulative Change                            in overall
(world index)         in Nominal Price     in U.S.    in ROECD        OECD

  Food                                     _)45.3          —25.7        —31.2

  Fuel                     —   8.9         —23.8             3.6        —



  Materials                —20.0           —33.1           — 9.0        —15.7




Source: As defined in footnote 13. The real price in the U.S. is defined as

         pl/pC for commodity i. The real price in the ROECD is defined as

         P1E/P°. The real price in the OECD overall is pl/[(pc)O.25(pOfE)O.IS1
                                              —30—



have caused a reduction of primaly commodity inventories; and favorable supply
conditions for many agricultural commodities. (See the IMF           World Economic

Outlook,     April 1985,   for   a detailed discussion of non—oil and oil price

developments and prospects).

      A recent study at the U.S. Department of Agriculture of grain prices

reached conclusions similar to the IMF studies, though the USDA study indicates

several amendments to the model underlying (8) that must be made in the case of

grain trade.17 In the basic model, the USDA study found that a 10 percent

appreciation of the U.S. dollar should reduce grain prices as follows:

7.3 percent for wheat; 6.7 percent for corn; and 6.3 percent for soybeans (see

Table )-t   of   Longmire and Morey). These elasticities are based on the U.S.

consumption and production shares of the three grains and estimates of demand

and supply elasticities, as in the Appendix. The authors indicate, however,

that protectionist restrictions in food trade should be expected to lower the

transmission       of the exchange rate since effectively the U.S. becomes a larger
proportion of the relavant trading area. We have already noted that the larger
is the U.S. role for a commodity in demand and supply, the smaller is the
exchange     rate effect. Accounting for these trade impediments in a rather

general way yielded the following lower price changes: —5.7' percent for wheat,

—5.9 percent for corn; and —5.9        percent   for soybeans (Table 6 of Longnrtre and

Morey).

      Last, there is the complicated issue of U.S.         agricultural   price supports,

and their interaction with the exchange rate effect. For some grains in some

periods during 1981—8)4, U.S. price supports put an effective floor on prices.
                                              —31--



Exchange rate appreciation in that case reduces the decline in dollar prices and

induces a rise in government stockpiling. Longmire and Morey model these

programs   in a very    general   way but   do not, unfortunately, analyze the recent

experience    with   the price support programs. In their model, the support

programs   greatly    reduce the short—run price responsiveness for those grains at

the price floor, but not the longer—run responsiveness. In           their interpretation
of   the price support programs, the long—run effect of a 10 percent appreciation

on prices still exceeds —5.0 percent with the government programs continuously

applied (see Table 7 of the study).

       A model such as (8) can also be used to account for OPEC oil pricing,

even though OPEC prices are set by cartel behavior rather perfect competition.

A full model of OPEC behavior would involve some form of dynamic optimization

of the large producers, taking account of the supply behavior of the

competitive fringe. OPEC       oil prices should then in general depend on a basket
of   OECD prices, as in (9), where the weights in that basket depend on oil

production and   consumption      shares of the various OECD economies and perhaps on

OPEC   consumption shares of OECD conunodity exports. The U.S. share of oil
consumption   among industrial economies is about 0.5       and the share of
production    is about 0.75.18 On the other hand, the share of the U.S. in OPEC

purchases from the OECD is 18 percent.          Assuming that OPEC attempts to
stabilize the level of oil demand when e changes, the exchange rate effect

would be on the order of —0.5. Assuming instead that OPEC attempts to fix the

real price of oil in terms of its consumption basket of OECD goods, the

exchange rate effect should be as high as —0.82 (=         i—.i8).   The latter
                                               —32—


approximation seems closer to the mark.            As shown in Figure 2, real oil prices

in l98)4:L in terms of OECD goods are only            )4
                                                           percent      below their 1980:)4 level,

when the U.S. has a weight of 0.18 in the OECD basket. In the U.S., real oil

prices (measured relative to the WPI)          fell by     25 percent in the period, while

in the rest   of   the OECD oil prices rose by 3 percent relative to the WPI.

        In the ndel below, I will use a single estimate, —0.75, for all three

primary   commodities. In solving the nodel, the equations for p", pf, e are

then   written as:


(10)          p =     + [0.25p   +   (i   —
                                              0.25)(p
                                                           —
                                                               et)]          I =   r,f,e

where   PC is measured as the U.S. consumption deflator, and p                     is an ROECD

weighted   average consumer price index (MERM weights). p                    is   the historical
relative price of    the input in terms       of   the OECD basket. I treat shifts in               as

exogenous to exchange rate movements. Note, as already mentioned, that the

choice of 0.75 implicitly attributes most, though not all, of the decline in

real input prices in the U.S. to exchange rate movements.

       The next step is an equation for m, the (log) price of consumer goods

imported into the U.S. In some initial experiments, I attempted to model                           as

a weighted average of U.S. consumer prices and ROECD consumer prices. The U.S.

consumer prices never entered significantly into an equation explaining m•

Consistently, ROECD consumer prices entered solely and significantly into such

an equation. Thus, in the simulations below, I treat m as a function of a

distributed lag of the (dollar-equivalent) consumer price level of the ROECD.

The specific equation, estimated for 1973: l—l984:                    is:
    Figure   2
-
                 —.   ::IL   1:jFi::E..f::Er::::i:: ñ/)!
                                                       —33—




       p    = —3.3 + 0.89 PDL (p —
                                                  e,3,8)
                (6.)4)   (.9)
            = 0.99                   p =    0.9            d.w. = 1.92

                                           (17.9)

Remember that p° is the (log) MERM—weight                  CPI level        in the ROECD. According to

this equation, a 10 percent appreciation of the dollar translates into an 8.9

percent decline in (non—auto) import prices of consunr goods into the U.S.
       To   close the nr,del, I estimate             a wage equation of standard form, relating

wage inflation to a distributed lag of price inflation, and to current and

lagged   values of the Perry demographically weighted unemployment rate. The
estimated equation is:
            =     0.01   —   0.002 Ut — 0.0001 Ut—1 +               0.98
                (11.2)       (2.2)           (0.2)                  (9.8)
                                                                            PDL(ir i,,12)
                                                                                 —




            = 0.75                   p   = 0.19            d.w. = 2.00
                                          (1.6)

       The entire model         can be simulated for the exchange rate changes since 1980,

assuming    that the path of output and foreign currency prices are the same for
alternative paths of the exchange rate.19                     The   model is solved in two versions,
using the unconstrained and constrained equations for the consumer price level.
As I have already noted, the unconstrained version of the model will show a
significantly larger exchange rate effect than the constrained version, since
the weight of tradeable goods is higher in the former case. As a first
exercise, we determine the passthrough of a ten percent currency appreciation
into   lower inflation:
                                             —3 14_




         Reduction in inflation (percentage points) Year 1                    2      3   4

                 Unconstrained                                          0.7 1.0 0.9 1.0
                 Constrained                                            0.5 0.8 0.6 0.5

     The model as a whole tracks quite well in a dynamic simulation

starting in 1976:1. In    the    dynamic   simulation,        the paths of output, the nominal

exchange, the real prices of primary inputs, and foreign currency consumer pri-

ces are taken as exogenous, so that the model effectively solves for the wage—

price dynamics, with nominal wages, consumer prices and primary input prices

changing endogenously over time. The simulation in the unconstrained case is

shown in Figure 3. Basically, the nodel misses about 1 percentage point of the

rise in inflation between 1979 and 1981, but is generally on track during

1981—84. For calendar years, the results are:

                1979     1980        1981             1982        1983        1984 (3 quarters)

Actual           9.5     10.2         7.8              4.9         3.1         314

Predicted       9.1       9.6         7.9              14.7        3.0         3.8


     When   the partial effects of the actual exchange rate changes are simulated
(by comparing a path of no nominal exchange rate change                 after 1980:14 with the

actual   exchange rate path) we find:
Exchange Rate           1981        1982          1983          19814 (3 quarters)
Effect on Reducing
Inflation:

Unconstrained            0.8         1.9              2.14        2.8

Constrained              0.6         1.5              1.7         1.9


To further examine the sensitivity of these results, we substitute a "Perry

wage—norm" equation for the wage equation in our model. In a wage norm model,
          Figure 3
                                                   m
-ir•. -        _i

                               TrTTTrTTTT
                     P F?FDIT:TFD   j.j FATj(':N
                                               —35—



the change in nominal wages is determined mostly by "norms" or rules of thumb,
rather than by inherited inflation or expected price inflation. In that spirit,
I   replace the earlier wage equation with (wt —        w14)
                                                               =
                                                                   0.3(p1    —
                                                                                 p5   ),   which
allows    for a small (0.3) passthrough of lagged consumer price inflation into

wages. The resulting estimates for the inflation effect of the dollar

appreciation in the unconstrained case are:

                               1981         1982       1983          19814


Exchange Rate Effect
with Perry wage norm            0.7          1.5        1.14          1.1


Clearly, nr own high estimates of the inflation effect as of 19814 depend on a

significant effect of lagged prices on nominal wage change. In the Perry model,

the exchange rate effects are largely dissipated by 19814 (of course such a model

must resort      to   some explanation for the downward shift in the wage norm after

1981.)

        Consider,     finally, a decomposition of the causes of the disinflation into
exchange    rates, unemploynente, and favorable, exogenous "supply—price" shocks.

First,    the   model is run   for   a constant nominal exchange rate after 1980:14, and

the difference of that path from the full dynamic simulation path with actual

exchange    rate changes is the exchange rate component. Then, the model is run

with the unemployment rate held at the NAIRU level (the level is 6.1 percent for

the Perry unemployment rate in the estimated wage equations reported earlier) at

the historical exchange rates. The difference of that path from the original

simulation      is the output gap component. Third, the model is run assuming no
fall in the real prices of primary inputs in terms of the OECD basket
(i.e.       is fixed at its 1980:14 level). The effect of this assumption
                                             —36—



relative to the baseline is termed the real—input price effect. The breakdown
of the      disinflation is as follows, for the unconstrained nodel:

                                               1981        1982     1983     198)4 (3 quarters)

              Total slowdown                   1.8         4.7      6.5      6.2
              of which:

              Exchange rate                    0.8         1.9      2.4      2.8
              Unemployment                    —0.2         1.6      3.9      3.4
              Real Input Price                 0.9         1.9      1.5      1.4
              Lagged inflation &               0.3        —0.7     —1.3     —1.4



For the constrained version, the breakdown          is:

                                               1981         1982     1983     1984 (3 piarters)

              Exchange rate                    0.6          1.5      1.7      1.9
              Unemployment                    —0.2         1.14      3.2      2.3
              Real Input Price                 0.5         1.4      1.2       0.8
              Lagged inflation and             0.9         0.4      0.4       1.3
                residuals


Thus, the range of estimates of the exchange rate effect is between 1.9

and   2.8   for 1984.   In both versions of the model, the exchange rate effect is
slightly less than the unemployment effect.


Prospects for the Dollar and U.S.       Inflation


       If   the real appreciation of the dollar could be attributed to a permanent
shift in underlying conditions (restoration of confidence, a safe haven effect,
etc.) then we could chalk      up a   permanent benefit in the disinflation process,
perhaps     almost 3 percentage points of inflation last year. The evidence is
                                                 —31--



strongly   to the contrary however. In this section I show that the market's own

forecasts continue to predict large dollar depreciations in the coming decade.

These will have a significant effect on U.S. inflation.

       In most interpretations of recent movements in the dollar, high U.S.

interest rates are a major    proximate      cause. A standard story, based on

Dornbusch's overshooting model, goes as follows. Assets denominated in

different currencies are close substitutes in asset portfolios. Therefore,

they   must earn a nearly equal expected return when the returns are       expressed

in a common currency. Let in be the nominal yield (on an annual basis) of a
riskiess n—year asset denominated in dollars, and let i be the nominal yield on
a   foreign riskiess asset of the same       maturity.   With   the spot exchange

rate, expressed as units of foreign currency per dollar, and tEt+ the

exchange rate expected to prevail in n years, the expected

dollar-denominated return of the foreign asset (on an annual basis) is

                         — 1.20    With perfect substitutability of home and

foreign assets (e.g. as would be implied by risk—neutral wealthholders, and

an absence of capital controls), home and foreign yields must be equalized.

Thus, we would have in equal to this quantity, or:

                                  1/n
(ii)        (1-i-i) =
                        (E/E+)          (l+i*)


       In one simple model, that is not too bad empirically, the real exchange

rate in the long run is presumed to be fixed at a given constant level though it

might deviate from that level in the short run because of the slowness of prices

to adjust to long—run equilibrium levels. Let H be the fixed long—run value of
                                               —38—




(P/EP*), and Rt be its current value. Suppose also that (by whatever
equilibrating mechanisms) the market expects Rt to return to R within a period

of n years (it may expect an even quicker return to B).

       Now, let us define         as the average annual inflation rate expected

over the n—year interval so that P
                                          tt+n
                                                 =   (i+iin)flp t and tt+n
                                                                      p*     =   (l+.ff*)rlP*.
                                                                                      n     t
Also, define the n—year real interest rates at home and abroad as:

(l+r) =      (l+i   )(Pt/tPt÷
                                )l and (1+r*) =
                                                      (l+i*)(P/tP+)Vn.           By these

definitions, equation (11) may be restated as:


(12) (a)                =   R[(l+r)/(1+r*)]n
       or

      (b) Et =

In   logs,

(13)(a) (et+p_p) = log R +           n(r_r*)
      (b)    e =            + log   B +   n(r_r*)

According to (12)(a), the current real exchange rate equals the long—term real

exchange rate time the ratio of interest rates to the n—tb power. In logs, the

log real exchange rate equals a constant plus n times the n—period real interest

rate differential, as shown in (13)(a). According to (12)(b), the current nominal

exchange rate equals the current price ratio, times the long—term real exchange

rate, times the ratio of gross interest rates to the n—th power. The log ver-

sion of the equation is shown as (13)(b).

       As we can see, small changes in the long—term real interest rate
                                           — 39—




 differential   will have a large effect on the current exchange rate. Suppose

that    home and foreign prices can be taken as given in the current period, and
that the real exchange rate is always expected to adjust to R within a ten—year
period. Then, a one percentage point rise in the 10—year U.S. real interest
rate relative to the foreign 10—year real interest rate will have a ten
percentage effect on the spot exchange rate today.
        The twin assumptions that interest rate differentials reflect expected
exchange rate changes, and that the long—term real exchange rate is constant, go
a long way towards tracking exchange rate nvements in the past decade. To show
this,    let us apply the framework to the Dollar—Deutsche Mark rate. This is a

particularly useful rate to examine, since unlike France, Japan, and the United

Kingdom,    Germany had no capital   controls   in   the past decade, and   so the
assumption   of high substitutability of dollar and DM assets is plausible. For

interest rates we take indexes of long—term government bonds in each country.

The expected inflation variable is calculated as follows. For each year, I take

the "long—term" inflation expection to equal the actual two—year inflation rate

centered on the quarter of the estimate (that is, the average of inflation one
year ahead and one year behind). However, in the case of the United States, I
allow for a shift in inflation expectations that depend on the 1980 election.
For   the four quarters leading up to 1980, I assume that inflation forecasts were

made conditional on the outcome of the election, with inflation expectations of

10   percent in the qp.arters after 1980 if President Carter won re—election, and
inflation   of its actual rate after 1980 if Reagan won the election. The

probability assigned to Carter's re—election is set at 0.5. In this way, I
                                        — I 0—




build in a downward shift in inflation expectations upon President Reagan's

election. This shift seems necessaiy to help explain the sharp appreciation of

the dollar following the election in November 1980. The resulting paths for

inflation expectations are shown in Figure -t.     The long—term real interest rates

are shown in Figure 5.

       An exchange rate equation as in (13) fits the data rather well for

19TT:ll981t:)4 for the $/DM rate. Estimating (13) using the real interest rate

differential that we have calculated, we get the equations shown in Table 6. In

the first equation, (13)(a) is estimated using OLS. The real interest rate

differential is highly significant, with the coefficient value indicating an

expectation of the return of Rt to R in 6.5 years. Note that because of the

flatness of the yield curve for maturities greater than 5 years, r_r* can be

interpreted as representing the interest rate differential over any long

interval. The equation picks 6.5 as the maturity length that is nst consistent

with  the maintained 1pothesis that Et returns to its long—run value R within
the interval. Note the low Durbin—Watson statistic in the estimate, suggesting
some mispecification of the equation. Data inspection revealed that the dollar

was weaker than expected in the recession period in l98l:3_l982:1, and somewhat

stronger than predicted in 1983. Similarly, the DM was weak during periods of

slow growth. This suggests that the real exchange rate strengthens, for a given

interest rate differential, when the econonr is experiencing above—average

growth, which is confirmed in equation (2), which included the difference in (MW

growth rates in the U.S. and Germany, Q_Q*.      This   variable may be picking up

shifts in expectations about the long—run real exchange rate (contrary to our

simple model), or reflecting a rise in capital inflow that occurs when profits
                       Figure   I.    InfLat tonary Expectations
                   /
               I
     //                          .-'-
                                                           N
                                                                            .. -
                                                                       -.          -
I   ;'77   1       1       1   )E()        1   Si      1   2       1    '3         1
                                                 Figure   5
                           (E?   (II I       I            re E;.t. F -—]-
1    •1
1 Ci
     L .1
     4.
      1
     1.—i
——
      1
          1   9'77   1   1979            1   9Q           191        1   2   1983   1984
                                    U.S.                      4.   Gcrm•r,
                Table 6:    Real Exchange Rate Equations, 1971:1 —            1984:14




          (1)       log B = _3.3 +      0.065(r    —   r*)
                        t                               t
                                      (11.52)


                                                   = 0.81
                                              d.w. = 0.71




          (2)       log Rt = —3.3 +
                                      ?.OSrt
                                                  -
                                                       r)                -
                                                                             Q)

                                                   = 0.90
                                              d.v. =   i.1

          (3)      log R = —3.3 + 0.068(r _r*) + 1.50(Q               — Q*)
                       t
                                     (10.5)                 (2.rr)




                           with instrumental variable (G_G*) for (r_r*)


                                                                 = .87

                                                             d.w. =   1.20
Source: R. is EP/P*, where E is DM/$, and                     are CPIs in the U.S. and
Germany. r,r* are long—term real interest rates, as calculated in the text.

Q,Q*   are real GNP growth rates, quarterly at an annual rate. The instrument

(G_G*) is the cumulative difference in the "fiscal impulse" (effectively, the

difference in the full employment surpluses, as calculated by the IMP).
                                         - 1-

are high at the upswing of the cycle. In the third regression, an instrumental

variable    is used to help correct for errors in measurement of the real exchange
rate differential. On the view that the differential fiscal stimulus in the
U.S. and Germany is the cause of the real interest rate differential, an index

of    this difference is created to serve as an instrument, based on an IMF measure

of fiscal impulse in the two countries. The result of the instrumental

variables estimation is shown in equation (3) of the table. Note that the point

estimate on the interest rate differential rises to .068.

       Using our inflation forecasts, and the actual th of interest rates, we

can also invert equation (13) to find the expectation of the long—tenn real

exchange rate conditional on the assumption that the real interest rate measures

the   expected rate of real depreciation over the interval of the bond. This
"long—term" real exchange rate may be calculated for each time period, as is
done for the interval 19T7:l_1981:14. As per the econometric estimates we assume
   return to R in years. The result is shown in Figure 6. According to these
estimates, real appreciation of the dollar does not reflect the expectation of a
long—term appreciation of the dollar but rather of a short—run deviation from a
fairly   constant long—run rate. In 1977:1, the market projection was for a

long—term real exchange rate of 106 (1977:1 =    100),   and the projection in 1981:14

was for a long—run real exchange rate of 99.     While   the dollar appreciated by

about 140   percent in real tents after 1980:14, the market expectation   of the

long—run real exchange rate is about the same as in 1980:14. The rise in the

dollar is consistent with unchanged expectations of the long—run real exchange

rate and a rise in U.S. real interest rates relative to German real interest
               Figure   6.   Spot Market Real Exchange Rate and Long—Term Real Exchange Rate Expectation
1
      Ii
1   1 Ci                                                                             /
                    —
                                                                                                                        /
                                          /                               /       /----.               I.  I•\_
                                                                                                                                  Ii
                                                    ,I    4——4
                                                                     •?       I                       (I
                                                                                                                                   Il
                                                +
                                                    \ / \+                                                        V
                                                         \
                                                             /   \    /   /
                                                                                               -.
           —
      Cl
           -
       1   )77          1            1   1'79        1   9O           1                    1    9;2         1     9L3       1   .4-
                                Long—Term Expectation                + + + Current Real Exchange Rate
rates of about )4   percentage points since l98O:4.
       If the expectations model is accepted, the fact that long—term real

interest rates in the U.S. are far higher than in Germarr and Japan nans that

expectations are for a dollar depreciation at approximately the rate of interest

rate   differential for the next decades. A skeptic can argue that this interest
rate differential has been present for the past four years, during which time
the dollar has continued to appreciate, so that the "expectations" in the expec-
tations   model have   never been borne out. The response to this observation in
terms   of the expectations hypothesis is that there have been continual surprises

in terms of long—term real interest rate differentials over the period. U.S.

long—term interest rates have stayed unexpectedly high, and the rate of U.S.

inflation has dropped unexpectedly rapidly.     The dollar has strengthened in each

of the past three years because the real interest rate differential continued

to rise, and nDst of that rise was probably unanticipated.

       Let us assume that the analysis is correct, and proceed to investigate the

inflationary consequences of a future depreciation of the dollar. As usual, we

examine the partial effect, for a fixed path of output and foreign inflation.

Suppose, then, that the dollar will depreciate 1O percent in the 7   years.
If the drop is sharp and swift (the hard—landing scenario in Marris' account

elsewhere in this issue), the spike to domestic inflation will likewise be

sharp. If the drop is slow the inflationary consequences in any year are muted,

but the adjustment is stretched out for longer. According to our structural

estimates, in the unconstsrained case, the inflationary consequences of a hard—

landing (defined as l4 percent depreciation per year for three years) and soft
                                                — I 3—



 landing (defined as 6 percent depreciation per year for seven years) beginning

 in 1986, are as follows:

                             Inflation Effects of Depreciation

                                                 1986     1987       1988

             "Hard" landing                        1.0     2.I        3.6

             "Soft" landing                        0.4     1.0        1.6


Remember     that these are not forecasts of the inflation following a decline in
the dollar, since they assume for analytical purposes that the path of output is
independent of the path of the exchange rate. As noted later, the policy
authorities might well choose to respond to a sharp drop in the dollar wIth               a

mild recession, to mute the inflationary consequences.



The    Strong Dollar as a Macroeconomic Strater In         a Single Econonr

       We   are now prepared to turn to the question raised at the opening of
the paper. Does it        make   sense   to pursue a policy mix   aiming at a strong
currency     for the purpose of easing the costs of disinflation? Can the

"sacrifice ratio"     be reduced    by- a strong dollar in the early phase of a

disinflation,    or does the strategy xrely push the costs           into   the future?
If   in fact the total costs of disinflation are unchanged over the long term,

is there any justification left for pursuing such a policy? Finally, even
if the policy- makes sense from a single country's point of view, is the
decision to pursue such a policy essentially a beggar—thy—neighbor decision?
What   happens if   all   countries try to pursue the strong currency approach?
                                      _114


     We turn first to an extended discussion of the policy mix from a single

countrys point of view, and turn later to some of the multi—country issues.

     Mundell's original notion in the 1911 essay is that a mix of tight

money and expansionary fiscal policy can reduce inflation and maintain

output at the same time. In principle, the short—term sacrifice ratio can

be reduced to zero if all of the disinflation is brought about by currency

appreciation, with fiscal policy being expansionary enough to offset the

contractionary tendencies of tight money.    Consider   a numerical illustration

from my paper with Gilles Oudiz in the BPEA 198L:1. The policy multipliers from

the EPA model are reproduced in Table 1. The multipliers shown are the average

effects of shifts in M and G over a two—year period. Below, I will offer

independent estimates of these effects, that display somewhat larger

movements in the exchange rate for a given change in policy. (In the EPA

model, exchange rate expectations are essentially backward—looking, while in

the model below, they are forward looking. That, and nv assumption of very

asset substitutability between currencies, seem to be the major distinctions in

the magnitude of the estimated effects.)

     In every country, a normalized fiscal expansion is less inflationary than a

normalized monetary expansion (by normalized expansion I mean a change in G or M

sufficient to raise output by one percentage point on average in the first two

years). Consequently, a fiscal expansion with an exactly offsetting monetary

contraction leaves output unchanged, but inflation lower. In Japan, for

example, a 2.5 percentage point increase in discount rates, balanced by a

O.61 percent of GNP fiscal expansion, leaves output unchanged, but reduces
Table 7      Normalized Policy Multipliers for Output, Inflation, and the Current Account Ratio
                                  Economic Planning Agency Model
                                              United States                     Japan                        West Ger,nany
             Country                                          Current                      Current                           Current
           acting, and      Size of             Inflation     account          Inflation   account             Inflation     account
              pohcv         policy    GNP         rate          ratio   GNP      rate        ratio   GNP         rate         ratio
          United States
           Monetary          4.08      1.00        0.09       —0.08     0.02    —0.22        0.06    —0.54        0.20         0.01
            Fiscal           0.48      1.00        0.04       —0.16     0.14      0.00       0.04     0.27        0.05         0.06
          Japan
           Monetary          2.50     —0.1!        0.00         0.00    1.00      0.59     —0.02     —0.06        0.00        —0.02
           Fiscal            0.64      0.00        0.01         0.01    1.00      0.18     —0.13      0.01        0.00         0.00
          West Ger,nany
           Monetary          1.11     —0.01      —0.01        —0.01     0.01      0.00       0.00     1.00        0.43       —0.05
           Fiscal            0.51      0.01       0.00          0.00    0.09      0.03       0.02     1.00        0.14       —0.28
          Source:         Table 6 in Sachs & Oudiz, BPEA 1984:1. Original source is Economic Planning
                          Agency of Japan, Economic Research Unit, "The Results of Exchange Rate
                          Simulations" (EPA, 1983). This study was prepared for the 1983 Link Inter-
                          national Conference, September 12—16, 1983. The document points out that the
                          model is being revised, and the results must be regarded as tentative.
                                          —)45—



inflation by (0.59—O.lB)0.51 percentage points —— a zero sacrifice ratio! Is

this the long sought after anti—inflation machine? No, for two reasons. First,

the policy works through a currency appreciation that raises prices abroad, in

the countries with the counterpart depreciating currencies. Thus, while Japan's

inflation is costlessly reduced by the policy mix, world inflation as a whole is

left unchanged. In the case of Japan, according to the EPA model, the

repercussion effects on foreign inflation rates in Germany and the United States

appear to be very small. Since Japan alone is a relatively small part of the

OECD econorry, a given inflation reduction in Japan translates into a much

smaller inflation increase in the other OECD economies. For a very small

country, a given reduction in inflation at home will be balanced by a negligible

increase abroad, but an average of world inflation (which gives the small

country very little weight) will show that there is no change in the global

average.

        Second, the policy mix is probably not sustainable for long. Note that

the proposed policy mix also worsens the current account, in this case by

(—0.13) minus (—0.02), or by .11 percent of GNP in Japan. Over time, those

external deficits would cause foreign indebtedness to build, which would reduce

real consumption opportunities of future generations, and for a variety of

reasons, eventually cause the currency to depreciate.

     According to the EPA model, even the short—run usefulness of a shift to

fiscal expansion and monetary contraction appears to be rather small in the

U.S.,    since   there is little quantitative effect of either policy on   inflation.
Based   on the evidence presented earlier in the paper, the opportunities for the
                                                      —46—



 U.S.    have probably been niich greater than shown in the EPA model.

         It is useful to consider a single—period optimization problem of the

 macroeconomic authorities when presented with the opportunities just examined.

Following the framework set out in Oudiz and Sachs, BPEA 1984:1, suppose that

policymakers have a quadratic loss function in three targets, output (measured

as a gap from potential), inflation, and the current account:

 (114)        u = -(1/2)(Q2+ni2+CA2)

Suppose further, that the relationship between M and G and the three fiscal

targets may        be   described in reduced form as:

 (15)
              Q=M+G+Q0
               =a M+aGirG+r 0
              iT
                        Mir

              CA =             —          +
                         4CM       aGCG       CA0
Because     fiscal expansion tends to appreciate the exchange rate (or at least to

cause a smaller depreciation than monetary- policy), we expect the value of

aG to be less than a, and the value of aac                    to   be greater than aMC. That is,
consistent with the results of Table 7,                 fiscal    expansion is less inflationary

than     monetary expansion, and fiscal expansion                is more adverse for the external

balance    than is monetary policy.
     Now suppose that the economy has an inflation problem, in the sense that if
it chooses to set M = G = 0 (these are policy settings as deviations from a
baseline    level), it achieves           full employment and external balance, but has an
inflation     rate above the optimum. Specifically, we set the constants                   and

CA0 to zero, and set it0           > 0.       What policy mix should the country- pursue? By

setting dU/dM = 0 and dU/dG = 0, we find the following optimum choices for M and

G:
                                                      ——


(i6)      M =
                     6MO
                              < 0


          G=                  >   0
                    +OGitO


where
                     )(a_aG) + 1PaGC(aGCaMlT_aGlTaMC)
                                                                >0
                                      + lI)aMC(aGCaMlT_aGaMC)
                                                                >0
                =                     2 +              2
                     (C_aGC)                  (a_aG)
As expected, the optimal policy is to choose M less than zero, and G greater

than zero, and thereby reduce inflation at the cost of a larger external

deficit. By substituting (12) ick in to the structural model, we find the

selected levels of the three targets:

(17)           =
                     'o' ó >          0

          it   =6 itO
                    it


          CA =
                     co' 6c >             0


where

                = _________________________



          6    —
           C

          6 = 1        —     (i/ti) hb(aG_aM)2    +
                                                      tJJ(aGCaM_aGaMC)2]

The built—in inflation is met by policy actions that reduce output,

implicitly overvalue the exchange rate, and cause an external deficit.
        Note that the policy mix may be reversed if the econourj inherits an

external balance problem in addition to an inflation problem. Suppose now

that CA0    is   now negative, while          remains positive. Now a choice of M = G
= 0 would leave the countiy with full emplcyment, but with high inflation

and an external deficit beyond the desired level. Optimizing once again, we

find the following set of preferred policies:



(18)        M =               +
                      0MO         YMCAO

            G =              —
                     OG1tO       IGCAO

where

                 =                    +                      > 0
                      (aGC_aMC)           a(aGCaM_aMCaG,T)
                 =                    +                      >   0
                      (aGC_aMC)           aG(aGCaM_aMCaG)

                             as in (16).
            0M' 0G'


Note that the following structural characterisitics militate against the

Mundell mix: (1) a high structural external deficit (i.e. a large value of

CA0); (2) a high loss parameter on external deficits; (3) a poor tradeoff of

output growth and external deficit, as given by the coefficient on G in the

current account equation, a (that is, a normalized fiscal stimulus causes a

large worsening of external balance); and () a small differential in the

inflation effects of M and G (as measured by a —
                                                                 a).
       So much for the static version of the model. We have seen in practice that

the large appreciation of the dollar is expected to be reversed in the next ten
                                             — )49—




years, so that the short—run gains to inflation will later be lost. What are

the merits of the strater given that real exchange rate gains tend to he

temporary? Stanley Fischer (l98) has recently pointed out that these merits

depend crucially on the type of wage—price process in the econoiny.2- In settings

were wages are "backward—looking" functions of inflation, the merits will tend

to be qualitatively different than in economies with wage change depending on

rational expectations of future policy actions. Fischer's analysis is extremely

illuminating on this point, though his focus is on shifts in          the   sacrifice ratio

when   monetary policy and capital controls are the instruments available to the
macro authorities, and he does not consider fiscal policy. The next section
extends his analysis to the question of the policy mix of fiscal and monetary
variables.
       Consider first the case of backward—looking wage behavior. As a simple
illustration, assume that wage change equals lagged CPI price change, and the
CPI is a markup over domestic wages and         foreign   goods prices. The foreign

currency price of foreign output is fixed, and foreign producers fully pass

exchange rate changes into domestic prices. In log levels, we have the

following relationships:



(19)             =          +



             p   =
                     Xwt
                           +
                                (l_X)(p_e)
                 =
                     p+e         —



This   system yields the following equation for inflation:
                                        —50—



(20)           =       +      — e(Rt_Rti)      ,   e =   (i—x)/x

Current inflation equals lagged inflation, plus an output effect, plus a

negative effect for appreciations of the real exchange rate (Rt_Ri) <            o.
       For the dynamic problem, the utility function is now written as the

discounted sum of period—by—period utilities, with a discount factor            less than

one (technically, we are assuming an additively separable intertemporal loss

function). We also write utility directly as a function of R, rather than the

current account balance:



(21)        V = —1/2       t(Q2÷242)
The econony inherits a given rate of wage inflation at t0, and thereafter

pursues an optimal path of policies of M and G, that minimizes V in          (17).
Instead   of focussing on M and G, we imore simply assume that these two

instruments can be used to control the two targets         and Rt in each period.

At time zero we assume that the econoimj begins with the real exchange rate R0=0

In this illustration, the Government credibly commits itself to the entire

future sequence of actions (an assumption I return to skeptically later on).

       Before solving for the optimum policy, let us examine the options actually

open to the policy maker. By solving (21) forward for T periods, we see that

inflation at time T is a function of inherited inflation, y        times   the cumulative

output   loss between t=0 and t=T, and the level of the real exchange rate at T:


(22)       11T =   — T_lQ     —
                                  ORT


Aside from the issue of whether the policy authority could actually commit to a
permanent rise in B (and obtain sufficient foreign finance to run the implied
                                          —51—



 current   account deficits), it will not in fact be optimal for the policy maker

to choose such a course in this example. Over time, optimal policy implies that

inflation return to zero, output return to full employment, and B return to

zero (given the utility function assumed here). Hence, as T gets large, we

expect       to approach zero. From equation (22) we can see an important

result, first shown by Buiter and Miller.22 In an economy with backward—looking

wage    setters, in which the long—term real exchange rate returns to its initial
level (either perforce, or     given an optimal policy path), the cumulative output
loss necessary to reduce a     given inherited inflation to zero in the long run is
fixed, and independent     of the path of the real exchange rate that is followed.

To see this,    simply let P get large in (22), let RT tend to zero, and examine
the    case in which    goes to zero. Then we see that the cumulative output loss
is simply given as:

(23)             =


The long—term sacrifice ratio, defined as the cumulative output loss from
t0 to t,      divided   by the reduction in inflation, 110, is a constant which
is independent of the exchange rate strater! Specifically, the sacrifice
ratio is (l/y), where y is the Phillips curve parameter in the wage
equation.

       Does this mean that Mundell is wrong, and that there is nothing to be

gained from a strong currency policy?

       The answer is no. With reasonable assumptions on intertemporal utility,

the policy mix of tight soney and loose fiscal policy (or equivalently, of
                                            —52—



    increases    in R) still may make sense in the beginning phase of of disinflation.

The short runs gains on inflation from raising R.t above zero may plausibly

exceed the longer run costs of higher inflation when Rt returns to zero. The
key assumption that can make this the case is that there are increasing marginal
costs of inflation, so that on the margin a reduction         in inflation from, say, 10

percentage points per year to 9 percentage         points per year, has a higher utility
value    (in terms of output that would be willingly foregone) than a reduction in

inflation from 2 percentage points to 1 percentage point. This kind of effect

is eminently plausible, most directly because the excess burden of taxes

(including the inflation tax) can be described as a function of the square of

the tax rate. This assumption is clearly built in to the quadratic utility

function in (21).

        Consider the formal optimization of V in (21) subject to the constraints in

(20). Let At be the shadow cost in terms of intertemporal utility of an

increment to inherited inflation at time t. The first—order conditions for the

dynamic optimization are then given as:23


(21k) (a)              —
        (b)        =
                       hPO/411rt

        (c)     At =   Ai/    —


In    (a) we have the obvious result that the optimal output contraction in period

t    is greater the larger is the welfare cost on inherited inflation in period t,
At. An optimal disinflation path begins with a steep recession, and then a
gradual return to full employment as the inflation rate ebbs to zero. More
                                               —53—



importantly    for our purposes here, note that (b) shows that Rt should be

proportional to inflation along the optimal disinflation path! In other words,

along an optimal path, there is an initial real exchange rate appreciation when

inflation is high, and a declining real exchange rate as inflation returns to

zero.    This path does not gain anything in terms of        the long—term sacrifice

ratio, but it raises utility relative to a disinflation path with a constant

real exchange rate. The reason is simple: by raising H early in the process,

some of the inflation is exported abroad without having to incur further costly

output losses; later on, the same amount of inflation is re—imported as H falls.

The welfare gain arises from the fact that the marginal utility gain from a unit

of inflation reduction when inflation is high (early in the disinflation)

exceeds the marginal utility loss from a unit of inflation increase later on

when the inflation rate is already low.

        In broad outline, then the Reagan disinflation has       had   some, but not other,

characteristics of an optimal disinflation path. The process began with a deep

recession,    and   was   followed    by a gradual return to full employment. The real

exchange rate was         increased   in the early part of the disinflation, and will pre-

sumably fall in the later stages of the process. Of course, depending on the

weights one attaches to inflation, output, and external balance in the utility

function, different degrees of recession or real appreciation will be called

for. The question we pick up later, however, is whether the continuation of

current policies is likeby to be appropriate as well. Note that an optimal path

builds in a steady real depreciation after the initial expansion. This model

and the results later on suggest that the actual U.S. fiscal expansion has been
                                              —5 )4_



carried too far, too long, from the point of view of optimal disinflation. As
inflation was reduced the dollar should have depreciated in real terms,
according       to the model. Exactly the opposite has occurred to date.

        In an economy with forward—looking wage setters, it     may be possible to
gain    even more by the Mundell strategy. Indeed, in some not—implausible models,
the sacrifice ratio can be reduced to almost zero by a policy of fiscal
expansion       and monetary contraction in the first phase of disinflation. As an

extreme illustration, consider the earlier model, but now with a wage process in

which the (log) wage for period t+l is set in t, but based on forward—looking

expectations of the price level. The wage equation becomes:

(25)            w+1 =

where             signifies the expectation of consumer prices in period t+l, held

as of period t. In each period, the nominal wage is predetermined, so that

macroeconomic policymakers retain period—by—period control over the output level

in the economy. The change between periods in the wage, however, depends on

expectations of future policies.

       The remaining structure of       the economy is as follows. Output is demand
determined,      with aggregate demand a decreasing function of Rt and an

increasing function of G. Consumer prices are a weighted average of w and p*_e
as in (19). Since B = pC+e_p*, we also have B = A(w+e_p*).          Foreign prices p41

are held constant, and normalized at zero. The demand and price equations can

therefore be written:

                 =
(26)
                     _t(wt+et_p) + Gt

       pC   =
                Xw+(l_A)(p._e)
                                                   —55—



We can think of the policymaker as choosing e and Gt in the period, with e

implicitly controlled by monetary policy, which we hold in the backgroud for the

moment.

        Now, suppose that the economy inherits some wage inflation, in that

exceeds w1. The exchange rate              at   t—l is given as eti.     Thus,   consumer price

inflation in the current period is given by:


(2T)                =
                        p — p1   =
                                     X(w_w1)
                                                   —
                                                       (1_A)(et_et1)
From the assumption of forward—looking wage behavior, wage setters note that

expected p÷1 equals the nominal exchange rate expected in the following

                                       =           - (1 —
period. This is because                    Xwt+1            X)et+1, and with w11 equal to
we have w           =
              t+l        t+l
       There is no fixed sacrifice ratio in this econow, either in the short

run    or   the long run. One strategy for policy makers is to absorb the current

inflation with accoinodating exchange rate or fiscal policy (that is, with

Gt hii enough or et low enough to hold output fixed), and to announce a value

of the future exchange rate equal to today's consumer price level. After one

period of inflation, the inflation rate vanishes costlessly. More strikingly,

using   the Mundell strategy, the policymakers can eliminate current inflation as
well, and still maintain full employment throughout! The idea is straightfor-
ward:       the exchange rate today is set at a high enough level so that current

inflation is zero. According to (2T), et is chosen to equal [X(wt_wt_i) +

                          This involves a real appreciation in R in the amount
(l_X)e1]/(l_X).
X(wt_wti)/(l_X). Then fiscal policy is expanded sufficiently so that aggregate
                                       — 56—



 demand is not reduced by the high real exchange rate.       For   the next period,

 policymakers announce a value of' the future exchange rate so that

 e+1=p,, and a return of fiscal policy to zero. Wages for period t+l then

 revert to a non—inflationary level, and the real exchange rate returns to zero.

 Note that workers get a big real wage increase in period t from the real

 exchange rate appreciation in period t, thich they then willingly give up in

 period t+l.

      The Mundell mix then allows for a complete elimination of inflation at

 zero output cost. Suppose that policy makers instead reduce the current

inflation through exchange rate policy alone (i.e. through tight money),

without the benefit of fiscal expansion. In that case, et would be moved to

the level we just found, but now output would fall because of the real

appreciation. The decline in output would be given by
                                                         _[a/(l_A)](wt_w1).
Obviously, the Mundell strater has improved the path of

output, even when viewed over the entire future   horizon.    As before the
announcement of future e would be sufficient to hold inflation to zero in the

future.

     Stepping back and comparing this model with the case of backward—looking

wage setting, we can make the following points. In this model with

anticipatory wage setters, inflation can be talked away in the future merely by

credible announcements of tight control over nominal variables (here, the

exchange rate; more generally, the money supply, exchange rate, etc.). The only

problemwith eliminating current inflation is that wage contracts build in some
wage stickiness over the duration of the contracts. One possible policy is to
                                           -51-

reduce inflation at the same pace as contracts expire, so as not to jeopardize

output. But another more aggressive policy is to use an exchange rate

overvaluation to reduce inflation in the time period in which current contracts

remain in force. The potentially contractionary effects coming from the real

appreciation are then offset by a temporary fiscal expansion. The Mundell

strategy does    not need to last longer than the length of the longest contracts
(assuming that wages are set on the basis of future prices, rather than on an
average   of wages,   as in Taylor's staggered contracts models). A temporary
appreciation    is the way around a set of pre—existing wage settlements.

Importantly, in this model, the economy does not really re—absorb the inflation

that   it exports in the   initial   period. When the real exchange rate falls,
workers   accept the   implicit real wage reduction without demanding a catch—up in
nominal wages. This is because the real appreciation itself in the first period
drives the real wage above its long—run target level, so that workers are
willing to see the real wage fall back to the target.
       To summarize the arguments of this section, the Mundell mix of    loose fiscal
policy    and tight monetary policy can reduce the sacrifice ratio in the short

run, and may or may not reduce the sacrifice ratio in the long run. In the

case of backward—looking wage setting, the real appreciation is a method of

redistributing the burden of adjustment over time, in order to make more rapid

gains against inflation when inflation is high, and accept the costs of higher

imported inflation when inflation is low. In the case of forward—looking wage

behavior, the strategy might actually reduce the sacrifice ratio to zero, in

that it provides a vehicle for cutting inflation and maintaining output in the
                                           —58—



 short    period in which existing wage contracts remain   in   forte. Long—tenn,

 painless disinflation is no problem in the model, under the (strong) assumption

 that governments can make credible commitments to future non—inflationary

 policies.



The Policy Mix in the Multi—Country Setting


       In a world econory in which individual countries pursue policies in a

non—cooperative setting (i.e. not subject to supra—national controls, IMF

surveillance, economic treaties, etc.) the previous analysis will apply on a

country—by—country basis. If many      countries   are simultaneously attempting to

disinflate, each will have an incentive to pursue a tight money, loose fiscal

policy in order to strengthen the currency. Of course, differing concerns in

each country regarding public, deficits or external deficits may cause the vigor

with which the policy mix is pursued to vary.

       As described in some detail in Ondiz and Sachs, BPEA l98t:l, the resulting

non—cooperative global equilibrium is likely to be inefficient, in the sense

that   all countries can come closer to their targets if they make some
cooperative adjustments to their policies. The reason for inefficiency in this
particular case should be clear. In a closed world system, not all countries
can   simultaneously appreciate their currencies vis—a--vis the    other countries.

Indeed,   in a fully symmetric             real exchange rates between identical
                                 setting, all

countries would be constant over time in equilibrium, even though from the
perspective   of each policy authority, the country's own real exchange rate would
                                          —59—


appear to be a choice variable. The common attempt of all countries to

appreciate will simply cancel out.

     To the extent that there are side costs to running large budget deficits

and a tight monetary policy, the (failed) attempt of each country to appreciate

will impose pure deadweight losses on the world economy. The policy xaix can

produce undesirably high world interest rates, or too rapid growth in public

indebtness, without achieving any inflation gains for any individual country.

     Even if some countries pursue the mix more aggressively than others (which

is certainly true for the U.S. vis—a-vis Europe and Japan in recent years), the

world equilibrium is still likely to be Pareto inefficient, with a bias towards

too high budget deficits throughout the world. One could surmise, for example,

that in the absence of the recent U.S. policy mix, the European and Japan

economies would have maintained looser monetary policies, and even tighter

fiscal   policies, but were constrained from doing so by fears over further
currency depreciation. In Oudiz and Sachs, Table l4, we used an optimization
framework to show that in the event of a U.S. fiscal contraction cum monetary

expansion,   the optimal response of Japan and West Germany    would be to follow

with similar changes. Similarly, using      formal techniques of dynamic
optimization, Sachs and Mckibbin    gives an extended illustration of how

non—cooperative policy making within the OECD is likely to lead to excessive

budget deficits and   real   interest rates in a   period of disinflation.2
     Thus, the Mundell   mix is most justifiable from an individual country's

perspective,   and is perhaps actually pernicious when viewed from the global
perspective. Our welfare     evaluation of alternative policies in the next section
                                          —6o—



must   therefore be viewed from a strictly national perspective, taking as given
the policy actions in the rest of the world.

Policy Optimization in a Medium—Scale Simulation Model

       In this section we draw together the pieces of our analysis, by estimating
optimal policies for disinflation in the United States within a structural model
of global macroeconomic adjustment. The model has been designed and refined in
joint work with Warwick McKibbin and Gilles Oudiz. It is a dynamic model of the
world economy with four regions (the U.S., rest of OECD, non—oil LDCs, and OPEC)
specially   designed for policy optimization studies. I use the model here for

three purposes: (1) to see whether, in broad outline, the movements of the

dollar can be explained in a structural model in terms of shifts in

macroeconomic policies in the U.S. and the ROECD (rest of OECD); (2) to see

whether from the vantage point of 1980, the mix of fiscal expansion and monetary

contraction had merit for the U.S.; and     (3)   to assess the prospects for future

developments of the U.S. price level and external balance, in view of the large

appreciation of the dollar since 1980.

       A complete description of the simulation model is available in Sachs and

McKibbin (1981).25 Here an outline of the model will be given. As a general

matter, the model has several features which make it particularly attractive for

the type of policy analysis undertaken here. First, the important stock—flow

relationships  and intertemporal budget constraints are carefully observed,
so that the long—run properties of the model are reasonable. Budget deficits,
for   example, cumulate   into a stock of public debt which must be serviced, while
                                          —6i—


current account deficits cumulate into a stock of foreign debt. Second, the

asset markets are forward looking, so that the exchange rate is conditioned by

the entire future path of policies rather than by a set of short—mn

expectations.     This model differs in this fundamental regard from all of the
large—scale world econometric models.
       The model is for a four—region division of the world econonr. Only the
developed country bloc (the U.S. and ROIECD) have      an internal macroeconomic

structure; the LDC's and OPEC are modelled only with respect to their

international trade and financial linkages. Each region produces a single

output, which is an imperfect substitute in consumption for the outputs of the

other   regions. Every region therefore exports and imports to the other regions,
with   the extent of trade parametrized on the baseline to correspond to a
direction—of—trade matrix for 1983. Importantly, it is assumed that potential
growth of GDP is fixed at 3 percent per year in both the U.S. and the ROECD, so
that I do not examine at all the long—term growth effects of alternative policy
mixes. In any    event,   there would be no easy way   to   pursue the more ambitious
task   of building in endogenous growth of potential GDP as a function of policy

variables as crudely defined as government aggregate expenditure and taxation.

A cut in tax revenues of a given percent of GNP, for example, can be detrimental

to the growth of potential GNP if the tax cut finances increased consumption,

while it might spur growth if the tax cut is made in order to        subsidize capital
expenditures    (as with much of the Reagan tax cuts on capital income).

       In the U.S. and the ROECD, output is demand determined along conventional

lines. In any period, the nominal wage is predetermined, and domestic prices
                                          —62—



are    written   as a fixed markup over wages. While domestic prices are   given,
consumer prices can of course vary within a period because of movements in the

nominal    exchange rate. Aggregate demand is the sum of private domestic
absorbtion,      exports net of imports, and government spending (which is assumed to

fail, on the margin, entirely on home     goods). Private absorbtion combines
personal    consumption expenditure and investment expenditure in one behavioral

relation. The level of total absorbtion is written as a function of disposable

income (defined as GDP net of taxes), the real interest rate r, and the stock of

financial wealth of households. The real interest rate is the nominal interest

rate minus the rationally anticipated change in domestic goods prices in the

next period. In the version of the model reported here, each period signifies

one calendar year. Note that current absorbtion is written as a function of

current    disposable income rather that permanent income. This specification of
course builds in a strong presumption that the time path of taxes affects the
time   path of private absorbtion, even for a given discounted value of the total

tax burden.

       International financial flows are assumed to be completely dollar

denominated, with ROECD, LDC, and OPEC residents holding dollar denominated

assets and liabilities, but with U.S. residents not holding any claims in

non—dollar currencies. Thus all current account imbalances are      settled   by

changes in net U.S dollar claims and liabilities. Dollar assets are assumed

to be imperfect substitutes for ECU denominated assets, with the required risk

premium a function,       la Tobin, of the relative stocks of ECU and dollar assets

in the ROECD portfolio. In practice a very high degree of substitutability is
                                        —63—


assumed, in line with the suggestive evidence on real interest     rates and the
dollar   described earlier.


       A few of the key parameter values in the behavioral equations can help in

understanding the effects of policies in the model. At the point of

linearization the following elasticities are assumed:



       the effect of a 1 percentage point increase in the
       short—term real interest rate on private absorbtion
       expediture: decline of .1 percent of absorbtion.

      the effect of a $1 increase in income on private
      absorbtion expenditure: increase of 7O.

      the effect of a $1 increase in financial wealth on private
      absorbtion expenditure: increase of 1Oç.

      the effect of a 1 percent real appreciation of the dollar
      vis—a—vis the ECU on U.S. imports from ROECD: a rise of 1.5
      percent.

      the effect of a 1 percent real appreciation of the dollar on
      U.S. exports to Europe: decline of 1.5 percent.
      the effect of a 1 percent increase in OECD imports from the
      LDC's on the LDC terms of trade (i.e. on the relative price
      of LDC commodities): increase of .5 percent.
      the   effect of a 1 percent increase in OECD imports from OPEC
      on the relative price   of OPEC exports: increase of .5
      percent.

      The role of the exchange rate on domestic inflation is based on a pricing

model that is somewhat different from the stractural model derived earlier in

the paper. In the global mDdelling for the simulation model it was convenient

to   distinguish goods by country—of—origin rather than by class of commodity.
                                      — 61 —




Goods from ROECD and LDC are assumed to enter the consumer   price level   with a

weight equal to the ratio of U.S. imports from each region as a percentage of

U.S. GNP. The weight for OPEC is set at 0.01, to reflect both the import and

domestic production effects of a change in world oil prices. In particular, in

the U.S. the following consumer price index equation is specified:


(28) Pc = 0.89 w + 0.05 ROECD + 0.02 LDC + o.o1 OPEC


The ROECD currency bundle will be termed the ECU (with due apologies to

Australia, Japan, New Zealand, Canada .   . .). It is assumed that for given
local currency prices in the ROECD, an exchange rate change is passed through

100 percent within the year into U.S. import prices of ROECD goods. Thus, from

(28), the direct effect of a 10 percent depreciation of the ECU on the U.S.

price index is 0.5 percent. it is also assumed that the price of LDC goods and

OPEC goods are fixed as markups over price indexes of OECD goods from the other

regions, where the markups are a rising function of the level of total exports.

In other words, the dollar price of OPEC exports is given as:


(29) OPEC = 0.09 PUS + 0.*3 ROECD + o.18 LDC + 0.5 log


The weights here are based on OPEC import shares in 1983. This may be regarded

as an OPEC supply curve, making the supply of exports a rising function of the

relative export price. The weights attached by OPEC to U.S. prices and ROECD

prices is assumed to be fixed by the proportion of OPEC spending in the two

areas (it could also have been based on the extent of U.S. and ROECD purchases

from OPEC, depending on the underlying model of supply). There is a similar

equation for LDC pricing, given by:
                                                       —65—



(30) LDC = 0.20                  + 0.50 R0ECD +        0.30    pE +      0.5 log

Taken   together, we can calculate the direct and indirect first—period effect
of a 10 percent currency appreciation of the dollar relative to the ECU, and
this is found to be 1 percent.
       PLs   described earlier, the wage equation may                  be specified as forward or
backward      looking, or some combination of the two. The specification chosen

allows for level and rate—of—change effects of output on wage inflation.

Note that Q         in   this equation is to be regarded as the deviation of output from

trend, i.e. as a GNP gap measure.



(31)            =          +                ÷      +           —
                     L1t       (i_a)t11+i

Note that t+l is the period t                   expectation        of consumer price inflation in period

t+1, i.e.                         For   the backward—looking wage behavior, a =          1.    We also


set y   =      = .2.       With y equal to .2, the long—run sacrifice ratio is

approximately 5(1/.2).

       Under the assumption of backward—looking wage behavior (a =                     1),    the system

just outlined has properties that are very close to those estimated earlier. In

particular, consider the effects of a 10 percent appreciation of the dollar in

the model, and compare them with the annual averages of the quarterly nidel

(unconstrained version) estimated earlier:


                                                    Year           1      2       3
                    Quarterly Model                           —0.7'     —1.0    —0.9
                    Simulation Model                          —1.0      —0.9    —0.8

       The dynamic effects of           U.S.     fiscal and monetary policies are shown in

Tables 8 and 9. The fiscal policy is a sustained, bond—financed U.S.                           fiscal
                      Table 8:    Effects of U.S. Fiscal Expansion



                                             1984      1985       1986      1987


U.S. GDP (84$)              %                 0.7       0.9       0.6        0.4
U.S. GDP (84$)              $bl              27.0      35.7      24.1       17.1

U.S. Inflation              D                —0.3       0.0          0.2     0.2

U.S. Interest Rate          0                 0.7       0.8          1.0     1.2

Exchange Rate (E/$)         %                 3.9       3.9          4.0     4.0

OECD GDP                    %                 0.7      -0.1      -0.1       -0.3

OECD Inflation             %                  0.2       0.4          0.2     0.2

OECD Interest Rate         0                  0.6       0.9          0.9     0.9

U.S. CA ($)                % of U.S.GDP      -0.5      -0.5      -0.6       —0.6
U.S. CA ($)                $bl              —16.8     —18.9     —21.6      —23.6
                      Table 9: Effects of U.S. Monetary Expansion



                                           1984      1985     1986    1987


U.S. GOP (84$)             %                2.0      -0.5      0.0    -0.4
U.S. GOP (84$)             $bl             -73.4    -20.1      0.9   —16.7

U.S. Inflation             0                0.1       0.7      0.2     0.3

U.S. Interest Rate         D               -0.4       0.4      0.2     0.3

Exchange Rate (E/$)        °h              -0.8      —0.3     —0.6    -0.7

OECD GDP                   %                0.0       0.1      0.0    —0.1

OECD Inflation             %                0.0       0.0      0.1     0.0

OECD Interest Rate         0                0.0       0.1      0.1     0.1

U.S. CA ($)                % of U.S.GDP    -0.1      -0.1     -0.1    -0.1
U.S. CA ($)                $bl             —3.5      —5.4     —2.7    —3.1
                                          —66—


expansion. The monetary policy is a one percent increase in the money- supply,

expected to be permanent. The expansion begins as a 1% of GNP rise in govern-

ment expenditures on home goods, with no initial change in taxes. Over tis,

the higher expenditure level is left unchanged, but taxes are raised in line

with rising debt—servicing charges. Note that to read the table, "%"      signifies
percentage deviation from a baseline simulation; "D" signifies an absolute dif-

ference from the baseline; "$bl" signifies billions of current dollars deviation

from baseline; and "$81"   signifies   billions of constant, 19814 dollars deviation

from baseline.

       In the case of a U.S. fiscal expansion, we find a rise in GD? of 0.8

percent relative to the baseline in the first year, and a fall in inflation of

0.3 percentage points. The inflation reduction has two sources, one of them

spurious: on the one hand the fiscal expansion causes the exchange rate to

appreciate by 3.8 percentage points, which has a direct passthrough effect on

import prices, and from them to consumer prices. More dubiously, the Phillips

curve effect of higher output on prices operates with a full year lag. In the

second year of the shock, inflation is 0.0 percentage points higher than in the

baseline. U.S. short—term interest rates rise by 70 basis points in the first

year, and by 100 basis points in the third year. The U.S. current account

worsens by about O.1 percentage points of GD?, and then continues to worsen in

the next three years. Note that a 5.0 percent of GNP swing of fiscal policy

causes a CA swing of about 2.0 percent of GNP. This is about the order of

magnitude of the swing in fiscal policy and the current account since 1980,     so
that   the model is on track here.
                     Figure   7:   Nominal and Real Exchange Rate Effects of Fiscal Stimulus
      c:    5
 O    04
 o
 o 02:
 0 01
—001
•—U   (32
—U    C.)   '3
                1   984               1990            1995          2000            2005       2010
                                                   NomincI                   +    Real
                                      —67—


     As explained in Sachs and Wyplosz (1984, op. cit.), the short—run appre-

 ciation of the dollar is reversed in the long run, for several reasons. The

persistent current account deficits of the U.S. cause a shift in world wealth,

which tends to diminish demand for U.S. goods. Second, the share of dollar

denominated assets in ROECD portfolios rises, and over time this induces a

growing risk premium on U.S. denominated claims. U.S. interest rates rise, and

the dollar tends to weaken. Importantly, the model does not signal any need for

a rapid reversal of the appreciation, as shown in Figure 7. The nominal

exchange rate does not return to its initial level until about 15 years after

the expansion.

     The implications of a U.S. monetary expansion are shown next. A U.S.

monetary expansion causes a more inflationary boom than does fiscal policy,

since the exchange rate depreciates on impact. Per unit of GD? gain, monetary

policy is more inflationary, but also less adverse to the current account

balance. The U.S. current account actually improves slightly on impact, but

then worsens over time. The differential impacts of monetary and fiscal policy

have the following implications. A mix of fiscal expansion (G rising by 1.1

percent of GNP) and monetary contraction (M falling by 0.8 percent relative to

trend), causes: no output change; an inflation reduction of 0.4 percentage

points in the first year; and a worsening of the current account of about 4.4

percent of GNP.

     Can this model hope to reproduce the essential quantitative aspects of

the U.S. disinflation and strong dollar of the past four years? The answer is

yes. Suppose that the U.S. and ROECD were on a particular adjustment path up
                                      —68—




until the policy changes of 1981. Let us describe the changes relative to that

old baseline as follows:


          a sustained U.S. debt financed fiscal expansion of 5
          percent of GNP;

          a sustained ROECD fiscal contraction of 2 percent of
          ROECD GNP;

          a substantial tightening of U.S. monetary policy;

          no change in ROECD monetary policy.


The degree of U.S. monetary tightening is calibrated so that the net effect of

monetary contraction and fiscal expansion is a recession with a GNP gap of 7.5

percent in the first year, and then a gradual recovery. This involves a sharp

fall in real money balances (7.5 percent relative to the baseline), and then a

path of nominal money growth slightly below inflation for the next two years.

This policy setting yields the path of variables shown in Table 10. The dollar

appreciates by 39.b percent relative to the ECU, and U.S. short—term real

interest rates rise by 8.0 percentage points relative to abroad. A protacted

period of unemployment ensues, with the U.S. returning gradually to full

employment. The U.S. inflation rate falls from 10 percent in the year before

the shift to 6.3 percent in the first year of the policy, 3.8 percent the next,

and so on gradually to zero inflation (the table records the drop in inflation

relative to the 10 percent per year inflation of the baseline). This simulation

does not attempt to capture the precise timing of exchange rate movements (for

that we would have to assess the expectations of the market with respect to

future policies in every period since 1980). Rather it illustrates that
                Table 10: Simulated Effects of Shift in Policy Mix
                         in the U.S. and ROECD after 1980



                                         1981      1982     1983      198)4



Real Exchange Rate                       39.)4     32.6     29.8      27.1

Policy Shift

  U.S. Fiscal Def/GNP                     )4.O      )4.O      )4.0     )4.O


 U.S. Monetary Policy (Growth Ml)        —7.5      _9.1     —7.6      —7.3

  ROECD Fiscal Def/GNP                   —2.0      —2.0     —2.0      —2.0

  ROECD Monetary Policy (Growth Ml)       0         0         0        0



Other Variables

 U.S. GNP Gap                            —7.5      —6.1     —5.1      —)4.3


  U.S. Inflation                         —3.7      —6.2     —7.0
  (shift relative to baseline)

  U.S. Interest Rate                     10.0       8.8                6.9
  (shift relative to baseline)

  ROECD GNP Gap                           3.7      —5.5      —)4.5

  ROECD Inflation                         i.lt      1.9       0       —0.5
  (shift   relative to baseline)

  ROECD Interest Rate                     2.0       2.1       0.5     —0.6
  (shift relative to baseline)



Note: Monetary policy is defined as the percentage rate of money growth minus
       the percentage rate of money- growth in the baseline path. For example,
       the entry —7.5 in 1981 signifies a slowdown in Ml growth of 7.5
       percentage points relative to the baseline.
                                        —69—



movements   in the value of the dollar of the magnitude observed since 1980 can be
captured in   simulation exercise with plausible shifts in policy.

      Now, it is time to examine the specific properties of optimal disinflation

paths in the model. One brief word must be said about the optimization tech-

nique. Unlike the illustration of optimal control policies pursued earlier, the

calculations described below are for so—called "time consistent" policies, in

which the optimization is made under the assumption that the government cannot

commit itself at a given moment to the entire future path of its actions.

Rather, it optimizes today with the understanding that it will have the oppor-

tunity (and unavoidable desire!) to re—optimize at each date in the future. The

government therefore optimizes today, taking as given that it   will be optimizing
in   the future. To solve the problem, backward recursion is used; in each period

the government computes its best policy taking as given the policies that it

will be pursuing in the future. Technically, the solution technique is dynamic

programming, rather than optimal control. The technical methodology employed

may be found in Oudiz and Sachs (l98), and an earlier illustration of the tech-

nique in Sachs and McKibbin (1981).26

      For the utility function, I employ a quadratic loss function in the output

gap, inflation rate, an adjusted budget deficit relative to GDP, and an

adjusted current account deficit relative to GDP. Let bt =           be the ratio
                                                             Bt/Qt
of public debt to potential GDP(). The adjusted budget deficit measure used

is (b÷1_b). Similarly, the adjusted current account measure is the change

in net foreign liabilities per unit of potential GDP, denoted dt÷i_dt. In long—

run equilibrium, both bt and dt reach a constant. This requires that the actual

level of public debt and of foreign indebtedness grow at the rate of potential
                                                —70—



GDP, which I take to be 3       percent per     year.

       The instantaneous utility function in period t is simply u =

—               +         + 4)2(bt+i_b)2   +                         The bliss point in each
                                               4)3(dt+i_dt)2].
period is output at potential            =         zero inflation (n =        0),       and   no change

in the two debt—GDP ratios (b+1_b =
                                                dt+i_   dt =   0).    At the bliss point,

u = 0;       at all other points, u. <   0.    The intertemporal utility function is an

infinite discounted sum of all present and future
                                                                u,    of the fonu:



(32)                           (l+6)__t)u
                      Ut =sL

where 6 is the pure rate of time preference (set at 0.10 in the simulations that

follow). In all of the simulations that follow, 2 is set at                         ,   and   4)3
                                                                                                    at
The value 4)     is   given three alternative values, signifying a "high" welfare

weight on output (4), =        ); a   "medium" welfare weight on output '2 =                   ); and    a

"low" welfare weight on output             =    ). The   low welfare weight is selected to

yield roughly a path of disinflation of about the rate during l98l—84, (in

particular, it produces a recession in the early stage of disinflation with a

GNP gap   of 8.5 percent).
       The   intertemporal utility function is maximized using dynamic programming
techniques, under the alternative utility assumptions. The policy controls are
specified     in three alternative ways. In Case I, the optimal policy mix                     of   M and

G is selected to minimize U. In Case II, the policy path is restricted to

choices of monetary policy alone, with government spending fixed at a baseline

level. These two cases allow us to examine the advantages of using two policy
                                         —Ti—


 instruments rather than one instrument alone. In a closed economy, Cases I and

II would yield almost identical results (in Tobin's "funnel" theory, there would

be no advantage, in terms of the output—inflation tradeoff, to having both

instruments). In Case III, both M and G vary, but the policy authority is

obliged to maintain that a policy mix that keeps the real exchange rate

constant. This alternative is implemented making Gt the policy instrument,

fixing the real real exchange rate, and making Mt adjust endogenously to the

level consistent with the exchange rate target. In comparing Cases III and I,

we find the gains that can be achieved through manipulation of the real exchange

rate.

        Table 11 shows the optimal policy paths for disinflation for backward—

looking wage behavior and for a variety of utility functions and policy options.

The results are striking. In Case I, where both M and G are freely employed,

the optimal path is to use expansionary G and contractionary M. In all cases,

the three—year sacrifice ratio is lower given this policy mix than with M alone,

and much lower than with a constant real exchange rate policy. However, in all

cases, the infinite—horizon sacrifice ratio is higher with the Mundell mix

policy than with M alone, or with a constant real exchange rate. This latter

effect results from the fact that in all cases the long—run real exchange rate

is more depreciated in Case I. Since the Mundell mix causes a sharp initial

appreciation, and an accumulation of foreign debt, it also involves a greater

long—run depreciation.2T

    In    all examples, the optimal policy is an early recession and a gradual
recovery. In Case I, the recession is always brought about by a fall in M and a
                  Table 11: Optimal Policy Paths for Disinflation
                   (with alternative weights on output in utility)

                                              Year              Sacrifice Ratio

                                      1981    1982    1983     3—year   Long Run


LOW OUTPUT WEIGHT

Case I. Flexible Exchange Rate                                  3.147    5.20
  Fiscal Policy         (D/GNP)      5.7       3.7     3.1
  Monetary Policy       (Growth Ml)  0.6       1.3     3.5
  Output Gap                        -.8.5     —7.0    —5.8
  Inflation                          7.5       14.7    3.9
  Real Exchange Rate   %            27.1      18.7    15.5

Case II. M Alone
  Fiscal Policy                        0       0       0
  Monetary Policy                      2.0     2.3     14.0
  Output Gap                          —9.5    —7.5    —6.1
  Inflation                            8.5     5.1     4.1      3.93     5.00
  Exchange Rate                       15.1    10.7     8.5

Case III. Fixed Real Exchange Rate                              14.55    14.97
  Fiscal Policy                    —6.1       —5.1    —14.1
  Monetary Policy                   3.6        14.3    5.1
  Output Gap                       —9.8       —7.8    -6.3
  Inflation                         9.8        5.9     14.7-
  Real Exchange Rate                0          0       0

MEDIUM OUTPUT WEIGHT

Case I. Flexible Exchange Rate                                  3.12     5.30
  Fiscal Policy                        5.9     14.5    14.1
  Monetary Policy                      1.8     2.3     14.0
  Output Gap                          —5.9    —5.2    —14.6
  Inflation                            7.5     5.6     14.9
  Real Exchange Rate                  26.8    20.0    17.5

Case II. M Alone
  Fiscal Policy                        0       0       0
  Monetary Policy                      3.1     3.6     14.9
  Output Gap                          —6.8    —5.8    —5.1      3.88     5.00
  Inflation                            8.8     6.3     5.14
  Exchange Rate                       12.1     9.1     7.7

Case III. Fixed Real Exchange Rate                              14.61    4.97
  Fiscal Policy                    —14.14     —14.0   —3.14
  Monetary Policy                    14.1      5.2     5.9
  Output Gap                       —7.1       —6.0    —5.2
  Inflation                          9.8       7.0     6.0
  Real Exchange Rate                 0         0       0

(Table continued on next page)
Table 11 (cont'd.)


HIGH OUTPUT WEIGHT

Case I. Flexible Exchange Rate                              2.65    5.)40
  Fiscal Policy                      6.0     5.2     1.8
  Monetary Policy                    2.8     2.9
  Output Gap                        _)4•Q   —3.6    _3.1
  Inflation                          T.6             5.9
  Real Exchange Rate                26.5    21.0    19.0

Case II. M Alone
  Fiscal Policy                      0       0       0
  Monetary Policy                    3.9     14.8    5.9
  Output Gap                        _14.7   J4 —3.8         3.83    5.00
  Inflation                          9.1     T.14    6.7
  Exchange Rate                      9.1     7.2     6.14


Case III. Fixed Real Exchange Rate                          14.67   14.97
  Fiscal Policy                    —3.0     —2.8    —2.5
  Monetary Policy                   14.6     5.9     6.8
  Output Gap                       —14.8    —14.3   —3.9
  Inflation                         9.9      8.0     7.2
  Real Exchange Rate                0        0       0
                                           —72—



rise   in G. The case with the low weight on output is closest to the U.S.

experience. Note that the deficit initially rises to 5.7' percent of GNP, and

the current account deficit is l.4 percent of GNP. The exchange rate appre-

ciates by 27' percent on impact, and then depreciates steadily over time, to a

new long—run equilibrium level percent below the initial baseline. As the uti—

lity weight on output increases, the optimal amount of fiscal expansion also

grows. Note that in the "high" case the initial deficit is 6.0 percent of GNP.

       The Mundell mix is attractive because it allows for a quick disinflation at

low output cost (i.e., a low sacrifice ratio), even though it raises the

sacrifice ratio in the long run. It should be stressed why such a tradeoff is

desirable in the model, and therefore why the analysis is somewhat limited in

scope. The desirability of exploiting the short—run benefits of appreciation

result from: (1) quadratic costs of inflation (or at least rising marginal costs

of inflation); and (2) the implicit assumption that the indirect costs of the

policy mix (including budget deficits and current account deficits) are small

when nasured at a zero policy—change baseline. In other words, as in the static

model of the previous section, the econo]ir must have nore of an "inflation

problem"   than a "budget deficit problem" or "current account problem" on          the

baseline.28    Because of quadratic costs of inflation,      it pays   to reduce inflation
quickly; because of small welfare costs on the margin of budget deficits and
current account deficits, it   is   worth pursuing the Mundell mix      for   the sake   of

inflation control.
       The results really focus then, on   the    output—inflation tradeoff, without
seriously trying to measure the welfare     costs of running large budget deficits
                                            —13—



or   large current account deficits. Some critics of the mix         have argued that the

policy mix has imposed large costs by restricting investment expenditure, though

Bosworth's analysis in this volume calls that view into question. Others have

worried about the political and economic ramifications of a large external U.S.

indebtedness. Still others have asserted that for given aggregate output

levels,   there are n.jor costs   to a building of the non—tradeables sectors at the

expense   of   tradeables, particularly since that buildup will likely have to be

reversed over time. Such assertions are plausible, but so far unquantified. I

have included a weight for them by weighing the welfare costs of budget deficits

and current account deficits in the social welfare function. To the extent that

they are to be more highly credited, the result would be to further weaken the

case for the strong—dollar policy    mix.    In any   event,   all of the optimal policy-

paths call for a steady real depreciation after the initial appreciation.

However much the Mundell mix is    pursued, it must be    reversed over time.

      Finally, I re—iterate a point nntioned several times before. The welfare

discussion is based entirely on a national welfare function, taking as given the

actions abroad. A global analysis of global disinflation would likely argue

against the attempt of any particular country- to engineer a large currency

appreciation.



Conclusions and Problems Ahead

      Without the strong dollar in recent years, the U.S. would either have much

higher inflation, or still be languishing with double—digit unempoloyment as in

Europe. But since the past is past, the future does indeed look somewhat
                                        —T 14_




bleaker since the U.S. economy has already enjoyed the benefits of the strong

dollar, and now faces the higher inflation built into the process of unwinding

the dollar. As long as the depreciation is gradual, the actual inflation rate

does not have to rise as the dollar falls, as long as domestic price inflation

continues to fall, which is likely if there is continued (and declining) slack

in the economy. As shown in Case (1) above, with "low" output weight, the

unwinding of the dollar takes place in the context of steady declines in

inflation and a steady rise of output to full employment.

     The risks from the current situation come either from the possibility of a

sharp drop in the dollar, or a real appreciatoin that is sustained for too long.

Note that the optimal policy packages involve high but steadily falling budget

deficits, and certainly not a path of continuing high and rising deficits, as

now appears possible in the United States. What happens, in fact, if the

Mundell mix gets stuck, and the deficits remain inappropriately high? To

investigate this case, the nde1 is simulated for a permanent exogenous path of

deficits of 5 percent of GNP, with optimum monetary policy that takes the

deficit path as given. The major effect of this undesirable fiscal policy is a

sustained   path of current account deficits, and a large long—term decline in
private absorption. The economy experiences an enormous increase in external
indebtedness, and real consumption is squeezed in the long run to make room for
the net exports needed for debt servicing.
    A   final case to consider is the implication of a shift in portfolio
preferences   against the dollar, starting from a situation of large real

appreciation. Many analysts, such as Marris, believe that when the dollar
                Table 12: Effects of a Shift in Portfolio Preferences
                                   Away from $U.S.
                        (28.5 percent depreciation on impact)



                                           1985      1986     1987      1988


(a) No Portfolio Shift
    (baseline adjustment path)

   Real Exchange Rate                      18.0      14.1     12.1      10.4

   Output Gap                              -4.8      -4.0      -3.4     -2.8

    Inflation                  level        3.3       2.6      2.2       1.8



(b) A Portfolio Shift, with
    Policies Kept as in (a)

   Real Exchange Rate                      —9.5      4.3       5.7       5.8

   Output Gap                               0.5      -7.5     —5.5      —6.3

   Inflation                   level        5.0       6.5      3.6       2.9


(c) A Portfolio Shift, with
    Optimal Policy Response

   Real Exchange Rate                       0.2      -1.5     -2.7      —3.6

   Output Gap                              —6.1      -5.0     —4.1      —3.4

   Inflation                   level        4.9       3.6      2.0       2.4
                                            —75—



 begins   to depreciate the "luster" on the currency will diminish and a flight
 from dollars will ensure. What is the appropriate response of policy in that
 case, given that adjustments to such a shock will inevitably be painful.
      To study this case, we suppose that inherited inflation is 5% at the time
 of the portfolio shift, and that the preceding period's GNP gap was 5 percent.
An exogenous and permanent portfolio shift in ROECD occurs that for unchanged
U.S.   policy settings would result in    a 28.5 percent depreciation of the dollar
(this is of course a very sizeable shock!). Optimal nnetary and fiscal
policies are then applied in response to this shock. The results are shown         in

Table 12, where we compare output and inflation in three cases: (1) no portfolio

shift; (b) a portfolio shift but no policy response; and (c) a portfolio shift,

with optimal policy response. The utility function settings are for the case of

low weight on output.

       By itself, the portfolio shift causes a rise in output in the first year

and sharp increase in inflation. In principal the direction of effect of a

portfolio shift on output is ambiguous. When the portfolio shift occurs, U.S.

interest rates rise and the real exchange rate depreciates. The first effect

tends to reduce output, while the latter tends to raise output. In the ndel as

specified, the exchange rate effect dominates the interest rate effect (this is

true of most large—scale econometric models as well). However, by year 2 the

effect turns negative.        Policyinakers are forced to tighten sharply in the face

of the portfolio shift. The economy is pushed into a mild recession, with the

output    gap about   1 percent higher, and inflation 1 percent higher, for four

years. Thus, even with an optimal response to the portfolio shift, the net

result is a spurt in inflation and a mild recession.
                                              —76—



                   Appendix:    Commodity Prices and the Exchange Rate


        We divide the world into the U.S., the rest of the OECD (hereafter ROECD),

and the less developed countries (hereafter LDC), including the non—oil ODCs and

OPEC. The exchange rate measures the ECU/$ rate, where the "ECU" is the

weighted average currency of the ROECD. We assume that LDC pegs its currency to

maintain a constant real exchange rate vis—a—vis the total OECD area, with the

U.S.    receiving a weight      and the ROECD (l—) in the LDC currency basket.
Letting p, p0 and        be the fixed (log) output prices in local currencies in the

three areas, we assume:


(A.1)       eL =   L         + (i—a)(p0—e)1


Furthermore, by the assumption of competitive world trade in R, we may      specify-
the local currency price of R is:


(A.2)        r in the U.S.

               + e in the ROECD

               + eL in the ROW


        Now, a useful model makes supply of R in each country an increasing

function    of the local relative price of R. Assuming a constant supply
elasticity



(A.3) R =                 )C
                                            —TT—




          R0 =       (pRE/PO)C                in ROECD



          RL =                                  in   LDC



Demand for R is written as a negative function of the relative price of R, and

as an increasing function of real national income (with a demand elasticity

in each area:


(A.14)
          fl
                             C         in


                B(pRE/pO)_y            in ROECD



                                       in LDC
          R=

Equilibrium requires the world supply R (=             +   + RT   )   equal world demand


   (      +      +      ):


(A.5)    RW =



     The conceptual experiment asks how a percentage change in E affects the

dollar price         of comndity B, holding fixed the output prices P and P°. To

solve this problem, we logarithmically differentiate (A.3) and (A.), and note

that the percentage changes in world supply and demand may be written as:
                                                   —78—




(A.6)       drW = &1dr1 +      0°dr°   + (l_OU_OO)drL




            dr = 0dr + 0dr +             (1—0—0)dr


where 0' and 00 are the shares of the U.S. and ROECD in supply                     of   RW (and 0 are

analogously defined) at the initial equilibrium.                   Remember, finally, that br

assumption de1 =        L/EL    = ade.    The second equality follows from           A.l.     After a

bit of algebra we find a general expression for dp":


(A.T)        dPr =      [dp   + (l—i)(dp0—de)J +


                                =0   dy +
             where        rW                OUdyO      +
                                                           00dy, and

             I   = jD[(1) +            (1-Q)a1
                                                   +   EIaQ0 +



Note that r changes in proportion to a weighted average of changes in p and

(p0—e), and      also   in response to changes (weighted) in world income yW• y is the weight

attached to U.S prices and (1.-i) is the corresponding weight for ROECD prices.

        According to (A.7), the effect of an exchange rate change on p' is given

by dp7de = (1—y).         It is easy to compute dp"/de a number of special cases.

If the U.S. is tsmall" in the world, in the sense that 0" =
                                                                                0=a         0, then

dp'7de = —1.      This is the standard case that for a sil1 country, an exchange

appreciation lowers traded good prices one—for—one. If the U.S. is dominant in

the OECD, with a = 1          and 0U =      = 1,   then dp'7de =       0. In   this case, an

exchange depreciation would have no effect on dollar commodity prices. Third,
                                         —79—



if the U.S. share of the OECD production and consumption of R are equal,
and are in turn equal to a (the weight of the U.S. in the LDC's exchange
                r
basket), then dp /de = 1 —   a.   The larger is the U.S. weight, the smaller

is the exchange rate effect on dollar commodity prices.
                                       —80—


                                    Footnotes



1.   Robert A. Mundell, "The Dollar and the Policy Mix: 1971," Essays in
International Finance, No. 85, May 1971. Mundell argued that "Etihe correct
policy mix is based on fiscal ease to get more production out of the economy-, in
combination with monetary restraint to stop inflation." (p. 24. Emphasis in original)

2.   To quote Mundell: "Monetary policy has its comparative advantage in
controlling inflation and the balance of payments, and should be reserved for
that purpose. Financial instruments [i.e. money] should be allocated to
cial targets; real instniments [i.e. fiscal policy] to real targets." (p. 17.
Emphasis in original. Brackets my own.)

3.   Robert A. Mundell, "The Appropriate Use of Monetary and Fiscal Policy for
Internal and External Stability," IMF Staff Papers, Vol. 9 (March 1962).

)4.  Throughout the paper the weighted—average exchange rate is the MERM   index
of effective exchange rates, as calculated by the IMP.

5.   For example, even in a closed economy, the high interest rate effects of
the Mundellian mix could cause primary commodity prices to fall if inventories
are de—stocked in response to the interest rates. Such a decline in inventories
would provide a temporary, favorable "supply shock" to the economy, which could
feed through to lower prices and wages.
6. See, for example, R. Dornbusch and S. Fischer, "Exchange Rates and the
Current Account," American Economic Review, 70:960—71, 1980; and J. Sachs and C.
Wyplosz, "Real Exchange Rate Effects of Fiscal Policy," T'IBER Working Paper No.
1255, January 198)4.

7.   See Stanley Fischer, "Real Balances, the Exchange Rate, and Indexation:
Real Variables in Disinflation," NBER Discussion Paper No. l197, November l984.

8.   Okun used a multiplier of 3 to get the GNP gap   from the unemployment rate.
Gordon's equation yields a multiplier of about 2.

9.    See  Peter looper and Barbara R. Lowrey, "Impact of the Dollar Depreciation
on the   U.S. Price Level: An Analytical Survey of Empirical Estimates," Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April 1979.

10. Rudiger Donthusch and Stanley Fischer, "The Open Economy: Implications for
Monetary and Fiscal Policy," NBER Working Paper No. 1)422, August 198)4.

11.   See, for example, Dean A. DeRosa and Morris Goldstein, "Import Discipline
in the U.S. Manufacturing Sector," IMP Staff Papers, Vol. 28, No. 3, September
1981.
                                             —81—



 on the 1983 inflation rate    will   be the sum of the import    price   effects of 1981,
 1982, and 1983.

13. The following variables are       used   in the regression:

       c $U.S. price       of Saudi crude petroleum exports

       pf      weighted average of Economist commodity indexes for primary food
               (weight 0.95) and beverages (weight 0.05)

               weighted average of Economist commodity indexes for primary non—food
               agriculture (weight     ) and for primary metals (weight     )


       m       implicit price deflator for U.S. consumer good imports, NIPA

       w       hourly earnings index for non—supervisory workers, non—farm econoiry

               (dependent variable) personal consumption deflator, NIPA

       t       =1,60:1;2=G0:2;etc.

114. The unit constraint is imposed in a manner suggested by Robert Gordon.
Using the lag distribution from the unconstrained estimation, a weighted average
wage variable is created, equal to w = (EX.wt                     where the X. are the
PDL   weights on w. Then, the regression is re—estimated by subtracting             from
the  left—hand and remaining right—hand side variables.
15. These are reported in technical appendixes on "non—oil primary commodity
price developments and prospects" of the World Economic Outlook, for May 19814,
April 198)4, and April 1985.

16. IMF World Economic Outlook, April 1985, p. 138.

17. J. Longmire and A. Morey, "Strong Dollar Dampers Demand for U.S. Farm
Exports," U.S. Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service, Foreign
Agricultural Economic Report Number 193, December 1983.

18.  The data refer to the lEA Countries. See the Monthly Energy Review, Energy
Information Administration, Washington, D.C., January 19814, pp. 101—103.
19. The model consists      of the c equation, the wage change equation, and the
input price equations.

20.   I    commit the minor sin of setting (1/E)e = ifEe, where "e" signifies
expectations. This is for expositional ease, and is exactly correct only if the
expectations are held with subjective certainty.
21.   Fischer, "Real Balances, the Exchange Rate, and Indexation", op.cit.

22. William Buiter and Marcus Miller, "Real Exchange Rate Overshooting and the
Output Cost of Bringing Down Inflation," European Economic Review, 18, 1 (1982),
pp. 85—123.
                                                 —82—


23. Set up the formal       Lagrangian:
           £ =
                 E1             +   nr +          2 +
                      +i —                     + o(Rt+i     —
                 At
                                    —
                                                                R)}
     Then the first—order conditions are found y setting /3ir             0,



                                    t A]/
                                                              t
            = 0,    /aR = 0 for tl.
     Spec iica1ly,
                   = 0  +       =        —
                                                            At
                                           =            —
           a/aRt = 0        +
                                    ORt        eA1I          OAt
                      = 0   +          =

     Combining the first two equations, we see also that              =

2b. J. Sachs and W. Mckibbin, "Macroeconomic Policies in OECD and LDC External
Adjustment,'t NEER Discussion Paper No. l534, January 1985.

25. Sachs and Mckibbin, op.cit.

26. Oudix and Sachs, "International Policy Coordination in Dynamic
Macroeconomic Models," in W. Buiter and R. Marston (eds.), International
Economic Policy Coordination, Cambridge University Press, for the NBER and CEPR.

27. Compare this result with our earlier illustration of the Buiter—Miller
model, in which the long—run sacrifice ratio is fixed. In that case we ruled
out long—run changes in the real exchange rate.

28. As we have seen, this statement can be given precise technical content for
a specific optmization problem.
