                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     A COMPARISON OF MONETARY ANCHOR OPTIONS, INCLUDING PRODUCT
      PRICE TARGETING, FOR COMMODITY-EXPORTERS IN LATIN AMERICA

                                          Jeffrey A. Frankel

                                        Working Paper 16362
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16362


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2010




This study was presented at a workshop on Myths and Realities of Commodity Dependence: Policy
Challenges and Opportunities for Latin America and the Caribbean, World Bank, Sept. 17-18, 2009.
 The author thanks Daniella Llanos for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are
those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Jeffrey A. Frankel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
A Comparison of Monetary Anchor Options, Including Product Price Targeting, for Commodity-
Exportersin Latin America
Jeffrey A. Frankel
NBER Working Paper No. 16362
September 2010
JEL No. E5,F4

                                              ABSTRACT

Seven possible nominal variables are considered as candidates to be the anchor or target for monetary
policy. The context is countries in Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC), which tend to be price
takers on world markets, to produce commodity exports subject to volatile terms of trade, and to experience
procyclical international finance. Three candidates are exchange rate pegs: to the dollar, euro and
SDR. One candidate is orthodox Inflation Targeting. Three candidates represent proposals for a
new sort of inflation targeting that differs from the usual focus on the CPI, in that prices of export
commodities are given substantial weight and prices of imports are not: PEP (Peg the Export Price),
PEPI (Peg an Export Price Index), and PPT (Product Price Targeting). The selling point of these
production-based price indices is that each could serve as a nominal anchor while yet accommodating
terms of trade shocks, in comparison to a CPI target. All seven nominal anchors deliver greater overall
nominal price stability in our simulations than the inflationary historical monetary regimes actually
followed by LAC countries (with the exception of Panama). A dollar peg does not particularly stabilize
domestic commodity prices. As hypothesized, a product price target generally does a better job of
stabilizing the real domestic prices of tradable goods than does a CPI target. CPI-targeters such as
Brazil, Chile, and Peru respond to increases in world prices of imported oil with monetary policy that
is sufficiently tight to appreciate their currencies, an undesirable property. A Product Price targeter
or PEP country would respond to increases in world prices of its commodity exports by appreciation,
a desirable property.


Jeffrey A. Frankel
Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
jeffrey_frankel@harvard.edu
    A Comparison of Monetary Anchor Options, Including Product
     Price Targeting, for Commodity-Exporters in Latin America




Introduction: The Evolution of Nominal Targets for Monetary
Policy in Latin America and the Caribbean
        In perhaps no other region have attitudes with respect to nominal anchors for
monetary policy evolved more than in the developing countries of the Western
Hemisphere.
        Inflation rates went very high in the early 1980s, to hyperinflation in some cases
(including Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, and Nicaragua). As a result, the need for a nominal
anchor was plain to see. In a non-stochastic model, any nominal variable is as good a
choice for monetary anchor as any other nominal variable. But in a stochastic model, not
to mention the real world, it makes quite a difference what is the nominal variable toward
which the monetary authorities publicly commit in advance. 1 Should it be the money
supply? Exchange rate? CPI? Other alternatives?
        When stabilization was finally achieved in the countries of Latin America and the
Caribbean (LAC), in the 1980s and early 1990s, the exchange rate was virtually always
the nominal anchor around which the successful stabilization programs were built,
whether it was Chile’s tablita, Bolivia’s exchange rate target, Argentina’s convertibility
plan, or Brazil’s real plan. But matters have continued to evolve.

The trend from exchange rate targeting to inflation targeting

         The series of emerging market currency crises that began in Mexico in December
1994 and ended in Argentina in January 2002 all involved the abandonment of exchange
rate targets, in favor of more flexible currency regimes, if not outright floating. In many
countries, the abandonment of a cherished exchange rate anchor for monetary policy took
place under the urgent circumstances of a speculative attack (including Mexico and
Argentina). A few countries made the jump to floating preemptively, before a currency
crisis could hit (Chile and Colombia). Only a very few smaller countries responded to
the ever rougher seas of international financial markets by moving the opposite direction,
to full dollarization (Ecuador, under pressure of crisis; and El Salvador, out of longer-run
motivations). On a 30-year time span, the general trend has been toward increased
flexibility.2


1
  The best reference for this familiar point is Rogoff (1985). Two appendices demonstrate the point in
this study, that the choice of nominal target makes a big difference in the presence of shocks.
2
  Collins (1996). The co-existence of floating, on the one hand, and currency boards and dollarization, on
the other, gave rise in the late 1990s to the hypothesis that emerging market countries could go to either the
floating corner or the institutionally fixed corner, but that intermediate exchange rate regimes such as


                                                                                                             2
         With exchange rate targets somewhat out of favor by the end of the 1990s, and the
gold standard and monetarism3 having been already relegated to the scrap heap of history,
there was a clear vacancy for the position of Preferred Nominal Anchor, or intermediate
target for monetary policy. The table in Appendix 1 summarizes, with historical
examples, the Achilles heel or vulnerability of monetarism, the gold standard, and each of
the other variables that have been proposed as candidates for nominal target. Appendix
2 illustrates the point with a theoretical model in the mode of Rogoff (1985).
         The regime of Inflation Targeting (IT) was a fresh young face, coming with an
already-impressive resume of recent successes in wealthier countries (New Zealand,
Canada, United Kingdom, and Sweden). In many emerging market countries around the
world, IT got the job of preferred nominal anchor. Three South American countries
officially adopted Inflation Targeting in 1999, in place of exchange rate targets: Brazil,
Chile, and Colombia.4 Mexico had done so earlier, after the peso crisis of 1994-95.
Peru followed suit in 2002, switching from an official regime of money targeting.
Guatemala has officially entered a period of transition to inflation targeting, under a law
passed in 2002.
         In many ways, Inflation Targeting has functioned well. It apparently anchored
expectations and avoided a return to inflation in Brazil, for example, despite two severe
challenges: the 50% depreciation of early 1999, as the country exited from the real plan,
and the similarly large depreciation of 2002, when a presidential candidate who at the
time was considered anti-market and inflationary pulled ahead in the polls.5

        One could argue, however, that events of the past few years, particularly the
global financial crisis of 2007-2009, have put strains on the Inflation Targeting regime
much as the events of 1994-2001 had earlier put strains on the regime of exchange rate
targeting. Three other kinds of nominal variables have forced their way into the
attentions of central bankers, beyond the CPI. One nominal variable, the exchange rate,
never really left – certainly not for the smaller countries. A second category of nominal
variable, asset prices, has been the most relevant in the last few years in industrialized
countries. The international financial upheaval that began in mid-2007 with the US
sub-prime mortgage crisis has forced central bankers to re-think their intent focus on
inflation, to the exclusion of equity and real estate prices. But a third category, prices of
agricultural and mineral products, is particularly relevant for countries in Latin America

basket pegs or target zones were no longer viable. This “corners hypothesis” subsequently fell largely out
of fashion, as one could have predicted. Frankel (2004).
3
  Enthusiasm for monetarism had largely died out by the mid-1980s, perhaps because M1 targets had
recently proven unrealistically restrictive in the largest industrialized countries. A surprising number of
LAC countries continue officially to list money supply as their anchoring variable (Argentina, Guyana,
Jamaica, and Uruguay). But one may doubt in practice how strictly they try to keep any monetary
aggregate within declared ranges.
4
  Chile had begun to set inflation targets in 1991, but had also followed a basket peg exchange rate target
throughout the 1990s. Mishkin (2008) discusses the examples of Chile and Brazil.
5
  Giavazzi, Goldfajn, and Herrera (2005). Skeptical investor perceptions of Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva were
not entirely unreasonable at the time, based on the record of his past statements, but in the end were belied
by his responsible policies when in office.


                                                                                                              3
and the Caribbean. The greatly heightened volatility of commodity prices in the past
decade, culminating in the price spike of 2008, has resurrected arguments about the
desirability of a currency regime that accommodates terms of trade shocks. This third
challenge to CPI-targeting is the one that receives the most attention in this study.

What, exactly, is meant by Inflation Targeting?

        Inflation targeting has sometimes been defined very broadly: “the monetary
authorities choose a long run goal for inflation and act transparently.” 6 But usually
something more specific is implied by the term. For one thing, the price target is
virtually always the Consumer Price Index (though sometimes “core” rather than
“headline” CPI). A contribution of this paper is to consider other price indices that are
possible alternatives to the CPI for the role of nominal anchor, within what could still be
called Inflation Targeting.

        The narrow definition of inflation targeting would have the central bank governor
committing each year to a goal for the CPI over the course of the coming year, and then
putting 100% weight on achieving that objective to the exclusion of all others. Some
proponents make clear that they are talking about something broader than this: flexible
inflation targeting, under which the central bank puts some weight on the output objective
rather than everything on the inflation objective – as in a Taylor Rule -- over the one-year
horizon. This study will not deal especially with the eternal question of how much
weight should be placed in the short term on a nominal anchor, such as a price index,
relative to real output; nor with the question of how much discretion a central bank
should be allowed, as opposed to strict adherence to a rule. The central focus will,
rather, be on another specific question: to whatever extent weight is to be placed on a
nominal anchor -- whether it is 100% as under a fixed exchange rate, or a more flexible
range – what are the advantages and disadvantages of various nominal anchors?

What is different about Latin American economies? Low credibility, procyclical
finance, supply shocks, and terms of trade volatility

        Which regimes are most suitable for countries in the region? Table 1 reports the
exchange rate and monetary regimes currently followed officially by 18 LAC countries.
Inflation, the exchange rate, and the money supply are all represented among their
choices of targets.7 We begin with a consideration of some structural characteristics that
tend to differentiate these countries from others, though it is important to acknowledge
tremendous heterogeneity within the region.8


6
 Among many references in the large literature on inflation targeting, three that are internationally oriented
are: Svensson (1995), Bernanke, Laubach, Mishkin, and Posen (1999); and Truman (2003).
7
 Mishkin and Savastano (2002).
8
  For a much more comprehensive consideration of the region’s structural characteristics, see: Loayza,
Fajnzylber, and Calderón (2005).



                                                                                                            4
         Studies of monetary policy in developing or emerging-market countries, and of
inflation targeting in particular, make the point that they tend to have less developed
institutions and lower central bank credibility than industrialized countries. 9 Lower
central bank credibility usually stems from a history of price instability, which in turn is
attributable in part to past reliance on seignorage in the absence of a well-developed
fiscal system. Another common feature is an uncompetitive banking system, which is
again in part attributable to a public finance problem: a traditional reliance on the banks
as a source of finance, through a combination of financial repression and controls on
capital outflows. These countries also have higher default risk, of course.10

             Table 1: LAC Countries’ Current Regimes and Monthly Correlations
        of Exchange Rate Changes ($/local currency) with Dollar Import Price Changes
                            Note: Import price changes are changes in the dollar price of oil.


                    Exchange Rate Regime                     Monetary Policy                 1970‐1999      2000‐2008      1970‐2008
     ARG       Managed floating                  Monetary aggregate target                     ‐0.0212        ‐0.0591        ‐0.0266
               Other conventional fixed peg
      BOL      arrangements                      Against a single currency                     ‐0.0139        0.0156         ‐0.0057
     BRA       Independently floating            Inflation targeting framework (1999)          0.0366         0.0961         0.0551
      CHL      Independently floating            Inflation targeting framework (1990)*         ‐0.0695        0.0524         ‐0.0484
      CRI      Crawling pegs                     Exchange rate anchor                          0.0123         ‐0.0327        0.0076
     GTM       Managed floating                  Inflation targeting framework                 ‐0.0029        0.2428         0.0149
               Other conventional fixed peg
     GUY       arrangements                      Monetary aggregate target                     ‐0.0335        0.0119         ‐0.0274
               Other conventional fixed peg
     HND       arrangements                      Against a single currency                     ‐0.0203        ‐0.0734        ‐0.0176
     JAM       Managed floating                  Monetary aggregate target                     0.0257         0.2672         0.0417
      NIC      Crawling pegs                     Exchange rate anchor                          ‐0.0644        0.0324         ‐0.0412
      PER      Managed floating                  Inflation targeting framework (2002)          ‐0.3138        0.1895         ‐0.2015
                                                  The country has an IMF‐supported or
      PRY      Managed floating                  other monetary program                        ‐0.023         0.3424         0.0543
      SLV      Dollar                            Exchange rate anchor                          0.1040         0.0530         0.0862
     URY       Managed floating                  Monetary aggregate target                     0.0438         0.1168         0.0564


    Oil Exporters
                    Exchange Rate Regime                     Monetary Policy                 1970‐1999      2000‐2008      1970‐2008
      COL      Managed floating                  Inflation targeting framework (1999)          ‐0.0297        0.0489         0.0046
     MEX       Independently floating            Inflation targeting framework (1995)          0.1070         0.1619         0.1086
               Other conventional fixed peg
      TTO      arrangements                      Against a single currency                     0.0698         0.2025         0.0698
               Other conventional fixed peg
     VEN       arrangements                      Against a single currency                     ‐0.0521        0.0064         ‐0.0382


    * Chile proclaimed an inflation target as early as 1990; nevertheless, it had an exchange rate target, under an explicit band‐
    basket‐crawl regime, until 1999.
    Source: IMF De Facto Classifications of Exchange Rate regimes and Monetary Policy approach.
    http://www.imf.org/external/np/mfd/er/2006/eng/0706.htm



9
    E.g., Fraga, Goldafjn and Minella (2003).
10
     Blanchard (2005) explores an implication for monetary policy.

                                                                                                                                       5
        The standardly drawn implications of underdeveloped institutions and low
inflation-fighting credibility are that it is particularly important (i) that their central banks
have independence11 and (ii) that they make regular public commitments to a transparent
and monitorable nominal target. Some Latin American countries have given their central
banks legal independence, beginning with Chile, Colombia, Mexico, and Venezuela in
the 1990s.12 Sure enough, Jácome (2001), Gutiérez (2003) and Jácome and Vázquez
(2008) find a negative statistical relationship between central bank independence and
inflation among LAC countries. There are also some skeptics, however, who argue that
central bank independence won’t be helpful if a country’s political economy dictates
budget deficits regardless of monetary policy. 13

        The principle of commitment to a nominal anchor in itself says nothing about
what economic variables are best suited to play that role. Public promises to hit targets
that cannot usually be fulfilled subsequently will do little to establish credibility.14
        Most analysis of inflation targeting is more suited to large industrialized countries
than to small developing countries, in several respects.15 First, the theoretical models
usually do not feature a role for exogenous shocks in trade conditions or difficulties in the
external accounts. The theories tend to assume that countries need not worry about
financing trade deficits internationally. Many assume that international capital markets
function well enough to smooth consumption in the face of external shocks.16 In reality,
however, financial market imperfections are serious for developing countries.17
International capital flows often exacerbate external shocks, rather than moderating them.
Booms -- featuring capital inflows, excessive currency overvaluation and associated
current account deficits -- are often followed by busts, featuring sudden stops in inflows,




11
     E.g., Cukierman, Miller and Neyapti (2002).
12
     Junguito and Vargas (1996) and Anone, Laurens and Segalotto (2006).

13
     Mas (1995).
14
   The Bundesbank had enough credibility that a record of proclaiming M1 targets and then missing them
did little to undermine its reputation or expectations of low inflation in Germany. Latin America does not
enjoy the same luxury.
15
  This is not to forget the many studies of inflation targeting for emerging market and developing
countries. They include Debelle (2001); Fraga, Goldfajn, and Minella (2003); McKibbin and Singh
(2003); Mishkin (2000; 2004); and Laxton and Pesenti (2003). Savastano (2000) offers offered a concise
summary of much of the research as of that date.

16
     One of the few exceptions is Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2003).
17
     See Caballero (2000) and comments thereon.


                                                                                                         6
abrupt depreciation, and recession.18 An analysis of monetary policy that did not take
into account the international financial crises of 1982, 1994-2001, or 2008-09 would not
be useful to policy makers in Latin America and the Caribbean.

        Capital flows are particularly prone to exacerbate fluctuations when the source of
the fluctuations is trade shocks.19 This observation leads us to the next relevant respect in
which developing countries differ from industrialized countries.

         Analysis of how IT works in practice sometimes gives insufficient attention to the
consequences of supply shocks. Supply shocks tend to be larger for developing
countries than for industrialized countries. One reason is the larger role of farming,
fishing, and forestry in the economy. Droughts, floods, hurricanes, and other weather
events – good as well as bad -- tend to have a much larger effect on GDP in developing
countries. When a hurricane hits a Caribbean island, it can virtually wipe out the year’s
banana crop and tourist season – thus eliminating the two biggest sectors in some of those
tropical economies. A second reason for larger supply shocks is terms of trade
volatility, which is notoriously high for small developing countries. This is especially
true of those dependent on agricultural and mineral exports.20 Another feature of these
countries is that they tend to be more dependent on imported inputs. In large rich
countries, the fluctuations in the terms of trade are both smaller and less likely to be
exogenous. (For industrialized countries that float, terms of trade fluctuations are
dominated by variation in the nominal exchange rate.21 For industrialized countries that
firmly fix, fluctuations are much smaller.)

         As has been shown by a variety of authors, Inflation Targeting (defined narrowly)
is not robust with respect to supply shocks.22 Under strict IT, to prevent the price index
from rising in the face of an adverse supply shock monetary policy must tighten so much
that the entire brunt of the fall in nominal GDP is borne by real GDP. Most reasonable
objective functions would, instead, tell the monetary authorities to allow part of the
temporary fall in nominal income to show up as an increase in the price level. Of course
this is precisely the reason why many IT proponents favor flexible inflation targeting,
often in the form of the Taylor Rule which does indeed call for the central bank to share
the pain between inflation and output. It is also a reason for pointing to the “core” CPI
rather than “headline” CPI. But these accommodations are insufficient.


18
  Calvo, Leiderman and Reinhart (1993); Kaminsky, Reinhart, and Vegh (2005); Reinhart and Reinhart
(2009); Perry (2009); Gavin, Hausmann, Perotti, and Talvi (1997); Gavin, Hausmann and Leiderman
(1996); Mendoza and Terrones (2008).
19
     E.g., Hausmann and Rigobon (2003).

20
  E.g., Fraga, Goldfajn, and Minella, op cit. The old structuralist school in Latin America believed that
specialization in primary commodities was undesirable because they faced a low elasticity of demand.
21
     E.g., Taylor (2002).
22
     Among other examples: Frankel (1985) ; Frankel, Smit, and Sturzenegger (2008).


                                                                                                            7
“Headline” CPI, Core CPI, and Nominal Income Targeting

         In practice, inflation-targeting central bankers usually say they respond to large
temporary shocks in the prices of oil and other agricultural and mineral products by
excluding them from the measure of the CPI that is targeted. Central banks have two
approaches to doing this. Some publicly explain ex ante that their target for the year is
inflation in the Core CPI, a measure that excludes volatile components, usually farm and
energy products. The virtue of this approach is that the central banks are able to abide
by their public commitments when the supply shock comes. (This logic assumes the
shock is located in the agricultural or energy sectors. It doesn’t work, for example, for
labor unrest or power failures that disrupt industrial activity.) The disadvantage of
declaring core CPI as the official target is that the person in the street is less likely to
understand it, compared to the simple CPI. Transparency and communication of a target
that the public can monitor are the original reasons for declaring a specific nominal target
in the first place.
         The alternative approach is to talk about the ordinary CPI ex ante, but then in the
face of an adverse supply shock explain ex post that the increase in farm or energy prices
is being excluded due to special circumstances. This strategy can be a public relations
disaster. The people in the street are told that they shouldn’t be concerned by the
increase in the CPI because it is “only” occurring in the cost of filling up their auto fuel
tanks and buying their weekly groceries. Either way, ex ante or ex post, the effort to
explain away supply-induced fluctuations in the CPI undermines the credibility of the
monetary authorities. This credibility problem is especially severe in countries where
there are serious grounds for believing that government officials fiddle with the consumer
price indices for political purposes, which includes Argentina (recently) and Brazil (in the
more distant past), among others.
         Given the value that most central bankers place on transparency and their
reputations, it would be surprising if their public emphasis on the CPI did not lead them
to be at least a bit more contractionary in response to adverse supply shocks, and
expansionary in response to favorable supply shocks, than they would be otherwise. In
other words, it would be surprising if they felt able to take full advantage of the escape
clause offered by the idea of core CPI. There is some reason to think that this is indeed
the case. A simple statistic: the exchange rates of all major inflation-targeting countries
(in dollars per national currency) are positively correlated with the dollar price on world
markets of their import baskets.23 Why is this fact revealing? The currency should not
respond to an increase in world prices of its imports by appreciating, to the extent that
these central banks target core CPI (and to the extent that the commodities excluded by
core CPI include all imported commodities that experience world price shocks, which is a
big qualifier). If anything, floating currencies should depreciate in response to such an
adverse terms of trade shock. When these IT currencies respond by appreciating instead,
it suggests that the central bank is tightening monetary policy to reduce upward pressure
on the CPI.
         Three columns of Table 1 repeat the correlation calculations for our LAC
countries, on monthly data. We take the example of dollar oil prices, since they are the
most important source of variation in dollar import prices, for oil-importing countries.
23
     Frankel (2005).


                                                                                          8
Six of the 18 countries are inflation targeters currently. We might exclude Guatemala,
because its transition to inflation targeting is recent, and perhaps not even complete. We
should also exclude those LAC countries that are oil producers. Regardless, every one
of the inflation targeters shows correlations between dollar import pries and the dollar
values of their currencies that are both positive over the period 2000-2008 and greater
than the correlations during the pre-IT period. The evidence supports the idea that in the
LAC region as well, inflation targeters – in particular, Brazil, Chile and Peru -- tended to
react to the positive oil shocks of the past decade by tightening monetary policy and
thereby appreciating their currencies. The implication seems to be that the CPI which
they target does not in practice entirely exclude oil price shocks. Apparently “flexible
inflation targeting” is not quite as flexible as one would think. (Argentina, by contrast, is
not an inflation targeter, and allows its peso to depreciate when world prices of its import
goods rise.)

        What is wanted as candidate for nominal target is a variable that is simpler for the
public to understand ex ante than core CPI, and yet that is robust with respect to supply
shocks. Being robust with respect to supply shocks means that the central bank should
not have to choose ex post between two unpalatable alternatives: an unnecessary
economy-damaging recession or an embarrassing credibility-damaging violation of the
declared target.

         One variable that fits the desirable characteristics is nominal GDP.24 Nominal
income targeting is a regime that has the desirable property of taking supply shocks partly
as P and partly as Y, without forcing the central bank to abandon the declared nominal
anchor. The proposal was popular among macroeconomists in the 1980s.25 Some
critics claimed that nominal income targeting was less applicable to developing countries
because of long lags and large statistical errors in measurement. But these measurement
problems are smaller in most developing countries than they used to be. Furthermore,
the fact that developing countries are more vulnerable to supply shocks than are
industrialized countries suggests that the proposal is more applicable to them, not less, as
McKibbin and Singh (2003) have pointed out.

         In any case, for some reason, nominal income targeting has not been seriously
considered since the 1990s, either by rich or poor countries. Thus it will not be analyzed
in this paper. Fortunately, nominal income is not the only variable that is more robust to
supply shocks than the CPI.




24
   Nominal demand would probably be better than nominal income, for some technical reasons (excluding
the trade balance and, if possible, unintended inventory accumulation). But it does not pass the test of
being easily perceived and understood by the public.
25
   It was plain to see the superiority of nominal GDP targeting when the status quo was M1 targeting .
(Indeed, the proposal for nominal income targeting might have been better received by central banks if it
had been called “Velocity-Shift-Adjusted Money Targeting.”) Bean (1983); Feldstein and Stock (1994);
Frankel (1995); Taylor (1985); Tobin (1980); West (1986).


                                                                                                       9
Terms of trade shocks

        If the supply shocks are terms of trade shocks, then the choice of CPI to be the
price index on which IT focuses is particularly inappropriate. The alternative is an
output-based price index such as an index of export prices, the GDP deflator, the
Producer Price Index, or a specially constructed Product Price Index. The important
difference is that imported goods show up in the CPI, but not in the output-based price
indices and vice versa for exported goods: they show up in the output-based prices but
much less in the CPI. Proponents of inflation targeting do not seem to have considered
this point. One reason may be that the difference is not, in fact, as important for large
industrialized countries as for small developing countries, especially those that export
mineral and agricultural products.

         Terms of trade volatility is particularly severe for commodity exporters, which
includes most countries in Latin America and the Caribbean. Some LAC countries have
a large share of their exports concentrated in a product – such as coffee, copper, or oil --
that is so volatile that it periodically experiences swings in world market conditions that
double or halve their prices. The export markets for the manufactured goods and
services produced by industrialized countries, on the other hand, tend to be much more
stable. This is especially true for the larger industrialized countries such as the United
States, who have more monopoly power and whose exports are more diversified.




                                                                                         10
Table 2: Major Commodity Exports in LAC countries
and Standard Deviation of Prices on World Markets
                  Leading                         Standard Deviation of
              Commodity Export*                 Log of Dollar Price  1970‐2008
ARG               Soybeans                                   0.2781
BOL              Natural Gas                                 1.8163
BRA                  Steel                                   0.5900
CHL                Copper                                    0.4077
COL                   Oil                                    0.7594
CRI                Bananas                                   0.4416
ECU                   Oil                                    0.7594
GTM                 Coffee                                   0.4792
GUY                  Sugar                                   0.4749
HND                 Coffee                                   0.4792
JAM              Aluminum                                    0.4176
MEX                   Oil                                    0.7594
NIC                 Coffee                                   0.4792
PAN                Bananas                                   0.4416
PER                Copper                                    0.4077
PRY                  Beef                                    0.2298
SLV                 Coffee                                   0.4792
TTO              Natural Gas                                 1.8163
URY                  Beef                                    0.2298
VEN                   Oil                                    0.7594

* World Bank Analysis (2007 data).                       Source: Global Financial Data


       Table 2 reports the leading export commodity for each of twenty LAC countries,
and the standard deviation of the dollar price of that commodity on world markets.
Natural gas and oil are by far the most variable in price. But the prices of aluminum,
bananas, coffee, copper, and sugar all show standard deviations above .4; assuming a
normal distribution this implies that price swings of plus or minus 80% occur 5% of the
time. Only beef and soybeans -- the leading products of Argentina, Paraguay and
Uruguay – have price volatilities less than this.

The option of an exchange rate target

       Many Inflation Targeting central banks in developing countries have all along put
more emphasis on the exchange rate than they officially admitted.26 This tendency is the
famous Fear of Floating of Calvo and Reinhart (2002). When booming markets for their
export commodities put upward pressure on their currencies (2003-2008), they intervened


26
  Edwards (2006) considers whether the exchange rate should play a role in determining monetary policy
under IT.


                                                                                                    11
heavily to dampen appreciation. Colombia was one of many examples.27 Then, when
the world financial crisis hit in 2007, and especially when it put more severe downward
pressure on their currencies in the latter part of 2008 -- partly in the form of an abrupt
reversal of the commodity price spike -- some of these same countries intervened heavily
to dampen the depreciation of their currencies. The point is that central banks still do –
and should – pay a lot of attention to their exchange rates.
         The point applies to the entire spectrum from managed floaters to peggers. Fixed
exchange rates are still an option to be considered for many countries, especially small
ones. For very small countries, especially those that are highly integrated with the
United States (many countries in Central America and the Caribbean, in particular), an
institutional peg or even full dollarization remain reasonable options.
         Fixed exchange rates have many advantages, in addition to their use as a nominal
anchor for monetary policy. They reduce transactions costs and exchange risk, which in
turn facilitates international trade and investment. This is especially true for
institutionally locked-in arrangements, such as dollarization. Influential research by
Rose (2000) and others over the last decade has shown that fixed exchange rates and,
especially, monetary unions, increase trade and investment substantially. In addition
they avoid the speculative bubbles to which floating exchange rates are occasionally
subject.
         Of course fixed exchange rates have disadvantages too. Most importantly, to the
extent financial markets are integrated, a fixed exchange rate means giving up monetary
independence; the central bank can’t increase the money supply, lower the interest rate,
or devalue the currency, in response to a downturn in demand for its output.
         It has been argued that Latin American governments have misused monetary
discretion more often than they have used it to achieve the textbook objectives, so that the
loss of monetary independence under a fixed exchange rate is not to be lamented. A
second disadvantage of a fixed rate, however, presupposes no discretionary abilities: it
means giving up the automatic accommodation of trade shocks that comes with floating:
a depreciation when world market conditions for the export commodity weaken, and vice
versa.28     Berg, Borensztein, and Mauro (2003) say it well:
        “Another characteristic of a well-functioning floating exchange rate is that it responds
        appropriately to external shocks. When the terms of trade decline, for example, it makes sense for
        the country’s nominal exchange rate to weaken, thereby facilitating the required relative price
        adjustment. Emerging market floating exchange rate countries do, in fact, react in this way to
        negative terms of trade shocks. In a large sample of developing countries over the past three
        decades, countries that have fixed exchange rate regimes and that face negative terms of trade
        shocks achieve real exchange rate depreciations only with a lag of two years while suffering large
        real GDP declines. By contrast, countries with floating rates display large nominal and real
        depreciations on impact and later suffer some inflation but much smaller output losses.”

       Besides the inability to respond monetarily to shocks, there are three more
disadvantages of rigidity in exchange rate arrangements. It can impair the central bank’s
lender of last resort capabilities in the event of a crisis in the banking sector, as Argentina
demonstrated in 2001. It entails a loss of seignorage, especially for a country that goes

27
   Vargas (2005)
28
   Among peggers, terms-of-trade shocks are amplified and long-run growth is reduced, as compared to
flexible-rate countries, according to Edwards and Yeyati (2005). Also see Broda (2004).


                                                                                                        12
all the way to dollarization. And, finally, for a country that stops short of full
dollarization, pegged exchange rates are occasionally subject to unprovoked speculative
attacks (of the “second-generation” type29).

        Econometric attempts to discern what sort of regime delivers the best economic
performance across countries – firmly fixed, floating, or intermediate – have not been
successful.30 Clearly the answer depends on the circumstances of the country in
question. A list of criteria that qualify a country for a relatively firm fixed exchange
rate, versus a more flexible rate, should include at least these eight characteristics:
    1. Small size.
    2. Openness, as reflected, for example, in the ratio of tradable goods to GDP.31 In
        the simple model of Appendix 2, a sufficient (but not necessary) condition for
        PEP to dominate an exchange rate target is if the traded commodity sector is
        larger than the nontraded goods sector.
    3. Less exposure to external shocks than to domestic and monetary shocks. Again,
        high variability in the terms of trade makes it more likely that a floating exchange
        rate dominates a pegged exchange rate. A conclusion of the model of Appendix 2
        is that high variability in export markets also makes it more likely that PEP
        dominates a pegged exchange rate.32
    4. The existence of a major-currency partner with whom bilateral trade, investment
        and other activities are already high, or are hoped to be high in the future.
    5. “Symmetry of shocks,” meaning high correlation of cyclical fluctuations between
        the home country and the country that determines policy regarding the money to
        which pegging is contemplated. This is important because, if the domestic
        country is to give up the ability to follow its own monetary policy, it is better if
        the interest rates chosen by the larger partner are more often close to those that the
        domestic country would have chosen anyway.33
    6. Labor mobility. When monetary response to an asymmetric shock has been
        precluded, it is useful if workers can move from the high-unemployment region to
        the low-unemployment region.34 This is the primary mechanism of adjustment
        across states within the monetary union which is the United States.
    7. Countercyclical remittances. In any given year, inflows or outflows of migration
        are a relatively small fraction of the labor force. Emigrant’s remittances,
        however, (i) constitute a large share of foreign exchange earnings in many
        developing countries, (ii) are variable, (iii) appear to be countercyclical.35
        This is particularly important for Mexico, Central America and the Caribbean,

29
   Obstfeld (1986).
30
   Levy-Yeyati and Sturzenegger (2003) find that floats do a better job than firmly fixed rates or
intermediate regimes. Unfortunately, other equally reputable studies find that floats do the best or that
intermediate regimes do the best.
31
   The classic reference is McKinnon (1963).
32
   Because small countries tend to be less diversified in their exports, criterion 3 can be somewhat at odds
with criterion 1.
33
   Mundell (1961); Bayoumi and Eichengreen(1994). Applications to Latin America include: Foresti
(2007), and Yeyati and Sturzennegger (2000).
34
   Mundell, op cit.
35
   Frankel (2010), and other references cited therein.


                                                                                                          13
        which send many emigrants to the United States, and receive a lot of remittances
        back. Of course, when there is a recession in the United States, as 2007-09, a
        loss in remittances is another way that the downturn is painfully transmitted to the
        migrant’s country of origin. But the point here is not to tally the effects of
        migration and remittances per se. The point is, rather, that remittances seem to
        respond to the difference between the cyclical positions of the sending and
        receiving country, which makes it a bit easier for the developing country to give
        up the option of setting a lower interest rate than the United States sets.36
     8. Countercyclical fiscal transfers. Within the United States, if one region suffers
        an economic downturn, the federal fiscal system cushions it; one estimate is that
        for every dollar fall in the income of a stricken state, disposable income falls by
        only 70 cents. Perhaps the IMF, World Bank, and Interamerican Development
        Bank play this role to some degree in the Western Hemisphere. But such fiscal
        cushions are mostly absent at the international level. (Even where substantial
        transfers exist, they are rarely very countercyclical.)
     9. Political willingness to give up some monetary sovereignty. Some countries
        look on their currency with the same sense of patriotism with which they look on
        their flag. It is not a good idea to force subordination to the US dollar (or the
        euro or any other foreign currency) down the throats of an unwilling public.
        Otherwise, in times of economic difficulty, the public is likely to blame
        Washington, D.C. (or Frankfurt).

         For Mexico, Central America, most of the Caribbean, and the northwestern part of
South America, an exchange rate target would naturally mean a dollar target, because so
much of their trade and other transactions are with the United States. But Argentina,
Brazil and Chile trade roughly as much with Europe (or, for that matter, East Asia) as
they do with the United States. To peg to the dollar is to introduce volatility vis-à-vis
Europe, Japan, and other important trading partners. For them, one must not take as
given that the relevant anchor currency would be the dollar. It could be the euro or, more
likely, a weighted basket. One possibility is the SDR.37
         In 2001, when Argentina’s rigid peg to the dollar was in its death throes, it was
observed that the country’s trade problems could in a sense be attributed to the original
1991 decision to link to the currency of a country with which Argentina traded relatively
little, and to the subsequent 1995-2001 appreciation of the dollar against the euro,
Brazilian real, and currencies of other major trading partners, as much as it could be
attributed to the rigidity of the regime per se. The alternative of a basket that would be
half dollars and half euros was apparently considered by the authorities at that time.
         Among the eight monetary regimes to be considered in this study are three
exchange rate targets: a peg to the dollar, a peg to the euro, and a peg to the SDR.




36
   For example, Lake (2006) finds that, even though remittances into Jamaica fall when US income falls,
they do respond to the difference between US and Jamaican income.
37
   The SDR was newly revived as a component of the international monetary system in April 2009, by a
summit of the G-20 in London.


                                                                                                          14
Other choices for price index for inflation targeting
        As noted, of the possible price indices that a central bank could target, the CPI is
the usual choice. The CPI is indeed the natural candidate to be the measure of the
inflation objective for the long-term. But it may not be the best choice for intermediate
target on an annual basis. There is a case to be made for targeting, in place of the CPI,
either the producer price index (PPI) or an export price index (PEPI). The latter idea is
a moderate version of a more exotic proposed monetary regime that I have written about
elsewhere, called Peg the Export Price – or PEP, for short.38

PEP
        I have proposed PEP explicitly for those countries that happen to be heavily
specialized in the production of oil or some other particular mineral or agricultural export
commodity. (The original idea was a very special case: an African gold exporter could
consider going on the gold standard.39) The proposal is to fix the price of that
commodity in terms of domestic currency. For example, Chile would peg its currency to
copper – in effect adopting a metallic standard. Ecuador, Trinidad and Venezuela would
peg to oil.40 Jamaica would peg to bauxite. The Dominican Republic would peg to
sugar. Central American coffee producers would peg to coffee. Argentina would peg to
soybeans. And so forth.
        How would this work operationally? Conceptually, one can imagine the
government holding reserves of gold or copper or oil, and buying and selling the
commodity whenever necessary to keep the price fixed in terms of local currency.
Operationally, a more practical method would be for the central bank each day to
announce an exchange rate vis-à-vis the dollar, following the rule that the day’s exchange
rate target (dollars per local currency unit) moves precisely in proportion to the day’s
price of gold or copper or oil on the New York market (dollars per commodity). Then
the central bank could intervene via the foreign exchange market to achieve the day’s
target. The dollar would be the vehicle currency for intervention -- precisely as it has
long been when a small country defends a peg to some non-dollar currency. Either way,
the effect would be to stabilize the price of the commodity in terms of local currency. Or
perhaps, since these commodity prices are determined on world markets, a better way to
express the same policy is stabilizing the price of local currency in terms of the
commodity.

        The argument for the export targeting proposal, relative to an exchange rate
target, can be stated succinctly: It delivers one of the main advantages that a simple
exchange rate peg promises, namely a nominal anchor, while simultaneously delivering
one of the main advantages that a floating regime promises, namely automatic adjustment
in the face of fluctuations in world prices of the countries’ exports. Textbook theory says
that when there is an adverse movement in the terms of trade, it is desirable to

38
   Frankel and Saiki (2002) and Frankel (2003).
39
   Frankel (2002).
40
    In recent years – especially as a result of the large increase in world oil prices toward the end of our
statistical sample – oil became the leading export commodity of Brazil and Colombia, both of whom
traditionally export coffee and a wide variety of other goods.


                                                                                                               15
accommodate it via a depreciation of the currency. When the dollar price of exports
rises, under PEP the currency per force appreciates in terms of dollars. When the dollar
price of exports falls, the currency depreciates in terms of dollars. Such accommodation
of terms of trade shocks is precisely what is wanted. In past currency crises, countries
that have suffered a sharp deterioration in their export markets have often eventually been
forced to give up their exchange rate targets and devalue anyway. The adjustment was
far more painful -- in terms of lost reserves, lost credibility, and lost output -- than if the
depreciation had happened automatically.
        The desirability of accommodating terms of trade shocks is also a particularly
good way to summarize the attractiveness of export price targeting relative to the
reigning champion, CPI targeting. Consider the two categories of adverse terms of trade
shocks: first, a fall in the dollar price of the export in world markets and, second, a rise in
the dollar price of the import on world markets. In the first case, a fall in the export
price, one wants the local currency to depreciate against the dollar. As already noted,
PEP delivers that result automatically; CPI targeting does not. In the second case, a rise
in the import price, the terms-of-trade criterion suggests that one again might want the
local currency to depreciate. Neither regime delivers that result.41 But CPI targeting
actually has the implication that the central bank tightens monetary policy so as to
appreciate the currency against the dollar, by enough to prevent the local-currency price
of imports from rising. This implication – reacting to an adverse terms of trade shock
by appreciating the currency – is perverse. It can be expected to exacerbate swings in
the trade balance and output.

PEPI

         Some have responded to the PEP proposal by pointing out, quite correctly, that
the side-effect of stabilizing the local-currency price of the export commodity in question
is that it would destabilize the local-currency price of other export goods. If
agricultural or mineral commodities constitute virtually all of exports, then this may not
be an issue. But for a heavy majority of countries, including most of those in Latin
America and the Caribbean, no single commodity constitutes more than half of exports.
Moreover, even those that are heavily specialized in a single mineral or agricultural
product may wish to encourage diversification further into new products in the future, so
as to be less dependent on that single commodity. For these two sorts of countries, the
strict version of PEP is not appropriate. For those countries where export diversification
is important, a moderated version of PEP is more likely to be suitable.

        One way to moderate the proposal is to interpret it as targeting a broad index of
all export prices, rather than the price of only one export commodity. I have
abbreviated this moderate form of the proposal as PEPI, for Peg the Export Price Index.42
        Some countries are intermediate with respect to the extent of diversification:
Exports are dominated by agricultural and mineral commodities, but it is a diversified

41
    There is a reason for that. In addition to the goal of accommodating terms of trade shocks, there is
also the goal of price instability; but to depreciate in the face of an increase in import prices would
exacerbate inflation.
42
   Frankel (2005).


                                                                                                           16
basket of commodities, rather than just oil or coffee. Examples include Argentina
(soybeans, wheat, maize and beef), Bolivia (hydrocarbons, zinc, soybeans, iron ore and
tin) or Jamaica (bauxite, sugar, bananas, rum and coffee). In that case, the natural price
index would be a basket of those four or five commodity prices, omitting manufactures
and services for simplicity.

         The proposal is not to be confused, however, with proposals in the 1930s or 1980s
to improve on the gold standard by targeting a diversified basket of commodities.43
Those proposals explicitly included the prices of imported commodities in the index. e.g.,
oil for an oil-importer The PEPI proposal explicitly excludes them. It also includes
commodities that may be minor and obscure from the world’s viewpoint but important
from the viewpoint of the producing country.44 These two differences are crucial when
the terms of trade fluctuate.

PPT
        A way to moderate the proposal still further is to target a broad index of all
domestically produced goods, whether exportable or not. PPT stands for Product Price
Targeting. The GDP deflator is one possible output-based price index, but has the
disadvantage of only being available quarterly, and being subject to lags in collection,
measurement errors, and subsequent revisions. The PPI is superior in that – just like the
CPI – it is generally collected monthly. Even in a small poor country with limited
capacity to gather statistics, government workers can survey a sample of firms every
month to construct a primitive PPI as easily as they can survey a sample of retail outlets
to construct a primitive CPI. The PPI is a familiar non-threatening variable; inflation
targeters should be open-minded enough to consider it as an alternative to the CPI.
        A possible disadvantage of the PPI as traditionally calculated (the old Wholesale
Price Index) is that it weights products according to their shares in gross sales by
businesses. An implication is that raw materials and other inputs get counted multiple
times, because they are reflected in each gross sales price. It would probably be better to
weight product prices by their share of the product’s value added in GDP, rather than the
share of their gross value.45 A simple product price index could be computed monthly
by surveying major establishments, and applying to their price changes the sectoral
weights that are taken from longer-term GDP data.

Targeting the price index
        If a broad index of export or product prices were to be the nominal target, it
would of course be impossible in practice for the central bank to hit the target exactly, in
contrast to the way that it is possible to hit virtually exactly a target for the exchange rate,
the price of gold, or even the price of a basket of four or five exchange-traded agricultural
or mineral commodities. There would instead be a declared band for the price index
target, which could be wide if desired, just as with the targeting of the CPI, money
43
   In the 1930s: Graham (1937); and Keynes (1938). In the 1980s: Hall (1982, 1985).
44
   Such as antimony, tungsten and lithium, for the case of Bolivia.
45
   The US Bureau of Economic Analysis took a step in this direction in 2007, when it began releasing a
new index of aggregate net output prices. This index at least nets out double-counting of transactions
within each aggregate industry.



                                                                                                         17
supply, or other nominal variables. Open market operations to keep the export price
index inside the band if it threatens to stray outside could be conducted in terms either of
foreign exchange or in terms of domestic securities.
         For some countries, it might help to monitor on a daily or weekly basis the price
of a basket of agricultural and mineral commodities that is as highly correlated as
possible with the country’s overall price index, but whose components are observable on
a daily or weekly basis in well-organized markets. The central bank could even
announce what the value of the basket index would be one week at a time, by analogy
with the Fed funds target in the United States. The weekly targets could be set so as to
achieve the medium-term goal of keeping the comprehensive price index inside the pre-
announced bands; and yet the central bank could hit the weekly targets very closely, if it
wanted, for example, by intervening in the foreign exchange market. This feature would
enhance transparency from the viewpoint of those who operate in financial markets, even
though the average household should not realistically be expected to follow such arcane
details.



Analysis of competing monetary targets with respect to ability to
stabilize relative prices

        The remainder of this paper is a counterfactual analysis of alternative monetary
regimes. We examine a set of countries in Latin America and the Caribbean, and we
compare the historical paths of prices under the historical monetary regime with what
would have happened under eight other possible regimes: dollar target, euro target, SDR
target, CPI target, PEP target, PEPI target, and PPI target. For simplicity, we assume
that the targets are hit precisely, even though we realize that in a stochastic model this
would not be possible with half the regimes (the price index targets).

Sectoral weights in the price indices

         The countries we are interested in are small open economies. Thus we assume
that the law of one price holds, for commodity exports as well as for other exportables
and importables, and that the prices of these goods are exogenous in world markets, that
is, in terms of dollars. Thus the local-currency prices of the tradable goods are given by
the exchange rate (actual or hypothetical, as the case may be) times the dollar prices.
         The price index for non-traded goods is determined differently, however. They
are not subject to the law of one price. Indeed, if all goods were subject to the law of
one price, then the choice of currency regime would not make very much difference. The
choice of monetary regime does make a difference, primarily because wages and prices
of nontraded goods are sticky in the short run in terms of whatever is the local currency.
In the longer run, however, purchasing power parity holds. Thus, in the case of the
dollar peg, the local inflation rate – including nontraded goods – converges to the global
inflation rate, which is here for simplicity taken to be that of the United States.
Inasmuch as many Latin American countries suffered very high inflation rates in the



                                                                                          18
1970s and 1980s, even hyperinflations, it makes a big difference whether the
counterfactual to the historical experience is that the country was credibly and rigorously
tied to a nominal target all along, or that the country would have switched at some point
during the sample period, and would have undergone a period of gradual disinflation in
non-traded goods.46      Eventually it would be good to try both kinds of counterfactual.
For now, we consider the first: hypothetically, what would have happened if the country
had always followed the dollar peg or inflation target, from the beginning.

      We define the CPI and PPI each as weighted averages of prices in four sectors,
working in logs:

CPI = w ntg Pntg +wcx Pcx + wpm Ppm + w otg Potg

PPI = vntg Pntg +vcx Pcx + vpm Ppm + v otg Potg

Definitions:
Pntg ≡ price of nontraded goods in local terms. We assume that, at a horizon of less than
1 year, these prices would not be affected by differences in the exchange rate. Under the
hypothetical counterfactual where a country would have been on a dollar peg all along,
then its NTG prices are given by the US CPI, since we assume that convergence would
have taken place in the long run.

Pcx ≡ price of exports of leading mineral/agricultural commodities in local terms. We
ignore trade barriers and define these TG prices to equal the actual historically observed
world dollar prices, times the exchange rate, which will differ depending on the monetary
regime assumed.

Pox ≡ price of other exports. Again, we assume perfect passthrough: the local price is the
exchange rate times the exogenous world price.

Ppm ≡ price of petroleum product imports (oil & natural gas, refined or nonrefined),
determined again as actual world dollar price times the simulated exchange rate.

Potg ≡ price of other tradable goods (i.e., excluding oil and the other commodities that are
measured explictly). Assume equal to world prices of the TGs times the exchange rate.
We need not have data on these prices directly. We are assuming these countries are all
price-takers for all tradable goods, not just for commodities. Thus in a counterfactual
simulation which says that some alternative regime would have caused the peso/$
exchange rate to have been 5% higher than it was historically, we simply assume this

46
  In theoretical models that were popular with monetary economists in the 1980s and 1990s, a change to a
credibly firm nominal anchor would fundamentally change expectations so that all inflation, in traded and
non-traded goods alike, would disappear instantly. In reality, exchange-rate based stabilization attempts
generally show a lot of inflation inertia. (E.g., Kiguel and Liviatan, 1992.) Some might claim that an
exchange rate peg is not a completely credible commitment. But there can be no more credibly firm
nominal anchor than full dollarization. Yet when Ecuador gave up its currency in favor of the dollar,
neither the inflation rate nor the price level converged rapidly to US levels. Inflationary momentum,
rather, continued for a long time.


                                                                                                       19
component of the price index Potg would similarly have been 5% higher, relative to the
historical baseline.

w ntg ≡ weight on ntg in CPI
wcx ≡ weight on cx in CPI
wpm ≡ weight on pm in CPI
w otg ≡ weight on otg in CPI

v ntg ≡ weight on ntg in PPI
v cx ≡ weight on cx in PPI
vpm ≡ weight on pm in PPI
v otg ≡ weight on otg in PPI

We impose w ntg ≡ v ntg .

       The key difference between the two price indices is that the weight of the
commodity export should be far smaller in the CPI than in the PPI, and the weight of the
import commodity the other way around. (If we take oil to be the only important source
of terms of trade fluctuations on the import side, then this is of course less important for
oil-exporting countries.)

        Table 3 reports the estimated weights that the countries’ CPI and PPI,
respectively, place on each of three sectors: non-tradable goods, the leading commodity
export (which in two cases is oil), and other tradables (which includes imports, exports
other than the leading commodity export, and any other goods that are perfect substitutes
for internationally traded goods). The methods for estimating the weights are described
in an Appendix. As one might expect, Mexico (located next to the United States and
having followed open trade policies for 20 years) shows the lowest share of goods that
are not internationally traded, while Argentina (which is distant, and generally
protectionist) registers the highest.
        Also as one would expect, the share of the commodity export in the CPI is usually
lower than its share in the PPI, sometimes far lower (Argentina, Bolivia, Jamaica, Peru
and Uruguay). The two exceptions are Mexico and Paraguay. One can guess a
possible explanation for Mexico: petroleum products are heavily subsidized in domestic
consumption, and oil production has been declining in recent years. Paraguay is more of
a puzzle. The explanation might simply be that it is one of the few Latin American
countries that is not heavily specialized in the production and export of a small number of
agricultural or mineral commodities.




                                                                                          20
Table 3: Estimation for each country of weights placed by national price index
on three sectors: nontradable goods, leading commodity export, and other
tradable goods
                                               Leading
                                  Non                                    Other
  Country       Price index                  Commodity       Oil                     Total
                               Tradables                               Tradables
                                                Export
                       CPI          0.6939        0.0063      0.0431        0.2567       1.000
    ARG
                       PPI          0.6939        0.0391      0.0230        0.2440       1.000
                       CPI          0.5782        0.0163      0.0141        0.3914       1.000
      BOL
                       PPI          0.5782        0.1471      0.0235        0.2512       1.000
                       CPI          0.5235        0.0079      0.0608        0.4078       1.000
      CHL
                       PPI          0.5235        0.0100      0.1334        0.3332       1.000
                       CPI          0.5985        ‐‐          0.0168        0.3847       1.000
     COL*
                       PPI          0.5985        ‐‐          0.0407        0.3608       1.000
                       CPI          0.6413        0.0002      0.0234        0.3351       1.000
     JAM
                       PPI          0.6413        0.1212      0.0303        0.2072       1.000
                       CPI          0.3749        ‐‐          0.0366        0.5885       1.000
    MEX*
                       PPI          0.3749        ‐‐          0.0247        0.6003       1.000
                       CPI          0.3929        0.1058      0.0676        0.4338       1.000
      PRY
                       PPI          0.3929        0.0880      0.0988        0.4204       1.000
                       CPI          0.6697        0.0114      0.0393        0.2796       1.000
      PER
                       PPI          0.6697     0.040504    0.021228      0.268568        1.000
                       CPI          0.6230        0.0518      0.0357        0.2895       1.000
     URY
                       PPI          0.6230        0.2234      0.1158        0.0378       1.000
* Oil is the leading commodity export.


A comparison of the ability of alternative regimes to stabilize the relative prices of
tradables and nontradables.

        The subsequent analysis presumes that, for commodity-producing countries such
as those in Latin America and the Caribbean, a highly volatile terms of trade is perhaps
the most important issue to be addressed by currency policy, second to the fundamental
decision to anchor inflationary expectations by a nominal target. Of course small
countries are assumed to have no control over the price of their exports relative to the
price of their imports. That relative price is the terms of trade, and is determined
exogenously on world markets. But the currency regime does help determine variation
in the relative price of traded goods (both the export commodities and other traded
goods), that is, the price relative to the price of nontraded goods or to the CPI or to
wages. Relative to floating, the goal is to avoid a cycle where a strong, but perhaps
temporary, upward swing in the world price of the export commodity causes a large real
appreciation in the currency (Dutch Disease), an increase in spending (especially by the
government), an increase in the price of nontraded goods relative to non-export-


                                                                                            21
commodity traded goods, a resultant shift of resources out of non-export-commodity
traded goods, and a current account deficit -- all of which are painfully reversed when the
world price of the export commodity goes back down. Relative to a fixed exchange rate
or a CPI target, PEP and PPT might show an advantage, in accommodating fluctuations
in the terms of trade. The goal is that a worsening in the terms of trade induces a weaker
currency under PPT than it would under CPI-targeting, and therefore raises the price of
non-commodity tradable goods relative to nontraded goods.
         For those who wonder what is the market failure, the distortion at which monetary
policy is aimed, the answer is that such price swings induce current account deficits and
capital inflows that are not optimizing in the way standard theory says. Facets of the
market failure could be excessively procyclical capital flows (including perhaps the
absence of an effective international mechanism for handling default), or a political
economy proclivity for governments to over-spend when the purchasing power of their
revenues goes up (due to soaring commodity export tax receipts47), or speculative
bubbles in real estate48 (as investors jump on the bandwagon of rising nontraded goods
prices).
         We will simulate the variability of the real prices of exports. It captures the
unwanted side-effects of commodity booms (and busts): (1) the excessive swings in
price signals that historically have induced labor and land to move into the production of
commodities during the boom, only to reverse when the crash comes, and (2) the
excessive swings in government revenue (royalties and corporate taxes on the commodity
sector) in terms of purchasing power over local goods and services, which historically
have tempted governments into pro-cyclical spending.
          We do not model any of these real effects in the body of the paper. Rather we
report implications of alternative regimes for movements in the key relative prices, a
process that has the advantage of being largely model-free.49

        More specifically, our analysis is guided by the assumption that the goals are, to
the extent possible, to minimize variability in the real price of commodity exports (to
moderate resource swings into that sector when its world price temporarily rises) and to
minimize variability in the real price of other traded goods (to moderate resource swings
out of that sector). Again, these two objectives are second to the objective of anchoring
inflationary expectations. But any nominal anchor can do that.50 We could choose to
measure the relative price of traded goods in terms of non-traded goods, or in terms of
wages. Instead we choose to measure the prices of these traded goods relative to the
CPI. This comes pretty much to the same thing, because nontraded goods are the only
other component in the CPI, other than traded goods (and the relative price of commodity
exports versus other traded goods is deemed exogenous).

47
   E.g., Lane and Tornell (1998).
48
   Aizenman and Jinjarak (2008) find a strong positive association between current account deficits and the
real increase in real estate prices
49
   Appendix 2 models theoretically the effects of relative prices on output. One result there is that high
sectoral elasticities of supply with respect to relative prices make it more likely that PEP dominates an
exchange rate target.
50
   Except to the extent that the variable chosen for nominal anchor is too likely when faced with shocks to
lead to big distortions and thereby is not credible from the beginning. (This was the case with M1
targeting and, I would argue, would be also with strict CPI targeting.)


                                                                                                        22
        The various panels of table 4 present the results of our simulations of the
variability of real prices under alternative regimes. In each case, the first column reports
the actual historical variability experienced by the country in question, under whatever
regime or (more often) sequence of regimes it chose to follow. One can see the high
variability of nominal prices for the leading export commodities. The highest standard
deviations are copper for Chile, oil for Ecuador and Venezuela, and beef for Uruguay.
        These prices in Table 4(a) are in domestic currency, so variability depends in part
on the stability of the exchange rate regime, and not solely on the volatility of the world
export market (Table 2). Some small countries that have been pegged to the dollar
during most of their history show price variability that is lower than others despite
commodities that are at least as variable: dollarized Panama with bananas, Trinidad with
oil, and Guatemala with coffee. In theory, the floating peso of Mexico or Chile,
respectively, could have appreciated precisely in proportion when dollar prices of oil or
copper rise, thereby eliminating variation in the peso price of oil or copper. In practice,
this tendency does not come close to fully insulating them from variation in the domestic
prices of their leading export commodities; indeed floating exchange rates may offer
some extraneous volatility. Interestingly, the standard deviation of an aggregate export
price index (PEPI) is in many cases not much less than (or is even greater than) the
standard deviation for individual commodities, suggesting that the commodity prices are
highly correlated.

         The remaining columns are counterfactuals.         We begin with the case of a
hypothetical peg to the dollar. Notice that it is the same as the historical peg in the case
of Panama. In the other cases, we can simulate precisely what the price of soy, copper,
etc. would have been in terms of pesos (let’s call the domestic currency the peso) under
the counterfactual, by using the historical series for the exchange rate between the peso
and the dollar: if the peso historically depreciated against the dollar by 1% in some
given month, we know that the price of soy would have been lower by precisely 1% if the
peso had instead been pegged to the dollar. In general, the dollar pegs would have
produced far more stable prices in domestic terms. This is true of all six nominal
anchors, and simply illustrates the tremendous price instability that almost all these
countries experienced in the 1970s and 1980s.
         The next two columns of Table 4a show what the variability of the commodity
export prices would have been under an SDR peg or euro peg, respectively. Variability
of the domestic price of the commodity export is often lower under the euro peg than
under the dollar peg: for natural gas and oil; iron and steel; copper, aluminum and gold;
bananas and sugar; and soy and beef. Coffee is virtually the only exception. This
illustrates a point frequently missed by observers who read too much into the fact that
international trade in these commodities is usually invoiced in dollars. While the use of
the dollar as currency of invoice and payment may introduce some dollar-stickiness in the
very short run, it does not carry over to the medium run. When the effective foreign
exchange vale of the dollar rises, dollar prices of these commodities tend to fall rather
quickly. The offset is not fully proportionate; but the point is that the prices are not more
stable in terms of dollars than in terms of euros. Table 4(a) shows that in some cases
(soy, coffee and beef), the basket offered by the SDR would stabilize commodity prices



                                                                                          23
better than either the dollar or euro. Even in these cases, however, the difference is small,
and this benefit would hardly seem worth giving up the simplicity of a single-currency
peg.

        After the currency peg columns comes PEP (Peg the Export Price). Variability
of the local-currency price of the leading export commodities is zero, by construction.
The same is true of the full basket of exports in the case of PEPI (Peg the Export Price
Index). Recall the essence of this regime: every time the dollar price of coffee falls by
one per cent on world markets, the dollar value of the local currency falls by one per cent,
leaving the local price of coffee unchanged. Nominal variability is far lower than under
floating, and yet there is a clear nominal target to anchor inflation expectations. The best
of both regimes. An overall judgment on the merits of the alternative regimes would
have to be based on far more than this, of course. The column of zeros is a conspicuous
“stacking of the deck” in favor of PEP and PEPI.

        Table 4(b) reports the standard deviations of the percentage changes in the local-
currency commodity prices across the seven regimes. Again the currency pegs stabilize
prices relative to the historical regime. (As one would expect, the reduction in volatility
no longer looks quite so dramatic). The euro peg no longer dominates the dollar peg in
terms of reducing local-currency price volatility; this is again what one would expect
from a dollar-stickiness of commodity prices that pertains only to the short term.

        Table 4(c) shows the standard deviation of real prices of the commodity exports,
across the seven regimes. Real is here defined in terms of the CPI, but we could just as
well be looking at the relative price in terms of non-traded goods. This is the most
important of the three measures of price volatility. It captures the unwanted side-effects
of the commodity cycle:        (1) the excessive swings in relative price signals that
historically have induced resources to move in and out of the production of commodities,
and (2) the excessive swings in real government revenue, which historically have yielded
pro-cyclical spending.

        The comparison of a PPI target with a CPI target, as an alternate possible
interpretation of inflation targeting, is the unique point of this study. The comparison in
terms of ability to stabilize domestic prices of the principle export commodities appears
in the last two columns of Tables 4(a) through 4(c). In most cases the standard deviation
of the domestic price of the export commodity is lower under the PPI target than under
the CPI target. In a few cases, it is less than half the size: Jamaica for aluminum and
Uruguay for beef. The only times when variability is higher under the PPI target than
under the CPI target is Mexico for oil and Paraguay for beef. The reason is immediately
apparent: these were the only two countries where the export commodity strangely
received a heavier estimated weight in the CPI than in the PPI; this cannot be the normal
situation.
        The one aspect of these tables that might be considered surprising is that, even
though variability of the export commodity price tends to be lower under a PPI target
than under a CPI target, under either form of inflation targeting it is generally
substantially higher than under a currency peg, and often higher even than under the



                                                                                          24
various historical regimes.         Perhaps this is an artifact of our approach that
operationalizes inflation targeting as the precise hitting of the price index target, whether
PPI or CPI. In practice this would be impossible to achieve. In our results, it is possible
to achieve, but perhaps only at the expense of imposing wild fluctuations in the exchange
rate to offset fully fluctuations in any one sector of the price index. Perhaps a more
reasonable and realistic approach that allowed a band or cone for the targeted price index
would yield more realistic results. In any case, the methods for implementing the CPI
and PPI targets bear further examination in future research.

        Stabilizing domestic prices of the export commodity is far from the only criterion
that should be considered in comparing alternative candidates for nominal anchor.
Another one is stabilizing domestic prices of other tradable goods. A valid critique of
PEP and PEPI is that it transfers uncertainty that would otherwise occur in the real price
of commodity exports into uncertainty (which otherwise might not occur) in the real price
of non-commodity exportables and importables. This critique is particularly relevant if
diversification of the economy is valued.

         In Table 5 we conduct simulations, under the same seven alternative regimes, for
the domestic prices of import goods. From the viewpoint of a small country, imports,
like exports, have their prices determined on world markets. The biggest source of
variability in the world price of LAC imports is bound to be oil price shocks (for the
countries that are oil importers, rather than exporters). Tables 5(a) and 5(b) report the
statistics on the variability of the nominal import price, measured in terms of levels or
changes respectively. Again, the currency pegs cut nominal price variability
substantially relative to the historical regime, but the euro peg and SDR peg both slightly
dominate the dollar peg. The commodity peg (PEP) does indeed introduce some extra
volatility into import prices, through exchange rate fluctuations, but the difference is not
large. When we look at the level of local import prices, PPI targeting dominates CPI
targeting. This supports the claim that the CPI target, if interpreted literally, forces the
monetary authorities to tighten and appreciate in a perverse response to an increase in the
world price of oil import (in the case of oil importers), and that the PPI target does not.
When we look at changes in local import prices, the standard deviations under the CPI
target and the PPI target are very close to each other, and close to the standard deviation
under the currency pegs as well.

        An attempt to construct anything like a comprehensive evaluation of regimes
rooted in a theoretically established welfare criterion is far beyond the ambitions of this
study. On the other hand, we cannot end the study with a state of affairs where the only
horse race insures by construction that PEP wins.51 Instead, we conclude with an


51
  In my first PEP papers, I pursued counterfactual simulations for the paths of exports, trade balances, and
debt under alternative possible nominal anchors, for a wide variety of commodity-producing countries.
There nothing was foreordained. But PEP did tend to product the result that in the late 1990s, when dollar
commodity prices fell and many emerging market countries experienced currency crises, PEP automatically
depreciated the currency, stimulated exports, and mitigated the debt problem – all without the need to
abandon the pre-declared nominal anchor. LAC countries that appear in those simulations include
Argentina (wheat); Bolivia, Ghana and Peru (gold), Brazil, Colombia, Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala,


                                                                                                         25
examination, in Table 6, of the implications of the alternative regimes for a simple
objective function that is a weighted average of the standard deviation of the real price of
commodity exports and the standard deviation of the real price of other tradables (just oil
in this case, or another largest single import good: steel). In other words we pursue the
logic that stabilizing the relative price of commodity exports is not much of an
accomplishment if it comes at the expense of a corresponding destabilization of the
relative price of other traded goods.
         The commodity price peg (PEP) is the winner in the competition to reduce
relative price variability, by a fairly substantial margin when we look at the level of
nominal prices (Table 6a) or the level of real prices (Table 6c), and by a smaller margin
when we look at changes in nominal prices (Table 6b). The three currency pegs are
again fairly similar to each other, showing less price variability than the historical regime
but more than the commodity peg. In the central competition of the last two columns,
the PPI target produces less relative price variability than the CPI target in most cases.
Looking at real price variability in Table 6c, the only exception is Peru; the gain is
substantial in the case of Jamaica and Uruguay, smaller for the others.



Summary of Conclusions
        What nominal variable is the best candidate for an anchor to monetary policy?
Inflation Targeting, with its usual focus on the CPI, has over the past decade been the
most popular choice among monetary economists, at least with respect to large
industrialized countries. Developing countries differ in a number of relevant structural
ways. They tend to be smaller, and thus to take prices of both imports and exports as
given on world markets. They tend to be more vulnerable to supply shocks, particularly
terms of trade shocks. This is especially true of countries that depend on the exports of
agricultural and mineral commodities, a description that fits most countries in Latin
America and the Caribbean. Inflation targeting – if interpreted literally and narrowly as
stabilization of the CPI – has the undesirable property that it calls on the central bank to
respond to an adverse supply shock by tightening monetary policy so much that the
currency appreciates. It appears that Brazil, Chile and Peru do precisely that in response
to oil price increases.
        The regimes currently followed by the LAC countries are generally distributed
across three categories: monetary targets, exchange rate targets, and inflation targets.
These are official regimes; in practice many of the countries deviate from the declared
targeting policy. Money-targeters, for example, let the monetary aggregates run well
outside the proclaimed range, and inflation targeters intervene heavily in the foreign
exchange market.




Honduras, Nicaragua, and Peru (coffee); Chile (copper); Colombia, Ecuador, Mexico and Venezuela (oil);
Bolivia and Peru (slver); and Jamaica and Surinam (aluminum). Of course commodity composition of
exports evolves over time; some of these associations may not be as relevant looking forward.



                                                                                                    26
         This study has focused on a comparison of exchange rate pegs and inflation
targets, but has also highlighted a new untried set of proposals. These proposals call for
targeting prices of whatever commodities are the important exports of the country in
question. The proposals range from the most exotic to the more down-to-earth. The
most exotic is the idea of Pegging the Export Price (PEP): Bolivia would fix the dollar
price of the sole to the dollar price of natural gas; Chile would intervene to keep the value
of its peso constant in terms of copper; Jamaica would peg its dollar to aluminum; and
Uruguay would peg its peso to the price of beef. A less radical version that takes export
diversification into account is Peg the Export Price Index (PEPI), which aims to stabilize
a basket, perhaps a comprehensive basket, of export prices in terms of the local currency.
Finally, the version that sounds the most reassuring and reasonable would be Product
Price Targeting (PPT): to target in place of the CPI the Producer Price Index or a
specially constructed index of product prices weighted by shares in output. All three
versions dominate a policy of targeting the CPI, to the extent that terms of trade shocks
are important, as they are for the LAC countries. All three have the desirable property
that the currency appreciates when prices for exports go up on world markets and
depreciates when they go down; the CPI does not have that desirable property.
         In addition, if inflation targeting is interpreted strictly as a commitment to the
CPI, it has the undesirable property that the currency appreciates when the prices of
imports such as oil go up on world markets, and depreciates when they go down; PEP,
PEPI and PPT targeting don’t have this undesirable property. Table 1 provides a
preliminary indication that ever since 1999, when Brazil and Chile switched from
exchange rate targeting to CPI targeting, they have experienced a higher correlation
between the dollar price of their currencies and the dollar price of oil imports. This
suggests that, language about core CPI notwithstanding, the monetary authorities in these
two countries have found it necessary to respond to the oil price increases of the last
decade by contracting monetary policy enough to appreciate their currencies. The
production-based price targets would not have this problem.
         The heart of the analysis is the comparison of seven alternative nominal targets
according to how they would affect the variability of the real prices of tradables:
commodity exports in Table 4, imports in Table 5, and both together in Table 6. Some
conclusions are very predictable. First, according to the simulations the currency anchors
offer far more price stability than does the historical reality, because our counterfactual
was that the countries had the benefits of the anchor from before the beginning of the
sample. An interesting extension would be a simulation in which the countries switched
to their nominal anchors sometime in the 1990s, requiring a gradual adjustment of
nontraded goods prices. Second, PEP perfectly stabilizes the domestic price of export
commodities, by construction.
         The more interesting findings are the comparison of a CPI target and a Product
Price target as alternative interpretations of inflation targeting. The results show that the
PPI target generally delivers more stability in the prices of traded goods, especially the
export commodity. This is a natural consequence of the larger weight on commodity
exports in the PPI than in the CPI. (The major exception to the regime ranking is
Mexico, a consequence of the anomalous larger weight on oil in the CPI than in the PPI,
according to our numbers.) Perhaps surprisingly, both the CPI target and the PPI target
deliver more relative price variability than any of the three exchange rate targets (dollar,



                                                                                          27
euro and SDR). More research is clearly needed here, to see if the estimation of the
sectoral weights and the price series can be improved, and to make the comparison more
realistic by allowing the CPI and Product Price Index to fall within a target range rather
than requiring the central bank to hit a target precisely.




                                                                                        28
                                             References
Aizenman, J. and Y. Jinjarak, 2008. “Current Account Patterns and National Real Estate Markets,” NBER
       Working Paper No. 13921, April.
Arnone, Marco, Bernard Laurens and Jean-François Segalotto , 2006, “Measures of Central Bank
        Autonomy: Empirical Evidence for OECD, Developing, and Emerging Market Economies,”
        October, IMF Working Paper No. 06/228.

Bayoumi, Tamim, and Barry Eichengreen 1994, ”One Money or Many? Analyzing the Prospects for
       Monetary Unification in Various Parts of the World,” Studies in International Finance No. 76
       (September), Princeton University Press.

Bean, Charles, 1983, “Targeting Nominal Income: An Appraisal,” Economic Journal 93, Dec., 806-819.

Berg, A., E Borensztein, P Mauro, 2003, “Monetary Regime Options for Latin America,” Finance and
         Development, September, pp 24-27

Bernanke, Ben, Thomas Laubach, Frederic Mishkin, and Adam Posen, 1999, Inflation Targeting: Lessons
       from the International Experience, Princeton University Press: Princeton NJ.

Blanchard, Olivier, 2005, “Fiscal Dominance and Inflation Targeting: Lessons from Brazil,” Chapter 2, in
        Francesco Giavazzi, Ilan Goldfajn, and Santiago Herrera, editors, Inflation Targeting, Debt, and
        the Brazilian Experience, 1999 to 2003 (MIT Press: Cambridge), 49-80. MIT Department of
        Economics Working Paper No. 04-13.

Broda, Christian, 2004, "Terms of Trade and Exchange Rate Regimes in Developing Countries," Journal of
        International Economics, 63(1), pp. 31-58.

Caballero, Ricardo 2000., “Macroeconomic Volatility in Latin America: A Conceptual Framework and
        Three Case Studies,” Economia 1.1 (LACEA) 31-88.

Caballero, Ricardo and Arvind Krishnamurthy, 2003, “Inflation Targeting and Sudden Stops,” NBER
        Working Paper No. 9599.

Calvo, Guillermo, Leonardo Leiderman and Carmen Reinhart, 1993, “Capital Inflows and Real Exchange
        Rate Appreciation in Latin America: The Role of External Factors,” IMF Staff papers, 40, no. 1,
        March.

Collins, Susan, 1996, “On becoming more flexible: Exchange rate regimes in Latin America and the
         Caribbean,” Journal of Development Economics, vol. 51, issue 1, pages 117-138.

Cooper, Richard, 1985, “The Gold Standard: Historical Facts and Future Prospects,” Brookings Papers on
        Economic Activity, 1, 1-45.

Cukierman, Alex, Geoffrey Miller and Bilin Neyapti, 2002 “Central bank reform, liberalization and
       inflation in transition economies—an international perspective,” Journal of Monetary Economics
       v, March, Pages 237-264.

Debelle, Guy, 2001, “The Case for Inflation Targeting in East Asian Countries,” Future Directions for
         Monetary Policies in East Asia, David Gruen and John Simon, eds. (Reserve Bank of Australia).


                                                                                                         29
Edwards, Sebastian, and Eduardo Levy Yeyati, 2005, “Flexible Exchange Rates as Shock Absorbers,”
        European Economic Review, Vol. 49, Issue 8, November, pp. 2079-05. NBER Working Paper 9867.

Edwards, Sebastian. 2006, “The Relationship Between Exchange Rates and Inflation Targeting Revisited,”
        Banco de Chile Annual Research Conferences, Santiago, October 2005, NBER WP No. 12163, April.

Eichengreen, Barry, 1985, The Gold Standard in Theory and History (New York: Methuen).

Engel, Charles, 1999, “Accounting for U.S. Real Exchange Rate Changes.” Journal of Political Economy, vol.
        107, no. 3, June, pp. 507-538.

Feldstein, Martin, and James Stock, 1994, “The Use of a Monetary Aggregate to Target Nominal GDP,” in
         Monetary Policy, edited by N. Greg Mankiw (Chicago: University of Chicago Press), pp 7-70.

Foresti, Pasquale, 2007, “Is Latin America an Optimal Currency Area? Evidence from a Structural Vector
          Auto-regression Analysis,” April, MPRA paper 2961, http://mpra.ub.uni-muenchen.de/2961/1/MPRA_paper_2961.pdf .

Fraga, Armino, Ilan Goldafjn and Andre Minella, 2003, “Inflation Targeting in Emerging Market
        Economies,” NBER Macro Annual 2003, edited by Ken Rogoff and Mark Gertler (MIT Press:
        Cambridge). NBER WP no. 10019.

Frankel, Jeffrey, 1985, "The Stabilizing Properties of a Nominal GNP Rule," Journal of Money, Credit and
         Banking 27, no. 2, May, 318-334.

Frankel, Jeffrey, 2002, “Should Gold-Exporters Peg Their Currencies to Gold?” Research Study No. 29
         (World Gold Council: London).

Frankel, Jeffrey, 2003, “A Proposed Monetary Regime for Small Commodity Exporters: Peg the Export
         Price (PEP),” International Finance (Blackwill Publishers), 6, no. 1, Spring, 61-88.

Frankel, Jeffrey, 2004, “Experience of and Lessons from Exchange Rate Regimes in Emerging
         Economies,” in Monetary and Financial Integration in East Asia: The Way Ahead, Asian
         Development Bank (Palgrave Macmillan Press, New York ), vol. 2, 91-138.

Frankel, Jeffrey, 2005, “Peg the Export Price Index: A Proposed Monetary Regime for Small Countries,”
         Journal of Policy Modeling, vol. 27, no.4, June, pp. 495-508.

Frankel, Jeffrey, 2010, “Are Bilateral Remittances Countercyclical?” forthcoming, Open Economies Review.
         NBER WP No. 15419, 2009.

Frankel, Jeffrey, and Ayako Saiki, 2002. “A Proposal to Anchor Monetary Policy by the Price of the Export
         Commodity,” Journal of Economic Integration, September, 17, no. 3: 417-448.

Frankel, Jeffrey, Ben Smit, and Federico Sturzenegger, 2008, "South Africa: Macroeconomic Challenges after
         a Decade of Success," Economics of Transition 16, no. 4, 639-677 (Blackwell).

Gavin, Michael, Ricardo Hausmann and Leonardo Leiderman , 1996, “Macroeconomics of Capital Flows to
        Latin America: Experience and Policy Issues,” Inter-American Development Bank, Research
        Department Working Paper no. 4012.

Gavin, Michael, Ricardo Hausmann, Roberto Perotti and Ernesto Talvi, 1997, “Managing Fiscal Policy in Latin
        America and the Caribbean: Volatility, Procyclicality, and Limited Creditworthiness,” Revista del
        Banco Central de Venezuela, vol. XI (1). Inter-American Development Bank, RES WP 4032, 1996.




                                                                                                                       30
Giavazzi, Francesco, Ilan Goldfajn, and Santiago Herrera, 2005, “Overview: Lessons from Brazil,” in
        Inflation Targeting, Debt, and the Brazilian Experience, 1999 to 2003 (MIT Press: Cambridge).

Graham, Benjamin, 1937, Storage and Stability (New York: McGraw Hill).

Gutiérez, Eva, 2003, “Inflation Performance and Constitutional Central Bank Independence: Evidence from
         Latin America and the Caribbean,” IMF WP/03/53, March.

Hall, Robert, 1985, “Monetary Policy with an Elastic Price Standard,” Price Stability and Public Policy
        (Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City).

Hall, Robert, 1982, “Explorations in the Gold Standard and Related Policies for Stabilizing the Dollar,” in
        Hall, ed., Inflation (Chicago: University of Chicago Press), 111-122.

Hausmann, Ricardo, and Roberto Rigobon, 2003, “An Alternative Interpretation of the ‘Resource Curse’:
       Theory and Policy Implications,” NBER WP no. 9424, January.

Jácome, Luis I., 2001, “Legal Central Bank Independence and Inflation in Latin America During the
        1990s,” International Monetary Fund Working Paper No. 01/212, December.

Jácome, Luis and Francisco Vázquez, 2008 , “Is there any link between legal central bank independence
        and inflation? Evidence from Latin America and the Caribbean,” Paolo Baffi Centre Research
        Paper No. 2008-07, March.

Junguito, Roberto, and Hernando Vargas, 1996,“Central Bank Independence and Foreign Exchange
         Policies in Latin America,” Banco de la Republica de Colombia, Borradores de Economia series,
         no. 046, Bogota, Feb.

Kaminsky, Graciela, Carmen Reinhart and Carlos Vegh, 2005."When It Rains, It Pours: Procyclical Capital
       Flows and Macroeconomic Policies," NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2004, Vol. 19, pages 11-82.

Keynes, John Maynard , 1938, “The Policy of Government Storage of Foodstuffs and Raw Materials,”
        Economic Journal, September.

Kiguel, Miguel and Nissan Liviatan, 1992, “The Business Cycle Associated with Exchange Rate-Based
        Stabilizations,” World Bank Economic Review, Vol 6, Number 2 pp. 279-305.

Lake, Lisa, 2006, “Remittances and the Jamaican Economy: From Fundamentals to Effective Policy
         Recommendations.” MPA/ID Second Year Policy Analysis, Harvard Kennedy School.

Lane, Philip and Aaron Tornell, 1998. “Voracity and Growth,” NBER WP 6498; published as "Voracity
        and Growth in Discrete Time", EL, Vol. 62, no. 1 (January 1999): 139-145.

Laxton, Douglas, and Paolo Pesenti, 2003, “Monetary Rules for Small, Open, Emerging Economies,”
        NBER WP No. 9568.

Levy Yeyati, Eduardo, and Federico Sturzennegger, 2000, “The Euro and Latin America : Is EMU a
       Blueprint for Mercosur?” American Journal of Economics, No. 110 , pp. 63-99.

Levy-Yeyati, Eduardo, and Federico Sturzenegger, 2003, “To Float or to Trail: Evidence on the Impact of
       Exchange Rate Regimes on Growth,” American Economic Review, 93, No. 4, Sept., pp. 1173-93.

Loayza, Norman, Pablo Fajnzylber, César Calderón, 2005, “Economic Growth in Latin America and the
        Caribbean: Stylized Facts, Explanations and Forecasts” (World Bank).




                                                                                                          31
Mas, Ignacio, 1995, “Central Bank Independence: A Critical View from a Developing Country
        Perspective,” World Development, Vol. 23, Issue 10, October, pages 1639-1652.

Masson, Paul, Miguel Savastano and Sunil Sharma, 1997, “The Scope for Inflation Targeting in
        Developing Countries,” IMF WP/97/130, October.

McKibbin, W., and K. Singh, 2003, “Issues in the Choice of a Monetary Regime for India,” Australian
       National University, May 2000. Brookings Discussion Papers in International Economics No.
       154, September 2003.

McKinnon, Ronald, 1963, “Optimum Currency Areas,” American Economic Review, vol.53, September,
       pp. 657-65.

Mendoza, Enrique and Marco Terrones, 2008, “An Anatomy of Credit Booms: Evidence from Macro
       Aggregates and Micro Data,” NBER Working Paper No. 14049, May.

Mishkin, Frederic, 2000, “Inflation targeting in emerging-market countries,” American Economic Review.

Mishkin, Frederic, 2008, “Can Inflation Targeting Work in Emerging Market Countries?” in Money,
        Crises, and Transition: Essays in Honor of Guillermo Calvo, edited by Carmen Reinhart, Carlos
        Vegh and Andres Velasco . NBER WP 10646, 2004.

Mishkin, Frederic, and Miguel Savastano, 2002, “Monetary Policy Strategies for Emerging Market
        Countries: Lessons from Latin America,” Comparative Economic Studies.

Mundell, Robert, 1961, “The Theory of Optimal Currency Areas,” American Economic Review 51,
        November, 509-517.

Obstfeld, Maurice, 1986, “Rational and Self-Fulfilling Balance-of-Payments Crises,” American Economic
         Review, vol. 76, no. 1, March 72-81.

Perry, Guillermo, 2009, “Beyond Lending: How Multilateral Banks Can Help Developing Countries
        Manage Volatility,” Center for Global Development, Washington, DC.

Reinhart, Carmen, and Vincent Reinhart, 2009, “Capital Flow Bonanzas: An Encompassing View of the
         Past and Present,” in J.Frankel and C.Pissarides, eds., NBER International Seminar in
         Macroeconomics 2008 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).

Rogoff, Kenneth, 1985, “The Optimal Degree of Commitment to an Intermediate Monetary Target,” Quarterly
         Journal of Economics 100, November: 1169-89.

Rose, Andrew K., 2000, “One Money, One Market: Estimating the Effect of Common Currencies on
        Trade,” Economic Policy, Vol. 15, No. 30, April, pp. 8–45

Savastano, Miguel, 2000, “Inflation Targeting in Non-Industrial Countries,” IMF Research Bulletin 1, no.

Svensson, Lars, 1995, “The Swedish Experience of an Inflation Target,” in Inflation Targets, edited by Leo
        Leiderman and Lars Svensson (Centre for Economic Policy Research: London).

Taylor, Alan, 2002, "A Century Of Purchasing-Power Parity," Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 84
         February, 139-150.

Taylor , John. 1985. “What Would Nominal GNP Targeting Do to the Business Cycle?” Carnegie-
         Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 22: 61-84.




                                                                                                       32
Tobin, James. 1980. “Stabilization Policy Ten Years After,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1: 19-
         72.

Truman, Edwin, 2003, Inflation Targeting in the World Economy, Institute for International Economics,
        Washington DC.

Vargas, Hernando, 2005, “Exchange Rate Policy and Inflation Targeting in Colombia,” Banco de la
        República, Colombia, September.

West, Kenneth, 1986, “Targeting Nominal Income: A Note,” Economic Journal, 96, Dec., 1077-1083.




                                                                                                        33
Table 4: Variability of Export Prices under Alternative Currency Regimes
(a) Standard Deviation of Level of Nominal Export Prices
                                              Nominal Export Prices
                    Historical                                 Comm.
                               Dollar Peg SDR Peg Euro Peg               CPI Target PPI Target
                     Regime                                       Peg
ARG    Soy            1.927      0.278     0.251     0.265       0.000     1.271      1.037
ARG    Basket         1.966      0.331     0.281     0.260       0.000       ‐‐         ‐‐
ARG    PEPI           2.433      0.104     0.064     0.093       0.000       ‐‐         ‐‐
BOL    Nat. Gas       1.997     0.627      0.591     0.594      0.000      0.907      0.584
BOL    PEPI           1.685     0.581      0.594     0.581      0.000        ‐‐         ‐‐
BRA    Steel          2.240     0.590      0.495     0.418      0.000        ‐‐         ‐‐
BRA    Iron Ore       2.180     0.460      0.388     0.333      0.000        ‐‐         ‐‐
BRA    Basket         2.186     0.415      0.333     0.281      0.000        ‐‐         ‐‐
BRA    PEPI           2.601     0.405      0.320     0.236      0.000        ‐‐         ‐‐
CHL    Copper         3.178     0.408      0.342     0.311      0.000      1.113      0.952
COL    Oil            2.315     0.759      0.697     0.623      0.000      1.123      0.974
COL    Coffee         1.752     0.479      0.494     0.504      0.000        ‐‐         ‐‐
COL    PEPI           0.553     0.186      0.155     0.166      0.000        ‐‐         ‐‐
CRI    Bananas        1.930     0.442      0.372     0.306      0.000        ‐‐         ‐‐
CRI    Coffee         1.577     0.479      0.494     0.504      0.000        ‐‐         ‐‐
ECU    Oil            3.288     0.759      0.697     0.623      0.000        ‐‐         ‐‐
ECU    PEPI           3.044     0.491      0.457     0.426      0.000        ‐‐         ‐‐
GTM    Coffee         0.910     0.479      0.494     0.504      0.000        ‐‐         ‐‐
GUY    Sugar          2.059     0.475      0.433     0.436      0.000        ‐‐         ‐‐
GUY    PEPI           1.914     0.404      0.372     0.325      0.000        ‐‐         ‐‐
HND    Coffee         0.971     0.479      0.494     0.504      0.000        ‐‐         ‐‐
HND    PEPI           0.937     0.277      0.305     0.334      0.000        ‐‐         ‐‐
JAM    Aluminium      1.959     0.418      0.361     0.303      0.000      1.222      0.565
JAM    PEPI           1.579     0.167      0.155     0.199      0.000        ‐‐         ‐‐
MEX    Oil            3.238     0.759      0.697     0.623      0.000      0.975      1.030
NIC    Coffee         2.185     0.479      0.494     0.504      0.000        ‐‐         ‐‐
PAN    Bananas        0.442     0.442      0.372     0.306      0.000        ‐‐         ‐‐
PER    Copper         1.923     0.408      0.342     0.311      0.000      0.671      0.688
PER    Gold           1.909     0.708      0.638     0.536      0.000        ‐‐         ‐‐
PER    PEPI           1.951     0.378      0.320     0.288      0.000        ‐‐         ‐‐
PRY    Beef           1.623     0.230      0.206     0.224      0.000      0.694      0.715
SLV    Coffee         0.670     0.479      0.494     0.504      0.000        ‐‐         ‐‐
TTO    Nat. Gas       0.929     0.627      0.591     0.594      0.000        ‐‐         ‐‐
URY    Beef           3.641     0.230      0.206     0.224      0.000      0.893      0.410
VEN    Oil            2.931     0.759      0.697     0.623      0.000        ‐‐         ‐‐



                                                                                             34
(b) Standard Deviation of First Difference of Nominal Export Prices
                                      First Difference of Nominal Export Prices
                    Historical                                    Comm.
                               Dollar Peg SDR Peg Euro Peg                  CPI Target PPI Target
                     Regime                                         Peg
ARG     Soy           0.201      0.067        0.068      0.073     0.000      0.061      0.041
ARG     Basket        0.179      0.051        0.052      0.059     0.000         ‐‐         ‐‐
ARG     PEPI          1.798      1.385        1.299      1.570     0.000         ‐‐         ‐‐
BOL     Nat. Gas      0.417      0.106      0.105      0.106       0.000      0.102      0.071
BOL     PEPI          0.204      0.055      0.059      0.066       0.000        ‐‐         ‐‐
BRA     Steel         0.149      0.090      0.091      0.095       0.000        ‐‐         ‐‐
BRA     Iron Ore      0.123      0.050      0.054      0.059       0.000        ‐‐         ‐‐
BRA     Basket        0.127      0.046      0.048      0.055       0.000        ‐‐         ‐‐
BRA     PEPI          0.969      0.097      0.101      0.131       0.000        ‐‐         ‐‐
CHL     Copper        0.122      0.078      0.076      0.078       0.000      0.070      0.073
COL     Oil           0.078      0.075      0.076      0.080       0.000      0.067      0.059
COL     Coffee        0.083      0.083      0.085      0.090       0.000        ‐‐         ‐‐
COL     PEPI          0.036      0.033      0.033      0.042       0.000        ‐‐         ‐‐
CRI     Bananas       0.159      0.154      0.156      0.158       0.000        ‐‐         ‐‐
CRI     Coffee        0.096      0.083      0.085      0.090       0.000        ‐‐         ‐‐
ECU     Oil           0.089      0.075      0.076      0.080       0.000        ‐‐         ‐‐
ECU     PEPI          0.177      0.170      0.171      0.174       0.000        ‐‐         ‐‐
GTM     Coffee        0.092      0.083      0.085      0.090       0.000        ‐‐         ‐‐
GUY     Sugar         0.135      0.105      0.105      0.108       0.000        ‐‐         ‐‐
GUY     PEPI          0.379      0.217      0.217      0.224       0.000        ‐‐         ‐‐
HND     Coffee        0.109      0.083      0.085      0.090       0.000        ‐‐         ‐‐
HND     PEPI          0.282      0.259      0.260      0.267       0.000        ‐‐         ‐‐
JAM     Aluminium     0.065      0.049      0.052      0.059       0.000      0.048      0.018
JAM     PEPI          0.192      0.128      0.124      0.150       0.000        ‐‐         ‐‐
MEX     Oil           0.090      0.075      0.076      0.080       0.000      0.064      0.067
NIC     Coffee        0.184      0.083      0.085      0.090       0.000        ‐‐         ‐‐
PAN     Bananas       0.154      0.154      0.156      0.158       0.000        ‐‐         ‐‐
PER     Copper        0.168      0.078      0.076      0.078       0.000      0.076      0.076
PER     Gold          0.158      0.051      0.049      0.051       0.000        ‐‐         ‐‐
PER     PEPI          0.218      0.136      0.138      0.142       0.000        ‐‐         ‐‐
PRY     Beef          0.065      0.044      0.047      0.055       0.000      0.027      0.031
SLV     Coffee        0.096      0.083      0.085      0.090       0.000        ‐‐         ‐‐
TTO     Nat. Gas      0.109      0.106      0.105      0.106       0.000        ‐‐         ‐‐
URY     Beef          0.076      0.044      0.047      0.055       0.000      0.028      0.022
VEN     Oil           0.116      0.075      0.076      0.080       0.000        ‐‐         ‐‐



                                                                                                 35
(c) Standard Deviation of Level of Real Export Prices
                                                Real Export Prices
                    Historical                                   Comm.
                               Dollar Peg SDR Peg Euro Peg                CPI Target PPI Target
                     Regime                                        Peg
ARG     Soy           0.561      0.497     0.523      0.483       0.000     0.858      0.767
ARG     Basket        0.578      0.418     0.443      0.408       0.000       ‐‐         ‐‐
ARG     PEPI          0.312      0.140     0.128      0.110       0.000       ‐‐         ‐‐
BOL     Nat. Gas      0.556     0.402      0.431      0.483      0.000      0.438      0.322
BOL     PEPI          0.523     0.616      0.650      0.638      0.000        ‐‐         ‐‐
BRA     Steel         0.496     0.427      0.403      0.363      0.000        ‐‐         ‐‐
BRA     Iron Ore      0.412     0.332      0.353      0.335      0.000        ‐‐         ‐‐
BRA     Basket        0.355     0.360      0.370      0.336      0.000        ‐‐         ‐‐
BRA     PEPI          0.403     0.191      0.220      0.206      0.000        ‐‐         ‐‐
CHL     Copper        0.418     0.485      0.496      0.451      0.000      0.909      0.815
COL     Oil           0.456     0.485      0.482      0.490      0.000      1.123      0.974
COL     Coffee        0.528     0.690      0.717      0.680      0.000        ‐‐         ‐‐
COL     PEPI          0.121     0.153      0.128      0.138      0.000        ‐‐         ‐‐
CRI     Bananas       0.273     0.252      0.283      0.281      0.000        ‐‐         ‐‐
CRI     Coffee        0.566     0.690      0.717      0.680      0.000        ‐‐         ‐‐
ECU     Oil           0.456     0.485      0.482      0.490      0.000        ‐‐         ‐‐
ECU     PEPI          0.302     0.381      0.406      0.404      0.000        ‐‐         ‐‐
GTM     Coffee        0.603     0.690      0.717      0.680      0.000
GUY     Sugar         0.823     0.677      0.676      0.624      0.000        ‐‐         ‐‐
GUY     PEPI          0.692     0.375      0.400      0.396      0.000        ‐‐         ‐‐
HND     Coffee        0.594     0.690      0.717      0.680      0.000        ‐‐         ‐‐
HND     PEPI          0.414     0.507      0.525      0.491      0.000        ‐‐         ‐‐
JAM     Aluminium     0.272     0.281      0.321      0.316      0.000      1.222      0.565
JAM     PEPI          0.239     0.363      0.383      0.356      0.000        ‐‐         ‐‐
MEX     Oil           0.479     0.485      0.482      0.490      0.000      0.975      1.030
NIC     Coffee        0.482     0.690      0.717      0.680      0.000        ‐‐         ‐‐
PAN     Bananas       0.210     0.252      0.283      0.281      0.000        ‐‐         ‐‐
PER     Copper        0.408     0.485      0.496      0.451      0.000      0.437      0.434
PER     Gold          0.250     0.440      0.422      0.406      0.000        ‐‐         ‐‐
PER     PEPI          0.338     0.349      0.345      0.308      0.000        ‐‐         ‐‐
PRY     Beef          0.312     0.425      0.468      0.441      0.000      0.694      0.715
SLV     Coffee        0.945     0.690      0.717      0.680      0.000        ‐‐         ‐‐
TTO     Nat. Gas      0.357     0.402      0.431      0.483      0.000        ‐‐         ‐‐
URY     Beef          0.494     0.425      0.468      0.441      0.000      0.893      0.410
VEN     Oil           0.429     0.485      0.482      0.490      0.000        ‐‐         ‐‐



                                                                                               36
Table 5: Variability of Import Prices under Alternative Currency Regimes *
(a) Standard Deviation of Level of Nominal Import Prices
                                        Nominal Import Prices
               Historical    Dollar                         Comm.        CPI       PPI
                                       SDR Peg Euro Peg
                Regime        Peg                             Peg      Target    Target
ARG Oil          2.242       0.759       0.697    0.623      0.647      0.886     0.740
ARG Steel        2.134       0.527       0.428    0.349      0.428      0.982     0.749
BOL    Oil       1.939       0.759       0.697      0.623     0.358     0.771     0.659
BOL    Steel     2.052       0.527       0.428      0.349     0.478     0.586     0.501
BRA    Oil       2.290       0.759       0.697      0.623     0.538       ‐‐        ‐‐
CHL    Oil       3.636       0.759       0.697      0.623     0.597     0.771     0.578
CHL    Steel     3.372       0.527       0.428      0.349     0.345     0.817     0.677
COL    Steel     2.166       0.527       0.428      0.349     0.538     1.193     1.073

CRI    Oil       2.142       0.759       0.697      0.623     0.484       ‐‐        ‐‐
CRI    Steel     1.967       0.527       0.428      0.349     0.405       ‐‐        ‐‐
ECU    Steel     3.187       0.527       0.428      0.349     0.538       ‐‐        ‐‐
GTM Oil          1.444       0.759       0.697      0.623     0.765       ‐‐        ‐‐
GTM Steel        1.323       0.527       0.428      0.349     0.669       ‐‐        ‐‐
GUY Oil          2.463       0.759       0.697      0.623     0.766       ‐‐        ‐‐
GUY Steel        2.367       0.527       0.428      0.349     0.581       ‐‐        ‐‐
HND Oil          1.504       0.759       0.697      0.623     0.765       ‐‐        ‐‐
HND Steel        1.370       0.527       0.428      0.349     0.669       ‐‐        ‐‐
JAM Oil          2.207       0.759       0.697      0.623     0.452     1.074     0.777
MEX Steel        3.125       0.527       0.428      0.349     0.538     1.050     1.094
NIC    Oil       2.389       0.759       0.697      0.623     0.765       ‐‐        ‐‐
NIC    Steel     2.338       0.527       0.428      0.349     0.669       ‐‐        ‐‐
PAN Oil          0.759       0.759       0.697      0.623     0.484       ‐‐        ‐‐
PAN Steel        0.527       0.527       0.428      0.349     0.405       ‐‐        ‐‐
PER    Oil       2.115       0.759       0.697      0.623     0.597     0.792     0.718
PER    Steel     2.059       0.527       0.428      0.349     0.345     0.803     0.613
PRY    Oil       2.049       0.759       0.697      0.623     0.625     0.792     0.718
PRY    Steel     1.939       0.527       0.428      0.349     0.444     0.803     0.613
SLV    Oil       1.153       0.759       0.697      0.623     0.765       ‐‐        ‐‐
SLV    Steel     1.012       0.527       0.428      0.349     0.669       ‐‐        ‐‐
TTO    Oil       1.089       0.759       0.697      0.623     0.358       ‐‐        ‐‐
TTO    Steel     0.914       0.527       0.428      0.349     0.478       ‐‐        ‐‐
URY    Oil       3.966       0.759       0.697      0.623     0.625     0.693     0.639
URY    Steel     3.896       0.527       0.428      0.349     0.444     0.562     0.408
VEN Steel      2.835         0.527     0.428      0.349      0.538       ‐‐         ‐‐
* Commodity peg refers to regime where the country's currency is pegged to the price of the leading
commodity export.


                                                                                                      37
(b) Standard Deviation of First Difference of Nominal Import Prices
                                First Difference of Nominal Import Prices
               Historical    Dollar                          Comm.
                                       SDR Peg Euro Peg               CPI Target PPI Target
                Regime        Peg                              Peg
ARG Oil          0.197       0.075       0.076     0.080      0.099     0.058      0.076
ARG Steel        0.209       0.106       0.105     0.107      0.112     0.105      0.106
BOL    Oil       0.218       0.075      0.076      0.080      0.183       0.207      0.137
BOL    Steel     0.223       0.106      0.105      0.107      0.261       0.287      0.205
BRA    Oil       0.140       0.075      0.076      0.080      0.111         ‐‐         ‐‐
CHL    Oil       0.124       0.075      0.076      0.080      0.097       0.062      0.050
CHL    Steel     0.143       0.106      0.105      0.107      0.125       0.109      0.110

COL    Steel     0.104       0.106      0.105      0.107      0.125       0.106      0.106
CRI    Oil       0.087       0.075      0.076      0.080      0.174         ‐‐         ‐‐
CRI    Steel     0.110       0.106      0.105      0.107      0.189         ‐‐         ‐‐
ECU    Steel     0.116       0.106      0.105      0.107      0.125         ‐‐         ‐‐
GTM Oil          0.086       0.075      0.076      0.080      0.110         ‐‐         ‐‐
GTM Steel        0.116       0.106      0.105      0.107      0.134         ‐‐         ‐‐
GUY Oil          0.112       0.075      0.076      0.080      0.124         ‐‐         ‐‐
GUY Steel        0.135       0.106      0.105      0.107      0.151         ‐‐         ‐‐
HND Oil          0.103       0.075      0.076      0.080      0.110         ‐‐         ‐‐
HND Steel        0.128       0.106      0.105      0.107      0.134         ‐‐         ‐‐
JAM Oil          0.085       0.075      0.076      0.080      0.077       0.063      0.079
MEX Steel        0.117       0.106      0.105      0.107      0.125       0.106      0.106
NIC    Oil       0.182       0.075      0.076      0.080      0.110         ‐‐         ‐‐
NIC    Steel     0.194       0.106      0.105      0.107      0.134         ‐‐         ‐‐
PAN Oil          0.075       0.075      0.076      0.080      0.174         ‐‐         ‐‐
PAN Steel        0.106       0.106      0.105      0.107      0.189         ‐‐         ‐‐
PER    Oil       0.191       0.075      0.076      0.080      0.097       0.068      0.086
PER    Steel     0.189       0.106      0.105      0.107      0.125       0.111      0.117
PRY    Oil       0.088       0.075      0.076      0.080      0.085       0.068      0.086
PRY    Steel     0.114       0.106      0.105      0.107      0.116       0.111      0.117
SLV    Oil       0.080       0.075      0.076      0.080      0.110         ‐‐         ‐‐
SLV    Steel     0.111       0.106      0.105      0.107      0.134         ‐‐         ‐‐
TTO    Oil       0.078       0.075      0.076      0.080      0.117         ‐‐         ‐‐
TTO    Steel     0.110       0.106      0.105      0.107      0.145         ‐‐         ‐‐
URY    Oil       0.284       0.075      0.076      0.080      0.085       0.070      0.068
URY    Steel     0.196       0.106      0.105      0.107      0.116       0.109      0.110
VEN Steel      0.137        0.106     0.105      0.107      0.125          ‐‐          ‐‐
* Commodity peg refers to regime where the country's exchange rate is pegged to the price of the leading
commodity export.



                                                                                                       38
(c) Standard Deviation of Level of Real Import Prices
                                            Real Import Prices
               Historical    Dollar                          Comm.
                                       SDR Peg Euro Peg              CPI Target PPI Target
                Regime        Peg                               Peg
ARG Oil          0.760       0.485      0.482      0.490       0.482   0.654      0.591
ARG Steel        0.684       0.380      0.359      0.315       0.378   0.646      0.567
BOL    Oil       0.520       0.485      0.482       0.490       0.277      0.539       0.574
BOL    Steel     0.483       0.380      0.359       0.315       0.435      0.523       0.452
BRA    Oil       0.549       0.485      0.482       0.490       0.374        ‐‐          ‐‐
CHL    Oil       0.601       0.485      0.482       0.490       0.597      0.771       0.578
CHL    Steel     0.478       0.380      0.359       0.315       0.345      0.817       0.677
COL    Steel     0.368       0.380      0.359       0.315       0.538      1.193       1.073
CRI    Oil       0.568       0.485      0.482       0.490       0.484        ‐‐          ‐‐
CRI    Steel     0.330       0.380      0.359       0.315       0.405        ‐‐          ‐‐
ECU    Steel     0.393       0.380      0.359       0.315       0.538        ‐‐          ‐‐
GTM Oil          0.416       0.485      0.482       0.490       0.765        ‐‐          ‐‐
GTM Steel        0.368       0.380      0.359       0.315       0.669        ‐‐          ‐‐
GUY Oil          1.021       0.485      0.482       0.490       0.766        ‐‐          ‐‐
GUY Steel        0.970       0.380      0.359       0.315       0.581        ‐‐          ‐‐
HND Oil          0.471       0.485      0.482       0.490       0.765        ‐‐          ‐‐
HND Steel        0.398       0.380      0.359       0.315       0.669        ‐‐          ‐‐
JAM Oil          0.405       0.485      0.482       0.490       0.424      0.518       0.400
MEX Steel        0.387       0.380      0.359       0.315       0.000      1.050       1.094
NIC    Oil       0.539       0.485      0.482       0.490       0.677        ‐‐          ‐‐
NIC    Steel     0.467       0.380      0.359       0.315       0.529        ‐‐          ‐‐
PAN Oil          0.413       0.485      0.482       0.490       0.411        ‐‐          ‐‐
PAN Steel        0.370       0.380      0.359       0.315       0.388        ‐‐          ‐‐
PER    Oil       0.480       0.485      0.482       0.490       0.342      0.403       0.424
PER    Steel     0.385       0.380      0.359       0.315       0.307      0.464       0.458
PRY    Oil       0.514       0.485      0.482       0.490       0.625      0.792       0.718
PRY    Steel     0.469       0.380      0.359       0.315       0.444      0.803       0.613
SLV    Oil       0.555       0.485      0.482       0.490       0.765        ‐‐          ‐‐
SLV    Steel     0.572       0.380      0.359       0.315       0.669        ‐‐          ‐‐
TTO    Oil       0.410       0.485      0.482       0.490       0.358        ‐‐          ‐‐
TTO    Steel     0.408       0.380      0.359       0.315       0.478        ‐‐          ‐‐
URY    Oil       0.515       0.485      0.482       0.490       0.625      0.693       0.639
URY    Steel     0.482       0.380      0.359       0.315       0.444      0.562       0.408
VEN Steel      0.441         0.380    0.359       0.315       0.538         ‐‐           ‐‐
* Commodity peg refers to regime where the country's exchange rate is pegged to the price of the leading
commodity export.


                                                                                                       39
Table 6: Average of the Variability of Export's and Import's Prices*
(a) Average of the Standard Deviation of Level of Nominal Prices
                             Nominal Prices
      Historical Dollar                   Comm. CPI          PPI
                        SDR Peg Euro Peg
       Regime Peg                          Peg     Target Target
 ARG 2.084       0.519 0.474 0.444 0.324 1.078 0.888
 BOL 1.968       0.693 0.644 0.609 0.179 0.839 0.621
 BRA 2.265       0.675 0.596 0.520 0.269             ‐‐       ‐‐
 CHL 3.407       0.584 0.519 0.467 0.298 0.942 0.765
 COL 2.315       0.759 0.697 0.623 0.000 1.123 0.974
 CRI    2.036    0.600 0.534 0.464 0.242             ‐‐       ‐‐
 ECU 3.288       0.759 0.697 0.623 0.000             ‐‐       ‐‐
 GTM 1.177       0.619 0.595 0.563 0.383             ‐‐       ‐‐
 GUY 2.261       0.617 0.565 0.529 0.383             ‐‐       ‐‐
 HND 1.237       0.619 0.595 0.563 0.383             ‐‐       ‐‐
 JAM 2.083       0.588 0.529 0.463 0.226 1.148 0.671
 MEX 3.238       0.759 0.697 0.623 0.000 0.975 1.030
 NIC    2.287    0.619 0.595 0.563 0.383             ‐‐       ‐‐
 PAN 0.600       0.600 0.534 0.464 0.242             ‐‐       ‐‐
 PER    2.019    0.584 0.519 0.467 0.298 0.732 0.703
 PRY    1.836    0.495 0.451 0.423 0.312 0.743 0.716
 SLV    0.911    0.619 0.595 0.563 0.383             ‐‐       ‐‐
 TTO 1.009       0.693 0.644 0.609 0.179             ‐‐       ‐‐
 URY 3.804       0.495 0.451 0.423 0.312 0.793 0.525
 VEN 2.931       0.759 0.697 0.623 0.000             ‐‐       ‐‐

* Average of leading commodity export standard deviation and oil price standard
deviation under different regimes.




                                                                                  40
(b) Standard Deviation of First Difference of Nominal Prices:
Export Price Standard Deviation and Import Price Standard Deviation Averaged
                             First Difference of Nominal Prices
         Historical    Dollar                       Comm.         CPI             PPI
                                SDR Peg Euro Peg
          Regime        Peg                           Peg       Target          Target
ARG        0.199       0.071      0.072     0.076    0.049       0.059           0.058
BOL        0.317       0.090      0.090     0.093    0.092       0.154           0.104
BRA        0.145       0.082      0.083     0.087    0.056         ‐‐              ‐‐
CHL        0.123       0.076      0.076     0.079    0.049       0.066           0.061
COL        0.078       0.075      0.076     0.080    0.000       0.067           0.059
CRI        0.123       0.114      0.116     0.119    0.087         ‐‐              ‐‐
ECU        0.089       0.075      0.076     0.080    0.000         ‐‐              ‐‐
GTM        0.089       0.079      0.080     0.085    0.055         ‐‐              ‐‐
GUY        0.123       0.090      0.090     0.094    0.062         ‐‐              ‐‐
HND        0.106       0.079      0.080     0.085    0.055         ‐‐              ‐‐
JAM        0.075       0.062      0.064     0.069    0.039       0.056           0.049
MEX        0.090       0.075      0.076     0.080    0.000       0.064           0.067
NIC        0.183       0.079      0.080     0.085    0.055         ‐‐              ‐‐
PAN        0.114       0.114      0.116     0.119    0.087         ‐‐              ‐‐
PER        0.180       0.076      0.076     0.079    0.049       0.072           0.081
PRY        0.076       0.059      0.061     0.067    0.043       0.047           0.058
SLV        0.088       0.079      0.080     0.085    0.055         ‐‐              ‐‐
TTO        0.093       0.090      0.090     0.093    0.058         ‐‐              ‐‐
URY        0.180       0.059      0.061     0.067    0.043       0.049           0.045
VEN        0.116       0.075      0.076     0.080    0.000         ‐‐              ‐‐

* Average of leading commodity export price standard deviation and oil price standard deviation under
different regimes.




                                                                                                        41
(c) Standard Deviation of Level of Real Prices
Export Price Standard Deviation and Import Price Standard Deviation Averaged

                               Real Prices**
      Historical Dollar                   Comm.    CPI      PPI
                          SDR PegEuro Peg
      Regime Peg                           Peg    Target   Target
ARG    0.661 0.491         0.503 0.486 0.241      0.756    0.679
BOL    0.538 0.443         0.457 0.486 0.138      0.488    0.448
BRA    0.522 0.456         0.442 0.426 0.187        ‐‐       ‐‐
CHL    0.510 0.485         0.489 0.470 0.298      0.840    0.696
COL    0.456 0.485         0.482 0.490 0.000      1.123    0.974
CRI    0.420 0.368         0.383 0.385 0.242        ‐‐       ‐‐
ECU    0.456 0.485         0.482 0.490 0.000        ‐‐       ‐‐
GTM    0.510 0.588         0.600 0.585 0.383        ‐‐       ‐‐
GUY    0.922 0.581         0.579 0.557 0.383        ‐‐       ‐‐
HND    0.533 0.588         0.600 0.585 0.383        ‐‐       ‐‐
JAM    0.338 0.383         0.401 0.403 0.212      0.870    0.483
MEX    0.479 0.485         0.482 0.490 0.000      0.975    1.030
NIC    0.511 0.588         0.600 0.585 0.339        ‐‐       ‐‐
PAN    0.312 0.368         0.383 0.385 0.206        ‐‐       ‐‐
PER    0.444 0.485         0.489 0.470 0.171      0.420    0.429
PRY    0.413 0.455         0.475 0.466 0.312      0.743    0.716
SLV    0.750 0.588         0.600 0.585 0.383        ‐‐       ‐‐
TTO    0.383 0.443         0.457 0.486 0.179        ‐‐       ‐‐
URY    0.504 0.455         0.475 0.466 0.312      0.793    0.525
VEN    0.429 0.485         0.482 0.490 0.000        ‐‐       ‐‐


* Average of leading commodity export standard deviation and oil price standard deviation under
different regimes.

** Minimum standard deviation across alternative regimes is shown in bold.




                                                                                            42
Appendix I: Each Candidate for Nominal Anchor has its Own
Vulnerability

       CPI targeting is not unique in having an Achilles heel, in the form of import price
shocks. Other standard candidates for nominal anchor have their own problems. Table
A1 summarizes how each of the variables that are candidates for nominal anchor has its
own characteristic sort of extraneous fluctuations that can wreck havoc on a country’s
monetary system.

Table A1: Six proposed nominal anchors and the Achilles heel of each
    Regime            Targeted                Vulnerability            Historical Examples
                   nominal variable


Inflation                 CPI              Import price shocks       Oil shocks of 1973, 1980,
targeting                                                                   2000, 2008

Monetarist                M1                 Velocity shocks                  US 1982
rule
Gold standard        Price of gold       Vagaries of world gold             1849 boom;
                                                market                      1873-96 bust
Commodity               Price of           Shocks in market for      Oil shocks of 1973, 1980,
standard              commodity                 imported                    2000, 2008
                         basket                commodity
Nominal              Nominal GDP         Measurement problems         Less developed countries
income
targeting
Fixed                      $                Appreciation of $                1995-2001
exchange rate          (or euro)               (or euro)              (or 2003-07 for the euro)




   A monetarist rule would specify a fixed rate of growth in the money supply. But
    fluctuations in the public’s demand for money or in the behavior of the banking
    system can directly produce gratuitous fluctuations in velocity and the interest rate,
    and thereby in the real economy. For example, in the United States, a large upward
    shift in the demand for money around 1982 convinced the Federal Reserve Board that
    it had better abandon the money growth rule it had adopted two years earlier, or else
    face a prolonged and severe recession.

   Under a gold standard, the economy is hostage to the vagaries of the world gold
    market. For example, when much of the world was on the gold standard in the 19th


                                                                                        43
       century, global monetary conditions depended on the output of the world’s gold
       mines. The California gold rush from 1849 was associated with a mid-century
       increase in liquidity and a resulting increase in the global price level. The absence of
       major discoveries of gold between 1873 and 1896 helps explain why price levels fell
       dramatically over this period. In the late 1890s, the gold rushes in Alaska and South
       Africa were each again followed by new upswings in the price level. Thus the
       system did not in fact guarantee stability.52

      One proposal is that monetary policy should target a basket of basic mineral and
       agricultural commodities. The idea is that a broad-based commodity standard of this
       sort would not be subject to the vicissitudes of a single commodity such as gold,
       because fluctuations of its components would average out somewhat.53 The proposal
       might work if the basket reflected the commodities produced and exported by the
       country in question. But for a country that is a net importer of oil, wheat, and other
       mineral and agricultural commodities, such a peg gives precisely the wrong answer in
       a year when the prices of these import commodities go up. Just when the domestic
       currency should be depreciating to accommodate an adverse movement in the terms
       of trade, it appreciates instead. Chile should not peg to oil, and Trinidad should not
       peg to wheat.

      The need for robustness with respect to import price shocks argues for the superiority
       of nominal income targeting over inflation targeting.54 A practical argument against
       nominal income targeting is the difficulty of timely measurement. For developing
       countries in particular, the data are sometimes available only with a delay of one or
       two years.

      Under a fixed exchange rate, fluctuations in the value of the particular currency to
       which the home country is pegged can produce needless volatility in the country’s
       international price competitiveness. For example, the appreciation of the dollar from
       1995 and 2001 was also an appreciation for whatever currencies were linked to the
       dollar. Regardless the extent to which one considers the late-1990s dollar
       appreciation to have been based in the fundamentals of the US economy, there was no
       necessary connection to the fundamentals of smaller dollar-linked economies. The
       problem was particularly severe for some far-flung economies that had adopted
       currency boards over the preceding decade: Hong Kong, Argentina, and Lithuania.

Dollar-induced overvaluation was also one of the problems facing such victims of
currency crisis as Mexico (1994), Thailand and Korea (1997), Russia (1998), Brazil
(1999) and Turkey (2001), even though none of these countries had formal rigid links to
the dollar. It is enough for the dollar to exert a large pull on the country’s currency to

52
     Cooper (1985), Eichengrenn (1985) or Hall (1982).

54
  Velocity shocks argue for the superiority of nominal income targeting over a monetarist rule. Frankel
(1995) demonstrates the point mathematically, using the framework of Rogoff (1985), and gives other
references on nominal income targeting.



                                                                                                          44
create strains. The loss of competitiveness in non-dollar export markets adversely
impacts such measures of economic health as real overvaluation, exports, the trade
balance, and growth, or such measures of financial health as the ratios of current account
to GDP, debt to GDP, debt service to exports, or reserves to imports.

   This brings us back to the current fashion of targeting the inflation rate or CPI. To
    some, PEP may sound similar to inflation targeting. But, as already noted, a key
    difference between the CPI and the export price is the terms of trade. When there is
    an adverse movement in the terms of trade, one would like the currency to depreciate,
    while price level targeting can have the opposite implication. If the central bank has
    been constrained to hit an inflation target, oil price shocks (as in 1973, 1979, 2000, or
    2008), for example, will require an oil-importing country to tighten monetary policy.
    The result can be sharp falls in national output. Thus under rigid inflation targeting,
    supply or terms-of-trade shocks can produce unnecessary and excessive fluctuations
    in the level of economic activity.




                                                                                          45
Appendix 2: Stabilizing Properties of Pegging the Export Price vs.
Exchange Rate and CPI Rules
           The theoretical model is a two-sector version of Frankel,"Monetary Regime
Choices for a Semi-Open Country," in Capital Controls, Exchange Rates and Monetary
Policy in the World Economy, edited by Sebastian Edwards, Cambridge University Press,
1995: 35-69; which followed closely in the path of Kenneth Rogoff, "The Optimal
Degree of Commitment to an Intermediate Monetary Target." Quarterly Journal of
Economics 100, November, 1985; which in turn introduced shocks into the Barro-Gordon
model dynamically-consistent monetary policy.

Assumptions

A supply relationship in each of two production sectors:
y n  y n  b( pn  pne )  u n                                     (1)
yx  yx  d ( px  pxe )  ux                                       (2)

where
yn & yx  output of nontraded & export sectors, respectively;
y & y  potential output in the two sectors;
 n      x

pn & px  prices in two sectors (in domestic currency)
pne & pxe  expected prices;
un & ux  supply disturbances;                       all in logs.
The country is a price-taker on world markets for exports and imports:
px = s + ε x ,                                                  (3)
pim = s + εim ,                                                 (4)

where
s  exchange rate, spot price domestic currency / $,
εx  fluctuating $ price of export commodity;
εim  fluctuating $ price of import good.
Price indices (CPI & GDP deflator) include the nontraded good and the international
good, with weights f and (1-f), respectively:

cpi = (f)pim +(1-f)pn   ,                                           (5)
p = (f)px + (1-f) pn    .                                           (6)

Money market equilibrium:
m = p + y - v,                                                      (9)

and exchange rate equation
s = m - y + e.                                                      (10)




                                                                                      46
where
m  money supply,
y  an index of total output,
v  velocity shocks
e  shocks in exchange rate equation.

Objective is to minimize quadratic loss function:

L = a (cpi) 2 + f(yx-yx’) 2 + (1-f)(yn-yn’) 2 ,             (7)

Results

(The derivations are omitted, to save space.)

                 Table
                  A2a         Objective: Stabilize export revenue


               Coefficient
               on:               εim2               εx2                 (v-e)2   ux2            un2


Exchange       Equation
rate peg       (17)
                                 0                (1+d)2                0        1              0
CPI rule               (29) f 2 +         f2+                      1+(1+d) 2     1              0
                            (1+d)f 2        (1+d)f2 +
                                                (1+d)
PEP             (24)              0                 1                      0     1              0
                       => PEP always dominates, so long as d > 0 and εx2 > 0.

               Table          Objective: Stabilize CPI and output in the NTG and X sectors
               A2b
               Coefficient
               on:
                                 εim2                εx2               (v-e)2     ux2           un2
Exchange               (19)      a f2     af2+ fd2 +                      1        f            1-f
rate peg                                                          a + b2
                                                       1                 1 f
                                               f 2b2
                                                     1 f
CPI rule               (32) b2f3           2 3
                                          d f + fd +2
                                                                  fd 2 +             f           1-f
                               (1-f)      b2(f3/1-f))]            b2(f2/1-f))
PEP                    (25)   af2                   af2           a[(1-f)/f] 2         f         1-f
                                                                      +
                                                                     b2/(1-f)


                                                                                           47
=>
PEP vs. Exchange rate peg:
        Even if there are no export price shocks, then the expected loss is smaller under
the PEP rule if f > 1/2, i.e., if the foreign sector is larger than the domestic sector.
        To the extent that export price shocks are greater than 0, the case is stronger,
because εx shocks affect output of both exports and nontraded goods, whereas PEP
insulates the real economy against them. If εx shocks are large, then PEP dominates
regardless of parameter values.

PEP vs. CPI rule:
        If a is large, i.e., if stabilizing CPI is top priority, then terms of trade and
exchange rate shocks hurt more under the PEP rule than under inflation targeting. But
shocks to world prices destabilize both output terms under the CPI rule, while PEP
insulates the real economy; thus if a is small (relative to b & d), PEP dominates.




                                                                                            48
Appendix 3: Data Sources and Computation Methods

Data Sources

Variable                           Source
Commodity Prices                   International Financial Statistics (IFS) and Global Financial Statistics (GFS)
Composition of commodity exports   World Bank analysis
Exports                            IFS
Imports                            IFS
Export Price Index                 IFS
Consumer Price Index (CPI)         IFS
Producer Price Index (PPI)         IFS, Countries' National Statistical Institute and Central Bank
Wholesale Price Index (WPI)        IFS, Countries' National Statistical Institute and Central Bank
Exchange Rates                     IFS
CPI detailed decomposition         Countries' National Statistical Institute
PPI detailed decomposition         Countries' National Statistical Institute
Non Tradables CPI                  Countries' Central Bank
Tradables CPI                      Countries' Central Bank



Computation Methods

    1. Simulation of Export Prices

A profit-maximizing firm that is competitive in its product and input markets will produce in
relation to the ratio of the price of the export good to the price of its variable inputs. If its
production is for simplicity taken to be Cobb-Douglas, with labor the only variable factor of
production, then in logs we have                 LogX  x   ( p x  w)

where px is the log of the domestic currency price of the export good in question, w is the log of
the wage in local currency, and  the supply elasticity depends on labor’s share.
                                                    p x  p x$  slc$
Where p$x is the log dollar price of the export good on world markets, which fluctuates
exogenously; and
s$lc is the log dollar value of the local currency, which depends both on the country’s exchange
rate policy and fluctuations in the dollar’s value.

A country can get into trouble under a regime where s$lc is fixed, because a decline in p$x hurts
exports in proportion  . (In dollar terms, which may be the most relevant measure if a country
has incurred debts in dollars, the loss of export revenue is (1+  ) times the fall in p$x.) But the
country can also get into trouble if the exchange rate s$lc floats, and thereby introduces its own
extraneous fluctuations into the equation.

Assume that w is stable, a prospect that is more likely if expected inflation has been secured by
means of one or another nominal anchor for monetary policy. Then to determine exports, whether
in real terms or dollar terms, we want to focus on:      p x  p x$  slc$




                                                                                                                    49
The way to do that is to set the dollar price of the domestic currency equal to the dollar price of
the export commodity:                                  p x$  slc$

Operationally, this is the way to implement a commitment to peg the domestic price of the export
commodity. Intuitively, by removing fluctuations in px, we may stabilize exports. (In the
simulations, we focus on how various regimes would affect px-w, where we represent the
domestic cost of variable inputs, w, by the domestic CPI).

To repeat from above, the key variable is px-w, the price of exports relative to the cost of variable
inputs, which could be defined as the real exchange rate. The path under the seven possible
regimes is calculated as follows:

Under actual history, Px  S $lc Px$ and w = CPIlc .
Under a hypothetical dollar peg, S $lc  1 , so Px  Px$ and w = CPIUS.
Under a hypothetical DM or euro peg 55, S $lc  S $DM , so Px  S $DM Px$ and w = CPIG.
Under a hypothetical SDR, S $lc  S $SDR , so Px  S $SDR Px$ and w = CPISDR.56
Under a hypothetical commodity peg, S $lc  P$x , so Px  1 and w = 1.
Under a hypothetical CPI target57, S $lc  (100  wntg Pntg ) /( wcx Pcx $  w pm Ppm $  wotg Potg $ ) ,
Px  S $lc Px$ .
Under a hypothetical PPI target58, S $lc  (100  v ntg Pntg ) /(vcx Pcx $  v pm Ppm $  votg Potg $ ) ,
Px  S $lc Px$ .

Under the CPI and PPI target, we have approximated non tradable goods’ prices using a 10-year
moving average of the US CPI (assuming the target was implemented credibly since the start of
the period under analysis).

We use the CPI to measure the price of variable inputs, w. When the currency is hypothetically
taken to be rigidly pegged to the dollar, SDR, or DM, then CPIHome is taken to be the CPI of the
US, SDR, or Germany, respectively, under the assumption that the peg is strong enough and
permanent enough to achieve convergence of inflation rates59.

The path of the real price of commodities under the seven possible regimes is calculated as
follows:

Under actual history, RPx  S $lc Px$ / CPI lc


55
   The exchange rate of the German Mark after 1999 is calculated as follows.
S(DM/$) in 1999 = S(Euro/$) in 1999 * S(DM/Euro) in 1999;
S(DM/$) in 2000 = S(DM/$) in 1999 * (1 + % change of the euro exchange rate).
56
   The CPI for the SDR peg is constructed as a weighted average of USA CPI, UK CPI, France CPI and
Germany CPI. To calculate this average we use the weight of each country’s currency in the SDR.
57
   Rewrite the CPI equation from part 2. of this appendix as: CPI = wntg Pntg +wcx S Pcx$ + wpm S Ppm$
+ wotg S Potg$ and solve for the exchange rate that maintains CPI constant.
58
   Rewrite the PPI equation from part 2. of this appendix as: PPI = vntg Pntg +vcx S Pcx$ + vpm S Ppm$
+ votg S Potg$ and solve for the exchange rate that maintains PPI constant.
59
   When calculating the real exchange rate for the euro, we continue to use the German CPI.


                                                                                                            50
Under a hypothetical dollar peg, RPx  ( Px$ / CPIUS )( K $ )
Under a hypothetical SDR peg, RPx  ( S $SDR Px$ / CPI SDR )( K SDR )
Under a hypothetical DM or euro peg, RPx  ( S $DM Px$ / CPI G )( K DM )
Under a hypothetical commodity peg, RPx  K x
Under a hypothetical CPI target, RPx  ( S $lc Px$ )( K CPI )
Under a hypothetical PPI target, RPx  ( S $lc Px$ )( K PPI )

Where K$ , KSDR , KDM , Kx , KCPI and KPPI are constants calculated so as to make the log of the real
price of the commodity on average over the 30 year period equal under each of the regimes to
what it was in actual history.

We simulated import prices for LAC countries using this same methodology; instead of using the
price of the leading commodity export in dollars we used the most important import prices in
dollar terms as can be seen in tables 5a.

    2. Simulation of CPI and PPI

To simulate the Consumer Price Index (CPI) and Producer Price Index (PPI) under different
regimes we impose the following equations.

CPI  wntg P ntg  wwcx Pcx  w pm Ppm  wotg Potg
PPI  vntg P ntg v wcx Pcx  v pm Ppm  votg Potg

where:

Pntg ≡ Price of non-traded goods in local terms. We assume that, at a horizon of less than 1 year,
these prices would not be affected by differences in the exchange rate. Under the hypothetical
counterfactual where a country would have been on a dollar peg all along, then its non tradable
prices are given by the US CPI, since we assume that convergence would have taken place in the
long run.
Pcx ≡ Price of exports of leading mineral/agricultural commodity in local terms (we ignore trade
barriers and define these tradable goods prices to equal the actual historically observed world
dollar prices, times the exchange rate, which will differ depending on the regime assumed.
Pox ≡ Price of other exports, which we approximate using Ppm ≡ Price of petroleum product
imports. This is determined again as actual world dollar price times the simulated exchange rate.
Potg ≡ Price of other tradable goods (i.e., excluding oil and the other commodities that are
measured explicitly). Assume equal to world prices of the tradable goods times the exchange
rate.

wntg ≡ weight on ntg in CPI         wcx ≡ weight on cx in CPI
wpm ≡ weight on pm in CPI           wotg ≡ weight on otg in CPI
vntg ≡ weight on ntg in PPI         vcx ≡ weight on cx in PPI
vpm ≡ weight on pm in PPI           votg ≡ weight on otg in PPI .

We impose wntg ≡ vntg




                                                                                                  51
To estimate the above mentioned weights, we followed these steps:

       a. Obtain countries’ Non Tradable CPI and Tradable CPI series.
       b. Regress CPI against Non Tradable CPI to get wntg = vntg.
       c. Obtain detailed decomposition of CPI and PPI, and calculate weight of leading
          commodity export (wcx and vcx) and weight of oil in CPI and PPI (wpm and vpm).
       d. Calculate weight of other tradable goods as the complement (i.e., 1 - wcx - wntg - wpm).




                                                                                               52
Appendix 4: Nominal and Real Log Export Prices, Simulated under
alternative regimes

Argentina

                                               Argentina, Nominal Soybean Price                                                                                                                                         Argentina, Real Soybean Price
                                               (in natural log, mean substracted)                                                                                                                                     (in natural log, mean substracted)
  2
                                                                                                                                                         Historic
                                                                                                                                                         regime           2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Historic
  0                                                                                                                                                      Dollar Peg                                                                                                                                                                 regime
                                                                                                                                                                          1.5                                                                                                                                                       Dollar Peg

                                                                                                                                                         SDR Peg          0.5                                                                                                                                                       SDR Peg
 ‐2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Euro Peg
                                                                                                                                                         Euro Peg        ‐0.5
 ‐4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Comm Peg
                                                                                                                                                         CPI Target      ‐1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CPI Target

 ‐6                                                                                                                                                      PPI Target      ‐2.5                                                                                                                                                       PPI Target

                                                                                                                                                                         ‐3.5
 ‐8
          1970
                 1972
                        1974
                               1976
                                      1978
                                             1980
                                                    1982
                                                           1984
                                                                  1986
                                                                         1988
                                                                                1990
                                                                                       1992
                                                                                              1994
                                                                                                     1996
                                                                                                            1998
                                                                                                                   2000
                                                                                                                          2002
                                                                                                                                 2004
                                                                                                                                        2006
                                                                                                                                               2008




                                                                                                                                                                         ‐4.5




                                                                                                                                                                                   1970
                                                                                                                                                                                          1972
                                                                                                                                                                                                 1974
                                                                                                                                                                                                        1976
                                                                                                                                                                                                               1978
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1980
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1982
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1984
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1986
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1988
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1990
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1992
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1994
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1996
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1998
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2002
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2004
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2006
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2008
                                      Argentina, Nominal Comm. Basket Price                                                                                                                             Argentina, Real Comm. Basket Price
                                         (in natural log, mean substracted)                                                                                                                              (in natural log, mean substracted)
  4                                                                                                                                                                       1.5
  2                                                                                                                                                   Historic regime          1                                                                                                                                               Historic regime
  0                                                                                                                                                   Dollar Peg          0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Dollar Peg
 ‐2                                                                                                                                                   SDR Peg                  0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               SDR Peg
 ‐4                                                                                                                                                   Euro Peg           ‐0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Euro Peg
 ‐6                                                                                                                                                                        ‐1

 ‐8                                                                                                                                                                      ‐1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                    1970
                                                                                                                                                                                    1972
                                                                                                                                                                                    1974
                                                                                                                                                                                    1976
                                                                                                                                                                                    1978
                                                                                                                                                                                    1980
                                                                                                                                                                                    1982
                                                                                                                                                                                    1984
                                                                                                                                                                                    1986
                                                                                                                                                                                    1988
                                                                                                                                                                                    1990
                                                                                                                                                                                    1992
                                                                                                                                                                                    1994
                                                                                                                                                                                    1996
                                                                                                                                                                                    1998
                                                                                                                                                                                    2000
                                                                                                                                                                                    2002
                                                                                                                                                                                    2004
                                                                                                                                                                                    2006
                                                                                                                                                                                    2008
          1970
          1972
          1974
          1976
          1978
          1980
          1982
          1984
          1986
          1988
          1990
          1992
          1994
          1996
          1998
          2000
          2002
          2004
          2006
          2008




* Basket: Maize, soybeans, oil and wheat.

Bolivia

                                             Bolivia, Nominal Natural Gas Price                                                                                                                                  Bolivia, Real Natural Gas Price
                                             (in natural log, mean substracted)                                                                                                                                (in natural log, mean substracted)
      4                                                                                                                                                                 2.5

      2                                                                                                                                               Historic            2                                                                                                                                                    Historic
                                                                                                                                                      regime                                                                                                                                                                   regime
                                                                                                                                                                        1.5                                                                                                                                                    Dollar Peg
      0                                                                                                                                               Dollar Peg
                                                                                                                                                                          1
  ‐2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           SDR Peg
                                                                                                                                                      SDR Peg
                                                                                                                                                                        0.5
  ‐4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Euro Peg
                                                                                                                                                      Euro Peg            0
  ‐6                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Comm Peg
                                                                                                                                                      CPI Target        ‐0.5
  ‐8                                                                                                                                                                     ‐1                                                                                                                                                    CPI Target
                                                                                                                                                      PPI Target
 ‐10                                                                                                                                                                    ‐1.5                                                                                                                                                   PPI Target
            1970
            1972
            1974
            1976
            1978
            1980
            1982
            1984
            1986
            1988
            1990
            1992
            1994
            1996
            1998
            2000
            2002
            2004
            2006
            2008




                                                                                                                                                                                   1970
                                                                                                                                                                                   1972
                                                                                                                                                                                   1974
                                                                                                                                                                                   1976
                                                                                                                                                                                   1978
                                                                                                                                                                                   1980
                                                                                                                                                                                   1982
                                                                                                                                                                                   1984
                                                                                                                                                                                   1986
                                                                                                                                                                                   1988
                                                                                                                                                                                   1990
                                                                                                                                                                                   1992
                                                                                                                                                                                   1994
                                                                                                                                                                                   1996
                                                                                                                                                                                   1998
                                                                                                                                                                                   2000
                                                                                                                                                                                   2002
                                                                                                                                                                                   2004
                                                                                                                                                                                   2006
                                                                                                                                                                                   2008




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        53
                                                            Bolivia, Nominal Export Price
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Bolivia, Real Export Price
                                                         (in natural log, mean substracted)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (in natural log, mean substracted)
      4                                                                                                                                                                            1.5
      2                                                                                                                                                                              1
                                                                                                                                                              Historic regime                                                                                                                                                                               Historic regime
      0
                                                                                                                                                              Dollar Peg           0.5
  ‐2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Dollar Peg
                                                                                                                                                              SDR Peg                0
  ‐4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        SDR Peg
                                                                                                                                                              Euro Peg             ‐0.5                                                                                                                                                                     Euro Peg
  ‐6
  ‐8                                                                                                                                                                                ‐1

 ‐10                                                                                                                                                                               ‐1.5




                                                                                                                                                                                               1970
                                                                                                                                                                                                      1972
                                                                                                                                                                                                             1974
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1976
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1978
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1980
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1982
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1984
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1986
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1988
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1990
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1992
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1994
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1996
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1998
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2002
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2004
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2006
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2008
            1970
            1972
            1974
            1976
            1978
            1980
            1982
            1984
            1986
            1988
            1990
            1992
            1994
            1996
            1998
            2000
            2002
            2004
            2006
            2008
Brazil
                                                         Brazil, Nominal Steel Price                                                                                                                                                           Brazil, Real Steel Price
                                                    (in natural log, mean substracted)                                                                                                                                                   (in natural log, mean substracted)
  4                                                                                                                                                                                  1.5
  2
                                                                                                                                                                 Historic regime          1                                                                                                                                                                  Historic regime
  0
                                                                                                                                                                 Dollar Peg                                                                                                                                                                                  Dollar Peg
  ‐2                                                                                                                                                                                 0.5
                                                                                                                                                                 SDR Peg                                                                                                                                                                                     SDR Peg
  ‐4                                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                                                                 Euro Peg                                                                                                                                                                                    Euro Peg
  ‐6
                                                                                                                                                                                     ‐0.5
  ‐8
 ‐10                                                                                                                                                                                      ‐1
           1970
                   1972
                           1974
                                   1976
                                           1978
                                                   1980
                                                           1982
                                                                   1984
                                                                          1986
                                                                                 1988
                                                                                        1990
                                                                                               1992
                                                                                                      1994
                                                                                                             1996
                                                                                                                    1998
                                                                                                                           2000
                                                                                                                                  2002
                                                                                                                                         2004
                                                                                                                                                2006
                                                                                                                                                       2008




                                                                                                                                                                                                  1970
                                                                                                                                                                                                         1972
                                                                                                                                                                                                                1974
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1976
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1978
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1980
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1982
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1984
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1986
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1988
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1990
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1992
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1994
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1996
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1998
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2002
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2004
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2006
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2008
                                                       Brazil, Iron ore Nominal Price                                                                                                                                                         Brazil, Iron Ore Real Price
                                                    (in natural log, mean substracted)                                                                                                                                                   (in natural log, mean substracted)
  4                                                                                                                                                                                   1.5
  2                                                                                                                                                                                        1
  0                                                                                                                                                                                   0.5
                                                                                                                                                               Historic regime                                                                                                                                                                             Historic regime
 ‐2                                                                                                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                                                                               Dollar Peg                                                                                                                                                                                  Dollar Peg
 ‐4                                                                                                                                                                                  ‐0.5
                                                                                                                                                               SDR Peg                                                                                                                                                                                     SDR Peg
 ‐6                                                                                                                                                            Euro Peg                   ‐1                                                                                                                                                               Euro Peg
 ‐8                                                                                                                                                                                  ‐1.5
          1970
                  1972
                          1974
                                  1976
                                          1978
                                                  1980
                                                          1982
                                                                  1984
                                                                          1986
                                                                                 1988
                                                                                        1990
                                                                                               1992
                                                                                                      1994
                                                                                                             1996
                                                                                                                    1998
                                                                                                                           2000
                                                                                                                                  2002
                                                                                                                                         2004
                                                                                                                                                2006
                                                                                                                                                       2008




                                                                                                                                                                                                  1970
                                                                                                                                                                                                         1972
                                                                                                                                                                                                                1974
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1976
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1978
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1980
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1982
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1984
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1986
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1988
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1990
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1992
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1994
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1996
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1998
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2002
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2004
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2006
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2008




                                                  Brazil, Nominal Comm. Basket Price                                                                                                                                                   Brazil, Real Comm. Basket Price
                                                   (in natural log, mean substracted)                                                                                                                                                (in natural log, mean substracted)
  4                                                                                                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                                                                                                           0.8
  2
                                                                                                                                                                                           0.6
  0                                                                                                                                                                                        0.4
                                                                                                                                                                Historic regime                                                                                                                                                                          Historic regime
                                                                                                                                                                                           0.2
 ‐2
                                                                                                                                                                Dollar Peg                   0                                                                                                                                                           Dollar Peg
 ‐4                                                                                                                                                             SDR Peg                   ‐0.2                                                                                                                                                           SDR Peg
                                                                                                                                                                                          ‐0.4
 ‐6                                                                                                                                                             Euro Peg                                                                                                                                                                                 Euro Peg
                                                                                                                                                                                          ‐0.6
 ‐8                                                                                                                                                                                       ‐0.8
          1970
          1972
          1974
          1976
          1978
          1980
          1982
          1984
          1986
          1988
          1990
          1992
          1994
          1996
          1998
          2000
          2002
          2004
          2006
          2008




                                                                                                                                                                                                         1970
                                                                                                                                                                                                         1972
                                                                                                                                                                                                         1974
                                                                                                                                                                                                         1976
                                                                                                                                                                                                         1978
                                                                                                                                                                                                         1980
                                                                                                                                                                                                         1982
                                                                                                                                                                                                         1984
                                                                                                                                                                                                         1986
                                                                                                                                                                                                         1988
                                                                                                                                                                                                         1990
                                                                                                                                                                                                         1992
                                                                                                                                                                                                         1994
                                                                                                                                                                                                         1996
                                                                                                                                                                                                         1998
                                                                                                                                                                                                         2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                         2002
                                                                                                                                                                                                         2004
                                                                                                                                                                                                         2006
                                                                                                                                                                                                         2008




* Basket: Iron Ore, Steel scrap, oil and sugar.



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          54
                                                  Brazil, Nominal Export Price                                                                                                                                                              Brazil, Real Export Price
                                              (in natural log, mean substracted)                                                                                                                                                      (in natural log, mean substracted)
      4                                                                                                                                                                                         1.5
      2                                                                                                                                                                                            1
      0
                                                                                                                                                                                                0.5
  ‐2                                                                                                                                                                Historic regime                                                                                                                                                          Historic regime
                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
  ‐4                                                                                                                                                                Dollar Peg                                                                                                                                                               Dollar Peg
                                                                                                                                                                    SDR Peg                     ‐0.5                                                                                                                                         SDR Peg
  ‐6
  ‐8                                                                                                                                                                Euro Peg                      ‐1                                                                                                                                         Euro Peg

 ‐10                                                                                                                                                                                            ‐1.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                          1970
                                                                                                                                                                                                          1972
                                                                                                                                                                                                          1974
                                                                                                                                                                                                          1976
                                                                                                                                                                                                          1978
                                                                                                                                                                                                          1980
                                                                                                                                                                                                          1982
                                                                                                                                                                                                          1984
                                                                                                                                                                                                          1986
                                                                                                                                                                                                          1988
                                                                                                                                                                                                          1990
                                                                                                                                                                                                          1992
                                                                                                                                                                                                          1994
                                                                                                                                                                                                          1996
                                                                                                                                                                                                          1998
                                                                                                                                                                                                          2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                          2002
                                                                                                                                                                                                          2004
                                                                                                                                                                                                          2006
                                                                                                                                                                                                          2008
            1970
            1972
            1974
            1976
            1978
            1980
            1982
            1984
            1986
            1988
            1990
            1992
            1994
            1996
            1998
            2000
            2002
            2004
            2006
            2008
Chile

                                                        Chile, Nominal Copper Price                                                                                                                                                                 Chile, Real Copper Price
                                                    (in natural log, mean substracted)                                                                                                                                                            (in log, mean substracted)
  4                                                                                                                                                                                      10.5


  2                                                                                                                                                                                       8.5

                                                                                                                                                                                          6.5
  0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Historic regime
                                                                                                                                                                  Historic regime         4.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Dollar Peg
  ‐2                                                                                                                                                              Dollar Peg
                                                                                                                                                                                          2.5                                                                                                                                                 SDR Peg
                                                                                                                                                                  SDR Peg
  ‐4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Euro Peg
                                                                                                                                                                  Euro Peg                0.5                                                                                                                                                 Comm Peg
                                                                                                                                                                  CPI Target
  ‐6                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          CPI Target
                                                                                                                                                                  PPI Target             ‐1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              PPI Target
  ‐8                                                                                                                                                                                     ‐3.5

 ‐10                                                                                                                                                                                     ‐5.5
          1970
                 1972
                        1974
                               1976
                                      1978
                                             1980
                                                    1982
                                                            1984
                                                                   1986
                                                                          1988
                                                                                 1990
                                                                                         1992
                                                                                                 1994
                                                                                                         1996
                                                                                                                 1998
                                                                                                                         2000
                                                                                                                                 2002
                                                                                                                                         2004
                                                                                                                                                  2006
                                                                                                                                                         2008




                                                                                                                                                                                                 1970
                                                                                                                                                                                                        1972
                                                                                                                                                                                                               1974
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1976
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1978
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1980
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1982
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1984
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1986
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1988
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1990
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1992
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1994
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1996
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1998
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2002
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2004
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2006
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2008
Colombia

                                                   Colombia, Nominal Oil Price                                                                                                                                                                  Colombia, Real Oil Price
                                               (in natural log, mean substracted)                                                                                                                                                          (in natural log, mean substracted)
  4                                                                                                                                                                                              5.00                                                                                                                                               Historic
                                                                                                                                                                            Historic             4.00                                                                                                                                               regime
  3
                                                                                                                                                                            regime                                                                                                                                                                  Dollar
  2                                                                                                                                                                                              3.00
                                                                                                                                                                            Dollar Peg                                                                                                                                                              Peg
                                                                                                                                                                                                 2.00                                                                                                                                               SDR Peg
  1
                                                                                                                                                                            SDR Peg              1.00
  0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Euro Peg
                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.00
 ‐1                                                                                                                                                                         Euro Peg            ‐1.00                                                                                                                                               Comm
 ‐2                                                                                                                                                                                             ‐2.00                                                                                                                                               Peg
                                                                                                                                                                            CPI Target                                                                                                                                                              CPI
 ‐3                                                                                                                                                                                             ‐3.00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Target
 ‐4                                                                                                                                                                         PPI Target          ‐4.00                                                                                                                                               PPI
 ‐5                                                                                                                                                                                             ‐5.00                                                                                                                                               Target
                                                                                                                                                                                                               1970
                                                                                                                                                                                                               1972
                                                                                                                                                                                                               1974
                                                                                                                                                                                                               1976
                                                                                                                                                                                                               1978
                                                                                                                                                                                                               1980
                                                                                                                                                                                                               1982
                                                                                                                                                                                                               1984
                                                                                                                                                                                                               1986
                                                                                                                                                                                                               1988
                                                                                                                                                                                                               1990
                                                                                                                                                                                                               1992
                                                                                                                                                                                                               1994
                                                                                                                                                                                                               1996
                                                                                                                                                                                                               1998
                                                                                                                                                                                                               2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                               2002
                                                                                                                                                                                                               2004
                                                                                                                                                                                                               2006
                                                                                                                                                                                                               2008
          1970
                 1972
                        1974
                               1976
                                      1978
                                             1980
                                                     1982
                                                            1984
                                                                   1986
                                                                          1988
                                                                                  1990
                                                                                          1992
                                                                                                  1994
                                                                                                          1996
                                                                                                                  1998
                                                                                                                          2000
                                                                                                                                  2002
                                                                                                                                           2004
                                                                                                                                                    2006
                                                                                                                                                           2008




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        55
                                               Colombia, Nominal Coffee Price                                                                                                              Colombia, Real Coffee Price
                                              (in natural log, mean substracted)                                                                                                       (in natural log, mean substracted)
 3                                                                                                                                                                             2.00
 2                                                                                                                                                                             1.50

 1                                                                                                                                                        Historic regime      1.00                                         Historic regime
                                                                                                                                                          Dollar Peg           0.50                                         Dollar Peg
 0
                                                                                                                                                          SDR Peg              0.00                                         SDR Peg
 ‐1
                                                                                                                                                          Euro Peg            ‐0.50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Euro Peg
 ‐2                                                                                                                                                                           ‐1.00
 ‐3                                                                                                                                                                           ‐1.50
 ‐4                                                                                                                                                                           ‐2.00
        1970
               1972
                      1974
                             1976
                                    1978
                                           1980
                                                  1982
                                                         1984
                                                                1986
                                                                       1988
                                                                              1990
                                                                                     1992
                                                                                            1994
                                                                                                   1996
                                                                                                          1998
                                                                                                                 2000
                                                                                                                        2002
                                                                                                                               2004
                                                                                                                                      2006
                                                                                                                                             2008




                                                                                                                                                                                      1970
                                                                                                                                                                                      1972
                                                                                                                                                                                      1974
                                                                                                                                                                                      1976
                                                                                                                                                                                      1978
                                                                                                                                                                                      1980
                                                                                                                                                                                      1982
                                                                                                                                                                                      1984
                                                                                                                                                                                      1986
                                                                                                                                                                                      1988
                                                                                                                                                                                      1990
                                                                                                                                                                                      1992
                                                                                                                                                                                      1994
                                                                                                                                                                                      1996
                                                                                                                                                                                      1998
                                                                                                                                                                                      2000
                                                                                                                                                                                      2002
                                                                                                                                                                                      2004
                                                                                                                                                                                      2006
                                                                                                                                                                                      2008
                                         Colombia, Nominal Export Price                                                                                                                   Colombia, Real Export Price
                                       (in natural log, mean substracted)                                                                                                             (in natural log, mean substracted)
  0.8                                                                                                                                                                   0.40
  0.6
                                                                                                                                                    Historic regime     0.30
  0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Historic regime
  0.2                                                                                                                                                                   0.20
                                                                                                                                                    Dollar Peg
    0                                                                                                                                                                   0.10                                                Dollar Peg
 ‐0.2                                                                                                                                               SDR Peg
 ‐0.4                                                                                                                                                                   0.00                                                SDR Peg
                                                                                                                                                    Euro Peg
 ‐0.6                                                                                                                                                                  ‐0.10                                                Euro Peg
 ‐0.8
   ‐1                                                                                                                                                                  ‐0.20
 ‐1.2                                                                                                                                                                  ‐0.30
           1970
           1972
           1974
           1976
           1978
           1980
           1982
           1984
           1986
           1988
           1990
           1992
           1994
           1996
           1998
           2000
           2002
           2004
           2006
           2008




                                                                                                                                                                                   1970
                                                                                                                                                                                   1972
                                                                                                                                                                                   1974
                                                                                                                                                                                   1976
                                                                                                                                                                                   1978
                                                                                                                                                                                   1980
                                                                                                                                                                                   1982
                                                                                                                                                                                   1984
                                                                                                                                                                                   1986
                                                                                                                                                                                   1988
                                                                                                                                                                                   1990
                                                                                                                                                                                   1992
                                                                                                                                                                                   1994
                                                                                                                                                                                   1996
                                                                                                                                                                                   1998
                                                                                                                                                                                   2000
                                                                                                                                                                                   2002
                                                                                                                                                                                   2004
                                                                                                                                                                                   2006
                                                                                                                                                                                   2008
Costa Rica

                                      Costa rica, Nominal Bananas Price                                                                                                                 Costa Rica, Real Bananas Price
                                         (in log, mean substracted)                                                                                                                   (in natural log, mean substracted)
  4                                                                                                                                                                         1.50
  3                                                                                                                                                                         1.00
  2
  1                                                                                                                                                                         0.50
                                                                                                                                                    Historic regime                                                         Historic regime
  0                                                                                                                                                                         0.00
                                                                                                                                                    Dollar Peg                                                              Dollar Peg
 ‐1
                                                                                                                                                                        ‐0.50
 ‐2                                                                                                                                                 SDR Peg                                                                 SDR Peg
 ‐3                                                                                                                                                                     ‐1.00
                                                                                                                                                    Euro Peg                                                                Euro Peg
 ‐4                                                                                                                                                                     ‐1.50
        1970
        1972
        1974
        1976
        1978
        1980
        1982
        1984
        1986
        1988
        1990
        1992
        1994
        1996
        1998
        2000
        2002
        2004
        2006
        2008




                                                                                                                                                                                   1970
                                                                                                                                                                                   1972
                                                                                                                                                                                   1974
                                                                                                                                                                                   1976
                                                                                                                                                                                   1978
                                                                                                                                                                                   1980
                                                                                                                                                                                   1982
                                                                                                                                                                                   1984
                                                                                                                                                                                   1986
                                                                                                                                                                                   1988
                                                                                                                                                                                   1990
                                                                                                                                                                                   1992
                                                                                                                                                                                   1994
                                                                                                                                                                                   1996
                                                                                                                                                                                   1998
                                                                                                                                                                                   2000
                                                                                                                                                                                   2002
                                                                                                                                                                                   2004
                                                                                                                                                                                   2006
                                                                                                                                                                                   2008




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 56
                                                Costa rica, Nominal Coffee Price                                                                                                                                           Costa Rica, Real Coffee Price
                                                  (in log, mean substracted)                                                                                                                                                (in log, mean substracted)
 3                                                                                                                                                                      2.00
 2                                                                                                                                                                      1.50
                                                                                                                                                         Historic       1.00
 1
                                                                                                                                                         regime         0.50
 0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Historic regime
                                                                                                                                                         Dollar Peg
                                                                                                                                                                        0.00
‐1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Dollar Peg
                                                                                                                                                         SDR Peg       ‐0.50
‐2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           SDR Peg
                                                                                                                                                                       ‐1.00
‐3                                                                                                                                                       Euro Peg      ‐1.50                                                                                                                                                 Euro Peg
‐4                                                                                                                                                                     ‐2.00
      1970
             1972
                    1974
                           1976
                                  1978
                                         1980
                                                1982
                                                       1984
                                                              1986
                                                                     1988
                                                                            1990
                                                                                   1992
                                                                                          1994
                                                                                                 1996
                                                                                                        1998
                                                                                                               2000
                                                                                                                      2002
                                                                                                                             2004
                                                                                                                                    2006
                                                                                                                                           2008




                                                                                                                                                                                1970
                                                                                                                                                                                       1972
                                                                                                                                                                                              1974
                                                                                                                                                                                                     1976
                                                                                                                                                                                                            1978
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1980
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1982
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1984
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1986
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1988
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1990
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1992
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1994
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1996
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1998
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2002
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2004
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2006
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2008
Ecuador

                                              Ecuador, Nominal Oil Price                                                                                                                                             Ecuador, Real Oil Price
                                         (in natural log, mean substracted)                                                                                                                                    (in natural log, mean substracted)
 6                                                                                                                                                                       1.50
 4                                                                                                                                                                       1.00
 2                                                                                                                                                  Historic regime      0.50                                                                                                                                               Historic regime
 0                                                                                                                                                                       0.00
                                                                                                                                                    Dollar Peg                                                                                                                                                              Dollar Peg
 ‐2                                                                                                                                                                     ‐0.50
                                                                                                                                                    SDR Peg                                                                                                                                                                 SDR Peg
 ‐4                                                                                                                                                                     ‐1.00
                                                                                                                                                    Euro Peg                                                                                                                                                                Euro Peg
 ‐6                                                                                                                                                                     ‐1.50
                                                                                                                                                                                  1970
                                                                                                                                                                                  1972
                                                                                                                                                                                  1974
                                                                                                                                                                                  1976
                                                                                                                                                                                  1978
                                                                                                                                                                                  1980
                                                                                                                                                                                  1982
                                                                                                                                                                                  1984
                                                                                                                                                                                  1986
                                                                                                                                                                                  1988
                                                                                                                                                                                  1990
                                                                                                                                                                                  1992
                                                                                                                                                                                  1994
                                                                                                                                                                                  1996
                                                                                                                                                                                  1998
                                                                                                                                                                                  2000
                                                                                                                                                                                  2002
                                                                                                                                                                                  2004
                                                                                                                                                                                  2006
                                                                                                                                                                                  2008
      1970
      1972
      1974
      1976
      1978
      1980
      1982
      1984
      1986
      1988
      1990
      1992
      1994
      1996
      1998
      2000
      2002
      2004
      2006
      2008




                                          Ecuador, Nominal Export Price                                                                                                                                          Ecuador, Real Export Price
                                            (in log, mean substracted)                                                                                                                                      (in natural log, mean substracted)
  6                                                                                                                                                                   1.00
  4
                                                                                                                                                                      0.50
  2                                                                                                                                               Historic regime                                                                                                                                                           Historic regime
  0                                                                                                                                                                   0.00
                                                                                                                                                  Dollar Peg                                                                                                                                                                Dollar Peg
 ‐2
                                                                                                                                                  SDR Peg             ‐0.50                                                                                                                                                 SDR Peg
 ‐4
 ‐6                                                                                                                                               Euro Peg            ‐1.00                                                                                                                                                 Euro Peg
       1970
       1972
       1974
       1976
       1978
       1980
       1982
       1984
       1986
       1988
       1990
       1992
       1994
       1996
       1998
       2000
       2002
       2004
       2006
       2008




                                                                                                                                                                               1970
                                                                                                                                                                               1972
                                                                                                                                                                               1974
                                                                                                                                                                               1976
                                                                                                                                                                               1978
                                                                                                                                                                               1980
                                                                                                                                                                               1982
                                                                                                                                                                               1984
                                                                                                                                                                               1986
                                                                                                                                                                               1988
                                                                                                                                                                               1990
                                                                                                                                                                               1992
                                                                                                                                                                               1994
                                                                                                                                                                               1996
                                                                                                                                                                               1998
                                                                                                                                                                               2000
                                                                                                                                                                               2002
                                                                                                                                                                               2004
                                                                                                                                                                               2006
                                                                                                                                                                               2008




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 57
El Salvador

            El Salvador, Nominal Coffee Price                                      El Salvador, Real Coffee Price
           (in natural log, mean substracted)                                   (in natural log, mean substracted)
  1.5                                                                    2.50
    1                                                                    2.00
                                                                         1.50
  0.5
                                                   Historic regime       1.00                                        Historic regime
    0                                                                    0.50
 ‐0.5                                              Dollar Peg            0.00                                        Dollar Peg
   ‐1                                                                   ‐0.50
                                                   SDR Peg              ‐1.00                                        SDR Peg
 ‐1.5                                                                   ‐1.50
                                                   Euro Peg                                                          Euro Peg
   ‐2                                                                   ‐2.00
          1970
          1972
          1974
          1976
          1978
          1980
          1982
          1984
          1986
          1988
          1990
          1992
          1994
          1996
          1998
          2000
          2002
          2004
          2006
          2008




                                                                                1970
                                                                                1972
                                                                                1974
                                                                                1976
                                                                                1978
                                                                                1980
                                                                                1982
                                                                                1984
                                                                                1986
                                                                                1988
                                                                                1990
                                                                                1992
                                                                                1994
                                                                                1996
                                                                                1998
                                                                                2000
                                                                                2002
                                                                                2004
                                                                                2006
                                                                                2008
Guatemala

           Guatemala, Nominal Coffee Price                                         Guatemala, Real Coffee Price
          (in natural log, mean substracted)                                    (in natural log, mean substracted)
      2                                                              2.00
 1.5                                                                 1.50
      1                                                              1.00
 0.5                                            Historic regime      0.50                                            Historic regime
      0                                                              0.00
                                                Dollar Peg                                                           Dollar Peg
 ‐0.5                                                                ‐0.50
                                                SDR Peg                                                              SDR Peg
  ‐1                                                                 ‐1.00
                                                Euro Peg                                                             Euro Peg
 ‐1.5                                                                ‐1.50
  ‐2                                                                 ‐2.00
                                                                              1970
                                                                              1972
                                                                              1974
                                                                              1976
                                                                              1978
                                                                              1980
                                                                              1982
                                                                              1984
                                                                              1986
                                                                              1988
                                                                              1990
                                                                              1992
                                                                              1994
                                                                              1996
                                                                              1998
                                                                              2000
                                                                              2002
                                                                              2004
                                                                              2006
                                                                              2008
          1970
          1972
          1974
          1976
          1978
          1980
          1982
          1984
          1986
          1988
          1990
          1992
          1994
          1996
          1998
          2000
          2002
          2004
          2006
          2008




Guyana

             Guyana, Nominal Sugar Price                                             Guyana, Real Sugar Price
          (in natural log, mean substracted)                                    (in natural log, mean substracted)
 3                                                                     2.50
                                                                       2.00
 2
                                                                       1.50
 1                                                                     1.00
 0                                               Historic regime       0.50                                          Historic regime
                                                                       0.00
 ‐1                                              Dollar Peg                                                          Dollar Peg
                                                                      ‐0.50
 ‐2                                              SDR Peg              ‐1.00                                          SDR Peg
                                                 Euro Peg             ‐1.50                                          Euro Peg
 ‐3
                                                                      ‐2.00
 ‐4                                                                   ‐2.50
          1970
          1972
          1974
          1976
          1978
          1980
          1982
          1984
          1986
          1988
          1990
          1992
          1994
          1996
          1998
          2000
          2002
          2004
          2006
          2008




                                                                                1970
                                                                                1972
                                                                                1974
                                                                                1976
                                                                                1978
                                                                                1980
                                                                                1982
                                                                                1984
                                                                                1986
                                                                                1988
                                                                                1990
                                                                                1992
                                                                                1994
                                                                                1996
                                                                                1998
                                                                                2000
                                                                                2002
                                                                                2004
                                                                                2006
                                                                                2008




                                                                                                          58
Honduras

                                                Honduras, Nominal Coffee Price                                                                                                                                            Honduras, Real Coffee Price
                                              (in natural log, mean substracted)                                                                                                                                      (in natural log, mean substracted)
    2                                                                                                                                                                         2.00
  1.5                                                                                                                                                                         1.50
    1                                                                                                                                                                         1.00
  0.5                                                                                                                                                   Historic regime       0.50                                                                                                                                             Historic regime
    0                                                                                                                                                                         0.00
                                                                                                                                                        Dollar Peg                                                                                                                                                             Dollar Peg
 ‐0.5                                                                                                                                                                        ‐0.50
   ‐1                                                                                                                                                   SDR Peg              ‐1.00                                                                                                                                             SDR Peg
 ‐1.5                                                                                                                                                   Euro Peg             ‐1.50                                                                                                                                             Euro Peg
   ‐2                                                                                                                                                                        ‐2.00




                                                                                                                                                                                         1970
                                                                                                                                                                                         1972
                                                                                                                                                                                         1974
                                                                                                                                                                                         1976
                                                                                                                                                                                         1978
                                                                                                                                                                                         1980
                                                                                                                                                                                         1982
                                                                                                                                                                                         1984
                                                                                                                                                                                         1986
                                                                                                                                                                                         1988
                                                                                                                                                                                         1990
                                                                                                                                                                                         1992
                                                                                                                                                                                         1994
                                                                                                                                                                                         1996
                                                                                                                                                                                         1998
                                                                                                                                                                                         2000
                                                                                                                                                                                         2002
                                                                                                                                                                                         2004
                                                                                                                                                                                         2006
                                                                                                                                                                                         2008
           1970
           1972
           1974
           1976
           1978
           1980
           1982
           1984
           1986
           1988
           1990
           1992
           1994
           1996
           1998
           2000
           2002
           2004
           2006
           2008
Jamaica

                                      Jamaica, Nominal Aluminium Price                                                                                                                                            Jamaica, Real Aluminium Price
                                      (in natural log, mean substracted)                                                                                                                                        (in natural log, mean substracted)
 4
 3                                                                                                                                                                         5.50
 2                                                                                                                                                  Historic regime                                                                                                                                                           Historic regime
                                                                                                                                                                           3.50
 1                                                                                                                                                  Dollar Peg                                                                                                                                                                Dollar Peg
 0                                                                                                                                                                         1.50
                                                                                                                                                    SDR Peg                                                                                                                                                                   SDR Peg
 ‐1                                                                                                                                                                       ‐0.50
                                                                                                                                                    Euro Peg                                                                                                                                                                  Euro Peg
 ‐2
                                                                                                                                                    CPI Target            ‐2.50                                                                                                                                               Comm Peg
 ‐3
 ‐4                                                                                                                                                 PPI Target            ‐4.50                                                                                                                                               CPI Target
                                                                                                                                                                                   1970
                                                                                                                                                                                   1972
                                                                                                                                                                                   1974
                                                                                                                                                                                   1976
                                                                                                                                                                                   1978
                                                                                                                                                                                   1980
                                                                                                                                                                                   1982
                                                                                                                                                                                   1984
                                                                                                                                                                                   1986
                                                                                                                                                                                   1988
                                                                                                                                                                                   1990
                                                                                                                                                                                   1992
                                                                                                                                                                                   1994
                                                                                                                                                                                   1996
                                                                                                                                                                                   1998
                                                                                                                                                                                   2000
                                                                                                                                                                                   2002
                                                                                                                                                                                   2004
                                                                                                                                                                                   2006
                                                                                                                                                                                   2008
        1970
        1972
        1974
        1976
        1978
        1980
        1982
        1984
        1986
        1988
        1990
        1992
        1994
        1996
        1998
        2000
        2002
        2004
        2006
        2008




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              PPI Target




Mexico

                                                  Mexico, Nominal Oil Price                                                                                                                                                 Mexico, Real Oil Price
                                             (in natural log, mean substracted)                                                                                                                                      (in natural log, mean substracted)
 6                                                                                                                                                                        2.00

 4                                                                                                                                                                        1.50

                                                                                                                                                                          1.00                                                                                                                                                 Historic regime
 2                                                                                                                                                   Historic regime
                                                                                                                                                                          0.50                                                                                                                                                 Dollar Peg
 0                                                                                                                                                   Dollar Peg
                                                                                                                                                                          0.00                                                                                                                                                 SDR Peg
                                                                                                                                                     SDR Peg
‐2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Euro Peg
                                                                                                                                                     Euro Peg             ‐0.50
‐4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Comm Peg
                                                                                                                                                     CPI Target           ‐1.00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               CPI Target
‐6                                                                                                                                                   PPI Target           ‐1.50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               PPI Target
‐8                                                                                                                                                                        ‐2.00
        1970
               1972
                      1974
                             1976
                                    1978
                                           1980
                                                  1982
                                                         1984
                                                                1986
                                                                       1988
                                                                              1990
                                                                                     1992
                                                                                            1994
                                                                                                   1996
                                                                                                          1998
                                                                                                                 2000
                                                                                                                        2002
                                                                                                                               2004
                                                                                                                                      2006
                                                                                                                                             2008




                                                                                                                                                                                  1970
                                                                                                                                                                                         1972
                                                                                                                                                                                                1974
                                                                                                                                                                                                       1976
                                                                                                                                                                                                              1978
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1980
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1982
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1984
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1986
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1988
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1990
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1992
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1994
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1996
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1998
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2002
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2004
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2006
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2008




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   59
Nicaragua

             Nicaragua, Nominal Coffee Price                                                                        Nicaragua, Real Coffee Price
            (in natural log, mean substracted)                                                                  (in natural log, mean substracted)
 4                                                                  2.00

 2                                                                  1.50
                                                                    1.00
 0
                                                  Historic regime   0.50                                                                                                                                                    Historic regime
 ‐2                                                                 0.00
                                                  Dollar Peg                                                                                                                                                                Dollar Peg
                                                                    ‐0.50
 ‐4                                               SDR Peg                                                                                                                                                                   SDR Peg
                                                                    ‐1.00
 ‐6                                               Euro Peg                                                                                                                                                                  Euro Peg
                                                                    ‐1.50
 ‐8                                                                 ‐2.00




                                                                             1970
                                                                                    1972
                                                                                           1974
                                                                                                  1976
                                                                                                         1978
                                                                                                                1980
                                                                                                                       1982
                                                                                                                              1984
                                                                                                                                     1986
                                                                                                                                            1988
                                                                                                                                                   1990
                                                                                                                                                          1992
                                                                                                                                                                 1994
                                                                                                                                                                        1996
                                                                                                                                                                               1998
                                                                                                                                                                                      2000
                                                                                                                                                                                             2002
                                                                                                                                                                                                    2004
                                                                                                                                                                                                           2006
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2008
           1970
           1972
           1974
           1976
           1978
           1980
           1982
           1984
           1986
           1988
           1990
           1992
           1994
           1996
           1998
           2000
           2002
           2004
           2006
           2008




Panama

            Panama, Nominal Bananas Price                                                                      Panama, Real Bananas Price
           (in natural log, mean substracted)                                                              (in natural log, mean substracted)
 1.5                                                                  0.60

      1                                                               0.40
                                                                      0.20
 0.5
                                                  Historic regime     0.00                                                                                                                                               Historic regime
      0
                                                  Dollar Peg         ‐0.20                                                                                                                                               Dollar Peg
 ‐0.5                                             SDR Peg                                                                                                                                                                SDR Peg
                                                                     ‐0.40
      ‐1                                          Euro Peg           ‐0.60                                                                                                                                               Euro Peg

 ‐1.5                                                                ‐0.80
           1970
           1972
           1974
           1976
           1978
           1980
           1982
           1984
           1986
           1988
           1990
           1992
           1994
           1996
           1998
           2000
           2002
           2004
           2006
           2008




                                                                               1970
                                                                               1972
                                                                               1974
                                                                               1976
                                                                               1978
                                                                               1980
                                                                               1982
                                                                               1984
                                                                               1986
                                                                               1988
                                                                               1990
                                                                               1992
                                                                               1994
                                                                               1996
                                                                               1998
                                                                               2000
                                                                               2002
                                                                               2004
                                                                               2006
Peru                                                                           2008




               Peru, Nominal Copper Price                                                                         Peru, Real Copper Price
           (in natural log, mean substracted)                                                               (in natural log, mean substracted)
  3                                                                 4.50
  2
  1                                                                 3.50                                                                                                                                                  Historic regime
  0                                              Historic regime
                                                                    2.50                                                                                                                                                  Dollar Peg
 ‐1
                                                 Dollar Peg
 ‐2                                                                 1.50                                                                                                                                                  SDR Peg
 ‐3                                              SDR Peg
 ‐4                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Euro Peg
                                                 Euro Peg           0.50
 ‐5                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Comm Peg
 ‐6                                              CPI Target         ‐0.50
 ‐7                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CPI Target
 ‐8                                              PPI Target         ‐1.50                                                                                                                                                 PPI Target
                                                                             1970
                                                                             1972
                                                                             1974
                                                                             1976
                                                                             1978
                                                                             1980
                                                                             1982
                                                                             1984
                                                                             1986
                                                                             1988
                                                                             1990
                                                                             1992
                                                                             1994
                                                                             1996
                                                                             1998
                                                                             2000
                                                                             2002
                                                                             2004
                                                                             2006
                                                                             2008
           1970
           1972
           1974
           1976
           1978
           1980
           1982
           1984
           1986
           1988
           1990
           1992
           1994
           1996
           1998
           2000
           2002
           2004
           2006
           2008




                                                                                                                                                                                               60
                Peru, Nominal Gold Price                                                  Peru, Real Gold Price
           (in natural log, mean substracted)                                      (in natural log, mean substracted)
  2                                                                         1.50
  1
  0                                                                         1.00
 ‐1                                                                         0.50
 ‐2                                               Historic regime                                                       Historic regime
 ‐3                                                                         0.00
                                                  Dollar Peg                                                            Dollar Peg
 ‐4
 ‐5                                               SDR Peg               ‐0.50                                           SDR Peg
 ‐6                                                                     ‐1.00
                                                  Euro Peg                                                              Euro Peg
 ‐7
 ‐8                                                                     ‐1.50
      1970
      1972
      1974
      1976
      1978
      1980
      1982
      1984
      1986
      1988
      1990
      1992
      1994
      1996
      1998
      2000
      2002
      2004
      2006
      2008




                                                                                   1970
                                                                                   1972
                                                                                   1974
                                                                                   1976
                                                                                   1978
                                                                                   1980
                                                                                   1982
                                                                                   1984
                                                                                   1986
                                                                                   1988
                                                                                   1990
                                                                                   1992
                                                                                   1994
                                                                                   1996
                                                                                   1998
                                                                                   2000
                                                                                   2002
                                                                                   2004
                                                                                   2006
                                                                                   2008
               Peru, Nominal Export Price                                                Peru, Real Export Price
           (in natural log, mean substracted)                                      (in natural log, mean substracted)
 4                                                                     1.50

 2                                                                     1.00
                                                                                                                              Historic
 0                                                                     0.50
                                                Historic regime                                                               regime
 ‐2                                                                    0.00                                                   Dollar Peg
                                                Dollar Peg
 ‐4                                             SDR Peg               ‐0.50                                                   SDR Peg
 ‐6                                             Euro Peg              ‐1.00
                                                                                                                              Euro Peg
 ‐8                                                                   ‐1.50
                                                                                   1970
                                                                                   1972
                                                                                   1974
                                                                                   1976
                                                                                   1978
                                                                                   1980
                                                                                   1982
                                                                                   1984
                                                                                   1986
                                                                                   1988
                                                                                   1990
                                                                                   1992
                                                                                   1994
                                                                                   1996
                                                                                   1998
                                                                                   2000
                                                                                   2002
                                                                                   2004
                                                                                   2006
                                                                                   2008
      1970
      1972
      1974
      1976
      1978
      1980
      1982
      1984
      1986
      1988
      1990
      1992
      1994
      1996
      1998
      2000
      2002
      2004
      2006
      2008




Paraguay

              Paraguay, Beef Nominal Price                                              Paraguay, Real Beef Price
           (in natural log, mean substracted)                                      (in natural log, mean substracted)
 3                                                                  4.00                                                    Historic
                                                 Historic                                                                   regime
                                                 regime             3.00                                                    Dollar Peg
 2
                                                 Dollar Peg         2.00
 1                                                                                                                          SDR Peg
                                                 SDR Peg            1.00
 0                                                                  0.00                                                    Euro Peg
                                                 Euro Peg           ‐1.00
 ‐1                                                                                                                         Comm Peg
                                                 CPI Target         ‐2.00
 ‐2                                                                                                                         CPI Target
                                                                    ‐3.00
                                                 PPI Target
 ‐3                                                                 ‐4.00                                                   PPI Target
      1970
      1972
      1974
      1976
      1978
      1980
      1982
      1984
      1986
      1988
      1990
      1992
      1994
      1996
      1998
      2000
      2002
      2004
      2006
      2008




                                                                             1970
                                                                             1972
                                                                             1974
                                                                             1976
                                                                             1978
                                                                             1980
                                                                             1982
                                                                             1984
                                                                             1986
                                                                             1988
                                                                             1990
                                                                             1992
                                                                             1994
                                                                             1996
                                                                             1998
                                                                             2000
                                                                             2002
                                                                             2004
                                                                             2006
                                                                             2008




                                                                                                              61
Trinidad and Tobago

                        Trinidad and Tobago, Nominal Natural Gas Price                                                                                                                                       Trinidad and Tobago, Real Natural Gas Price
                               (in natural log, mean substracted)                                                                                                                                                 (in natural log, mean substracted)
      2                                                                                                                                                                        1.00
 1.5                                                                                                                                                                           0.80
      1                                                                                                                                                                        0.60
                                                                                                                                                      Historic regime
                                                                                                                                                                               0.40                                                                                                                                                                      Historic regime
 0.5
                                                                                                                                                      Dollar Peg               0.20                                                                                                                                                                      Dollar Peg
      0
                                                                                                                                                      SDR Peg                  0.00
 ‐0.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    SDR Peg
                                                                                                                                                                              ‐0.20
     ‐1                                                                                                                                               Euro Peg                                                                                                                                                                                           Euro Peg
                                                                                                                                                                              ‐0.40
 ‐1.5                                                                                                                                                                         ‐0.60
     ‐2                                                                                                                                                                       ‐0.80
 ‐2.5                                                                                                                                                                         ‐1.00
             1970
             1972
             1974
             1976
             1978
             1980
             1982
             1984
             1986
             1988
             1990
             1992
             1994
             1996
             1998
             2000
             2002
             2004
             2006
             2008




                                                                                                                                                                                      1970
                                                                                                                                                                                             1972
                                                                                                                                                                                                    1974
                                                                                                                                                                                                           1976
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1978
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1980
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1982
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1984
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1986
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1988
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1990
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1992
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1994
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1996
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1998
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2002
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2004
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2006
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2008
Uruguay

                                                  Uruguay, Nominal Beef Price                                                                                                                                                         Uruguay, Real Beef Price
                                               (in natural log, mean substracted)                                                                                                                                                (in natural log, mean substracted)
 6
                                                                                                                                                                                  8.50
 4                                                                                                                                                                                6.50

 2                                                                                                                                                                                4.50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Historic regime
                                                                                                                                                            Historic regime       2.50
 0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Dollar Peg
                                                                                                                                                            Dollar Peg
                                                                                                                                                                                  0.50                                                                                                                                                                      SDR Peg
                                                                                                                                                            SDR Peg
‐2                                                                                                                                                                               ‐1.50                                                                                                                                                                      Euro Peg
                                                                                                                                                            Euro Peg
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Comm Peg
                                                                                                                                                            CPI Target           ‐3.50
‐4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          CPI Target
                                                                                                                                                            PPI Target
                                                                                                                                                                                 ‐5.50                                                                                                                                                                      PPI Target
‐6
                                                                                                                                                                                 ‐7.50

‐8                                                                                                                                                                               ‐9.50
          1970
                 1972
                        1974
                               1976
                                      1978
                                             1980
                                                    1982
                                                           1984
                                                                  1986
                                                                         1988
                                                                                1990
                                                                                       1992
                                                                                              1994
                                                                                                     1996
                                                                                                            1998
                                                                                                                   2000
                                                                                                                          2002
                                                                                                                                 2004
                                                                                                                                        2006
                                                                                                                                               2008




                                                                                                                                                                                             1970
                                                                                                                                                                                                    1972
                                                                                                                                                                                                           1974
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1976
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1978
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1980
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1982
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1984
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1986
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1988
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1990
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1992
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1994
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1996
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1998
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2002
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2004
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2006
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2008
Venezuela

                                           Venezuela, Nominal Oil Price                                                                                                                                                       Venezuela, Real Oil Price
                                        (in natural log, mean substracted)                                                                                                                                               (in natural log, mean substracted)
  6                                                                                                                                                                            1.50

  4                                                                                                                                                                            1.00

  2                                                                                                                                                                            0.50
                                                                                                                                                  Historic regime                                                                                                                                                                                       Historic regime
  0                                                                                                                                                                            0.00
                                                                                                                                                  Dollar Peg                                                                                                                                                                                            Dollar Peg
 ‐2                                                                                                                                               SDR Peg                     ‐0.50                                                                                                                                                                     SDR Peg
 ‐4                                                                                                                                               Euro Peg                    ‐1.00                                                                                                                                                                     Euro Peg
 ‐6                                                                                                                                                                           ‐1.50
          1970
          1972
          1974
          1976
          1978
          1980
          1982
          1984
          1986
          1988
          1990
          1992
          1994
          1996
          1998
          2000
          2002
          2004
          2006
          2008




                                                                                                                                                                                         1970
                                                                                                                                                                                         1972
                                                                                                                                                                                         1974
                                                                                                                                                                                         1976
                                                                                                                                                                                         1978
                                                                                                                                                                                         1980
                                                                                                                                                                                         1982
                                                                                                                                                                                         1984
                                                                                                                                                                                         1986
                                                                                                                                                                                         1988
                                                                                                                                                                                         1990
                                                                                                                                                                                         1992
                                                                                                                                                                                         1994
                                                                                                                                                                                         1996
                                                                                                                                                                                         1998
                                                                                                                                                                                         2000
                                                                                                                                                                                         2002
                                                                                                                                                                                         2004
                                                                                                                                                                                         2006
                                                                                                                                                                                         2008




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      62
