                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                CULTURE, INSTITUTIONS AND THE WEALTH OF NATIONS

                                          Yuriy Gorodnichenko
                                             Gerard Roland

                                          Working Paper 16368
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w16368


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2010




We thank Vladimir Asriyan and Insook Lee for excellent research assistance. We benefited from discussions
with Olivier Coibion, Fred Finan, Edward Miguel, Gerard Padro-I-Miquel, Guido Tabellini and seminar
participants at UC Berkeley, the Booth School of Business, IMT Lucca, the University of Sienna, “Macroeconomic
Across Time and Space” conference, the Berkeley Center for Political Economy conference on Endogenous
Institutions, and the NBER Workshop in Political Economy. We are especially grateful to Romain
Wacziarg for his comments and suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Yuriy Gorodnichenko and Gerard Roland. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Culture, Institutions and the Wealth of Nations
Yuriy Gorodnichenko and Gerard Roland
NBER Working Paper No. 16368
September 2010
JEL No. O1,O3,O4,P5

                                              ABSTRACT

We construct an endogenous growth model that includes a cultural variable along the dimension of
individualism-collectivism. The model predicts that more individualism leads to more innovation because
of the social rewards associated with innovation in an individualist culture. This cultural effect may
offset the negative effects of bad institutions on growth. Collectivism leads to efficiency gains relative
to individualism, but these gains are static, unlike the dynamic effect of individualism on growth through
innovation. Using genetic data as instruments for culture we provide strong evidence of a causal effect
of individualism on income per worker and total factor productivity as well as on innovation. The
baseline genetic markers we use are interpreted as proxies for cultural transmission but others have
a direct effect on individualism and collectivism, in line with recent advances in biology and neuro-science.
The effect of culture on long-run growth remains very robust even after controlling for the effect of
institutions and other factors. We also provide evidence of a two-way causal effect between culture
and institutions.


Yuriy Gorodnichenko
Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall #3880
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
ygorodni@econ.berkeley.edu

Gerard Roland
UC Berkeley
Department of Economics
627 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
groland@econ.berkeley.edu
1. Introduction
One of the central questions in economics of growth and development is why disparities in income and
development across countries are large and persistent. Despite decades of the quest to identify the
fundamental forces explaining these differences, the question continues to puzzle the profession as the
bulk of the differences are attributed to variation in productivity. It is widely perceived that the key
conduit of economic growth and productivity enhancements is innovation that brings new goods and
services to the economy as well as new ways to produce existing goods and services. In this paper, we
argue theoretically and empirically that culture plays a key role in stimulating innovations and hence
explaining long-run economic growth.
        The idea that culture is a central ingredient of economic development goes back to at least Max
Weber who, in his classical work “The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism,” argued that the
protestant ethic of Calvinism was a very powerful force behind the development of capitalism in its early
phases. Weber saw culture as the driving force behind differences in economic development. His theory
was in direct opposition to that of Karl Marx, who viewed culture as determined by the level of economic
development and the economic interests of the various social classes. Although Landes (1998) and others
have argued that culture played a fundamental role in explaining the wealth of nations, there has so far
been little theoretical or empirical work examining the effect of culture on long-run growth and
development.
        We define culture as the set of values and beliefs people have about how the world (both nature
and society) works as well as the norms of behavior derived from that set of values. This definition
highlights that culture affects not only social norms but also economic behavior such as the propensity to
save or to innovate and many other economic decisions such as fertility choices, investment in education,
charitable contributions or the willingness to contribute to public goods. Culture is directly related to
institutions in the sense that culture, like formal political or legal institutions as defined by North (1990),
imposes constraints on individual behavior. Roland (2004) has argued that culture tends to be more slow-
moving than political or legal institutions. Therefore, one can argue that culture might have an important
effect on the choice of political and legal institutions itself. One can thus hypothesize that culture is a
basic force underlying formal institutions and long-run growth.
        In particular, we investigate theoretically and empirically one aspect of culture that may be
relevant for long-run growth: the difference between individualism and collectivism. This distinction
captures only one aspect of differences between cultures across the world but it is considered by cross-
cultural psychologists to be the main dimension of cultural variation (see Heine, 2007) and it potentially
has important economic effects. For example, Greif (1994, 2006) uses this distinction in his path-breaking
work showing strong effects of culture on the economic outcomes.

                                                                                                             1
           We stress several main elements of the difference between individualism and collectivism in our
theory. Individualism emphasizes personal freedom and achievement. Individualist culture therefore
awards social status to personal accomplishments such as important discoveries, innovations or great
artistic achievements. On the other hand, individualism can make collective action more difficult because
individuals pursue their own interest without internalizing collective interests. Collectivism makes
collective action easier in the sense that individuals internalize group interests to a greater degree.
However, it also encourages conformity and discourages individuals from standing out. This framework
implies that individualism should encourage innovation, everything else equal, but collectivism should
have an advantage in coordinating production processes and in various forms of collective action.1
           We put these ingredients in an endogenous growth model similar in spirit to models developed in
Aghion and Howitt (1998). The model is standard in many respects. There is a competitive sector
producing final goods using labor and intermediate inputs. Collectivist culture is assumed to give a
competitive edge in the production of final goods, but so does a higher quality of intermediate inputs
which is the result of innovation. Households own the firms producing intermediate inputs and derive
utility not only from consumption but also from social prestige associated with producing a higher than
average quality of intermediate products. This social prestige is stronger in individualistic cultures than in
collectivist cultures. The quality of intermediate inputs is determined by the effort put into research,
which in turn is a function of the monetary and social status rewards to innovation. The government can
act in a predatory way by expropriating the rents from innovation. The main result generated by the model
is that individualism leads to higher long-term growth via stronger incentives to innovate due to the
culturally induced social rewards. This positive effect of social status rewards may offset the negative
effects of predatory institutions. Although collectivism generates static efficiency gains, it has no growth
effects.
           We bring the model to the data by testing the effect of individualism versus collectivism on long-
run growth. Since one can argue that culture might be endogenous to economic outcomes, finding a
convincing causal effect of culture on long-run growth requires having a valid instrumental variable. Our
main instrumental variable is a measure of genetic distance between the population in a given country and
the population in the USA, which happens to be the most individualistic country in our sample. We know
from Bisin and Verdier (2000, 2001) and others that parental transmission of culture is a fundamental
determinant of the cultural values of individuals. Obviously, parents transmit their cultural values as well
as their genes to their offspring. Populations that interbreed a lot should be genetically close and also
culturally close because a very similar parental transmission mechanism is at work in both cases.

1
  There might also be an advantage of collectivism in terms of public good provision. We do not explore this aspect
in this paper.

                                                                                                                 2
Therefore, measures of genetic distance can be seen as a proxy measure of differences in parental
transmission of cultural values.
        Since there are no identified genetic causes for why some countries became wealthier than others,
genetic distance is very likely to satisfy the exclusion restriction. We strengthen the quality of our
instrumental variable by using only “neutral” genetic markers (such as from mitochondrial DNA) which
have no direct effect on genetic fitness. Thus, these markers are excellent instrumental variables (IVs) to
correct for potential endogeneity of culture. In our baseline specifications we use genetic distance based
on frequencies of blood types, which is the genetic information available for the largest number of
countries. We aggregate genetic data from over 2,000 groups of population across the globe and construct
country-level data using ethnic shares from Fearon (2003) and our data.
        A potential problem with this identification strategy is that there may be multiple channels
through which these neutral genetic markers are indirectly related to measures of economic performance.
In an important check, we address this concern by using an alternative set of instrumental variables such
as information on genes (e.g. the frequency of the S-allele in the serotonin transporter gene 5HTTLPR)
that, according to recent advances in neuro-science, biology and epidemiology, appear to directly affect
personality traits and, according to the recent literature in cross-cultural psychology, can explain the
prevalence of collectivist culture. Although these data cover only a limited sample, this check confirms
our causal analysis of culture’s effects on long-run on growth.
        Genetic distance data have been used by Guiso et al. (2009) and by Spolaore and Wacziarg
(2009) in contexts that are close but different in various respects from the setting of our paper. Their data
includes a broader set of genes but only for 42 groups across the world. Guiso et al. (2009) interpret
genetic distance as proxying both cultural and genetic dissimilarity which is a source of a potential bias
distorting people’s propensity to trust each other and engage in trade. Spolaore and Wacziarg (2009) view
genetic distance as a barrier to the diffusion of technologies as people that are more distant from each
other will communicate less and thus benefit less from technological innovation.
        Using genetic differences as an instrument for culture, we find a strong causal effect of
individualism on income per worker, total factor productivity, and innovation as predicted by our theory.
These results hold even when we exclude the Americas and Oceania where settler colonization played an
important role. They also hold when controlling for measures of geographic distance, human capital,
ethnic fractionalization, and other factors affecting growth. While we find an important role for the
individualism-collectivism dimension of culture in determining long run growth, the measure of
generalized trust which is also used as a cultural variable in various studies (or as a measure of social
capital) does not have a robust effect on growth. Moreover, even after controlling for measures of
institutions which were previously found (e.g., Hall and Jones, 1999, Acemoglu et al., 2001) to affect

                                                                                                           3
long-run growth, culture continues to play a statistically significant and quantitatively important role,
implying that culture has an effect on economic development that is independent of institutions.
Furthermore, we find that there is a two-way causality between culture and institutions thus suggesting
that institutions are in part determined by culture.
        Our results are robust to the introduction of different types of controls and different measures of
long-run growth as well as to using alternative instrumental variables (also used in Licht et al. (2007) and
Tabellini (2008a)) based on linguistic properties of individualist cultures. In effect, we examine many
other potential channels from the literature via which genetic distance might indirectly affect economic
outcomes and we find that individualism still positively affects innovation and long-run growth after
controlling for these other potential explanations. Together with the evidence of direct genetic effects on
culture, these results unambiguously show that culture is empirically relevant for understanding economic
development and should be included in theories of economic growth.
        Our findings contribute to the nascent literature emphasizing the effects of culture on economic
outcomes. Using a game theoretical approach, Greif (1994, 2006) studied the effects of individualist
versus collectivist beliefs on contract formation, social stratification and the expansion of markets in the
late Medieval trade in the Mediterranean. Bisin and Verdier (2000, 2001) examined the dynamics of
intergenerational transmission of cultural preferences taking into account family choices of cultural
transmission and effects of social environment. Tabellini (2008b) studied how the cultural transmission of
values of cooperation can affect the form of institutions which in turn reinforces norms of cooperative
behavior. Ashraf and Galor (2007) model the trade-off between non-conformism and conformism at
different stages of development and provide a theory of why China was richer in the Malthusian stage of
development but lagged behind in the industrialization stage. Doepke and Zilibotti (2008) developed a
model to explain the cultural transmission of the values of the pre-industrial middle class (thriftiness, hard
work) in the industrialization process as well as their eventual social success and the demise of the landed
aristocracy. Fernandez, Fogli and Olivetti (2004), Fernandez and Fogli (2009) and Giuliano (2007)
examined the effects of culture on fertility choices, family living arrangements and labor supply
decisions. Barro and McCleary (2003) argue that economic growth is affected by religious beliefs (e.g.,
existence of hell and heaven). Knack and Keefer (1997) considered the effect of social capital on
economic performance.2 Aghion et al. (2008) found a negative correlation between trust and the level of
regulation in societies. Guiso et al. (2003, 2009) examined the effect of trust on economic attitudes and
international trade patterns, and Giuliano et al. (2006) investigated the link between geography, genetic


2
 Knack and Keefer (1997) use two instrumental variables for trust: i) the percentage of a country’s population
belonging to the largest “ethnolinguistic” group, and ii) the number of law students in 1963 as a percentage of all
postsecondary students.

                                                                                                                 4
distance, transportation costs and economic variables. Tabellini (2008a) and Licht et al. (2007) provide
evidence of a causal link from culture to institutions and Jellema (2009) provides evidence of a causal
link from cultural practices to a society’s basic achievements (such as the presence of writing, the wheel
or money) documented for different cultures in Murdock’s (1967) Ethnographic Atlas.
        The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In section 2, we present our model. In section 3, we
discuss the data used in our empirical analysis. In section 4, we present our empirical analysis of how
culture can affect economic development. Section 5 contains a series of robustness checks. Sections 6
through 8 examine the interplay between culture, institutions and other factors. In Section 9, we
investigate occupational choices of various ethnic groups in the USA. Section 10 makes concluding
remarks.


2. The Model
Consider an economy producing two goods: a final good Yt and a continuum of intermediate goods
   ,    0,1 . The final good is produced by a competitive sector. Firms in this sector maximize profit

        Π                                                                                         (1)
subject to the production function constraint:

                                                                                                  (2)
where i and t index variety and time, pit is the price of xit, wt is the wage rate, Fit is the quality of

intermediate good xit ,               is aggregate labor input, and  is an efficiency parameter measuring
how easy it is to combine intermediate inputs.
        The parameter  is assumed to be a decreasing function of individualism in a given culture, i.e.,
                          with    0. This assumption captures three basic facts. First, combining inputs in
production requires coordination of workers/units. Second, such coordination is easier to achieve in
collectivist cultures that value harmony, conformity and team effort. Third, collectivist countries may be
good at incremental innovations, which however have diminishing returns (i.e., one can relatively easily
improve a cassette player in terms of design and functionality but one needs a radical innovation to create
a CD player).
        The common finding that blind copying of production techniques from collectivist culture to
individualistic cultures led to poor results is consistent with this assumption. For example, Liker (2003)
shows that teamwork and consensus building are among defining features of the Japanese way to run
business. The attempts to copy the Japanese organization inside US automobile factories however failed
to lead to catch up with the efficiency of Japanese automobile firms since American carmakers could
replicate lean production but could not imitate Toyota’s culture.

                                                                                                         5
        Other facts are consistent with our modeling of the trade-off between the innovation advantages
of individualism and the production advantages of collectivism. The color TV was invented by RCA, an
American firm, but Japan ended up making the best TV sets. Sony invented the walkman which was a
great consumer success starting in the 1980s. However, the key invention of the compact cassette was
made by Philips, a European firm. Similarly, Sony introduced the VCR but the technology was invented
by the American company Ampex, which was unable to make its VCR affordable to households.
        Intermediate goods are produced by entrepreneurial households who solve the following
optimization problem
             ∑         ln               /                                                            (3)
        subject to
                 1           ,                                                                       (4)
                     1             ,        Π    1                                                   (5)
                                                                                                     (6)

where                  is the average level of quality of intermediate goods in the economy, Ait is the
amount of wealth,        is the fraction of labor supply devoted to producing the final goods, 1       is the
fraction of labor supply devoted to research, and             is the profit from market power in producing an
intermediate good. Total labor supply and the marginal cost of producing the intermediate variety are
normalized to one for all households.
        Equation (5) is the standard budget constraint. Equation (6) is the profit from producing an
intermediate variety. Equation (3) is the value function showing that instantaneous utility is derived from
consumption goods and from producing a superior than average quality of the intermediate good. The
choice of the log utility function for consumption is standard in growth models. It makes the analysis
easier as income and substitution effects offset each other and hence it is easy to construct a balanced
growth path consistent with the Kaldor facts.
        The term         /       in the utility function is meant to capture the social status reward from
innovation. We assume that         is increasing in the level of individualism, i.e.,                      with
     0. Hence, the social status reward for developing a better technology is higher in individualist
cultures than in collectivist cultures. This assumption is consistent with numerous studies documenting
that individualistic societies permit more innovation than collectivist societies by providing a higher
status for individuals making important discoveries. In contrast, collectivist societies emphasize the role
of collective effort and give less status reward to innovation. They reward conformity more and
discourage individuals from standing out. There is also ample evidence (see Merton 1973) that social
reward with heightened status is the most significant part of the total reward for scientists. Since


                                                                                                             6
individual innovating entrepreneurs are small relative to the number of other entrepreneurs in the
economy, we assume that an entrepreneur i takes Ft as given when deciding how much labor to allocate to
research.
            Equation (4) is the law of motion for the quality of the intermediate good. Quality is a positive
function of the labor supply devoted to research. We assume a deterministic law of motion for simplicity
only. We also assume that                · is an increasing function of the labor supply devoted to research. To
simplify the algebra, we assume that the elasticity                   1           1       / 1      is constant in
1       .
            The government taxes profits of intermediate producers at rate  and spends the receipts on
(wasteful) consumption G which does not provide any utility to households.3

                                                                                                          (7)

Note that profit          is the only source of rents in this economy. The tax  can also be interpreted as the
level of expropriation risk, predatory behavior, lack of rule of law and institutional weakness more
generally. We will henceforth interpret high levels of τ as predatory institutions expropriating rents
generated by innovations.
            The following equations are market-clearing conditions: equilibrium between aggregate demand
and aggregate supply (8), equilibrium on the consumer goods market (9) and labor market equilibrium
(10):
                                                                                                          (8)
                                                                                                          (9)
                                                                                                          (10)
            Profit maximization in the final good sector implies that

                      1                                      1            /           0                   (11)

                                                 0                                                        (12)

            Given the demand for the intermediate goods (12), the entrepreneurial households’ optimality
conditions are
                                                                                                          (13)
                      1              ,                                                                    (14)
                  1          ,                                                                            (15)
                                 1                                ,           1   ,                       (16)
                                     1                                                                    (17)

3
  Our key qualitative results do not change if we allow government spending to be in the form of lump-sum transfers
to households or to be an investment in public goods (e.g., infrastructure) which could raise η. Likewise, our key
qualitative results do not change when we also allow status to be derived from the relative level of consumption.

                                                                                                                 7
Equation (13) is the standard relationship between consumption Cit and the marginal utility of wealth qit.
Equation (14) is the Euler equation for consumption. Equation (15) captures the instantaneous optimality
condition for the allocation of labor to research and production activities. The return on labor has to be
equalized between research and the final goods sector. Equation (16) is the Euler equation for the quality
Fit, where     is the shadow value of Fit. The value of a marginal increase in quality (the right hand side
of equation on (16)) has three components. The first is the social status derived from developing a better
technology (the first term on the left hand side). The second is the after-tax marginal revenue product
from selling xit units of the intermediate good of higher quality, and hence facing a larger demand from
the final good sector. The third term captures the dynamic gains from better technology. By increasing the
level of technology today an entrepreneur prepares the stage for future increases in the level of technology
(see equation (4)). Equation (17) is the first order condition for the level of produced intermediate inputs.
It states that the marginal revenue product from producing an additional unit of an intermediate input has
to be equal to the marginal cost of producing this additional unit (recall that the marginal cost is
normalized to one).
        We can then derive the following result in the symmetric equilibrium:


Proposition 1: On a balanced growth path, the ratio of labor devoted to research 1              to labor devoted
to producing final goods is given by:
                                                                                                           (18)
The ratio    is increasing in , decreasing in , and is independent of η.
Proof: See appendix A.


Proposition 1 indicates that the share of labor devoted to research is increasing in the level of
individualism (larger     ) and decreasing in the strength of predatory institutions (larger τ). Intuitively, a
higher social status reward to innovation (larger       ) increases the allocation of labor to innovation. This
culturally embedded incentive to innovate comes on top of the monetary reward to households via higher
profits from innovation.
        The fact that a high level of predatory institutions (larger τ) has a negative effect on innovation is
less novel. Note that the latter effect is due to the fact that taxes are levied directly on the profit from
intermediate goods so that τ directly affects the incentive to innovate. If taxation were on final output, its
distortionary effect on innovation would be absent and would affect only levels of variables.4




4
  Note that profits in the final goods sector are equal to zero in equilibrium and cannot be a source of taxation. If
labor income were taxed instead, there would be a positive effect of τ on innovation.

                                                                                                                   8
        Note also that the cost of individualism captured by a low value of η only affects the level of
output for any given average quality of intermediate input, but not the rate of innovation. Indeed,
parameter η is not present in equation (18). The intuition is that a higher level of η will lead to the same
proportional increase in the equilibrium level of intermediate output and equilibrium level of final output.
Since returns to labor in the research and final good sector are equalized, changes in η do not affect the
equilibrium level of allocation of labor between research and the final good sector.
        The proposition also states that the negative effect of taxes on research effort becomes smaller
when the status derived from research effort increases. In other words, high status rewards can counteract
high tax rates because while income and wealth can be expropriated, social status cannot.5 Thus even if a
country has bad institutions, there can still be incentives to innovate if there is a high enough status
reward to innovation. Clark (2007) argues against the view that institutions are important for long-run
growth by pointing to the fact that institutions in England around the time of the Industrial Revolution
were no better than in many developing countries today, whose institutional weaknesses are precisely
cited as the main cause of their underdevelopment. Our model shows that the negative effect of predatory
institutions on long-run growth can be offset by the social status reward to innovation under an

individualist culture. Note also that lim                                  and thus, if      0, no labor is devoted

to research when institutions are fully predatory. In other words, if culture were absent in this model,
predatory institutions would result in lack of innovation. With zero research effort, the growth rate in the
economy is also equal to zero.
        We now turn to the properties of the economy on the balanced growth path. First, from equation

(4) on a balanced growth path we get that                              1          and consequently sgn
            /                                   /
sgn              and sgn            sgn             . Also observe that the level of total factor productivity

(TPF) in the final goods sector is                      which varies over time only due to changes in        as we
assume fixed cultural attributes. The results of Proposition 1 thus carry over to the growth rate of TFP,
which will be higher for more individualist cultures and for lower levels of taxation.
        Along a balanced path in a symmetrical equilibrium,                               . Using equation (17), we
                                          /         /                                         /
get             so that                                      and therefore                          . We conclude

that the growth rate of output in the economy is determined by the growth rate of technology, which is
pinned down by rewards to innovation. From equation (11), we have                                     . Given that

5
  One can argue that predatory institutions and individualist culture should not coexist easily and that under an
individualist culture, there will eventually be strong pressures to reform political institutions so as to limit the
executive powers of government. This would point towards a causal effect from culture to institutions. This
observation is discussed in the empirical section. See also Roland (2004).

                                                                                                                  9
            and equations (6), (7), and (8), we have                          1        1          . Therefore,

           and income, consumption and wages grow at the same rate. From (14) and (13), we have

            /     1       /     1 and thus the interest rate is constant. Finally, note that the value of capital,

which is equal to the present value of profits generated in the intermediate goods sector, is proportional to
output and hence the capital-output ratio is constant on the balanced growth path. These last results show
that the model fits the Kaldor facts about economic growth.
         Our model also sheds light on possible episodes of reversal of fortune. In the Malthusian stage
when labor is allocated almost exclusively to production of final goods (food, clothes, etc.) and virtually
no labor is allocated to innovation, collectivist societies, which enjoy a greater level of coordination and
thus a larger value of η, may be richer than individualistic societies. This prediction is consistent with, for
example, China being richer, more urbanized and more densely populated than much of Western Europe
in 1500. However, as the economy exits the Malthusian stage, the collectivism-individualism difference
across cultures starts to play a new and different role. Since individualistic societies grow faster than
collectivist societies outside the Malthusian stage, countries with an individualistic culture eventually
become richer and thus one may observe a “reversal of fortune”, i.e. those countries catch up and become
more affluent than collectivist countries which initially had a higher level of development.6
         While there is a trade-off between the benefits and costs of individualism and collectivism, in our
model the benefits of individualism affect the output growth rate while the costs of individualism affect
the level of output.7 Although there is a strong argument for the advantages of individualist culture for
long-run growth via cultural incentives to innovate, one could think of other models where collectivism
might affect not only the static output level but also long-run growth. For example, in a collectivist
culture there might be better public good provision which could be complementary to private innovation,
a feature that is not present in this model. We need solid empirical evidence to find out which cultural
features have more favorable effects on long-run growth, and below we present some empirical evidence
for the importance of the individualism-collectivism dimension of culture. In any case, our model has the
advantage of i) spelling out precise mechanisms through which culture may affect long-run growth, and



6
  We replicated the exercise in Acemoglu et al (2002) with our measure of individualism instead of institutions and
we find that culture is not robustly correlated with urbanization and population density in 1500. The estimated
effects of culture do not change even after controlling for initial conditions and the level of institutions (i.e., we
reproduce Table VIII in Acemoglu et al (2002)). Results are available upon request.
7
  Using information on the behavior of foreign firms operating in China, Huang et al. (2010) compare foreign firms
owned by ethnic Chinese and firms owned by non-ethnic Chinese. Huang et al. find that firms run by ethnic Chinese
have an initial advantage operating in China but that they have a dynamic disadvantage because they invest less in
technology and human capital than firms owned by non-ethnic Chinese. These results are consistent with our model
if non-ethnic Chinese owned firms are from more individualistic cultures.

                                                                                                                   10
ii) making the distinction between cultural features that affect the level of output and those that affect
the long-run rate of growth.8
         To summarize, the endogenous growth model derived in this section can match the basic Kaldor
facts on economic growth but predicts importantly that a higher level of individualism in a country’s
culture should lead to higher long-run growth because of the social status reward attached to innovation,
an effect that is independent of the monetary reward to innovation.


3. Data
A key question for our empirical analysis is how to measure individualism. A well-known measure of
individualism (and other cultural dimensions) at the country level was developed by Hofstede (2001) who
used surveys of IBM employees in about 30 countries. To avoid cultural biases in the way questions are
framed, the translation of the survey into local languages was done by a team of English and local
language speakers. With new waves of surveys and replication studies, Hofstede’s measure of
individualism has been expanded to almost 80 countries.9 In a nutshell, the individualism score measures
the extent to which it is believed that individuals are supposed to take care of themselves as opposed to
being strongly integrated and loyal to a cohesive group. Individuals in countries with a high level of the
index value personal freedom and status, while individuals in countries with a low level of the index value
harmony and conformity. Hofstede’s index as well as the measures of individualism from other studies
use a broad array of survey questions to establish cultural values. Factor analysis is used to summarize
data and construct indices. In Hofstede’s analysis, the index of individualism is the first factor in work
goal questions about the value of personal time, freedom, interesting and fulfilling work, etc. This
component loads positively on valuing individual freedom, opportunity, achievement, advancement,
recognition and negatively on valuing harmony, cooperation, relations with superiors.10 Although
Hofstede’s data were initially collected mostly with the purpose of understanding differences in IBM’s
corporate culture, the main advantage of Hofstede’s measure of individualism is that it has been validated
in a number of studies.11 For example, across various studies and measures of individualism (see Hofstede

8
  Much of previous research on culture’s effects on economic outcomes (e.g., Knack and Keefer (1997) and Guiso et
al. (2009)) focused on trust, social capital and similar concepts that emphasize collective effort. In contrast, we stress
the individual’s freedom from the collective in his or her aspirations. Our finding that individualism leads to higher
development does not contradict previous results on the importance of trust, social capital, etc. for economic
development. One can view our results as emphasizing growth effects, while previous studies as highlighting the
level effects.
9
  The most current version of the data is available at http://www.geert-hofstede.com/.
10
   Appendix C provides the list of questions. See Hofstede (2001) for more details.
11
   See for example Hoppe’s (1990) study among members of parliaments, labor and employer leaders, academics
and artists in 18 countries, Shane’s (1995) study across 28 countries for international companies other than IBM,
Merrit’s (2000) study on commercial airline pilots in 19 countries, de Mooij’s (2003) survey among consumers in 15
European countries and van Nimwegen’s (2002) research among employees of ABN-AMRO bank in 19 countries.

                                                                                                                       11
(2001) for a review) the United Kingdom, the USA and Netherlands are consistently among the most
individualistic countries, while Pakistan, Nigeria and Peru are among the most collectivist. Figure 1
represents a world map of Hofstede's individualism scores.
           We also use the data base established by cross-cultural psychologist Shalom Schwartz, built with
the purpose of establishing a core set of values that have a common cross-cultural meaning. Schwartz
(1994) gathered survey responses from K-12 schoolteachers and college students for a total of 195
samples drawn from 78 nations and 70 cultural groups between 1998 and 2000. Each sample generally
consists of 180-280 respondents for a total of over 75,000 responses. Schwartz’s value survey consists of
56-57 value items that ask respondents to indicate the importance of each as “a guiding principle in my
life.” Schwartz believes that it is crucial to identify what he calls value types which reflect the type of
motivational goals that each individual expresses. As such, he identifies a list of 10 such value types.
These value types are intended to be items that have an equivalent meaning across cultures. These value
types have been used to create cultural mappings. In particular, similarly to the individualistic-collectivist
dimension of cultures in Hosftede (2001), Schwartz differentiates cultures along the autonomy and
embeddedness dimensions. In autonomous cultures, people are viewed as autonomous, bounded entities.
They are encouraged to cultivate and express their own preferences, feelings, ideas, and abilities, and to
find meaning in their own uniqueness by pursuing their own ideas and intellectual directions
independently (intellectual autonomy) and by pursuing positive experiences for themselves (affective
autonomy). In contrast, meaning in life for people in embedded cultures comes largely through social
relationships, through identifying with the group, participating in its shared way of life, and striving
toward its shared goals. Embedded cultures emphasize maintaining the status quo and restraining actions
that might disrupt in-group solidarity or the traditional order. Countries that score high on embeddedness
also score low on intellectual and affective autonomy. Although measures of individualism in Hofstede
and Schwartz are based on different sources and indentifying procedures, the correlation between
Hofstede’s individualism score and Schwartz’s embeddedness and autonomy scores is fairly high, ranging
between 0.55 and 0.65. The key advantage of using Hofstede’s measure relative to Schwartz’s measures
is that Hofstede’s measure of individualism is one-dimensional while Schwartz uses three (correlated)
variables.
           As we will discuss later in greater detail, the causality between individualism and economic
outcomes can flow in both directions. For example, our model suggests a causal effect of culture on
growth where more individualist countries may be wealthier because individualism fosters innovation. On
the other hand, a more affluent economy can support a more individualist culture. Indeed, there is a long
tradition in social sciences starting with Marx claiming that economic development affects a country’s
culture.

                                                                                                           12
             To address this potential endogeneity problem, we use a measure of genetic distance between
people in different countries as an instrumental variable (IV) for individualism. To the extent that culture
is transmitted mainly from parents to children, so are genes. Thus, genetic markers can be used as a proxy
for cultural markers and this instrumental variable should be seen as a proxy measure of cultural
transmission.
             The genetic data originate from Cavalli-Sforza et al. (1994) which provides measured genetic
markers for roughly 2,000 groups of population across the globe. These data contain allele frequencies
(alleles are variants taken by a gene) for various ethnic groups. Since we want to eliminate the feedback
from economic outcomes to genetic variation, we focus on neutral genetic markers which are not related
to evolutionary fitness. Furthermore, as discussed in Cavalli-Sforza et al. (1994), genetic variation for
countries not affected by massive colonization since 1500s was largely determined during the Neolithic
migration of early humans thousands of years ago. These markers are thus potentially excellent
instrumental variables.12
             Although there are many genetic markers potentially useful for our analysis, our instrument is the
Euclidian (benchmark) or Mahalanobis distance between the frequency of blood types in a given country
and the frequency of blood types in the USA, which is the most individualistic country in our sample.13
The Euclidian distance measure is displayed in Figure 2.14 Using the frequency of blood types is attractive
because, apart from being neutral genetic markers, the frequency of alleles determining blood types is the
most widely available genetic information and thus we can construct the most comprehensive (in terms of
country coverage) measure of genetic distance.15 Another key advantage of utilizing frequency of blood
types is that we can exploit alternative sources of information (e.g., Red Cross) about frequency of blood
types to corroborate our data from DNA studies.16 In a series of robustness checks, we also employ


12
   Note that the genetic and cultural data were collected predominantly in 1950s through the early 1970s. On the
other hand, our measures of economic outcomes are generally from the 21st century. This difference in the timing of
explanatory/instrumental variables (i.e., culture and genetic variables) and dependent variables (i.e., economic
outcomes) helps us to alleviate certain types of endogeneity (e.g., recent strong migration of skilled workers).
                                                                                                              ′
13
   The Mahalanobis distance between a vector x and y picked from distributions X is             ,               Σ
    /
       where Σ is the covariance matrix for X. In our contexts, Σ         var     ,   ,   where A and B denote blood
types and c indexes countries. We obtain the Euclidian distance         , when Σ is set to the identity matrix. Thus,
the Euclidian distance between country c and the USA is equal to                    ,           ,       ,         ,
         /
     ,    .
14
   Appendix E shows the geographical distribution of genetic distance relative to the UK. The advantage of using
distance relative to the UK is that UK’s population is genetically more homogenous and that UK is often described
as the cradle of individualism and the Industrial revolution.
15
   In contrast, Spolaore and Wacziarg (2009) use genetic information for 42 ethnic groups while we use the full
spectrum of genetic information for 2,000 groups. We complement genetic information from Cavalli-Sforza et al.
(1994) with Mourant et al. (1976) and Tills et al. (1983).
16
   In some cases, we have information on the distribution of phenotypes of blood groups. In these cases, we convert
phenotypes into genotypes using the Bernstein formula.

                                                                                                                  13
aggregate measures of genetic distance constructed in Cavalli-Sforza et al. (1994) and used in Spolaore
and Wacziarg (2009).
         Since the genetic data are available at the level of ethnic groups while our analysis is done at the
country level, we have aggregated genetic information using ethnic shares of population from Fearon
(2003).17 Specifically, if we define blood frequency fbec for blood type b and ethnic group e in country c,
then the country level blood frequency for type b is calculated as                ∑            where sec is the share
of ethnic group e in the population of country c.
         We also use other genetic and epidemiological data for which the recent literature in cross-
cultural psychology has found a direct link between frequencies of particular genes and culture. A first set
of data are from Chiao and Blizinsky (2009) who document a strong correlation between collectivism and
the presence of a short (S) allele in the polymorphism 5-HTTLPR of the serotonin transporter gene
SLC6A4 in 30 countries. This allele is known in psychology to put individuals at greater risk for
depression when exposed to life stressors. The mechanism linking individual behavior and culture is that
a collectivist culture protects individuals from these risks by embedding them more strongly in
communities with strong social links thus providing strong psychological support networks. We also use
data on 23 countries from Way and Liebermann (2010) showing that collectivism is also strongly
correlated with the G allele in polymorphism A118G in the -opoid receptor gene that leads to higher
stress in case of social rejection. Way and Liebermann (2010) reason that collectivist culture can be seen
as providing psychological protection from social rejection.18 Finally, we use epidemiological data put
together by Fincher et al. (2008) for 73 countries on pathogen prevalence.19 Given a strong correlation
between pathogen prevalence and collectivism, Finch et al. argue that stronger pathogen prevalence
pushed communities to adopt more collectivist values emphasizing tradition, putting stronger limits on
individual behavior, and showing less openness towards foreigners. Collectivism is thus understood as a
defense mechanism created to cope with greater pathogen prevalence.
         In addition to DNA-based IVs, we also employ an instrumental variable based on linguistic
peculiarities of individualistic cultures. Specifically, in languages where the pronoun cannot be dropped
in a sentence there is a greater differentiation between the individual (first person of the singular) and the
community, whereas in languages where pronouns can be dropped there is less emphasis on such a
differentiation. Kashima and Kashima (1998) and others document that prohibition of pronoun drop is


17
   Whenever Fearon’s (2003) data were too crude, we used additional sources of information. For example, Fearon
(2003) reports on the share of whites in the USA. We used a variety of sources about migration patterns and
information on ancestors to split whites into British, German, Italian, Polish, etc. Details are available upon request.
18
   We are very grateful to Romain Wacziarg for having drawn our attention to this study and to this literature.
19
   Fincher et al. (2008) use 9 pathogens: leishmanias, trypanosomes, malaria, schistosomes, filariae, leprosy, dengue,
typhus and tuberculosis.

                                                                                                                     14
strongly correlated with individualism.20 This instrumental variable was used in Licht et al. (2007),
Tabellini (2008a) and other papers studying the effects of culture on socioeconomic outcomes.
        The sources of data on economic outcomes are standard. We take income per worker data from
the Penn World Tables (version 6.3). To control for differences in factor endowments, we use data on
total factor productivity (TFP) from Hall and Jones (1999) and Jones and Romer (2010). These two
measures have been widely used as measures of long-run growth in the literature.
        Since the main conduit of individualism’s effect on growth in our theoretical model is innovation,
we proxy for the intensity of innovations with the innovation performance index and the log patents per
million population from Economist Intelligence Unit (2007, 2009; henceforth EIU). EIU constructs
patents per million population as the sum of patents granted to applicants (by residence) from the 82
economies by three major government patent offices—the European Patent Office, the Japanese Patent
Office, and the US Patent and Trademark Office. The data are averaged over 2002-2007. Although the
use of patent data has a number of problems, this is the single best available measure for innovation
outputs. The innovation performance index incorporates information on patents and alternative indicators
of innovation output such as royalty and license fee receipts as a percentage of GDP, high-technology
manufacturing output per head, high-technology services output per head, etc. As documented in EIU
(2007, 2009), these measures are highly correlated with other proxies for innovation performance such as
citations from scientific and technical journals, UNIDO estimates of the share of medium- and high-
technology products in a country’s manufacturing output and its manufacturing exports, and the results of
a survey question from the World Economic Forum’s Global Competitiveness Report that asked
respondents to rate the extent to which companies were adept at, or able to absorb, new technology. Thus,
these measures of innovation are likely to capture salient features of innovative activities across countries.


4. Baseline econometric specification and results
Our theoretical model predicts that more individualistic countries should be more affluent since
individualism encourages innovation. Consistent with this prediction, Figure 3 shows that countries with
more individualistic cultures enjoy higher levels of income, TFP and rates of innovation. Also, innovation
is strongly positively correlated with income and TFP (Figure 4). These raw correlations, some of which
were reported earlier in Hofstede (2001), are informative but they do not control for other factors and
cannot be interpreted as causal relationships.21
        To address these concerns, we employ the following basic econometric specification:

20
  For example, English does not allow dropping pronouns and it is the only language which capitalizes “I”.
21
  Note that Southeast Asian tiger economies have high innovation rates and a relatively low index of individualism.
This might be explained by the fact that research effort in these countries was mostly directed and financed by the
government rather than arising spontaneously.

                                                                                                                15
                                                                                                             (19)
where i indexes countries, Yi measures an economic outcome (e.g., log income per worker), Ci is a
measure of culture, Xi is a vector of control variables and ei is the error term.22 The vector Xi includes
commonly used controls for geography such as countries’ longitude and latitude and a dummy variable
for being landlocked. In addition to this standard set of controls, we include the percentage of Muslims in
a given country to ensure that our results are not driven by a Muslim effect. Finally, Xi includes a set of
dummy variables for continents.
         As discussed above, genetic distance is our main instrumental variable to deal with reverse
causality in equation (19). Figure 5 shows that countries with more individualistic cultures are genetically
less distant from the US. The converse applies to countries with collectivist cultures. At the same time,
countries with individualist and collectivist cultures are genetically distant from each other. The strong
negative correlation between genetic distance (computed relative to USA, which has a highly
individualistic culture) and individualism suggest that genetic distance may be a strong instrument.
         Table 1 (Panel A) presents the OLS and IV estimates for the basic specification (19) where the
dependent variables is log income per worker. Irrespective of whether we use controls and/or continental
dummies, the coefficient on individualism is positive and significant. Specifically, a one standard
deviation increase in individualism (say from the score of Venezuela to Greece, or from that of Brazil to
Luxemburg) leads to 60 to 87 percent increase in the level of income, which is a large effect. The
magnitude of the effect is roughly similar regardless of whether we introduce continental dummies and
control variables. The IV estimates are slightly larger than the OLS estimates which probably suggests
that the instrumental variable corrects for measurement errors and thus for the attenuation bias. Note that
the first stage fit is strong in all columns and thus our results are not likely to suffer from problems
associated with using weak IVs. Overall, these empirical results confirm the insights from our theoretical
model and strongly suggest that the advantages of individualism outweigh its disadvantages relative to
collectivism, and thus that individualism has a positive causal effect on the wealth of nations.23
         From Hall and Jones (1999) and others, we know that the main factor behind differences in
incomes is differences in the level of TFP across countries. In Table 1 (Panels B and C), we replicate our
estimation of equation (19) when log TFP rather than log income per worker is the dependent variable.
Again, we find strong and positive effects of individualism on productivity. A one standard deviation
increase in the individualism score leads to a 17 to 27 percent increase in TFP. Note that the effect on


22
   In light of the critique of regressions based on growth rates (see e.g. Easterly et al (1993), Klenow and Rodriguez-
Clare (1997) and Hall and Jones (1999)), we focus on levels of income and other economic variables. In Appendix
Table 2, we report results for growth rates over long periods of time based on data constructed in Maddison (2003).
23
   Although we use GDP per worker in 2000 in our baseline regressions, the results are very similar when we use the
level of income from other decades.

                                                                                                                    16
TFP is smaller than the effect on income. This should be expected since differences in income per worker
are due to differences in factor accumulation on top of differences in TFP.
        Finally, we perform a more direct test of our theory by regressing measures of innovation on
individualism (Table 1, Panels D and E). With and without controls, we see a strong robust effect of
individualism, confirming the channel going from individualism to innovation and to income and
productivity. Importantly, this finding highlights that although countries may achieve a larger level of
total factor productivity via diffusion of existing knowledge and willingness of people in individualistic
cultures to accept new goods/services as well as new ways of producing goods/services, individualism
affects the creation of knowledge. In other words, individualism not only helps countries to approach to
the technological frontier, it also pushes the frontier.
        To assess whether the magnitudes of individualism’s effect on economic outcomes are plausible,
consider differences in economic outcomes in Italy’s South and North, which is a prime example of the
importance of cultural effects. In his classic book, Putnam (1994) argues that the North of Italy is
culturally similar to Switzerland and Germany (the individualism score for these countries is equal to 68)
while the South of Italy is similar to Spain (the score is 51). Our baseline regression results (column (8) in
Table 1) predict that the difference in income per capita and TFP between Italy’s North and South should
be 0.0341758% and 0.0201734% respectively. According to Italy’s statistical office income per
capita in Southern regions is about 50% smaller than income per capita in Northern regions. Using the
methods developed in Hall and Jones (1999), Aiello and Scoppa (2000) estimate the difference in TFP
across two regions to be 27%. Thus predictions made from our cross-country regression are remarkably
similar to within-Italy variation in incomes and productivity and validate our parameter estimates.
        One may be concerned that our results are driven by a set of countries which for historical
reasons were disadvantaged in economic development. Likewise, if our theory explains income
differences at the global scale, it is reasonable to expect our theory to explain income differences within
continents where countries may be more similar. These concerns are important because, for example,
Albouy (2008) argues that the theory of institutions as the fundamental cause of economic development
has weak or no empirical support when tested within continents. More generally, we are interested in
whether our results survive when we consider more homogenous countries.
        Table 2 reports regression estimates for each continent separately and for OECD economies. By
and large, we confirm our basic finding that individualism leads to higher income per worker. Even if we
focus on OECD countries or relatively more developed countries in Europe and the Americas,
individualism can explain a large fraction of variation in income. Although the coefficient on
individualism is somewhat smaller for the subsample of developed countries, it does not necessarily mean
that culture is less important. It simply reflects the fact that variation in incomes and individualism is

                                                                                                           17
more compressed in these countries and thus, with less variation in our key variables, measurement errors
can have a stronger attenuation bias. This observation can also explain why the estimated coefficients are
the largest for Africa where countries are extremely diverse in the level of development and
individualism. For example, Morocco has the highest individualism scores (same level as Argentina),
excluding South Africa, whereas Nigeria, Sierra Leone and Ghana have the lowest scores (same as China,
Singapore, Thailand and Vietnam).24 Most importantly, to eliminate concerns that our results reflect
migration patterns from the colonization era in which the Americas and Oceania were settled by European
immigrants, column (5) gives result for Africa, Europe and Asia where there was no massive migration of
European settlers. Note that the coefficient in the IV estimation is even larger than in the results from
Table 1 where the Americas and Oceania were included. In summary, our results are not driven by a
particular continent and the effect of culture is significant also within continents. We can also rule out
that our results reflect only migration patterns of European settlers in the colonization period of the last
500 years.
        To summarize, we have shown empirically a strong causal effect from culture to long-run growth
and the level of innovation. These findings are consistent with the predictions of our theory indicating that
more individualist cultures should lead to more innovation and hence greater economic development.


5. Robustness checks and direct genetic/epidemiological effects on culture.
Table 3 reports results for a series of robustness checks. In column (1), instead of using as instrument for
culture the Euclidian distance of frequency of blood types A and B in a country relative to the USA, we
use the Mahalanobis distance which takes into account the covariance between variables when calculating
the distance. In column (2), we use the frequency of blood types A and B separately so that there are two
instrumental variables instead of one and we do not need to construct a distance measure to a particular
country. In column (3), we use the Euclidian distance for both blood types but this time relative to the UK
rather than the USA. In column (4), instead of using the Cavalli-Sforza et al. (1994) data on blood types,
we use the data from the Red Cross. Although the Red Cross data are available for a smaller set of
countries, it does not require us to use ethnic shares in population to aggregate genetic data to the country
level. In columns (5) and (6), we use the genetic distance data used by Spolaore and Wacziarg (2009).
Their data also come from Cavalli-Sforza et al. (1994) data. In contrast to our blood distance, Spolaore
and Wacziarg (2009) take genetic distances calculated by Cavalli-Sforza et al. (1994) for a larger set of
genes. However, with a larger set of genes, the distance can be computed for only 42 subgroups of the
world population. Similar to our approach, Spolaore and Wacziarg (2009) aggregate ethnic data to the

24
  Hofstede’s score for South Africa is based on the sample of whites. None of our results change in any important
way when we exclude South Africa.

                                                                                                              18
country level using shares of ethnic groups in country populations. Column (7) uses the prohibition of
pronoun drop as an instrument whereas in column (8), it is used as an instrument on top of blood distance.
We find similar results in these robustness checks aimed at assessing the sensitivity to using alternative
measures of genetic or linguistic distance between cultures.
        In our analysis so far, we have used the genetic distance as a proxy for cultural transmission. In
Table 4, we report regressions with genetic and epidemiological instrumental variables from the recent
cross-cultural psychology literature. As we discussed in section 3, these alternative instrumental variables
have a direct effect on individualism/collectivism as the factors captured by these instrumental variables
are conducive for emergence of collectivist cultures. Column (1) presents results for the instrumental
variable regression of log output per worker on individualism where the instrument is the frequency of the
short (S) allele in the polymorphic region 5HTTPLR of the serotonin transporter gene (SLC6A4). Even
though the data are available only for 30 countries, the first stage fit is remarkably strong and we continue
to find a strong effect of culture on income. The instrumental variable in column (3) is the frequency of
the G allele in polymorphism A118G in the -opoid receptor gene (data are from Way and Lieberman
(2010)) that leads to higher stress in case of social rejection. The results stay significant despite the low
number of observations (23). Column (5) uses as instrument a measure of historical pathogen prevalence
from Fincher et al. (2008). We prefer the historical pathogen prevalence index because it uses data from
old atlases of infectious diseases which were compiled before the epidemiological revolution in treating
infectious diseases. Again, we find a strong effect of culture on economic development.
        Note that the magnitudes of the effect for all alternative instrumental variables are similar to the
magnitude we find for the baseline specification which uses blood distance as an instrumental variable.
Furthermore, when we combine alternative instrumental variables with the blood distance (columns 2, 4,
and 6 in Table 4), overidentifying restriction tests cannot reject the null of instrumental variables being
correctly excluded at any standard significance level. This result not only helps us to justify our exclusion
restrictions but also clarifies the role of genetic distance in our exercise. Specifically, Spolaore and
Wacziarg (2009) interpret genetic distance as a proxy for barriers to the diffusion of knowledge. In
contrast, we interpret genetic (blood) distance as a proxy for cultural distance between populations. For
the former interpretation, we should not expect that genetic and epidemiological instruments with direct
effect on culture should yield estimates of culture’s effect on economic outcomes similar to estimates
based on genetic distance as an instrumental variable. On the other hand, for the latter interpretation to be
correct, this alternative set of instruments should lead to similar estimates. Thus, the overidentifying
restriction tests fail to reject the null that our interpretation is correct. These results together with our
benchmark results clearly show a causal link from culture to economic development.



                                                                                                          19
           Finally, we explore in Table 5 if our basic results are sensitive to alternative measures of
individualism. Specifically, we re-run specification (19) using Schwartz’s embeddedness and autonomy
measures as the dependent variables. Again, we find that individualism leads to higher levels of income.

6. Culture and institutions
We now turn to the relationship between culture and institutions in the context of long-run growth. We
have documented a strong causal effect of culture, along the individualism-collectivism dimension, on log
income per worker and TFP. Acemoglu et al. (2001) and others on the other hand argue that there is a
causal effect of institutions on long-run growth. This raises two interconnected questions. First, does
culture have an effect separate from the effect of institutions? This question is important because culture
and institutions are correlated and it is possible that culture simply captures the effect embodied in
institutions. Second, what is the relative importance of culture and institutions in explaining economic
development? This question aims to assess the quantitative importance of culture and institutions once
they are considered simultaneously as factors determining economic development.
           We already saw from the results of Table 2 that there was a robust and strong effect of culture on
growth if we exclude the Americas and Oceania where there has been very strong migration from
European settlers. However, it is useful to analyze the effects of culture when we introduce institutions in
the empirical analysis. We augment the baseline econometric specification (19) with the average
protection against expropriation risk between 1985 and 2009, a measure of institutions used by Acemoglu
et al. (2001):25
                                                                                                       (20)
where Ii is a measure of institutions in country i. Estimates of equation (20) (see Table 6) show that
culture (individualism) remains significant even after including institutions in the OLS and IV
specifications. Culture thus has a robust effect that is separate from institutions. Furthermore, even after
controlling for protection against expropriation risk, the causal effect of individualism is large. A one
standard deviation increase in the individualism score leads to a 47 to 73 percent increase in the level of
income without instrument for institutions and to a 56 to 77 percent increase in the level of income when
the institutional variable is instrumented using the settler mortality variable as in Acemoglu et al.
(2001).26
           Note that the size of the effect of culture on income remains fairly robust to including institutions
and other controls. We cannot say the same for the institutional variable which is rather sensitive to
including controls and individualism in the regression. For example, with no controls and without culture


25
     Acemoglu et al. (2001) use the average of the same data between 1985 and 1999.
26
     We find similar results when we use long-run growth rates. See Appendix Table 2.

                                                                                                              20
(column (2) in Panel A of Table 6), a one standard deviation increase in protection against expropriation
risk raises the level of income by 84 percent as can be seen in the OLS specification in panel A of Table
6. Once we introduce controls and individualism (column (5) in Panel A of Table 6), the effect is reduced
by nearly one half. Note also that the coefficient on institutions does not increase in the IV estimation
(panel B) once culture is included but rather tends to decrease, which was not the case in Acemoglu et al.
(2001). Note also that the effect of institutions ceases to be statistically significantly different from zero
when we apply the correction for settler mortality as in Albouy (2008) and include culture in the
regression (columns 8 and 9 in panel B). We observe similar results (not reported) when we use
innovation or TFP (rather than income per worker) as the dependent variable.27,28
         In brief, there is an important contribution of culture to economic development that is
independent of institutions. In terms of magnitudes, culture explains income differences across countries
at least as much as institutions.

7. Genetic distance and other channels for growth
Genetic distance may be correlated with variables other than culture which might affect development.
Although this is not a concern for our results in Table 4 where we use genetic and epidemiological
variables with a direct effect on culture as instrumental variables, it is important to rule out the influence
of other potentially important determinants of long-run growth for our baseline approach of using genetic
distance as an instrumental variable. Table 7 reports estimates of the effect of culture on our outcome
variables when we control for a variety of additional factors.
         For example, genetic distance may reflect geographical distance which has nothing to do with
culture but relates to transport costs in international trade (see e.g. Giuliano et al. 2006). To address this
concern, we introduce the log of the population-weighted distance of a country from the UK, which
proxies for transportation costs from the cradle of the Industrial revolution. While this distance variable
is negatively correlated with the log of income per worker, when it is combined with the individualism
score, it is not statistically significant while our cultural variable remains robustly significant both in the
OLS and IV specifications.
         Genetic distance might also be related to other cultural variables. A variable that has been widely
used in the social sciences literature is the measure of generalized trust constructed from the World


27
    Importantly, genetic distance is not significantly correlated with institutions and therefore our instrumental
variable does not pick up variation of individualism correlated with institutions.
28
   We also looked at another popular measure of institutions, the legal origins variable put forward by La Porta et al.
(1998) and in the literature that followed. In regressions similar to those reported in Tables 6 and 7, there are two
striking findings. First, individualism remains robustly significant. Second, none of the legal origin variables are
robustly significant which is consistent with the results in Jellema and Roland (2009) reporting that legal
institutional variables did not play an important role in explaining growth.

                                                                                                                    21
Values Survey. It is often interpreted either as a cultural norm that reduces transaction costs or as a
measure of social capital which reflects the density of social networks and a culture of participation and
citizenship. While there is some correlation between log income per worker and trust, it is not robust.
Once we regress log income per worker on both individualism and trust, trust ceases to be significant
while individualism remains robustly significant and quantitatively important.29
         Finally, we control for other potentially important factors: average protection against property
rights, legal origins, ethnic fractionalization and human capital.30 While institutions and the education
index are strongly correlated with log of income per worker and the log of patents per capita,
individualism remains strongly significant in all specifications. Also observe that since we do not
instrument potentially endogenous controls such as trust, legal origins, education, etc., we likely bias the
estimate of culture’s effect downward and therefore the true effect of culture can be larger.31 In other
specifications (not reported), we also examined including other controls as indicators of the rule of law
and indicators of democracy and the results are similar.
         In summary, although genetic distance may be correlated with non-cultural factors or cultural
factors other than individualism, none of the popular alternatives appears to change our main result that
individualism plays an important role in determining economic development. These results together with
the more direct instrumental variables used in Table 4 unambiguously show that culture cannot be ignored
as an important determinant of long run growth.

8. Causal channels between culture and institutions.
The last question we try to address is whether culture causally affects institutions or vice versa.
Arguments could go both ways. One can reason that culture shapes institutions. When institutions are put
in place, they correspond to a view of how the world works and are thus based on culture. The political
transformations that took place in the Western world between the eighteenth and twentieth century from
absolute monarchy and autocracy to republican and democratic regimes can be seen as based on the
values of the Enlightenment that go back to the Renaissance period and the rediscovery and

29
   Although the raw correlation between trust and genetic distance is significant, this correlation disappears after
controlling for basic factors such as longitude/latitude, landlocked dummy, etc.
30
   Human capital is proxied with the 2000 education index from the United Nations. This index is measured by the
adult literacy rate (with a weight of two thirds) and the combined primary, secondary, and tertiary gross enrollment
ratio (with a weight of one third). We obtain very similar results if we use the Barro-Lee measures of educational
attainment.
31
   One may argue that many of these variables should themselves be instrumented. Note however that we are facing
potential difficulties when doing this. First of all, it may be very hard to find a good instrument for all relevant
variables. Second, even if this were possible, the data sets for which all instruments would overlap would be
considerably smaller. Already when using our genetic instrument together with settler mortality, our number of
observations drops from 76 to 35. By not instrumenting an explanatory variable in the growth regression, we are
biasing downward our estimate of the effect of the cultural variable which we instrument (see Appendix B for more
details). Therefore, if we find a significant positive effect of culture on growth, the true effect is likely to be larger.

                                                                                                                        22
reappropriation of the Greek culture of rationality and democracy. The French revolution led to the
abolition of monarchy and profound institutional changes that were inspired by the ideals of the
Enlightenment. In contrast, large-scale revolts in China throughout its history led at best to the
replacement of one emperor/dynasty by another one (Finer, 1997). This is because the Chinese imperial
system was in line with the Confucianist culture and its view of the “good emperor” as father figure with
the associated moral duties towards the people. Within that culture, dissatisfaction of the people tended to
be interpreted as the result of having a “bad” emperor and replacing him with a “good” emperor who
would behave according to the Confucianist moral cannons was seen as the appropriate response. Culture
can thus be argued to affect institutional choices of a society.
        However, one can also make a case in favor of an opposite causal channel. People lived for
centuries under empires characterized by different institutional organizations, be it the Chinese imperial
system, the Ottoman Empire or the Austro-Hungarian Empire. The administrative apparatus of empires
(as well as of smaller political entities) made it possible to influence the world view of people living
within its boundaries, usually by the spreading of religions such as Islam under the Ottoman Empire or
Catholicism under the Austro-Hungarian Empire.32 For example, Confucianism became widespread in
China in part because it was adopted as the official ideology of the empire as early as the Han dynasty.
Institutions can thus be argued to have affected the spread of specific culture, and thus also the degree of
individualism and collectivism.
        We thus test for the existence of two causal channels: from culture to institutions and from
institutions to culture. For this test we employ two econometric specifications:
                                                                                                      (21)
                                                                                                      (22)
where I is a measure of institutions (i.e., protection against expropriation risk as in Acemoglu et al.
(2001)), C is a measure of culture (i.e., individualism), X is a vector of controls, and e and u are error
terms. In equation (21), individualism is instrumented with the blood distance we constructed before. In
equation (22), protection against expropriation risk is instrumented with settler mortality. If we find that
      is significant while         is not, culture can be interpreted as causing institutions. If            is
significant while       is not, institutions can be interpreted as causing culture. Joint significance of
and       can be understood as causation flowing in both ways.
        The results for equation (21) are reported in Panel A of Table 8. The effect of individualism on
the strength of economic institutions is positive and significant thus implying a flow of causality from
culture to institutions. This finding corroborates Tabellini (2008a) and Licht et al. (2007). We report

32
  Grosjean (2009) finds that having lived together under the same empire for more than 100 years reduced a
measure of cultural distance between two localities by at least a third.

                                                                                                             23
results for equation (22) in Panel B (which uses settler mortality from Acemoglu et al. (2001)) and Panel
C (which uses settler mortality from Albouy (2008)) of Table 8. Results in Panel B indicate that causality
also flows from institutions to culture. However, according to results in panel C, the effect of institutions
on culture ceases to be significant once one introduces controls. Also note that the first stage fit in Panel C
becomes quite poor so that the standard statistical inference probably overstates the significance of the
estimated coefficients as weak instruments typically mean much wider confidence intervals. Hence, the
effect of institutions on culture might be less robust than the other way round. One must however be
careful in interpreting all these results since they are based only on 35 observations, the countries for
which the data on culture and institutions and their instruments overlap. In summary, culture has a causal
effect on institutions and is itself influenced by institutions, although the latter direction of causation is
less clear cut than the former.

9. Within-country evidence
Cross-country analysis may fail to control fully for differences in institutional factors. However, we can
examine the effect of culture within a given country, thereby holding institutional factors constant.
Specifically, our model predicts that more individualistic cultures should ceteris paribus stimulate
persons to choose research-oriented occupations that require independent thought and deviation from
traditional ways of doing things. For this analysis, the U.S.A. is a particularly attractive research object
since this country has many ethnicities and occupational opportunities are relatively open for peoples of
all origins and cultures.33
        We use ethnicity, age, gender, birth place, educational attainment from the 5 percent public micro
data (IPUMS) of the U.S. Census in year 2000. Our sample includes only employed males who are aged
between 25 and 60 and have non-missing information on ancestors (country of origin). The reason why
we constrain the sample only to individuals with non-missing ethnicity information is because then we
focus only on individuals who associate themselves with a particular culture (which could be different
from the American one) and are likely to observe the traditions of their original cultures. We exclude
females, unemployed and other ages to minimize the various possible selection effects.
        We consider several sub-samples. The first sample split is determined by whether an individual is
born in the U.S.A. so that we can attenuate the effects of high-human-capital migration into the USA
(intuitively, high-human-capital migration from countries with low level of individualism could create a
sample of highly individualistic U.S. persons from these countries, and thus the difference between
persons from individualistic cultures/countries and collectivist cultures/countries would not be reflected in


33
  In this respect, our analysis is similar to Fisman and Miguel (2007) who study how norms determine corrupt
behavior when institutions are the same.

                                                                                                            24
the sample). The second sample split is based on educational attainment. By focusing on individuals with
a bachelor (or higher) degree we can attenuate the effects of differences in initial conditions across
ethnicities and also differences in abilities. The higher is the level of educational attainment, the smaller
should be the effect of differences in initial conditions and abilities on the estimates.
           Our approach has two steps. In the first step, we estimate the following probit:
                     Φ          Σ            error                                                      (23)
where i, s, k index individuals, categories of educational attainment, ROO is a dummy variable equal to
one if an individual has a research oriented occupation and zero otherwise, D is a set of dummies of each
ethnicity, and the vector X includes controls such as age, age squared, a set of dummies for educational
attainment, states, metropolitan status, and marital status. The omitted category in the set of ethnic
dummy variables is British.
           In the second step we estimate the following specification by least squares:34
                                             error                                                      (24)
where          is the set of estimated coefficients         in regression (23) and Individualism is Hofstede’s
individualism score. Our theory predicts that          should be positive.
           Table 9 presents estimates from regression (24). Note that the estimate of         is larger when we
constrain the sample only to U.S. born persons and when we consider persons with a certain educational
threshold. The estimates of         indicate that persons coming from individualistic cultures are more likely to
take research-oriented occupations than persons from collectivist cultures. Obviously, these estimates do
not prove that persons from individualist cultures are more successful at innovation than persons from
collectivist cultures but they clearly suggest that there is a cultural component at work in the choice of
such occupations.

10. Concluding remarks
Our key finding is that individualistic culture has a strong causal effect on economic development,
shedding new light on what determines the wealth of nations. The effect of individualism on long-run
growth is robust and quantitatively important even after accounting for a variety of alternative theories.
This result has a number of implications for positive and normative economics.
           There are clearly many pitfalls that should be avoided in interpreting our results. By no means
should our (or any other) research on economic effects of culture be seen as implying a “ranking” of
cultures in the world or a need for cultural revolutions. On the contrary, this research is aimed to better
understand the tradeoffs implied by different cultures which are deeply rooted in history and change very
slowly. We must better understand the world we live in and the values and beliefs upon which people in

34
     To minimize the effect of outliers, we use Huber robust least squares regression.

                                                                                                               25
different countries base their expectations, judgments and calculations. Identifying effects of culture on
economic outcomes should be interpreted in a way that leads to better dialogue and communication across
cultures.
        On a more practical side, this research can help pinpoint effective margins of development policy
and aid programs to developing countries. Depending on the strengths of various cultures, different
emphases may have to be put on a spectrum of available policy tools. For example, in collectivist
societies, aid for programs providing public goods may be more effective than in individualist countries.
In the latter, aid programs counting on local initiatives might be more effective. Alternatively,
organizational support may have to be stronger for infrastructure projects in individualist societies,
whereas in collectivist societies one may have to make special effort to encourage creative initiatives.
        Research on the economic effects of culture is still in its infancy. We hope that our results
showing the importance of culture for long-run growth will help to spur research in this direction.




                                                                                                           26
References
Acemoglu, D., S. Johnson, and J. Robinson (2001) “The Colonial Origins of Comparative Development:
     An Empirical Investigation,” American Economic Review 91: 1369-1401.
Acemoglu, D., S. Johnson, and J. Robinson (2002) “Reversal of Fortune: Geography and. Institutions in
     the Making of the Modern World Income Distribution,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 117(4),
     1231-1294.
Aghion, Ph., Y. Algan, P. Cahuc and A. Shleifer (2008) “Regulation and Distrust”, mimeo.
Aghion, Ph. And P. Howitt (1998) Endogenous Growth Theory MIT Press, Cambridge Mass.
Aiello, F., and V.Scoppa (2000) “Uneven Regional Development in Italy: Explaining Differences in
     Productivity Levels,” Giornale degli Economisti 59(2), 270-298.
Albouy, D. (2008) “The Colonial Origins of Comparative Development: An Investigation of the Settler
     Mortality Data,” NBER Working Paper 14130.
Ashraf, Q. and O. Galor (2007) “Cultural Assimilation, Cultural Diffusion and the Origin of the Wealth
     of Nations” CEPR Working Paper No 6444, London UK.
Barro, R.J., and R.M. McCleary (2003) “Religion and Economic Growth Across Countries,” American
     Sociological Review 68(5), 760-781.
Bisin, A. and T. Verdier (2000) ““Beyond The Melting Pot”: Cultural Transmission, Marriage, And The
     Evolution Of Ethnic And Religious Traits,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 115: 955-988.
Bisin, A. and T. Verdier (2001) “The Economics of Cultural Transmission and the Dynamics of
     Preferences,” Journal of Economic Theory 97, 298-319.
Cavalli-Sforza, L. L., P. Menozzi, and A. Piazza (1994). The History and Geography of Human Genes.
     Princeton University Press.
Chiao, J.Y., and K.D. Blizinsky (2010) “Culture-gene coevolution of individualism-collectivism and the
    serotonin transporter gene,” Proceedings - Royal Society. Biological sciences 277(1681), 529-537.
Clark, G. (2007) A Farewell to Alms. A Brief Economic History of the World. Princeton Univ. Press.
De Mooij, M. (2003) “Convergence and Divergence in Consumer Behaviour”Implications for Global
     Advertising” International Journal of Advertising 22(2), 183-202
Doepke, M., and F. Zilibotti (2008) “Occupational Choice and the Spirit of Capitalism,” Quarterly
     Journal of Economics 123(2): 747-793.
Easterly, W., M. Kremer, L. Prichett, and L. Summers (1993) “Good policy or good luck? Country
     growth performance and temporary shocks,” Journal of Monetary Economics 32(3), 459-483.
Economist Intelligence Unit (2007) Innovation: Transforming the way business creates. www.eiu.com.
Economist Intelligence Unit (2009) A new ranking of the world’s most innovative countries.
     www.eiu.com.
Fearon, J.(2003) “Ethnic and Cultural Diversity by Country,” Journal of Economic Growth 8(2), 195-222.
Fernandez, R., A. Fogli and C. Olivetti (2004) “Mothers and Sons: Preference Formation and Female
     Labor Force Dynamics,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 119(4), 1249-1299.
Fernandez, Raquel, and Alessandra Fogli (2009) “Culture: An Empirical Investigation of Beliefs, Work
     and Fertility,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 1(1), 146-177.
Fincher, C.L., R. Thornhill, D.R. Murray, and M. Schaller (2008) “Pathogen prevalence predicts human
     cross-cultural variability in individualism/collectivism” Proceedings - Royal Society. Biological
     sciences 275(1640), 1279-1285
Finer, S. (1997). The History of Government, volumes I-III, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Fisman, R., and Miguel, E. (2007) “Corruption, Norms, and Legal Enforcement: Evidence from
     Diplomatic Parking Tickets,” Journal of Political Economy 115(6): 1020-1048.
Giuliano, P. (2007) “Living Arrangements in Western Europe: Does Cultural Origin Matter?” Journal of
     the European Economic Association 5: 927-952.
Giuliano, P., A. Spilimbergo and G. Tonon (2006) “Genetic, Cultural and Geographical Distance,”
     Discussion Paper IZA No 2229.
Greif, A. (1994) “Cultural Beliefs and the Organization of Society: A Historical and Theoretical
     Reflection on Collectivist and Individualist Societies,” Journal of Political Economy 102, 912-950.

                                                                                                     27
Greif, A. (2006). Institutions and the Path to the Modern Economy: Lessons from Medieval Trade.
     Cambridge University Press.
Grosjean, P. (2009) “The Contributions of Spatial Proximity and History to Cultural Integration: A
     Gravity Approach”, mimeo, UC Berkeley.
Guiso, L., P. Sapienza and L. Zingales (2003) “People’s Opium? Religion and Economic Attitudes.”
     Journal of Monetary Economics 50: 225-282.
Guiso, L., P. Sapienza and L. Zingales (2009) “Cultural Biases in Economic Exchange,” Quarterly
     Journal of Economics 124(3), 1095-1131.
Hall, R. E., and C.I. Jones (1999) “Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much More Output Per Worker
     Than Others?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 114(1), 83-116.
Heine, S.J. (2007) Cultural psychology. W. W. Norton & Company.
Hofstede, G. (2001) Culture’s Consequences: Comparing Values, Behaviors, and Organizations Across
     Nations. 2nd edition. Sage Publications.
Hoppe, M.H. (1990) A comparative study of country elites: international differences in work-related
     values and learning and their implications for management training and development” Ph.D. thesis
     University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
Huang, Y., J. Lin and Y. Qian (2010) “Does Ethnicity Pay?” NBER Working Paper No 16294.
Jellema, J. (2009) “Cultural Variation, Genetic Heterozygosity and Economic Development,” mimeo.
Jellema, J. and Roland, G. (2009) “Institutional Clusters and Economic Performance”, mimeo.
Jones, C. I., and P. Romer (2010) “The New Kaldor Facts: Ideas, Institutions, Population, and Human
     Capital,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 2(1), 224-245.
Kashima, E., and Y. Kashima (1998). “Culture and language: The case of cultural dimensions and
     personal pronoun use,” Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology 29, 461-486.
Klenow, P. and A. Rodriguez-Clare (1997) “Economic growth: A review essay,” Journal of Monetary
     Economics 40(3), 597-617.
Knack, S., and P. Keefer (1997) “Does Social Capital Have an Economic Payoff? A Cross-Country
     Investigation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 112(4), 1251-1288.
La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny. 1998. “Law and Finance.” Journal of
      Political Economy 106(6): 1113-1155.
Landes, D. S. (1998) The Wealth and Poverty of Nations. Norton Publishers, New York.
Licht, A. N., C. Goldschmidt, and Shalom H. Schwartz (2007) “Culture Rules: The Foundations of the
     Rule of Law and Other Norms of Governance,” Journal of Comparative Economics 35(4), 659-688.
Liker, J. (2003) The Toyota Way. McGraw-Hill.
Maddison, A. (2003) The World Economy. Historical Statistics OECD, Paris.
Merrit, A. (2000) “Culture in the cockpit: Do Hofstede’s Dimensions replicate?” Journal of Cross-
     Cultural Psychology 31(3): 283-301.
Merton, R. K. (1973) The Sociology of Science: Theoretical and Empirical Investigations. University of
     Chicago Press.
Mourant, A.E., Ada C. Kopec, and Kazimiera Domaniewska-Sobczak (1976) The Distribution of the
     Human Blood Groups and Other Polymorphisms. Oxford University Press.
Murdock, G. (1967) Ethnographic Atlas. Pittsburgh, PA: University of Pittsburgh Press.
North, D. (1990) Institutions, Institutional Change and Economic Performance Cambridge University
     Press.
Putnam, R.D. (1994) Making democracy work: Civic traditions in modern Italy. Princeton Univ. Press.
Roland, G. (2004) “Understanding Institutional Change: Fast-moving and Slow-moving Institutions.”
     Studies in Comparative International Development 38: 109-131.
Schwartz, S. H. (1994) “Beyond Individualism/Collectivism: New Cultural Dimensions of Values” in
     Uichol K. et al, eds., Individualism and Collectivism: Theory, Method, and Applications. Sage.
Shane, S. (1995) “Uncertainty avoidance and the Preference for Innovation Championing Roles”, Journal
     of International Business Studies 26(1): 47-68.


                                                                                                   28
Spolaore, E., and R. Wacziarg (2009) “The Diffusion of Development,” Quarterly Journal of Economics
      124(2): 469-529.
Tabellini, G. (2008a) “The Scope of Cooperation: Values and Incentives,” Quarterly Journal of
      Eocnomics 123(3): 905-950.
Tabellini, G. (2008b) “Institutions and Culture. Presidential Address European Economic Association,”
      Journal of the European Economic Association 6: 255-294.
Tills, D., A. C. Kopec, and R. E. Tills (1983) The Distribution of the Human Blood Groups and Other
      Polymorphisms. Oxford University Press.
Van Nimwegen, T. (2002) “Global Banking, Global values: The in-house reception of the corporate
      values of ABN-AMRO” Ph.D. dissertation Nyenrode University Delft, Netherlands.
Weber, M. (2002) The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism, translated by Stephen Kalberg,
      Oxford University Press, Oxford U.K.
Way, B.M. and M.D. Lieberman (2010) “Is there a genetic contribution to cultural differences?
         Collectivism, individualism and genetic markers of social sensitivity,” Social Cognitive &
         Affective Neuroscience 5(2-3), 203-211.




                                                                                                  29
                                            Table 1. Income and individualism.
                                                OLS                                                        IV
                             (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)              (5)          (6)           (7)           (8)
  Continent dummies          No           Yes          No           Yes              No           Yes           No            Yes
  Controls                   No           No           Yes          Yes              No           No            Yes           Yes
                                                Panel A: Log income per worker
  Individualism           0.027***      0.024*** 0.016*** 0.020***          0.031***            0.037***     0.025***     0.034***
                         (0.003)       (0.003)    (0.003)     (0.004)      (0.006)             (0.009)      (0.009)      (0.010)
  Observations               76            76         76          76           76                  76           76           76
  R2                        0.374         0.616     0.479       0.643        0.365               0.570        0.455        0.598
  1st stage F-stat                                                           42.97               19.70        19.96        13.47
  1st stage partial R2                                                       0.388               0.308        0.301        0.260
                                 Panel B: Total factor productivity from Hall and Jones (1999)
  Individualism           0.011*** 0.011*** 0.007**            0.011***       0.016*** 0.019***             0.016***     0.020***
                         (0.003)     (0.003)      (0.004)     (0.004)        (0.004)     (0.006)            (0.006)      (0.006)
  Observations                66         66           66           66            66          66                 66           66
  R2                        0.170      0.326        0.270        0.422          0.140      0.288              0.217        0.376
  1st stage F-stat                                                              42.40      17.78              20.06        13.21
  1st stage partial R2                                                          0.418      0.324              0.338        0.292
                                Panel C: Total factor productivity from Jones and Romer (2010)
  Individualism           0.018*** 0.014*** 0.007*** 0.011***                 0.023*** 0.018***              0.014***     0.017***
                         (0.002)     (0.003)      (0.003)     (0.003)        (0.004)    (0.005)             (0.005)      (0.006)
  Observations                53         53           53           53            53         53                   53           53
  R2                        0.404      0.674        0.629        0.728          0.379     0.663                0.596        0.706
  1st stage F-stat                                                              37.64     16.69                18.02        11.03
  1st stage partial R2                                                          0.452     0.350                0.353        0.306
                                                   Panel D: Log patents per capita
  Individualism           0.095***      0.093***     0.076*** 0.084***          0.103***        0.134***     0.102***     0.132***
                         (0.012)       (0.013)      (0.012)     (0.012)        (0.024)         (0.031)      (0.027)      (0.033)
  Observations                63            63           63         63             63              63            63           63
  R2                        0.420         0.546        0.637      0.667           0.418           0.500        0.618        0.617
  1st stage F-stat                                                                39.19           15.79        16.44        10.89
  1st stage partial R2                                                            0.397           0.279        0.311        0.261
                                               Panel E: Innovation performance index
  Individualism           0.060***      0.059*** 0.048*** 0.053***             0.066***           0.086*** 0.066*** 0.084***
                         (0.008)       (0.008)      (0.007)     (0.008)       (0.015)            (0.019)      (0.017)      (0.021)
  Observations                63            63          63          63            63                 63           63           63
  R2                        0.429         0.553       0.642       0.672          0.425              0.503       0.621        0.617
  1st stage F-stat                                                               39.19              15.79       16.44        10.89
  1st stage partial R2                                                           0.397              0.279       0.311        0.261
Notes: In Panel A, the dependent variable is log income (at purchasing power parity) per worker from the Penn World Tables. In
Panels B and C, the dependent variable is log total factor productivity relative to the USA from Hall and Jones (1999) and from Jones
and Romer (2010). In Panels D and E, the dependent variables are innovation performance index and log patents per million
population taken from Economist Intelligence Unit (2007, 2009). Individualism is Hofstede’s index of individualism. A larger value of
the index corresponds to a greater level of individualism. The instrument is the Euclidian distance of frequency of blood types A and
B in a given country relative to the frequency of blood types A and B in the USA. Controls include a dummy for landlocked
countries, the percentage of Muslims in a country and absolute values of country longitude and latitude. Robust standard errors in
parentheses. ***, **, * denote significance at 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels.



                                                                                                                         30
                              Table 2. Income and individualism by region.
                                                                    Africa
                                                                                Africa                  non-
                       Asia      Europe      Africa     America      Asia                  OECD
                                                                                 Asia                  OECD
                                                                    Europe
                        (1)        (2)         (3)        (4)        (5)          (6)        (7)         (8)
                                               Panel A: OLS
Individualism         0.035*     0.022***   0.062***   0.017***    0.031***    0.046***   0.016***    0.033***
                      (0.017)     (0.005)    (0.012)    (0.003)     (0.006)     (0.011)    (0.005)     (0.008)

Observations            19         26         11          17          56         30           29          46
R-squared              0.192      0.376      0.611       0.524       0.626      0.531       0.298       0.483

                                                 Panel B: IV
Individualism        0.061**     0.045**     0.080*    0.021***    0.059***    0.066***   0.028***    0.054***
                     (0.027)     (0.021)     (0.046)    (0.005)     (0.018)     (0.024)    (0.009)     (0.017)

Observations             19         26         11          17         56         30          29          46
R-squared              0.087      -0.074     0.553       0.482       0.495      0.487       0.122       0.413
1st stage F-stat       6.874       2.572     4.563       8.962       11.65      10.59       6.609       14.52
Partial R2             0.352       0.157     0.232       0.441       0.200      0.299       0.318       0.250


Notes: the dependent variable is log income (at purchasing power parity) per worker from the Penn World Tables.
Individualism is Hofstede’s index of individualism. A larger value of the index corresponds to a greater level of
individualism. The instrument is the Euclidian distance of frequency of blood types A and B in a given country
relative to the frequency of blood types A and B in the USA. Columns (5)-(8) include continent dummies. Robust
standard errors in parentheses. ***, **, * denote significance at 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels.




                                                                                                                31
                                                 Table 3. Robustness checks.

                                    Frequency                                                       Spolaore-Wacziarg                  Pronoun drop
                                                                           Red
                                      of blood                                                                                                  Comb.
                       Mahal.                       Distance              Cross
                                       types                                                          First        Nei                           With
                       distance                      to UK                blood                                                     Individ.
                                       A&B                                                          distance     distance                       blood
                                                                           info
                                     separately                                                                                                distance
                          (1)            (2)           (3)                  (4)                    (5)             (6)                (7)         (8)
Individualism          0.030***     0.043***        0.035***             0.040***               0.058***        0.058***           0.019*** 0.023***
                       (0.006)      (0.007)         (0.006)              (0.011)                (0.013)         (0.013)            (0.005)    (0.005)

Observations               76            76             76                   37                       76            76                40          40
R2                       0.369         0.285          0.348                0.225                    -0.130        -0.134            0.421       0.419
1st stage F-stat         46.33         28.57          59.12                20.26                     16.99         15.01            47.77       42.45
1st stage partial R2     0.396         0.384          0.445                0.397                    0.213         0.210             0.558       0.666
Over-id p-value                        0.520                                                                                                    0.196

     Notes: the dependent variable log income per worker (at purchasing power parity) is from the Penn World Tables.
     Individualism is Hofstede’s index of individualism. A larger value of the index corresponds to a greater level of
     individualism. In column (1), Blood Distance is computed with the Mahalanobis metric (instead of Euclidean). In
     column (2), we use raw frequencies (i.e., no distance) of blood types A and B as separate instruments. Over-id p-
     value is the p-value for the overidentifying restrictions test. In column (3), Blood Distance is computed relative to
     the United Kingdom (instead of the USA). In column (4), Blood Distance (relative to the USA) is computed based
     on data available from the Red Cross and similar agencies. In columns (5) and (6), the distance between nations is
     taken from Spolaore and Wacziarg (2009) who use a broader set of genetic polymorphisms. The first and Nei
     genetic distances for a given gene are computed as follows. Let pij be the frequency of gene i with L alleles in

                                                                        ( pij  pi ) / pi (1  pi ) where pi  12 ( pi 1  pi 2 ) and the Nei
                                                                  2
     populations j=1,2. Then the first distance is FST           j 1
                                                                                        2




     distance is FN   log{J 12 / ( J 11 J 22 ) } where J 12                                      and J dd  1   m 1 p md , d  {1, 2} . See
                                           1/2                            L      L                                         L   2
                                                                          k 1   m 1
                                                                                        pk 1 pm 2
     Table 1.10.1 in Cavalli-Sforza et al. (1994) for a more detailed description of how the first and Nei genetic distances
     are constructed. In columns (7) and (8), the linguistic instrument Pronoun drop dummy is a dummy variable (from
     Licht et al. 2007) equal to one if a language permits dropping a pronoun in sentences and zero others. In column (7),
     only Pronoun drop dummy is used as an instrumental variable. In column (8), Pronoun drop dummy and Blood
     Distance are instrumental variables. Robust standard errors in parentheses. ***, **, * denote significance at 0.01,
     0.05, and 0.10 levels.




                                                                                                                                                32
                   Table 4. Effect of culture on growth with direct impact of genes on culture.
                                                                 Instrumental variables
                          Frequency of short (S) allele
                                                               Frequency of G allele in
                           in the polymorphic region                                                  Historical pathogen
                                                                 polymorphism A118G
                             5HTTLPR of serotonin                                                      prevalence index
                                                               in -opoid receptor gene
                          transporter gene (SLC6A4)
                                            Combined                           Combined                           Combined
                            Separate       with blood          Separate        with blood          Separate       with blood
                                             distance                           distance                           distance
                               (1)              (2)                (3)             (4)                (5)             (6)
 Second stage: regression of log output per worker on individualism
   Individualism             0.023**          0.031***          0.019***         0.023***           0.043***        0.039***
                            (0.011)          (0.011)           (0.006)          (0.006)            (0.006)         (0.005)

 First stage: regression of individualism on IV
   Alternative IV            -1.127***       -0.657**        -178.442***      -104.188*           -24.769***      -19.533***
                             (0.230)         (0.291)          (40.004)         (54.860)            (2.210)         (2.235)
   Blood distance                          -217.636*                          -291.052**                         -225.387***
                                           (113.051)                          (112.610)                           (58.228)
 Observations                    30              30                23              23                  73              73
 R2                            0.442           0.394             0.509           0.509               0.256           0.311
 1st stage F-stat              23.88           18.26             19.90           30.23               125.5           75.66
 Over-id test p-value                          0.261                             0.473                               0.206

Notes: The dependent variable in the second stage is log output per worker from the Penn World Tables. Individualism is
Hofstede’s index of individualism. The instrument in columns (1) and (2) is from Chiao and Blizinsky (2010), in columns (3)
and (4) from Way and Lieberman (2010), in columns (5) and (6) from Fincher et al. (2008). In columns (1), (3), and (5) the
set of instrumental variables does not include blood distance from the USA. In columns (2), (4), and (6) the set of
instrumental variables includes the blood distance from the USA and an alternative instrumental variable shown in the
heading of the column. Over-id test p-value reports the p-value for the overidentifying restriction tests that instruments are
correctly excluded.




                                                                                                                      33
             Table 5. Income and alternative measures of individualism (Schwartz).
                               OLS             IV            OLS             IV            OLS             IV
                                (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)
Embeddedness                 -1.889***    -2.208***
                              (0.194)     (0.412)
Affective autonomy                                       1.293***       1.545***
                                                         (0.150)        (0.310)
Intellectual autonomy                                                                  1.728***        2.813***
                                                                                       (0.219)         (0.626)
Observations                   73              73            73              73             73              73
R2                            0.599          0.582          0.533           0.513          0.461           0.279
1st stage F-stat                             27.27                          23.38                          20.19
1st stage partial R2                         0.235                          0.252                          0.157


Notes: the dependent variable is log income (at purchasing power parity) per worker from the Penn World Tables.
Intellectual autonomy encourages individuals to pursue their own ideas and intellectual directions independently.
Affective autonomy encourages individuals to pursue affectively positive experience for themselves. In
Embeddedness cultures, people are viewed as entities embedded in the collectivity. A larger value of Intellectual
autonomy and Affective autonomy corresponds to a greater level of individualism. A smaller value of Embeddedness
corresponds to a greater level of individualism. Schwartz’s Intellectual autonomy, Affective autonomy, and
Embeddedness are taken from Licht et al. (2007). The instrument is the Euclidian distance of frequency of blood
types A and B in a given country relative to the frequency of blood types A and B in the USA. Robust standard
errors in parentheses. ***, **, * denote significance at 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels.




                                                                                                              34
             Table 6. Relative effects of institutions and culture on economic development.
                            Panel A: Control for protection against expropriation risks.

                                             OLS                                              IV
                               (1)            (2)        (3)             (4)          (5)         (6)          (7)
    Individualism           0.012***                  0.027***        0.024***     0.031***    0.020***     0.029***
                            (0.002)                   (0.003)         (0.005)      (0.008)     (0.007)      (0.009)
    Protection against
    expropriation risk      0.141***     0.169***                     0.112***     0.093***    0.121***     0.101***
                            (0.016)      (0.015)                      (0.020)      (0.016)     (0.020)      (0.014)
    Continent dummies          No           No           No              No           Yes         No           Yes
    Controls                   No           No           No              No           No          Yes          Yes
    Observations                76           76           76              76           76          76           76
    R2                        0.723        0.666        0.374           0.665        0.746       0.708        0.781
    1st stage F-stat                                                    38.44        20.89       20.18        13.96
    1st stage partial R2                                                0.393        0.297       0.301        0.255

                     Panel B: Instrument and control for protection against expropriation risks
                                                                                  IV
                                                                                                                     Blood
                                                                                           Blood
                                                                                                                   Distance
                                                                                          Distance     Settler
                                      OLS                         Blood       Settler                                  +
                                                                                             +        mortality
                                                                 Distance    mortality                              Settler
                                                                                           Settler    (Albouy)
                                                                                                                   mortality
                                                                                          mortality
                                                                                                                   (Albouy)
                           (1)         (2)         (3)              (4)          (5)         (7)          (8)         (9)
Individualism           0.021***                0.007*           0.033***                 0.025**                  0.024*
                        (0.004)                 (0.004)          (0.009)                  (0.011)                  (0.013)
Protection against
expropriation risk                 0.208***     0.192***                     0.255***     0.129*      0.288***     0.136
                                   (0.023)      (0.024)                      (0.038)      (0.069)     (0.059)      (0.125)
Observations               35          35           35              35           35          35           35          35
R2                       0.215       0.675        0.696           0.151        0.640        0.564       0.574        0.573
1st stage:
       F-stat                                                                  14.88       7.964        4.424        3.654
       Partial R2                                                              0.424       0.424        0.174        0.185
       F-stat                                                     12.01                    14.13                     10.66
       Partial R2                                                 0.377                    0.553                     0.482

    Notes: the dependent variable is log income (at purchasing power parity) per worker from the Penn World Tables.
    Individualism is Hofstede’s index of individualism. A larger value of the index corresponds to a greater level of
    individualism. Protection against expropriation risk , taken from the International Country Risk Guide, is averaged
    between 1985 and 2009. It is the same variable Acemoglu et al. (2001) used to approximate the strength of a
    country’s institutions. A larger value of the index corresponds to a greater strength of institutions. The instrument is
    blood distance, the Euclidian distance of frequency of blood types A and B in a given country relative to the
    frequency of blood types A and B in the USA. The instrument for institutions (Economic Risk) is Settler mortality
    from Acemoglu et al. (2001) and Settler mortality (Albouy) from Albouy (2008). The Instrumented variables are in
    bold. Robust standard errors in parentheses. ***, **, * denote significance at 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels.




                                                                                                                         35
                     Table 7. Effect of individualism after using extended controls.
                                                                                                        Log TFP
                               Log income per worker            Log patents per capita
                                                                                                 (Hall and Jones, 1999)
                                 OLS             IV               OLS            IV                OLS            IV
                                  (1)            (2)               (3)           (4)                (5)           (6)
Individualism                   0.008**        0.017**           0.048***      0.118***            0.010**      0.021**
                               (0.004)        (0.007)           (0.016)       (0.037)             (0.005)      (0.009)
Trust                          -0.399         -0.536*           -1.167        -1.757              -0.519       -0.689*
                               (0.289)        (0.286)           (1.361)       (1.360)             (0.443)      (0.396)
Protection against
expropriation risk              0.097***       0.096***          0.351***      0.353***          0.100***       0.103***
                               (0.015)        (0.014)           (0.080)       (0.080)            (0.025)       (0.021)
Education index                 2.700***       2.096***          8.430**       2.609             -1.072        -2.097*
                               (0.558)        (0.563)           (4.128)       (3.168)            (1.068)       (1.254)
Ethnic fractionalization       -0.217         -0.336            -1.139        -1.992             -0.461        -0.588
                               (0.272)        (0.280)           (1.267)       (1.374)            (0.422)       (0.388)
Log geographic distance
   from the UK                 -0.091         -0.008             0.002         0.751              -0.105       -0.002
                               (0.128)        (0.128)           (0.487)       (0.629)             (0.148)      (0.145)
Legal origin
   French                       0.132           0.235            -0.407          0.739             0.141         0.282
                               (0.140)         (0.154)           (0.666)        (0.836)           (0.210)       (0.226)
     German                    -0.183          -0.025             0.143          1.821            -0.381        -0.189
                               (0.207)         (0.204)           (1.298)        (1.152)           (0.312)       (0.303)
     Scandinavian              -0.170           0.047             0.460          2.014            -0.014         0.255
                               (0.292)         (0.314)           (1.293)        (1.450)           (0.433)       (0.435)
Observations                      62              62                 53             53               56             56
R-squared                       0.926           0.916              0.870          0.813            0.703          0.672
1st stage F-stat                                11.02                             5.235                           6.714
Partial R2                                      0.236                             0.169                           0.193
Notes: the dependent variable is log income (at purchasing power parity) per worker from the Penn World Tables.
Individualism is Hofstede’s index of individualism in columns (1) to (4) and log patents per million population
taken from Economist Intelligence Unit (2007, 2009) in columns (5) to (8). A larger value of the index corresponds
to a greater level of individualism. The instrument is the Euclidian distance of frequency of blood types A and B in a
given country relative to the frequency of blood types A and B in the USA. Legal origin is from La Porta et al.
(2002). British legal origin is the omitted category. Protection against expropriation risk, taken from the
International Country Risk Guide, is averaged between 1985 and 2009. It is the same variable Acemoglu et al.
(2001) used to approximate the strength of a country’s institutions. A larger value of the index corresponds to a
greater strength of institutions. Trust is percent of people agreeing that strangers can generally be trusted from the
World Values Survey. Education index is for 2000 from the Human Development of the World Bank. Ethnic
fractionalization is from Fearon (2003). Geographic distance from the UK is population weighted distance taken
from CEPII database (http://www.cepii.fr/anglaisgraph/bdd/distances.htm). All regression include controls (a
dummy for landlocked countries, the percentage of Muslims in a country and absolute values of country longitude
and latitude) and continent dummies. The Instrumented variables are in bold italic. Robust standard errors in
parentheses. ***, **, * denote significance at 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels.




                                                                                                                   36
                       Table 8. Causal effects between culture and institutions.
                                OLS                                             IV
                                 (1)                   (2)             (3)              (4)             (5)

Panel A: Dependent variable = Protection against expropriation risk; Instrument = Blood Distance

Individualism                   0.073***              0.061*          0.107**          0.070*          0.116**
                               (0.019)               (0.035)         (0.043)          (0.040)         (0.051)
Continent dummies                No                    No              Yes              No              Yes
Controls                         No                    No              No               Yes             Yes
Observations                      35                   35              35               35              35
R2                              0.163                 0.159           0.366            0.277           0.359
1st stage F-stat                                      12.01           9.046            12.31           6.683
1st stage partial R2                                  0.377           0.340            0.316           0.281

Panel B: Dependent variable = Individualism; Instrument = Setter mortality

Protection against
expropriation Risk              2.245*                5.107***        5.772***         5.039***        4.604***
                               (1.134)               (1.620)         (1.912)          (1.862)         (1.614)
Continent dummies                No                    No              Yes              No              Yes
Controls                         No                    No              No               Yes             Yes
Observations                      35                    35              35               35              35
R2                              0.163                -0.102           0.123            0.045           0.364
1st stage F-stat                                      14.88           6.101            7.003           4.880
1st stage partial R2                                  0.424           0.272            0.273           0.240

Panel C: Dependent variable = Individualism; Instrument = Setter mortality (Albouy)

Protection against
expropriation Risk              0.073***              6.274**         5.733*           5.596           4.534
                               (0.019)               (2.732)         (3.146)          (3.824)         (2.944)
Continent dummies                No                    No              Yes              No              Yes
Controls                         No                    No              No               Yes             Yes
Observations                      35                    35              35               35              35
R2                              0.163                -0.362           0.130           -0.063           0.373
1st stage F-stat                                      4.424           2.100            1.789           1.383
1st stage partial R2                                  0.174           0.116            0.102          0.0896

Notes: Individualism is Hofstede’s index of individualism. A larger value of the index corresponds to a greater level
of individualism. Economic risk is from the International Country Risk Guide which Acemoglu et al. (2001) used to
approximate the strength of a country’s institutions. A larger value of the index corresponds to a greater strength of
institutions. Blood distance is the Euclidian distance of frequency of blood types A and B in a given country relative
to the frequency of blood types A and B in the USA. The instrument for institutions (Economic Risk) is Settler
mortality from Acemoglu et al. (2001) and Settler mortality (Albouy) from Albouy (2008). Controls includes a
dummy for Muslim countries, a dummy for landlocked countries, and absolute values of country longitude and
latitude. Robust standard errors in parentheses. ***, **, * denote significance at 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels.




                                                                                                                   37
                Table 9. Propensity to choose research-oriented occupations in the USA.
                    Narrow definition of research occupations            Broad definition of research occupations
                                   Persons with                                        Persons with
                  Persons with                      Persons with      Persons with                      Persons with
                                     bachelor                                            bachelor
                  all levels of                    Ph.D. degree       all levels of                     Ph.D. degree
                                    degree or                                           degree or
                   education                         or higher          education                         or higher
                                      higher                                              higher
                        (1)             (2)              (3)                (4)             (5)              (6)
                                             Panel A: U.S. born persons
Individualism         0.007***         0.022***         0.195***           0.023**         0.070***         0.355***
                     (0.003)          (0.006)          (0.044)           (0.012)          (0.021)          (0.060)
Observations            67              67               57                 67              67                57
R-squared             0.111           0.191            0.267              0.058           0.142             0.386

                                               Panel B: All persons
Individualism        0.004***          0.013***       0.105**                0.019**          0.029            0.110*
                    (0.001)           (0.004)        (0.049)                (0.009)          (0.018)          (0.060)
Observations           67               67             67                     67               67               67
R-squared            0.102            0.149          0.066                  0.071            0.036            0.050

  Notes: The table report Huber-robust estimate of parameter θ in specification (24). The dependent variable is the set
  of estimated coefficients αk from regression. Huber-robust regression is used in estimation. Individualism is
  Hofstede’s index of individualism. A larger value of the index corresponds to a greater level of individualism. ***,
  **, * denote significance at 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels. Narrow definition of research oriented occupations includes
  Life, Physical, and Social Science Occupations (codes 160-196 in the 2000 census occupational classification
  system recorded in the IPUMS variable OCC). Narrow definition of research oriented occupations includes Narrow
  definition of research oriented occupations and Architecture and Engineering Occupations (codes 130-156 in the
  2000 census occupational classification system recorded in the IPUMS variable OCC).




                                                                                                                    38
Figure 1. Map of individualism scores.




                                         39
Figure 2. Map of the Mahalanobis distance of frequency of blood types A and B relative to the USA.




                                                                                                     40
                                                                                        Figure 3. Individualism and economic outcomes.

                                                                                        Panel A                                                                                                                                      Panel B
                                        12




                                                                                                                                                   Log TFP relative to USA (Hall and Jones, 1999)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ITA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SGPHKG                 ESP    LUX     FRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 SAU                             CAN
 Log GDP per worker (Penn World Tables)




                                                                                                           LUX                                                                                                                                                              GBR




                                                                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             AUT            BEL NLD          USA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          MEX                         GERSWE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CHE
                                                                                                                                                                                                            VEN BGD                         ISR                             AUS
                                                                                                                                      USA                                                               GTM     TTO     PRT      BRA            MLTFIN IRL DNK
                               11




                                                                    SGP                             AUT           NOR
                                                                                                                   IRL  BEL NLD                                                                                                  EGY
                                                                                                   ISR           CHEFRA                                                                                                       GRC IRN ARG               NOR
                                                                                                                GER      ITA CAN
                                                                                                                       DNK           AUS
                                                                                                                                    GBR                                                                                               JPN




                                                                                                                                                                                    -.5
                                                                                             JPN ESP        FIN     SWE                                                                                                                                         NZL
                                                                                                                            NZL                                                                              COL   SLE
                                                                                                                                                                                                              PAKKOR           URY
                                                              TTO    PRT         GRC                                                                                                                           CRISLV                 MAR
                                                               KORCHL                        ARG                                                                                                                                TUR
                                                                    MYS                                                                                                                                                MYS                           ZAF
                                                                                  URY                    CZE                  HUN
                       10




                                                         PANCRI             MEX                           EST ZAF                                                                                               PER CHL
                                                          VEN                      IRN     SVK                                                                                                           ECU




                                                                                                                                                                            -1
                                                                                 RUS                      POL                                                                                                      THA
                                                           COL              BGR BRA                                                                                                                        PAN
                                                                                TUR
                                                       ECU PER
                                                      GTM      SLV
                                                                THA         ROM                                                                                                                                                                                  HUN
                                                                             PHL JAM   MAR                                                                                                                                             IND
               9




                                                             IDN                                                                                                                                              IDN                          SVK CZE




                                                                                                                                                                   -1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 POL
                                                             PAK CHN
                                                                                              IND                                                                                                                  GHA      PHL JAM

                                                                    VNM                                                                                                                                                     ROM
                                                                    BGD                                                                                                                                                   KEN
       8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    NGA




                                                                                                                                                          -2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          TZA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CHN
7




                                                                                                                                                  -2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ZMB

                                                  0            20                40              60                          80             100                                                     0           20               40              60               80               100
                                                                          Hofstede's index of individualism                                                                                                               Hofstede's index of individualism



                                                                                        Panel C                                                                                                                                      Panel D
Log TFP relative to USA (Jones and Romer, 2010)




                                                                                                                                                                                           10
                                                                                                                       IRL
                                           0




                                                                      HKG                                                             USA
                                                                                                                      ITA CAN


                                                                                                                                                  Log patents per million population (EIU)
                                                                                                                    DNK
                                                                       PRT                          AUT           FRABEL NLD
                                                                                                            FIN CHE
                                                                                                                                    GBR
                                                                                                                                     AUS
                                                              TTO                            JPN ESP              SWE                                                                                                                   JPN
                                                                                                   ISR                        NZL                                                                                                                           CHE
                                                               KORCHL        URY
                                                                            GRC                                                                                                                                 TWN                                    FIN GERSWE            USA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ISR               DNK NLD
                                                      GTM                     BRA ARG
                                                                     MYSMEX TUR
                                                                              EGY                                ZAF                                                             5                               KOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  SGP                           AUT            FRABEL CAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             NOR            GBR
                                 -1




                                                           COL SLV               IRN                                                                                                                                                                          IRL ITA        AUS
                                                             CRI                                                                                                                                                                                                     NZL
                                                          VEN
                                                                 THA                                                                                                                                                                          ESP
                                                         PANIDN CHN                                                                                                                                                                                                 HUN
                                                                                     IND                                                                                                                                                            CZE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     EST ZAF
                                                              PERBGD                                                                                                                                                       GRC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          MYS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           PRT
                                                            PAK                JAM
                                                       ECU                PHL                                                                                                                                 CRI            RUS ARG SVK
                                                                                                                                                                     0




                                                                                                                                                                                                            VEN         BGR BRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CHL MEX                           POL
                      -2




                                                                 GHA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  THA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  CHN   ROM TUR     IND
                                                                      KEN                                                                                                                                ECUCOL          PHL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 SLV
                                                                                                                                                                                                               PER
                                                                                                                                                                                                             IDN                   MAR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               IRN
                                                                                                                                                                                                             PAK VNM
                                                                                                                                                        -5
           -3




                                                                          ZMB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    BGD
                                                                          TZA
                                                                                                                                                                           -10
 -4




                                                  0            20                40              60                          80             100                                                     0           20               40              60               80               100
                                                                          Hofstede's index of individualism                                                                                                               Hofstede's index of individualism



                                                                                        Panel E
                         10




                                                                                             JPN
                                                                                                                 CHE
                                                                                                            FIN GERSWE               USA
                                                               TWN                                                    DNK NLD
                                                                                                    ISR
Innovation performance index (EIU)




                                                                KOR                                  AUT            FRABEL CAN
                                                                 SGP                                              NOR               GBR
                                                                                                                   IRL ITA           AUS
                                                                                                                          NZL
                            8




                                                                                                   ESP
                                                                                                                              HUN
                                                                                                         CZE
                                                                                                          EST
                                                                          MYS
                                                                           PRT   GRC                             ZAF
                                                                                   SVK
                                                              CRI          RUS ARG
                  6




                                                            VEN  CHL BGR
                                                                     MEX BRA                               POL
                                                               THA
                                                               CHN   ROM  TUR   IND
                                                                      PHL
                                                       ECUCOL SLV
                                                            PER
       4




                                                             IDN                             MAR
                                                                                       IRN
                                                             PAK VNM
                         2




                                                                    BGD


                                                  0            20                40              60                          80             100
                                                                          Hofstede's index of individualism


Notes: Individualism is Hofstede’s index of individualism. A larger value of the index corresponds to a greater level
of individualism. Log income (at purchasing power parity) per worker is from the Penn World Tables. Log total
factor productivity relative to the USA is from Hall and Jones (1999) and Jones and Romer (2010). Log patents per
million population and innovation performance index are taken from Economist Intelligence Unit (2007, 2009).




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   41
                                                                                  Figure 4. Innovation, income and productivity.

                                                                                 Panel A                                                                                                                       Panel B
                                         12




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ITA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ESP          FRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      SGP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CAN USA
  Log GDP per worker (Penn World Tables)




                                                                                                                                 Log GDP per worker (Penn World Tables)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      GBR




                                                                                                                                                                     0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 JOR                                  BEL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       AUT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          MEX                            NLD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           GER
                                                                                                                                                                                      BGD                                 VEN                     AUS ISRSWE CHE
                                                                                                               USA                                                                           DZA                          BRA   PRT
                                11




                                                                                                          NOR
                                                                                                          BEL
                                                                                                        IRL
                                                                                                          SGP
                                                                                                           AUT                                                                                                                                             FIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   IRLNORDNK
                                                                                                            NLDCHE
                                                                                                           FRA                                                                                               TUN
                                                                                                       ITA
                                                                                                       AUS  ISR
                                                                                                          GBR GER
                                                                                                             DNK
                                                                                                           CAN                                                                                IRN                           ARG GRC       CYP                  JPN




                                                                                                                                                            -.5
                                                                                                  ESP         SWE
                                                                                                              FIN JPN                                                                                                                           NZL
                                                                                   BHR            CYP NZL                                                                                                     COL                                      KOR
                                                                                            PRT    SVN                                                                                      PAK
                                                                                            GRC            KOR                                                                                       MAR SLV        TUR     CRI
                                                                                     CHLARGMYS                                                                                                          DOM
                                                                                              CZE
                                                                                                HUN                                                                                                                               ZAF
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  MYS
                        10




                                                                                         CRIZAF
                                                                                             EST
                                                                      IRN
                                                                                     MEX
                                                                               TUN POLVEN
                                                                                      LTU SVK
                                                                                        RUS  HRV                                                                                                      LKA PER
                                                                                                                                                                                                           ECU            CHL




                                                                                                                                                     -1
                                                                     DZA               LVA                                                                                                                          THA
                                                                               COL BRA
                                                                             DOM
                                                                              KAZ     BGR
                                                                                  JOR
                                                                                   TUR
                                                                             PER
                                                                              SLV  THACUB
                                                                               ECUROM                                                                                                                                                   HUN
                                                                          MAR
                                                                           LKA PHL UKR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    IND
                9




                                                                         IDNAZE                                                                                                                     IDN                   POL SVK   CZE




                                                                                                                                            -1.5
                                                                    PAK           CHN                                                                                                                         PHL
                                                                                  IND
                                                          AGO      VNM             SCG                                                                                                                              ROM
                                                            BGD
        8




                                                                                                                                                                                    AGO




                                                                                                                                     -2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CHN
 7




                                                                                                                                                           -2.5
                                                    -10         -5                 0                  5                     10                                                        2             4                6               8                         10
                                                                Log patents per million population (EIU)                                                                                          Innovation performance index (EIU)



                                                                                 Panel C                                                                                                                       Panel D
   Log TFP relative to USA (Hall and Jones, 1999)




                                                                                                                                   Log TFP relative to USA (Hall and Jones, 1999)
                                                                                                  ITA                                                                                                                                             ITA
                                                                                                   ESPFRA
                                                                                                     SGP                                                                                                                                  ESP          FRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      SGP
                                                                                                      CANUSA
                                                                                                     GBR                                                                                                                                               CAN USA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      GBR
                                             0




                                                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                 JOR                 BEL
                                                                                                      AUT                                                                                                        JOR                                  BEL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       AUT
                                                                                    MEX                NLD
                                                                                                         GER                                                                                                              MEX                            NLD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           GER
                                                                                                  AUS    SWE
                                                                                                           CHE                                                                                                                                    AUS ISRSWE CHE
                                                            BGD                     VEN                ISR                                                                            BGD                                 VEN
                                                                     DZA            BRA PRT                                                                                                  DZA                          BRA   PRT
                                                                                                   IRL
                                                                                                     NOR FIN
                                                                                                        DNK                                                                                                                                                FIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   IRLNORDNK
                                                                              TUN        GRC                                                                                                                 TUN
                                                                      IRN             ARG    CYP NZL          JPN                                                                             IRN                           ARG GRC       CYP                  JPN
                                    -.5




                                                                                                                                                                    -.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                NZL
                                                                    PAK        COL                    KOR                                                                                   PAK               COL                                      KOR
                                                                          MARSLV TUR CRI                                                                                                             MAR SLV        TUR     CRI
                                                                             DOM         ZAF                                                                                                            DOM                       ZAF
                                                                                         MYS                                                                                                                                      MYS
                                                                             PER
                                                                           LKA      CHL                                                                                                               LKA PER             CHL
                                                                               ECUTHA                                                                                                                      ECU
                            -1




                                                                                                                                                            -1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                    THA

                                                                                                HUN                                                                                                                                     HUN
                                                                                    IND                                                                                                                             IND
                                                                          IDN          POLSVK CZE                                                                                                   IDN                   POL SVK   CZE
                  -1.5




                                                                                                                                                  -1.5




                                                                                  PHL                                                                                                                         PHL

                                                                                    ROM                                                                                                                             ROM

                                                          AGO                                                                                                                       AGO
          -2




                                                                                                                                          -2




                                                                                    CHN                                                                                                                             CHN
 -2.5




                                                                                                                                 -2.5




                                                    -10         -5                 0                  5                     10                                                        2             4                6               8                         10
                                                                Log patents per million population (EIU)                                                                                          Innovation performance index (EIU)



                                                                                 Panel E                                                                                                                       Panel F
 Log TFP relative to USA (Jones and Romer, 2010)




                                                                                                                                 Log TFP relative to USA (Jones and Romer, 2010)




                                                                                                          IRL                                                                                                                                     IRL
                                            0




                                                                                                                                                                            0




                                                                                                                USA                                                                                                                                           USA
                                                                                                          ITA
                                                                                                            GBRDNK
                                                                                                               NLD                                                                                                                                ITAGBRNLD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         DNK
                                                                                            PRT           AUSCAN
                                                                                                            BEL
                                                                                                              AUT
                                                                                                             FRA                                                                                                                  PRT                 CAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  AUSBEL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      AUT FIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      FRA
                                                                                                   ESP           FIN
                                                                                                                   CHEJPN                                                                                                                 ESP                CHE
                                                                                                                 SWE                                                                                                                                       SWE JPN
                                                                                                         NZL ISR                                                                                                                                NZL     ISR
                                                                                             GRC            KOR                                                                                                           GRC                           KOR
                                                                                       CHL                                                                                                                          CHL
                                                                                         ARGMYS
                                                                                       BRA                                                                                                                            ARG MYS
                                                                                DOM TURMEX ZAF                                                                                                            DOM   TURBRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    MEX   ZAF
                              -1




                                                                                                                                                              -1




                                                                                 SLV
                                                                                  COL                                                                                                                      SLV
                                                                                                                                                                                                            COL
                                                                      IRN                 CRI                                                                                                 IRN                     CRI
                                                                                       VEN                                                                                                                          VEN
                                                                      DZA            THA                                                                                                     DZA                THA
                                                                          IDN                                                                                                                       IDN
                                                                                   CHN
                                                                                  JOR                                                                                                                            CHN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 JOR
                                                            BGD               PER IND                                                                                                 BGD                   PER IND
                                                                    PAK     LKA ECU                                                                                                         PAK       LKA
                                                                                 PHL                                                                                                                         ECU
                                                                                                                                                                                                               PHL
                -2




                                                                                                                                                -2
  -3




                                                                                                                                  -3




                                                    -10         -5                 0                  5                     10                                                        2             4                6               8                         10
                                                                Log patents per million population (EIU)                                                                                          Innovation performance index (EIU)


Notes: Log income (at purchasing power parity) per worker is from the Penn World Tables. Log total factor
productivity relative to the USA is from Hall and Jones (1999) and Jones and Romer (2010). Log patents per million
population and innovation performance index are taken from Economist Intelligence Unit (2007, 2009).




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              42
                                                                                              Figure 5. Genetic and cultural distance
                                                                              Panel A                                                                                                                Panel B
                 100




                                                                                                                                            5
                                        USAAUS
                                                    GBR
Hofstede's index of individualism




                                                                                                                                                                                             YEM            EGY
                             80




                                                 CAN
                                                  NZL       NLD                HUN




                                                                                                                           Schwartz's Embeddedness
                                                                                                                                               4.5
                                                    ITA       BEL
                                                             DNK                                                                                                                                            CMR
                                                                                                                                                                                                             SEN
                                                              IRLFRA  SWE                                                                                                                                    NGA
                                                               CHE            NOR                                                                                                                                      MYS
                                                                GER                                                                                                                    ETH     FJI
                                                                      ZAF                                                                                                                                     GHA     IDN
                                                                        FIN                                                                                                                                 UGA
                    60




                                                                       LUX
                                                                        POL
                                                                        EST                                                                                                    JOR                    IRN       NPL
                                                                           CZE
                                                                 AUT                                                                                                     GEO           ISR
                                                                ISR                                                                                                                                                      BOL
                                                                    ESP       SVK                                                                                                           ZAF
                                                                                                                                                                                           BIH NAMCYP
                                                                                                                                                                                                    ZWE
                                                                                                                                                                                                  PHL                         THA




                                                                                                                                       4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                SGP                 IND
                                                                                                              IND                                                                              UKR
                                                          ARG       MAR               JPN                                                                                                    MKD       MEX                   PER
                                                                                                                                                                                   COL         BGR
                                                                                                                                                                                              POL
                                                                                                                                                                                                    SVK LVA TWN
          40




                                                                                IRN                                                                                                           EST RUS
                                                   BRA LBY LBN               RUS IRQ
                                                                                  JAM
                                                                                    EGY
                                                                                     SAU
                                                                                      KWT ARE                                                                                                    ROM
                                                                                                                                                                                                  TUR
                                                                             TUR                                                                                                VEN SVN                       CHN
                                                   GRCURY                                                                                                         USA                                                    KOR
                                                                              PHL                                                                                                               CHL
                                                                           BGR
                                                                            ROM MEX                                                                                  AUS BRA          ISR
                                                                                                                                                                                          HRVSCG CZE HUN
                                                                ETH         PRT
                                                                            ZMB
                                                                             KEN    TZA




                                                                                                                           3.5
                                                                                               MYS                                                                             ARG CRI                    JPN
                                                                            CHL                                                                                            ITA                  PRT NOR
 20




                                                                                 SLESLV
                                                                                      NGA
                                                                                       GHA
                                                                                         CHN
                                                                                           SGP     VNM
                                                                                                     THABGD                                                               GRC
                                                                                                                                                                        CAN         IRL
                                                                                        TWN TTO KOR                                                                         GBR               FIN
                                                              CRI                                   PER                                                                                   ESP
                                                            COL                               IDN               PAK                                                      NZL         CHE
                                                                                                                                                                                    BEL
                                                          VEN                     PAN                                                                                             NLD
                                                                                                                                                                                   DNK FRA
                                                                                             ECU                                                                                      GER
                                                                                           GTM                                                                                         AUT SWE
                                                                                                                                                                                      GER
                 0




                                                                                                                                            3
                                    0                       .05                  .1                     .15           .2                                      0                      .05                .1                   .15               .2
                                                                       Blood distance to USA                                                                                                  Blood distance to USA



                                                                              Panel C                                                                                                                Panel D
                 4.5




                                                                                                                                            5.5
                                                                FRA
                                                     GBR     DNK
                                                               AUT
                                                               GER
                                                              CHE
                                                  NZL            SWE
                                                         NLDGERHRV
                                                                                                                           Schwartz's Intellectual autonomy
                                                 CAN
Schwartz's Affective autonomy




                                                           IRL                                                                                                                          FRA
                           4




                                                                  FIN                                                                                                                        SWE
                                                   GRC     BEL
                                                                                                                                                       5
                                        USAAUS                                                                                                                                         GERESP
                                                         ISR                                                                                                                ITA                FIN
                                                    ARG   SVN SCG NOR JPN                                                                                                               AUT
                                                                                                                                                                                        SVN
                                                                                                                                                                                   NLDCHE
                                                             ESP        HUN                THA
                                                       COL         PRT ZWE                                                                                                          DNK                     JPN
                  3.5




                                               BRA      CRI    ZAFUKR RUS LVA
                                                                    CZE                                       IND                                                                             SCG
                                             GEO                  BGR
                                                                    ROM                 KOR                                                                               NZLGBR       GER            NOR
                                                                                    IDN                                                                                              BEL          CZE
                                                                                                                                                                                                  ROM
                                                   JOR   ISR     EST  TUR                                                                                                CAN
                                                              BIHPOL                                                                                                                   ISR HRV PRT HUN
                                                                                                                                          4.5




                                                ITA VEN           NAM          CHN
                                                                              TWNSGP                                                                                                 IRL
                                                                  FJI CYP                                                                                                        VEN                TUR
                                                                                                                                                                           GRC       CRI                  MEX TWN
                                                                            CHL                                                                                      AUS        ARG              CHL                     BOL
                                                                          MKD                                                                                                                 POL
          3




                                                                              PHL
                                                                               SVK
                                                                                 IRN        NPL   MYS   PER                                                                BRA      COLISR      BGR RUS
                                                                                                                                                                                                      SVK                  PER
                                                                                                                                                                                              MKD
                                                                                                                                                                                               EST        LVA            KOR
                                                                                   MEX                                                                            USA                       BIH                 CHN MYS
                                                                                     UGA            BOL                                                                        JOR     ETH      UKR             NPL
                                                                                                                                                                                                NAM                          THA    IND
                                                                                                                              4




                                                                ETH                                                                                                     GEO
                                                                                                                                                                                                    PHLIRN
2.5




                                                                                       NGA                                                                                                                           IDN
                                                                                        GHA                                                                                                                EGY
                                                                                                                                                                                                             SEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                              GHA SGP
                                                                      YEM                                                                                                                    ZAFFJI CYP
                                                                                       SEN                                                                                                            ZWE UGA
                                                                                                                                                                                             YEM             NGA
                                                                                   CMR                                                                                                                      CMR
                                                                                   EGY
                                                                                                                                            3.5
                 2




                                    0                       .05                  .1                     .15           .2                                      0                      .05                .1                   .15               .2
                                                                       Blood distance to USA                                                                                                  Blood distance to USA


                                    Notes: Individualism is Hofstede’s index of individualism. A larger value of the index corresponds to a greater level
                                    of individualism. Intellectual autonomy encourages individuals to pursue their own ideas and intellectual directions
                                    independently. Affective autonomy encourages individuals to pursue affectively positive experience for themselves.
                                    In Embeddedness cultures, people are viewed as entities embedded in the collectivity. A larger value of Intellectual
                                    autonomy and Affective autonomy corresponds to a greater level of individualism. A smaller value of Embeddedness
                                    corresponds to a greater level of individualism. Schwartz’s Intellectual autonomy, Affective autonomy, and
                                    Embeddedness are taken from Licht et al. (2007). Blood distance to USA is the Euclidian distance of frequency of
                                    blood types A and B in a given country relative to the frequency of blood types A and B in the USA.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          43
                                                                                 APPENDIX A
Proof of proposition 1:
In the symmetric equilibrium we have
Yt   L1t Ft xt                                                                                                                                                (A.1)
 pt   L1t  Ft xt 1   1                                                                                                                                   (A.2)
wt  (1   )Yt / Lt                                                                                                                                                (A.3)
xt   2 L1t Ft xt   2Yt                                                                                                                                     (A.4)
 t  pt xt  xt   (1   )Yt                                                                                                                                     (A.5)
Gt   (1   )Yt                                                                                                                                                  (A.6)
Ct  Yt  Gt  [1   (1   )]Yt                                                                                                                                  (A.7)
1 / Ct  qt                                                                                                                                                         (A.8)
qt   (1  rt 1 ) qt 1                                                                                                                                           (A.9)
t  (1  Lt ) Ft 1  qt wt                                                                                                                                       (A.10)
t   Ft   t 1 (1  Lt 1 )  qt (1   )  L Ft xt
                  1                                                                  2     1
                                                                                            t
                                                                                                       1 
                                                                                                                                                                    (A.11)
 2 L1t  Ft xt 1  1                                                                                   (A.12)
Ft   (1  Lt ) Ft 1                                                                                       (A.13)
Using (A.3), (A.8) and (A.10), we have
             1          1 wt     1        1 (1   )Yt / Lt             (1   )            1         1
t                                                                                                      . (A.14)
       (1  Lt ) Ft 1 Ct  (1  Lt ) Ft 1 [1   (1   )]Yt [1   (1   )] Lt  (1  Lt ) Ft 1
Plus this expression for t into (A.11) to find
   (1 )             1        1
[1 (1 )] Lt   (1 Lt ) Ft 1     F1t                 (1 )               1          1
                                                              [1 (1 )] Lt 1  (1 Lt 1 ) Ft    (1  Lt 1 )  C1 (1   ) 2 L1t Ft 1 xt
                                                                                                                                     t

which simplifies to
   (1 )    1 Lt    (1 Lt )
[1 (1 )] Lt (1 Lt )  (1 Lt )        (1  Lt ) FF     [1(1(1) )] 1LL
                                                                  t
                                                                 t 1
                                                                                                           t 1
                                                                                                          t 1
                                                                                                                        (1 Lt 1 )
                                                                                                                  (1 Lt 1 )  (1 Lt 1 )        (1 ) 2
                                                                                                                                                    [1 (1 )]

Given   (1  Lt ) (1  Lt ) /  (1  Lt ) and (A.13), we can further simplify to
   (1 )    1 Lt 1
[1 (1 )] Lt                             (1 )    1 Lt 1 1
                                                [1 (1 )] Lt 1             (1 ) 2
                                                                                 [1 (1 )]

On a balanced growth path, we have Lt  L and thus
1 L
 L            
           [1(1(1) )]
                              2

                                       
                                       1 
                                                [1 (1 )]
                                                   (1 )                                                                                                           (A.15)
                  Note that (1  L) / L is monotonically decreasing in L. We can then derive:
( )     [1   (1   )]
       1 L
                                  ( 1LL )     2     
       L
                             0,                         0.
     1     (1   )                      1     1 




                                                                                                                                                                        44
                                              APPENDIX B
The downward bias on an instrumented variable when several variables need to be instrumented.

Suppose that the link between economic variable Y, culture C and institutions I is given by the following
setup
              C                                                                                     (B.1)
                                                                                                    (B.2)
                                                                                                    (B.3)
where equation (B.1) shows the effect of culture and institutions on economic outcomes (e.g., income per
worker), equation (B.2) captures the first-stage for culture with D being exogenous genetic distance,
equation (B.3) reflects the first stage regression for institutions with Q being exogenous (to economic
outcomes) factors affecting the spread of institutions. We assume that
      0,       0 which means that culture and institutions both positively affect economic outcomes,
cov     ,        0 which means that factors affecting the spread of culture and institutions (or similar
            factors) are positively correlated,
        ,        0,       ,     0,       ,   0 which captures the endogeneity of culture and institutions.
            The positive correlations mean that unobservables move economic outcomes, institutions and
            culture in the same direction.
        We have a good instrument for culture (i.e., D) but for variables that measure institutions (or
maybe other factors such as trust, rule of law, etc.) it may be hard to come by a good instrument which
has a good coverage of countries. For example, settle mortality applies only to colonies and excludes
European countries. Hence, the question is what would happen with an estimate of if we instrument
only culture.
        Using the facts that                                     , we can show that if           (rather
than           ) then
                                                 ,        ,
                                                                                                (B.4)


                        ,                 ,
where                       ,                 ,     is the R2 in equation (B.2),   is the R2 in equation (B.3).
        The numerator in the bias term in equation (B.4) is unambiguously positive. The sign of the
denominator depends on the strength of correlations between error terms as well as correlation between D
and Q and the relative strength of the fit in the first stage regressions (B.2) and (B.3). We can assess
empirically if this term is positive. Specifically, the R2 is the first stage fit is about 0.2 – 0.3 in both

regressions (B.2) and (B.3) so that the range for                     is 0.5 to 1.5 at most. The correlation

between error terms in the first stage is 0.3. The correlation between predicted values of C and I (which
would correspond to D and Q) is 0.1. Hence, the bias in unambiguously downward.
        To conclude, if we do not instrument institutions or any other variable which satisfies conditions
we spell out above, we would have a negative bias in the estimates. If the bias is downward and we still
find a positive and significant value of    , then the true value of has to be even larger.




                                                                                                          45
                                          APPENDIX C
Questions from Hofstede’s survey used to identify individualism (source Exhibit 5.11 in Hofstede
(2001)):

    1. Have challenging work to do – work from which you can get a personal sense of accomplishment
        [challenge].
    2. Live in an area desirable to you and your family [desirable area].
    3. Have an opportunity of high earnings [earnings].
    4. Work with people who cooperate well with one another [cooperation].
    5. Have training opportunities (to improve your skills and to learn new skills) [training].
    6. Have good fringe benefits [benefits].
    7. Get recognition you deserve when you do a good job [recognition].
    8. Have good physical working conditions (good ventilation and lighting, adequate work space, etc.)
        [physical conditions].
    9. Have considerable freedom to adapt your own approach to the job [freedom].
    10. Have the security that you will be able to work for your company as long as you want to
        [employment security].
    11. Have an opportunity for advancement to higher level jobs [advancement].
    12. Have a good working relationship with your manager [manager].
    13. Fully use your skills and abilities on the job [use of skills].
    14. Have a job which leaves you sufficient time for your personal or family life [personal time].
    15. Have the security that you will not be transferred to a less desirable job [position security].
    16. Work in a department which is run efficiently [efficient department].
    17. Have a job which allows you to make a real contribution to the success of your company
        [contribute to company].
    18. Work in a company which is regarded in your country as successful [successful company].
    19. Work in a company which stands in the forefront of modern technology [modern company].
    20. Work in a congenial and friendly atmosphere [friendly atmosphere].
    21. Keep up to date with the technical developments relating to your work [up-to-dateness].
    22. Have a job on which there is a great deal of day-to-day learning [day-to-day learning].
    23. Have little tension and stress on the job [stress-free].
    24. Be consulted by your direct supervisor in his/her decisions [consulted].
    25. Make a real contribution to the success of your company or organization [contribute].
    26. Serve your country [country].
    27. Have an element of variety and adventure in the job [variety].
    28. Work in a prestigious, successful company or organization [prestige].
    29. Have an opportunity for helping other people [helping].
    30. Work in a well-defined job situation where requirement are clear [clear job].




                                                                                                    46
                                          APPENDIX D: Tables
                                 Appendix Table 1. Descriptive statistics.

Variable                                        Obs       Mean      Std. Dev.    Min       Max
Explanatory variables
  Individualism                                  78      41.717      22.980      6        91
  Trust                                         114      51.453      28.210      7.900   148
  Education index                               147       0.764       0.197      0.118     0.993
  Ethnic fractionalization                      152       0.470       0.258      0.002     1
  Log geographic distance from the UK           164       8.426       0.812      5.382     9.826
  Protection against expropriation risk         138      33.728       5.777     16.5      44.96

Instrumental variables
   Pronoun drop                                  41        .560       0.502      0         1
   Euclidian genetic distance from the USA      156       0.086       0.038      0         0.185
   Mahalanobis genetic distance from the USA    156       1.504       0.660      0         3.163
   Euclidian genetic distance from the UK       156       0.102       0.048      0         0.212
   Mahalanobis genetic distance from the UK     156       1.752       0.809      0         3.586

Economic outcome variables
  Log income per worker                         153       9.246       1.187      6.785    11.648
  Log patents per million of population         81        0.705       3.363     -7.600     7.126
  Innovation performance index                  81        6.224       2.107      1.440    10
  Log TFP relative to the USA
     Hall and Jones (1999)                      117      -0.893       0.713     -2.538     0.188
     Jones and Romer (2010)                     79       -1.199       0.799     -3.440     0.146




                                                                                                   47
                               Appendix Table 2. Long-term growth, 1500-2001 and 1820-2001.
                                                   OLS                                                     IV
                         (1)           (2)           (3)         (4)              (5)          (6)              (7)         (8)

Controls                       No            Yes           No          No               No           Yes              No          No
Continent dummies              No            No            Yes         No               No           No               Yes         No

                                                                     Panel A: 1500-2001
Individualism            0.028***      0.016***      0.015**     0.015**         0.040***      0.042*           0.023*      0.036***
                         (0.005)       (0.005)       (0.005)     (0.006)         (0.011)       (0.023)          (0.013)     (0.013)
Protection against
expropriation risk                                               0.102***                                                   0.043
                                                                 (0.024)                                                    (0.041)
Observations             31            31            31          31               31           31               31          31
R-squared                0.479         0.683         0.684       0.678            0.375        0.446            0.661       0.486
1st stage F-stat                                                                  14.12        3.414            3.797       8.639
Partial R2                                                                        0.466        0.292            0.200       0.420

                                                                     Panel B: 1820-2001
Individualism            0.017***      0.009*        0.009**     0.006*          0.025***      0.028**          0.017*      0.020***
                         (0.004)       (0.005)       (0.004)     (0.003)         (0.007)       (0.012)          (0.010)     (0.007)
Protection against
expropriation risk                                               0.100***                                                   0.062**
                                                                 (0.015)                                                    (0.027)
Observations             46            46            46          46               46           46               46          46
R-squared                0.293         0.464         0.448       0.595            0.226        0.251            0.411       0.446
1st stage F-stat                                                                  28.16        8.695            10.11       19.41
Partial R2                                                                        0.456        0.283            0.269       0.437

        Notes: the dependent variable is log growth rate of income per capita from Maddison (2003). Individualism is
        Hofstede’s index of individualism. The instrument is the Euclidian distance of frequency of blood types A and B in
        a given country relative to the frequency of blood types A and B in the USA. Protection against expropriation risk,
        taken from the International Country Risk Guide, is averaged between 1985 and 2009. It is the same variable
        Acemoglu et al. (2001) used to approximate the strength of a country’s institutions. A larger value of the index
        corresponds to a greater strength of institutions. The instrumented variables are in bold. Robust standard errors in
        parentheses. ***, **, * denote significance at 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10 levels.




                                                                                                                            48
                              APPENDIX E: Figures

Map of the Mahalanobis distance of frequency of blood types A and B relative to the UK.




                                                                                          49
