NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE DEMAND FOR ETHANOL AS A GASOLINE SUBSTITUTE
Soren T. Anderson
Working Paper 16371
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16371

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2010

For helpful comments and suggestions, I thank Matias Busso, Brian Cadena, Lucas Davis, Alex Farrell,
Meredith Fowlie, Ben Keys, Brian Kovak, Erin Mansur, Michael Moore, Alex Resch, Stephen Salant,
Jim Sallee, Gary Solon, Roger von Haefen, Sarah West, and seminar participants at the University
of Michigan, University of California Energy Institute, NBER Summer Institute, Michigan State University,
Triangle Resource and Environmental Economics Seminar, MIT, and NBER. I thank the Minnesota
Department of Commerce and the American Lung Association of Minnesota for providing retail ethanol
price and sales volume data, the Minnesota Department of Public Safety for providing vehicle registration
data, and the U.S. Department of Transportation for providing vehicle sales data. I thank the University
of Michigan's Center for Local, State, and Urban Policy and Rackham Graduate School for research
funding. I thank Eric Ravnikar for valuable research assistance. Finally, I gratefully acknowledge financial
support from the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) under the Science to Achieve Results
(STAR) Graduate Fellowship program. EPA has not officially endorsed this publication and the views
expressed herein may not reflect the views of the EPA. All errors are my own. The views expressed
herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Soren T. Anderson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

The Demand for Ethanol as a Gasoline Substitute
Soren T. Anderson
NBER Working Paper No. 16371
September 2010
JEL No. Q41,Q42,Q48
ABSTRACT
This paper estimates household preferences for ethanol as a gasoline substitute. I develop a theoretical
model linking the shape of the ethanol demand curve to the distribution of price ratios at which individual
households switch fuels. I estimate the model using data from many retail fueling stations. Demand
is price-sensitive with a mean elasticity of 2.5–3.5. I find that preferences are heterogeneous with many
households willing to pay a premium for ethanol. This reduces the simulated cost of an ethanol content
standard, since some households choose ethanol without large subsidies; simulated costs are still high
relative to likely environmental benefits.

Soren T. Anderson
Department of Economics
Marshall - Adams Hall, Office 18C
Michigan State University
East Lansing, MI 48824-1038
and NBER
sta@msu.edu

1

Introduction

Policies to reduce oil consumption increasingly promote ethanol and other biofuels through subsidies, mandates, and funding for research. Proponents argue that substituting toward biofuels will
enhance energy security, reduce carbon dioxide emissions, improve air and water quality, and benefit farmers. Many recent policies mandate, either explicitly or implicitly, a minimum market share
for ethanol. A prime example is the U.S. Renewable Fuels Standard (RFS), which will increase
ethanol use to about 25% of gasoline consumption in the coming years. Despite this attention
from policymakers, relatively little is known about household preferences for biofuels or the effect
that ethanol mandates will have on gasoline markets. This information is critical for designing,
implementing, and evaluating policies to promote ethanol and other biofuels.
I address this important research need by estimating demand for ethanol as a gasoline substitute.
I find that demand for ethanol is sensitive to relative prices, with an average elasticity of about 2.5–
3.5. These are the first available estimates in the literature for the price elasticity of household
ethanol demand, which is a key parameter for studies that analyze a retail ethanol subsidy or
mandate. I find that elasticities are substantially smaller in magnitude (and less variable) than
they would be if fuel-switching behavior were concentrated around a single price. Rather, fuelswitching behavior extends over a wide range of prices where ethanol is discounted 0%–25%
below gasoline. These results imply that many households are willing to pay a per-mile premium
for ethanol and that preferences for ethanol among these households are actually quite diffuse.
These results have important implications for policy. Previous analyses assume that households
are identical and that preferences depend exclusively on ethanol’s fuel-economy performance relative to gasoline (Holland, Knittel and Hughes 2008). This assumption can yield misleading results if some households also value ethanol for its perceived environmental and social benefits.
In simulations, I find that accounting for households that prefer ethanol can substantially reduce
the economic efficiency cost of a hypothetical ethanol content standard (i.e., a minimum marketshare requirement), since households with strong preferences choose ethanol without large price
subsidies. Similar intuition likely applies for policies to promote other “green” substitutes, such
1

as renewable electricity, energy-efficient light bulbs and appliances, hybrid-electric vehicles, and
organic foods.
I begin my analysis by developing a model of household utility in which inputs of ethanol and
gasoline combine linearly to produce household transportation services. The key parameter in this
model is the relative price at which the household is indifferent between relying entirely on either
fuel. When this parameter varies continuously among households, aggregate demand for ethanol
is a smooth function of relative fuel prices. Thus, the model formalizes the precise, theoretical link
between the distribution of preferences for ethanol and the shape of the aggregate demand curve,
allowing me to recover micro preferences from aggregate data.
I estimate the model using a unique dataset that contains nearly 5000 monthly observations for
ethanol prices and sales volumes at over 200 individual retail fueling stations in Minnesota during
1997–2006. These data provide a rare and valuable opportunity to document household preferences for biofuels, whose market shares have generally been too small to be included in household
surveys or reported separately from gasoline in aggregate measures. I use these data to estimate
demand for ethanol as a function of relative fuel prices. Consistent with my theoretical model,
which implies that price elasticities might vary dramatically, I estimate demand as a flexible function of relative fuel prices using semi-parametric methods. Previous empirical studies of demand
for alternative fuels and gasoline varieties with close substitutes do not allow for this potentially
important flexibility.
I use the distribution of preferences implied by my econometric estimates to simulate the effects of a national ethanol content standard. I find that a 25% standard would decrease gasoline
consumption by about 20% and would cut carbon dioxide emissions from gasoline by about 10% at
an annual efficiency cost of roughly $20 billion. Efficiency losses derive primarily from ethanol’s
higher marginal production cost. Costs average about $180 per metric ton of carbon dioxide emissions avoided, which is substantially higher than most estimates for marginal external damages,
or about $0.80 per gallon of gasoline saved, which exceeds most estimates for the external cost
associated with petroleum dependence.

2

The empirical economic literature on demand for biofuels is miniscule.1 While an immense literature estimates demand for gasoline, the vast majority of studies focus on the response of overall
fuel demand to changes in fuel price levels. Because households have relatively few transportation
alternatives, fuel demand in the short run is price inelastic.2 This paper in contrast focuses on fuelswitching behavior and how demand for ethanol as a gasoline substitute responds to changes in
relative fuel prices. Because households that purchase ethanol in my sample are able to substitute
easily between ethanol and gasoline, demand for ethanol is price elastic.
Within the fuel demand literature, this paper is most similar to studies that estimate demand for
particular fuels with close substitutes, including full-service and self-serve gasoline (Phillips and
Schutte 1988) and regular and premium gasoline in both leaded and unleaded varieties (Greene
1989). These studies find own-price and cross-price elasticities that exceed 10 in absolute value.
Elasticities also tend to be large for other goods with close substitutes, including breakfast cereals
(Nevo 2001), brand-name and generic pharmaceutical products (Ellison, Cockburn, Griliches and
Hausman 2006), and individual components of money supply (Barnett, Fisher and Serletis 1992).
I improve on this vein of the gasoline demand literature by formalizing fuel-switching behavior in
terms of the distribution of household preferences for alternative fuels, using instrumental variables
(IV) techniques to identify demand behavior more credibly, and estimating flexible econometric
models to test whether elasticities vary with relative fuel prices.3
This paper also contributes to the literature showing how to interpret IV estimates in the presence of heterogeneous treatment effects. Following Angrist, Graddy and Imbens (2000), I go
1 Rask

(1998) estimates intermediate demand for ethanol as a 10% blending component in gasoline. He does
not estimate household demand. Alves and Bueno (2003) estimate aggregate demand for gasoline in Brazil, which
requires 25% ethanol blending in all gasoline, and where ethanol comprises roughly 40% of the non-diesel fuels
market (Perkins and Barros 2006). They do not estimate price responses for ethanol. Salvo and Huse (2010) find
that the correlation between ethanol and gasoline prices in Brazil increased in the mid 2000s after the introduction of
flexible-fuel vehicles, which allow consumers to arbitrage between the two fuels. They do not model heterogeneous
preferences, and they do not estimate demand.
2 Using a variety of methods, Davis and Kilian (2010) estimate price elasticities ranging from roughly −0.1 to
−1.1. For relatively recent surveys see Graham and Glaister (2002), Espey (1996; 1998), and Dahl and Sterner
(1991). Recent studies indicate that the price response may have declined even further in recent decades (Hughes,
Knittel and Sperling 2008; Kilian 2008)
3 Hausman and Newey (1995) and Yatchew and No (2001) estimate gasoline demand using a semi-parametric
approach and other flexible methods. They do not model fuel switching.

3

beyond the standard testing for whether my instruments predict prices (i.e., F-tests for instrument
relevance) and develop a heuristic approach to analyze where in the demand function my instruments actually induce price variation. This analysis allows me to determine which section(s) of
the demand function I estimate using instrumental variables. Such an approach may prove useful
in future applications.
The format of the paper is as follows. Section 2 discusses the role of ethanol in the fuels market,
ethanol’s environmental effects, and ethanol production and distribution. Section 3 presents a
model of household demand for ethanol as a gasoline substitute, aggregates households to give an
expression for market demand, and relates the distribution of household preferences to aggregate
price responses. Section 4 describes the data I use to estimate the model, providing descriptive
statistics that summarize supply and demand behavior. Section 5 outlines the econometric model,
discusses identification, and presents my results. Section 6 uses the distribution of preferences
implied by these estimates to simulate the effects of a national ethanol content standard. Section 7
concludes.

2
2.1

Background
Ethanol’s role in the fuels market

Ethanol is an alcohol fuel that in the United States derives primarily from corn. Gasoline blenders
mix ethanol with gasoline to comply with federal air quality regulations, to produce mid-grade and
premium fuels, and to satisfy the federal RFS. Virtually all gasoline vehicles can burn fuel blends
that contain 10% ethanol or less. While blenders sometimes use ethanol as a gasoline substitute
when ethanol prices are low, ethanol’s primary role is as a gasoline complement. Blenders added
about 5 billion gallons of ethanol to gasoline in 2006, or about 3.5% of gasoline consumption by
volume; blending has since doubled to 10 billion gallons or 7.3% of consumption in 2009. Ethanol
is heavily subsidized, with direct federal and state payments to ethanol producers, a federal tax
subsidy of $0.45 per gallon for blenders, and a tariff of $0.54 per gallon that applies to all but a
4

nominal quantity of imports.
The market for ethanol as a direct gasoline substitute is small but growing rapidly. Stimulated
by rising gasoline prices and supported by federal, state, and local subsidies for alternative-fuel
vehicles and infrastructure, the number of retail stations offering E85—an alternative fuel blend
of 85% ethanol and 15% gasoline—more than doubled during 2006–2009 to over 1900 stations
nationwide. Here and throughout, I refer to E85 simply as “ethanol” or, when necessary to avoid
confusion, as “retail ethanol.”4 On the consumer side of this market, the federal Alternative Motor
Fuels Act of 1988 created strong incentives under the Corporate Average Fuel Economy (CAFE)
standards program for automakers with binding CAFE constraints to produce flexible-fuel vehicles
capable of burning both ethanol and gasoline. Automakers produced about 5 million of these
vehicles between 2000 and 2006, and production continues apace.
The federal RFS, which Congress first established in 2005 and then expanded in late 2007, sets
a minimum quantity of renewable fuel each year from 2008–2022, increasing gradually from 9
to 36 billion gallons. Industry is currently using ethanol to comply with the standard, and this is
likely to continue. The quantity standard for 2022 is about 25% of current gasoline consumption.
Although the standard mandates a minimum quantity of renewable fuel, the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) implements the standard as a percentage of projected fuel consumption.
Below I simulate the effects of a 25% ethanol content requirement for gasoline, which is modeled
roughly on the RFS for 2022.
Only flexible-fuel vehicles are certified to run on fuel blends containing more than 10% denatured ethanol. These vehicles have larger fuel injectors as well as fuel-system components that
are more resistant to corrosion. Earlier models also had special fuel sensors. These components,
which increase production costs no more than $100–$200, allow the vehicles to burn retail ethanol,
regular gasoline, or any combination of the two. Ethanol has lower energy content than gasoline,
implying fewer miles per gallon. The ratio of gasoline to retail ethanol mileage is about 1.35,
4 I distinguish retail ethanol from “denatured ethanol,” which is blended with gasoline to produce retail fuels.
Denatured ethanol is nearly pure alcohol but with a small quantity of gasoline or other chemical added, making it unfit
for human consumption.

5

which means that retail ethanol’s mileage is about 1 − 1/1.35 ≈ 25% lower.5 Thus, households
that care only about minimizing fuel costs will demand a 25% price discount for retail ethanol.

2.2

Ethanol’s environmental and social effects

It has been estimated that replacing one gallon of gasoline with pure corn-based ethanol reduces
net petroleum consumption by 0.95 gallons, after accounting for upstream petroleum inputs and
ethanol’s lower mileage (Farrell, Plevin, Turner, Jones, O’Hare and Kammen 2006). Ethanol’s
climate benefits are less impressive. Corn collects energy from the sun and absorbs carbon dioxide
from the atmosphere as it grows, but ethanol production from corn is energy-intensive. Corn farming uses a lot of fertilizer, and the ethanol refining process uses a lot of heat. These inputs derive
largely from natural gas given current production techniques. As a result, ethanol only reduces net
carbon dioxide emissions by 15% after accounting for upstream energy inputs and ethanol’s lower
mileage (Farrell et al. 2006). In fact, ethanol may in some cases increase emissions, after further accounting for direct and indirect land-use changes associated with growing feedstocks (Searchinger,
Heimlich, Houghton, Dong, Elobeid, Fabiosa, Tokgoz, Hayes and Yu 2008; Fargione, Hill, Tilman,
Polasky and Hawthorne 2008).
The local air and water quality benefits of ethanol are mixed. Ethanol is an oxygenate that
reduces carbon monoxide emissions in older engines, improving air quality, but modern engines
and pollution-control equipment largely obviate these benefits. Ethanol reduces tailpipe emissions
of benzene (a known human carcinogen) but increases emissions of acetaldehyde (a possible carcinogen) and nitrogen oxide (a precursor to ozone and smog). Ethanol displaces environmentally
harmful petroleum refining, but corn production increases fertilizer and pesticide use on environmentally sensitive land. Finally, some policymakers worry about ethanol’s role in driving up food
prices.
5 Using

Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) estimates for combined city and highway driving, I calculate
the ratio of regular gasoline to retail ethanol mileage for each flexible-fuel vehicle model offered between 2000 and
2006 (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 2000-2006). EPA did not test vehicles using both fuels until 2000, but
relatively few flexible-fuel vehicle models were offered prior to 2000. I calculate the sales-weighted mean ratio using
data for nationwide sales of individual flexible-fuel vehicle models from the U.S. Department of Transportation.

6

Household preferences for ethanol as a gasoline substitute vary considerably. First, ethanol’s
relative mileage varies across vehicles and driving scenarios, even in highly controlled government
tests. On the road, some households drive primarily in stop-and-go city traffic, while others log a
large fraction of highway miles. These and other differences may affect relative mileage. Second,
many households internalize ethanol’s perceived benefits. More than half of the drivers in a recent
nationwide poll expressed interest in owning a flexible-fuel vehicle (Harris Interactive 2006). Of
these, nearly 90% were motivated by reducing oil dependence, while nearly two-thirds wanted
to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. Over 90% of the drivers in another poll would prefer to
own a flexible-fuel vehicle. When asked about ethanol’s benefits, they cited “renewable fuel,”
“clean fuel,” “made in America,” and “more economical” with roughly equal frequency (Phoenix
Automotive 2006).

2.3

Ethanol production and distribution

There were about 100 ethanol refineries nationwide in 2006, and the number has since doubled
to over 200 in 2009. Most refineries are located in the corn belt, although a handful are located
outside of the Midwest.
Nearly all denatured ethanol is blended with gasoline in ratios less than 10%. Most blending
occurs at fuel blending and distribution terminals, which are located strategically near population
centers throughout the country. Terminal operators blend gasoline, ethanol, and other components
into finished products and then distribute fuel by tanker truck to individual retail stations. A relatively small share of ethanol blending occurs at ethanol refineries that have infrastructure for fuel
blending.
Fuel terminals receive most gasoline by pipeline from oil refineries. Existing pipelines are not
suitable for transporting ethanol, however, since ethanol can corrode gasoline pipelines, and since
water accumulating in the pipelines can mix with and contaminate ethanol. Moreover, existing
pipelines connect large oil refineries with cities, whereas ethanol refineries are usually located in
rural areas. In the corn belt, tanker trucks deliver ethanol from ethanol refineries to fuel terminals.
7

Ethanol traveling from the Midwest to the coasts usually goes by rail.
Retail ethanol is readily available wherever large quantities of denatured ethanol are blended
with gasoline. In Minnesota, for instance, retail ethanol is available at virtually every fuel terminal
any time of year, because Minnesota has required 10% ethanol blending in all gasoline year-round
since October 1997. Terminal operators maintain stocks of fuel and sometimes lease storage facilities to retail chains who manage their own fuel stocks. Retail ethanol is also readily available
at a handful of ethanol refineries that have infrastructure for fuel blending. Retail ethanol stations
in states such as Minnesota have no difficulty resupplying on short notice, given ethanol’s wide
availability for gasoline blending.

3

Theoretical model

To motivate my empirical analysis, I develop a model of demand for ethanol as a gasoline substitute. The model formalizes the precise link between the distribution of household preferences and
the shape of the aggregate demand function.

3.1

The household’s problem

For the moment I assume that each household owns a single flexible-fuel vehicle. The household’s
utility is quasilinear in transportation services v(·) and other goods:

v(e + rg) + x,

(1)

where v(·) is strictly increasing and strictly concave, e is consumption of ethanol, g is consumption
of regular gasoline, x is consumption of all other goods, and r is the rate at which the household
converts gallons of regular gasoline into ethanol-equivalent gallons. Ethanol and gasoline are perfect substitutes. That is, utility is defined over a linear combination of ethanol and gasoline, which
I call ethanol-equivalent fuel. When a household cares only about miles traveled the conversion

8

rate r exactly equals the ratio of the household’s mileage when burning gasoline to its mileage
when burning ethanol. This ratio will vary across households due to minor differences in relative
mileage. More importantly, some households will value ethanol for its perceived environmental
or social benefits.6 By embodying mileage differences and these other factors, r fully summarizes
household preferences for ethanol as a gasoline substitute.
The household’s budget constraint is given by

y − pe e − pg g − x = 0,

(2)

where pe and pg are the prices of ethanol and gasoline, y is income, and I have normalized the
price of the composite good to $1.
Which fuel will the household choose?7 Because ethanol and gasoline combine linearly in the
utility function, the household will be at a corner solution and will purchase ethanol exclusively
when pe < pg /r and gasoline exclusively when pg /r < pe . That is, the household will choose the
fuel with the lower ethanol-equivalent price. For a household that cares only about mileage, this
amounts to choosing the fuel that is least costly per mile. Equivalently, the household will choose
ethanol when the conversion rate r is less than the price ratio pg /pe . Because the conversion rate
r equals the relative price where fuel switching occurs, I also refer to it as the fuel-switching price
ratio.
While relative prices determine the type of fuel that a household chooses, quantity demanded
depends on absolute price levels, with the household equating the marginal utility of ethanolequivalent fuel consumption to the ethanol-equivalent price of whichever fuel it chooses. For
households that choose ethanol, the optimal quantity of ethanol demanded is therefore given by
e∗ = q(pe ),

(3)

6 In addition, the relative convenience of filling up with ethanol might vary somewhat across households, given the
fuel’s limited availability; I argue below that this source of variation is not particularly important in my data.
7 I assume that the household always buys fuel but never spends its full income on fuel. Assuming that v0 (0) > 1
ensures that the household buys fuel. Assuming that y is sufficiently large, so that v0 (y/pe ) < 1 and v0 (ry/pg ) < 1,
guarantees that the household does not spend its full income on fuel.

9

where I have defined ethanol-equivalent fuel demand as q(p) ≡ v0 −1 (p) given ethanol-equivalent
fuel price p. The quantity of gasoline demanded for households that choose gasoline is given by
g∗ =

q(pg /r)
,
r

(4)

where the presence of r converts ethanol-equivalent gallons into nominal gallons of gasoline. I
assume that households that do not own flexible-fuel vehicles (or are otherwise unable to buy
ethanol) face the same maximization problem, which implies that their gasoline demand is also
given by equation (4).

3.2

Aggregate demand

Because ethanol and gasoline are perfect substitutes, households that own flexible-fuel vehicles
sort into ethanol buyers and gasoline buyers according to their fuel-switching price ratios. While
each individual household rests at a corner solution, aggregate demand will be a smooth function
of relative prices when fuel-switching price ratios are distributed continuously.
To move formally from individual to aggregate demand, I first assume that there are N (technically, an infinite number of measure N) households in the market. Each household owns a single
vehicle, and a fraction φ of these are flexible-fuel vehicles. I next assume that fuel-switching
price ratios are distributed according to the differentiable cdf H(r), defined on [0, ∞). Recall from
above that households will choose ethanol if their fuel-switching price ratios are less than the relative price pg /pe . So the fraction of households that choose ethanol is simply the cdf evaluated
at this relative price: H(pg /pe ). I assume for convenience that v(·) and flexible-fuel ownership
are distributed independently of r (and of each other), so that fuel-switching price ratios are the
only relevant source of heterogeneity in the model. I discuss the validity of this independence
assumption below.

10

Given these assumptions, aggregate demand for ethanol as a function of fuel prices is
Z pg /pe

Qe (pe , pg ) = Nφ

q̄(pe )dH(r)
 
pg
q̄(pe ).
= NφH
pe
−∞

(5)

where q̄(·) ≡ E[q(·)] is expected ethanol-equivalent fuel demand for an individual household
(which by independence does not depend on r). Aggregate demand is simply the total number
of households, multiplied by the fraction that own flexible-fuel vehicles, multiplied by the fraction
of these that choose ethanol (which depends on relative prices), multiplied by average ethanol consumption among households that choose ethanol (which depends on the absolute price of ethanol).
The appendix provides similar expressions for aggregate gasoline demand and aggregate welfare,
which are important for the policy simulation below.
Taking logs on both sides yields logged aggregate ethanol demand:

ln Qe (pe , pg ) = ln Nφ + ln H

pg
pe


+ ln q̄(pe ),

(6)

This equation is critical because it relates fuel prices and ethanol quantities to the distribution of
household preferences for ethanol as a gasoline substitute. As is clear from the equation, tracing
out the precise shape of the demand curve as a function of relative prices will reveal the underlying
cdf of fuel-switching price ratios.
Differentiating (6) with respect to pg and then multiplying by pg yields the gasoline-price
elasticity of aggregate ethanol demand:
h

 

H

 

pg
pe

ξg =

pg
pe

pg
,
pe

(7)

where h(r) ≡ H 0 (r). This cross-price elasticity quantifies the rate at which consumers switch from
regular gasoline to ethanol given a percent increase in the price of gasoline. A 1% increase in

11

gasoline prices leads to a ξg % increase in the quantity of ethanol demanded. Observe that this
elasticity is also the elasticity of ethanol’s market share (i.e., the fraction of households that choose
ethanol) with respect to the price ratio. Thus, I also refer to this elasticity as the fuel-switching
elasticity.
Differentiating (6) with respect to pe and then multiplying by pe yields the own-price elasticity:
 
p

g
pe q̄0 (pe ) h pe pg
− p 
ξe =
q̄(pe )
H pge pe
 
p
h pge pg
= ξf −  p  ,
H g pe

(8)

pe

where I have defined ξ f ≡ pq̄0 (p)/q̄(p). The first term in (8), which I refer to as the price elasticity
of individual ethanol-equivalent fuel demand, quantifies the rate at which individual households
respond to the price increase (on average) by curtailing demand. The second term in (8), which
is identical to the gasoline-price elasticity in (7) multiplied by negative one, quantifies the rate at
which households switch from ethanol to gasoline as the price of ethanol increases. Again, this is
the fuel-switching elasticity (i.e., the elasticity of ethanol’s market share with respect to the price
ratio), this time multiplied by negative one. Together these terms imply that a 1% increase in
ethanol prices leads to a −ξe % decrease in the quantity of ethanol demanded.
As an aside, observe that the fuel-switching elasticity, given by
h
H

 
pg
pe

 ,
pg
pe

(9)

is the hazard rate for exiting the ethanol market as the price ratio decreases. That is, expression (9)
gives the instantaneous rate at which households switch to gasoline given a marginal decrease in
the price ratio, conditional on choosing ethanol.
Given any distribution of fuel-switching price ratios, equation (7) specifies precisely how elasticities will vary with relative prices. It is clear from the equation that elasticities could vary
12

30

30

5

10

15

20

25

Fuel−switching elasticity
Density

0

0

5

10

15

20

25

Fuel−switching elasticity
Density

1.0

1.1

1.2

1.3

1.4

1.5

1.0

Ratio of gasoline to ethanol price

1.1

1.2

1.3

1.4

1.5

Ratio of gasoline to ethanol price

(a) r ∼ N(1.25, 0.05)

(b) r ∼ N(1.25, 0.30)

Figure 1: Hypothetical preference distributions and elasticity functions
Note: Figure illustrates the relationship between the density function for fuel-switching price ratios and
the fuel-switching elasticity, as given by equation (7), for two hypothetical density functions.

dramatically, depending on the shape of the distribution. For this reason, imposing a constant
elasticity in empirical applications may yield misleading results. Given a sufficiently flexible estimate of the elasticity function, however, the equation shows how to recover the distribution of
fuel-switching price ratios.
Figure 1 illustrates this relationship. When households are nearly identical, as in figure 1(a),
fuel-switching behavior is concentrated around a single price ratio, which leads to a large and
highly variable price response in that neighborhood. When households are literally identical, as
previous studies assume, aggregate demand mirrors individual demand: the entire market is at a
corner solution, with all households choosing the fuel with the lowest ethanol-equivalent price. In
terms of figure 1(a), this assumption implies a mass point of individuals at the same fuel-switching
price ratio, an infinite price response at that single point, and a zero elasticity everywhere else. This
extreme assumption has important implications for policy analysis. If ethanol has relatively high
costs, so that no ethanol is consumed in the unregulated equilibrium, large distortions in market
prices may be required to induce households to choose ethanol.
When households are heterogeneous, however, as in figure 1(b), price elasticities are much

13

smaller in magnitude and less variable. Fuel switching extends over a wide range of relative prices,
and demand is not especially sensitive to prices at any particular point. In this case, households
with particularly strong preferences for ethanol can be induced to purchase the fuel with less severe
distortion of market prices.
In theory, the model also provides a method for disentangling extensive-margin price responses
associated with fuel-switching behavior from intensive-margin responses associated with overall
fuel demand. Adding equations (7) and (8) demonstrates that the price elasticity of individual
ethanol-equivalent fuel demand is simply the sum of the two aggregate elasticities:

ξ f = ξe + ξg .

(10)

For a precise quantitative interpretation of this elasticity, consider a simultaneous 1% increase in
both fuel prices. No fuel switching occurs, because relative prices do not change, but households
that choose ethanol reduce their demand by ξ f %. Put differently, a 1% increase in the price of
ethanol generates both fuel-switching behavior and conservation, while a 1% increase in the price
of gasoline only generates the former; thus, the difference in magnitude between these two price
responses equals the conservation effect.

4

Data and summary statistics

I estimate the model of logged aggregate ethanol demand in equation (6) above using monthly data
for ethanol prices and sales volumes at a large number of retail fueling stations, gasoline prices
in those same areas, and several ancillary variables. Table 1 presents summary statistics for my
estimation sample.

14

Table 1: Summary statistics
Variable
sales volume (gallons)
retail ethanol price
retail gasoline price
retail gasoline / ethanol price
wholesale ethanol price
wholesale gasoline price
wholesale gasoline / ethanol price
ethanol pump age (months)
number flexible-fuel vehicles in county
number ethanol pumps in county
number gas stations in county
distance to Benson refinery (miles)

Mean Std. Dev.
3352.71 3977.99
1.74
0.35
1.98
0.43
1.14
0.10
1.27
0.56
1.39
0.45
1.17
0.33
29.08
24.27
3252.61 4804.87
3.72
2.75
96.69
110.68
112.47
43.89

Min.
6.90
0.74
1.10
0.74
0.45
0.44
0.69
1.00
0.00
1.00
4.00
4.63

Max.
37770.50
2.96
3.00
1.69
3.03
2.33
2.45
110.00
24453.00
13.00
357.00
242.18

Note: Table is based on estimation sample of 4,825 monthly reports from 232 fueling stations in Minnesota
between October 1997 and November 2006. Prices are in 2006 dollars. See text for details.

4.1

Data sources

These data come from several sources. My data for retail ethanol prices and sales volumes
come from a Minnesota Department of Commerce and American Lung Association of Minnesota
monthly survey of retail ethanol stations in Minnesota. Stations that received funding to help defray ethanol infrastructure costs are required to respond, while other stations may participate on a
voluntary basis. This requirement is not strongly enforced, however, and stations do not always
report as required. The earliest stations began reporting in October 1997, and the data include
records through November 2006.8
Stations report volume-weighted prices derived from monthly sales volumes and revenues.
Retail prices include federal, state, and local fuel taxes. State and federal fuel taxes did not change
during my sample period. The data also record open and close dates for all retail ethanol pumps
in Minnesota and the county in which each pump is located. I use this information to calculate
8 The data include records for a handful of state-operated stations; I ignore these stations in my analysis, because
they are only open to government fleets. While government fleets are able to purchase ethanol from private stations,
private flexible-fuel vehicles outnumber government flexible-fuel vehicles 100 to 1 in the Midwest Corts (2010).
Minnesota’s governor issued an executive order requiring state-owned flexible-fuel vehicles to fill up using ethanol
“whenever practical,” but not until spring of 2006, near the end of my sample period.

15

300
250
200
150

Frequency

100
50
0

8000
4000
2000
1000
500
250
125

Ethanol sales volume (gallons/station, log scale)

1.40
1.30
1.20
1.10
1.00
0.90

Retail gasoline price / ethanol price

Retail price ratio
Ethanol sales volume

Oct97 Oct98 Oct99 Oct00 Oct01 Oct02 Oct03 Oct04 Oct05 Oct06

−25

0

Month

25

50

Percent ethanol discount

(a) Relative prices and sales volumes

(b) Distribution of relative prices

Figure 2: Relative retail prices and ethanol sales volumes
Note: Ethanol sales volume in figure (a) is the monthly average volume of ethanol sales among reporting
ethanol stations in Minnesota; the ratio of gasoline to ethanol prices is the volume-weighted sample-mean
price of gasoline divided by the volume-weighted sample-mean price of ethanol. Figure (b) is the empirical
distribution of relative prices (i.e., percent price discounts for ethanol) in the estimation sample.

the total number of stations operating retail ethanol pumps in each county in each month and the
length of time that each pump has been operating, both of which I include as control variables. I
match these retail ethanol data to county-average retail prices for regular gasoline from Oil Price
Information Service (OPIS). I convert all prices to real 2006 prices using the monthly consumer
price index from the U.S. Department of Labor.
My data report geographic coordinates for many (but not all) stations. Using these coordinates,
I attempted to assign brand affiliations (if any) to the stations in my sample.9 I am unable to
identify 14% of stations (accounting for only 5% of my observations), due to missing or inaccurate
coordinates, and some of the brand affiliations that I assign to stations are possibly incorrect, due
to inaccurate coordinates and changing affiliations over time. While these problems (and station
fixed effects) rule out using brand dummies directly in my estimating equation, I do use the brand
affiliations to construct my price instruments, as I discuss below.
9 After

locating the coordinates in Google Maps, I searched for the nearest gasoline station and recorded its name. I
attempted to corroborate this information using a MN Department of Commerce list of stations operating in Minnesota
as of late 2006, a similar list from the National Ethanol Vehicle Coalition, and the U.S. Department of Energy’s
database of alternative fueling stations (which includes the date the station was added to the database, which is highly
correlated with open date).

16

Figure 2(a) plots relative retail prices over time. Relative prices vary considerably during the
sample period, with the relative price of gasoline trending upward. Average ethanol sales also
increase steadily over time. The relationship is not necessarily causal, however, as the increase in
sales volume is also consistent with a growing stock of flexible-fuel vehicles. I am careful in my
estimation to control explicitly for flexible-fuel vehicles and trends in fuel demand. Short-run increases in the relative price of gasoline correlate with contemporaneous increases in ethanol sales
volumes, which is perhaps more suggestive of a price response. Again, however, this relationship is not necessarily causal, as unmodeled shifts in aggregate demand might affect fuel prices.
Below, I discuss how I identify demand parameters using cross-sectional variation in pricing behavior. Figure 2(b) shows that retailers typically discount ethanol 0%-25% below gasoline; thus,
my estimates will reflect price responses within this range of the demand function.
As a measure of underlying fuel costs, I obtain wholesale ethanol price data from a trade
publication called Ethanol and Biodiesel News (previously known as Renewable Fuels News and
Oxy-Fuel News before that). These data measure weekly spot prices at fuel terminals for denatured
ethanol in Minneapolis and Fargo. I assign to each county (and thereby each station) the wholesale
price from whichever city is nearest. About four-fifths of stations are located in counties nearest to
Minneapolis. I calculate the monthly average of these weekly prices and then subtract the federal
ethanol blending subsidy, which fell from $0.54 per gallon to $0.51 per gallon during my study
period. I obtain wholesale gasoline price data come from the U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA). These data measure the volume-weighted monthly average spot price in Minnesota.
Although wholesale spot price data are available for additional Minnesota cities at a substantial
cost from proprietary sources, in practice these prices track each other closely (Minnesota Department of Agriculture 2003). I use these wholesale price variables to construct my price instruments.
In addition to these price variables, I obtain data on flexible-fuel vehicle registrations from the
Minnesota Department of Public Safety Division of Driver and Vehicle Services. These data record
vehicle identification numbers (VINs), original sales dates, and owner zip codes for all vehicles
registered in Minnesota as of the summer of 2007. I identify 154,000 flexible-fuel vehicles in the

17

250
200
150
100
50

Retail ethanol stations

150
125
100
75
50

0

25
0

Flexible−fuel vehicles (thousands)

Flexible−fuel vehicles
Retail ethanol stations

Oct97 Oct98 Oct99 Oct00 Oct01 Oct02 Oct03 Oct04 Oct05 Oct06

Month

(a) Vehicles and stations over time

(b) Spatial distribution of stations

Figure 3: Flexible-fuel vehicles and retail ethanol stations
Note: Figure (a) shows the growth in the number of retail ethanol stations and the stock of flexible-fuel
vehicles in Minnesota. Figure (b) shows the locations of Minnesota’s 264 retail ethanol fueling stations as
of August 2006. Minnesota measures 400 miles from north to south and about 250 miles along its southern
border. The shaded region is the seven-county metropolitan area of Minneapolis and St. Paul.

database by cross-referencing VINs with lists of flexible-fuel vehicle models and VIN identifiers
from the National Ethanol Vehicle Coalition and from a private firm that collects data on the auto
industry. These vehicles represent about 3.3% of the 4.6 million light-duty vehicles registered in
Minnesota in 2007. I then use original sales dates to reconstruct a monthly time series for the stock
of flexible-fuel vehicles in each county, which I include as a control variable.10
Figure 3(a) charts the growth in the number of retail ethanol stations and flexible-fuel vehicles.
The flexible-fuel stock grows at a roughly constant rate during the sample period, which is consistent with CAFE standards that generated strong incentives for some manufacturers to produce a
limited number of flexible-fuel vehicles each year. Growth in the number of retail ethanol stations
accelerated in 2000, when the American Lung Association negotiated an agreement with a particular retail chain to subsidize ethanol pumps at a large number of its stations. Growth accelerated
again in 2004-2005. High gasoline prices and low wholesale ethanol costs may have contributed
10 I

am unable to determine whether some vehicles are flexible-fuel vehicles due to missing or invalid VINs, and
a relatively small number of flexible-fuel vehicles are excluded due to missing sales dates or zip codes outside Minnesota. I am also unable to account for vehicle attrition or historical movements of vehicles in and out of Minnesota
and across county lines prior to 2007. Owner addresses also might differ from counties where flexible-fuel vehicles
are actually driven. For these various reasons I measure flexible-fuel stocks with some error.

18

to this accelerated growth.
As I note above, I calculate the total number of retail ethanol stations in each county in each
month to quantify variation in competition, and I include this variable as a control. Figure 3(b)
maps the locations for all 264 retail ethanol stations in Minnesota as of August 2006 based on a
separate list of station addresses from the Minnesota Department of Commerce. I also calculate
the total number of retail gasoline stations operating in each Minnesota county in 2006 based on
station address information from the Minnesota Department of Commerce Weights and Measures
Division. Table 1, which assumes the same number of gas stations operating in each county for
1997-2006, shows that there are more than 20 gasoline stations for every ethanol station on average
in my sample.11 While competition in fuel markets is typically fierce, most ethanol retailers operate
as local monopolists in the narrower retail ethanol market. I use both measures of competition to
construct my price instruments.
My analysis covers the time period from October 1997 through November 2006. During this
time the number of private retail ethanol stations in Minnesota grew from less than 10 to nearly
250. Based on reported open and close dates, there were about 7500 potential monthly observations
at these stations. Approximately 64% of these potential observations are covered by the Minnesota
survey. The remaining 36% are missing, reflecting stations that almost never participate in the
survey, as well as stations that fail to report in just some months. This results in an estimation
sample of 4825 observations at 232 stations, implying an average panel size of about 21 months.
Some stations operate nearly the entire study period, while others operate for just a few months, as
is clear from figure 3(a).
My data are subject to several potential layers of selection. First, ethanol retailers might locate
in areas where preferences for ethanol are strongest. Ethanol pumps are spread throughout Minnesota, however, covering every major region except the sparsely populated northeast, which has
11 The actual ratio is probably slightly higher. Although most of the nearly 2900 individual stations operating in
2006 were also operating during 1997-2005 (personal communication with Mark Buccelli of the Minnesota Bureau
of Weights and Measures), the total number of retail stations statewide declined about 7% from 1997–2006 (National
Petroleum News 2006).

19

higher ethanol transport costs (being farther from ethanol refineries).12 Rural areas are overrepresented, but infrastructure subsidies in the state were allocated so as to make ethanol as widely
available as possible. Minnesota itself has more pumps than other states, but the state has lower
ethanol transport costs (having many in-state ethanol refineries) and has been receiving federally
funded infrastructure subsidies longer than most states.
Second, not all stations participate in the Minnesota survey, not all participating stations report
every month, and stations appear and disappear from the sample as they open and close over time.
Below, I test formally for biases related to an unbalanced panel and sample selection in my dataset,
finding no evidence for either.
Finally, flexible-fuel owners might have systematically different preferences than other drivers.
Flexible-fuel owners tend to buy American, and they are more likely than other drivers to consider
minivans and pickups for their next purchase (Phoenix Automotive 2006). Furthermore, most
flexible-fuel vehicles have identical gasoline-only counterparts, which could lead to sorting directly
on flexible-fuel capacity. On the other hand, automakers produce flexible-fuel vehicles primarily to
comply with fuel-economy regulations. They market the vehicles all over the country, even in areas
where ethanol is not available, they sell the vehicles for the same prices as comparable gasolineonly vehicles, and flexible-fuel buyers are not observably different from buyers of comparable
gasoline vehicles (Anderson and Sallee 2010). In sum, while there is undoubtedly some selection
present in my data, it is not necessarily severe. Consistent with this judgment, I find below that
price responses do not vary significantly across sub-samples.

4.2

Retail pricing behavior and instruments

I spoke with industry representatives and inspected retail pricing behavior closely to identify price
variation that is arguably exogenous to demand.13 Retailers generally set prices using rule-of12 Corts

(2010) finds that ethanol availability within the Midwest is highly correlated with the presence of flexiblefuel vehicles and proximity to ethanol refineries.
13 I spoke with representatives from the largest retail chains in Minnesota that offer retail ethanol, as well as several
independently owned and operated stations, representatives from two ethanol refineries that directly supply about onethird of retail ethanol stations in Minnesota, several ethanol industry analysts, and the administrators of the Minnesota

20

.5
.4
.3
.2
.1
0
−.1
−.3

−.2

Nominal discount for ethanol ($/gallon)

.6

200
150
100

Frequency

50
0
−0.50

0.00

0.50

1.00

Oct97

Oct98

Oct99

Oct00

Oct01

Retail gasoline price minus ethanol price ($/gallon, nominal)

Oct02

Oct03

Oct04

Oct05

Oct06

Month

(a) Distribution of discounts

(b) Discount over time (example)

Figure 4: Nominal price discounts
Note: Figure (a) shows the empirical distribution of ethanol’s nominal retail price discount relative to
gasoline in the estimation sample. Figure (b) shows ethanol’s nominal price discount relative to gasoline
for an example ethanol retailer over time.

thumb strategies. Most retailers price ethanol at a discount to regular gasoline in nominal increments of $0.10 per gallon, while some price at a fixed nominal markup over wholesale ethanol.
This behavior is manifest in figure 4(a), which plots the distribution of nominal price discounts in
my sample, and is consistent with how retailers tell me they set prices.14
The industry representatives with whom I spoke indicated that discounts at individual stations
can sometimes persist at the same level for extended periods. Retailers update discounts primarily
to adjust for broad shifts in relative fuel costs; they do not deliberately adjust discounts in response
to local, short-term shifts in demand, which are probably not even detectable until after the fact.
This behavior is evident in figure 4(b), which plots the nominal discount for one station over time.
This station has been operating longer than most but its pricing behavior is fairly typical. This
behavior helps identify demand parameters: because retailers often set rule-of-thumb discounts
and maintain them for extended periods of time, unmodeled shifts in ethanol demand will tend not
to affect relative fuel prices, limiting the potential for price endogeneity.
The sizes of these discounts depend on underlying fuel costs as determined in the broader
survey.
14 While this pricing behavior may appear suboptimal, ethanol sales are very low relative to gasoline (and not hugely
sensitive to prices, as I show below), so the stakes are not especially high.

21

.25
.2
.15
.1
.05
0

Oct97 Oct98 Oct99 Oct00 Oct01 Oct02 Oct03 Oct04 Oct05 Oct06

Oct97 Oct98 Oct99 Oct00 Oct01 Oct02 Oct03 Oct04 Oct05 Oct06

Month

Month

(a) Relative wholesale and retail prices

Retail price dispersion

2.50
2.00
1.50
0.50

Wholesale gasoline / ethanol price

Wholesale price ratio
Retail price dispersion

1.00

1.40
1.30
1.20
1.10
0.90

1.00

Retail gasoline price / ethanol price

3.00
2.50
2.00
1.50
1.00
0.50

Wholesale gasoline price / ethanol price

Wholesale price ratio
Retail price ratio

(b) Dispersion of relative retail prices

Figure 5: Relative wholesale prices and relative retail fuel prices
Note: The ratios of gasoline to ethanol prices in figures (a) and (b) are the volume-weighted sample-mean
prices of gasoline divided by the volume-weighted sample-mean prices of ethanol. The dispersion of the
retail price ratio in figure (b) is the monthly standard deviation of the OLS residuals from the retail price
ratio regressed on a vector of month and station dummies. This variable quantifies differential changes in
relative prices across stations.

markets for gasoline and fuel additives. Average discounts generally increase when wholesale
prices for denatured ethanol fall relative to gasoline, and discounts shrink when ethanol prices rise,
as is evident in figure 5(a). The economic causality is markedly one sided: events specific to the
tiny retail ethanol market have zero bearing on prices for crude oil, gasoline, or even denatured
ethanol, whose primary role is as a fuel additive. See the appendix for an extended discussion on
the determinants of wholesale fuel prices.
The key to my identification strategy is that, for a variety of reasons, these changes in market spot prices affect the ethanol retailers in my sample differently. One reason is the different
relationships the retailers have with their suppliers. As of 2006, about one third of ethanol retailers in Minnesota bought finished fuel from an ethanol refinery in Benson, which is a small town
in the southwestern part of the state. Throughout the entire sample period, this refinery supplied
ethanol to retailers at a fixed nominal discount below the spot price of gasoline. The retailers, in
turn, agreed by contract to pass this same discount along to consumers at their stations.
15 This

15

As a

unique pricing agreement ended in the fall of 2007. The ethanol refinery now supplies retail ethanol at
market prices, and retailers are free to price ethanol at whatever price the market will bear. I am not aware of any

22

result, relative prices are mechanically less variable at these stations. Other retailers have no such
contractual arrangement and therefore bear the full brunt of variation in relative spot prices, which
transmits to the retail level. Even among these other retailers, variation in contracts could lead to
variation in pricing behavior.16
Differences in local competition will also lead to variation in pricing behavior. Retail ethanol
prices will be more sensitive to changes in relative fuel costs for retailers facing greater competition
from other ethanol retailers, whereas retailers in less competitive areas will price largely based on
willingness to pay and will therefore be less sensitive to costs. In addition, stations facing different
levels of competition in the overall fuel market will also price differently. Where competition is
weak, consumers that do not buy ethanol at a given station will likely buy gasoline from the same
station instead; where competition is fierce, these consumers are more likely to buy gasoline from
a different station altogether. Thus, differences in overall competition will also lead to variation in
pricing behavior. I make these points formally in the appendix.
This variation in pricing behavior is critical: it allows me to control for month effects common
to all stations and still identify demand parameters using differential changes in fuel prices across
stations. To quantify this variation, I regressed relative prices on a vector of month and station
effects and then computed the standard deviation of the residuals in each month. I refer to this
standard deviation as the dispersion of relative prices. Figure 5(b) shows that price dispersion
increases when gasoline spot prices are high relative to ethanol. This behavior is consistent with the
different supply relationships I document. Some stations have supply contracts that mechanically
tie retail ethanol prices to gasoline, while other stations purchase ethanol at spot prices and pass
these costs on to consumers. Price dispersion therefore increases whenever ethanol and gasoline
spot prices diverge. This behavior is also consistent with differences in competition. When ethanol
similar agreements between ethanol retailers and their suppliers.
16 Larger retail chains generally have long-term contracts for denatured ethanol and blend their own fuel, whereas
smaller chains and independents buy fuel from terminal operators at market spot prices. Contract prices for denatured
ethanol are often tied directly to the price of gasoline, which means that relative fuel costs are less variable for larger
firms. In theory, the opportunity to sell fuel on the spot market should equalize marginal costs across these firms. Only
a small fraction of denatured ethanol actually trades on the spot market, however, and so it is possible that larger firms
with long-term contracts perceive their ethanol costs as being less variable. If so, then ethanol’s relative price may be
less variable at their retail stations.

23

costs are low relative to gasoline, competitive retailers are forced to reduce prices, while less
competitive retailers are able to price closer to gasoline. Price dispersion therefore decreases as the
gap between ethanol costs and gasoline prices narrows.
To exploit this variation in pricing behavior, I construct three distinct sets of instruments. The
first set (my “Brand” instruments) interact logged wholesale prices for ethanol and gasoline with
dummy variables for the 14 identifiable retail brands in my sample (28 variables total). These
instruments predict variation in pricing behavior related to chain-specific supply relationship and
idiosyncratic pricing strategies. The second set (my “Benson” instruments) interact logged wholesale prices with the logged distance between each county’s population-weighted center and the
Benson ethanol refinery (2 variables total). These instruments predict variation in pricing behavior
related to having a supply contract with the Benson refinery. Because ethanol is costly to transport, the Benson refinery is most likely to supply nearby stations. The third set (my “Competition”
instruments) interact logged wholesale prices with the logged numbers of ethanol and gasoline
retailers in each county (4 variables total). These instruments help predict variation in pricing behavior related to differences in local competition. I use these three sets of instruments to identify
variation in relative prices that is arguably exogenous to demand.

5
5.1

Econometric estimation and results
Econometric model

I estimate logged aggregate ethanol demand of the following form:


pgit
+ β0 Xit + γt + δi + ωi (t) + εit ,
ln volumeit = α ln peit + F ln
peit

(11)

where: volumeit is gallons of ethanol sold at fueling station i in month t; peit is the retail price of
ethanol and pgit is the retail price of regular gasoline; Xit is a vector of time-varying county and
station characteristics; γt is a month effect that is constant across all fueling stations; δi is a fueling

24

station effect that is constant across all time periods; ωi (t) is a station-specific time trend; εit is
an unobserved station-month demand shifter; and the remaining elements are coefficients, vectors
of coefficients, and functions to be estimated. Note that regression (11) is the empirical analog of
logged aggregate demand in theoretical equation (6) above.17
While my main estimates assume that F(·) is linear, implying a constant fuel-switching elasticity, my theoretical model implies that elasticities may vary dramatically with relative prices. I
test for variable elasticities using two approaches. First, I estimate the model using different sets of
instruments. In the presence of a variable elasticity response, different instruments may yield different estimates, if those instruments are inducing price variation at different points in the demand
function Angrist et al. (2000). I return to this issue below when interpreting my main results. Second, I use OLS to estimate flexible polynomial, cubic spline, and semi-parametric approximations
for F(·). While it is well-known that OLS is a biased estimator of demand, I argue below that the
OLS bias in my application relatively mild.
The own-price elasticity of ethanol demand in this model is simply α − F 0 (ln pg /pe ). The
gasoline price elasticity is F 0 (ln pg /pe ), which is equivalent to the fuel-switching elasticity. Following equation (10), the price elasticity of individual ethanol-equivalent fuel demand is the sum of
the gasoline-price and own-price elasticities (i.e., the difference in magnitudes), which simplifies
here to α. Thus, equation (11) imposes a constant price elasticity for overall fuel demand, which
is consistent with recent nonparametric estimates (Yatchew and No 2001). When F(·) is linear,
this model is equivalent to the standard linear-in-logs demand model, with constant own-price and
cross-price elasticities.
In my main estimates, I impose α = −0.20 rather than estimate it directly; this value is consistent with previous estimates for the short-run price elasticity of fuel demand. I do this for two
reasons. First, efficiency. To pin down α precisely, I need to observe different stations charging the
17 Unfortunately, I do not observe gasoline quantities below the state level, and so I am unable to calculate local
market shares. I am also unable to estimate the model using any alternative level of aggregation (e.g., zip code or
county), because I do not observe prices and sales volumes for every ethanol station. Ethanol stations tend to be
isolated from one another, however, with stations in my sample located 8 miles from their nearest competitors on
average. Thus, it is valid to treat the stations themselves as approximately distinct ethanol markets.

25

same relative prices (so that fuel choice is held constant) but different price levels (so that quantity
demanded varies). Unfortunately, because gasoline prices vary little after controlling for month
and station effects, the variation needed to pin down α precisely does not exist, and attempting
to estimate it inflates the standard errors on the fuel-switching responses.18 Second, consistency.
While I argue that most variation in relative prices is orthogonal to demand, this same argument
does not hold for price levels. Thus, imposing α helps me mitigate endogeneity problems when
I estimate the model using OLS. I show below that my fuel-switching results are not particularly
sensitive to the choice of α, whether imposed or estimated freely.
Returning to the econometric model, the fueling station effect δi controls for persistent differences in fueling station characteristics, such as brand name, location, and amenities. The station
effect also controls for persistent determinants of local fuel demand, including household income
and other demographics, driving habits, and vehicle efficiency. The month dummy variables given
by γt control for trends in demand related to growing awareness of flexible-fuel vehicle capabilities
or rising state income levels. The station-specific time trends ωi (t) control for similar factors that
evolve at different rates locally. Finally, the month dummies control for potential seasonality in
demand, including the well-known surge in driving that occurs each summer.19
The vector of time-varying station characteristics Xit includes the log of the county’s flexiblefuel vehicle stock. The vector also includes the log of the total number of stations that offer retail
ethanol in the same county. While a negative coefficient would imply that new stations draw
customers away from existing stations, a zero coefficient might only suggest that new stations
locate where competition is weak. This measure of competition reflects retailer choices about
when and where to install ethanol pumps, and these decisions presumably depend critically on the
locations of existing pumps. Table 1 indicates that there are less than 5 retail ethanol stations per
18 After controlling for station effects, the month dummies explain just 42% of the variation in logged relative prices.
The remaining variation comes almost entirely from differences in ethanol prices across stations: the month dummies
explain 99.5% of the variation in logged gasoline prices but only 88% of the variation in logged ethanol prices.
19 The minimum denatured ethanol content of retail ethanol in Minnesota varies seasonally due to cold weather
starting issues, ranging from 70% in the winter to 79% in the summer (U.S. Department of Energy 2006). Although
the month dummies control for seasonality in the level of demand, they do not control for potential seasonality in the
price elasticity of demand due to variation in denatured ethanol content. Variation in ethanol content is relatively minor,
however, and unlikely to be transparent to consumers, making it neither problematic nor useful for identification.

26

county, while there are more than twenty times as many gasoline stations. A finding of significant
competition in retail ethanol markets would therefore be surprising. Finally, the vector of timevarying station characteristics includes dummy variables that indicate the length of time that a
station has been offering ethanol. These dummy variables differ from the month dummy variables
because start dates vary from station to station. Sales will likely be low after a station first opens
before customers are fully aware of the new opportunity to purchase ethanol.

5.2

Identification

I estimate regression (11) using ordinary least squares (OLS) and two-stage least squares (2SLS).
OLS estimates are potentially biased if unmodeled shifts in ethanol demand correlate with fuel
prices. This is a standard endogeneity problem in estimating demand functions. Shifts in ethanolspecific demand would tend to bias the own-price elasticity toward zero, if such shifts led to higher
ethanol prices. In contrast, shifts in overall fuel demand would tend to increase prices for all
fuels, in which case relative prices would arguably be exogenous. This would facilitate identification using OLS because I am primarily interested in fuel-switching behavior, which only depends
on relative prices. Endogenous price levels would nevertheless bias OLS estimates for the price
elasticity of individual ethanol-equivalent fuel demand (when this parameter is estimated freely).
In practice, the station owners with whom I spoke indicated that they do not deliberately update
retail ethanol prices in response to local, short-term demand shifts. Rather, they price ethanol at
nominal discounts to regular gasoline (or markups over denatured ethanol), often maintain these
discounts for extended periods of time, and only adjust discounts in response to changes in underlying fuel costs. Indeed, for a large fraction of stations in the sample, discounts are fixed by
contract. This behavior largely rules out ethanol-specific demand shifts at individual stations being
correlated with station-level price changes and biasing OLS estimates.20
20 There is theoretical justification for retailers being unresponsive to local demand shifts when setting relative prices.

For a monopolist ethanol retailer, relative retail prices will be invariant to demand shifts that enter multiplicatively
by scaling aggregate demand. This is because multiplicative demand shifts do not alter the shape of the own-price
elasticity function, leaving the monopolist’s first-order pricing condition unchanged. See the appendix for benchmark
models of retail pricing behavior.

27

Underlying fuel costs could still be endogeneous to local demand shifts, however, if such shifts
were correlated across many stations. That is, even if individual retailers are price takers in wholesale markets, their collective behavior could influence wholesale prices, meaning that wholesale
prices are not exogenous in an econometric sense (Kennan 1989). A classic example is the surge in
travel demand that drives up fuel prices each summer. I control for these and other correlated demand shifts using month dummy variables. Finally, I control for any slowly evolving local demand
shifts using station-specific trends.
While these controls throw away potentially useful time-series and cross-sectional variation,
I am able to document a variety of contractual relationships between retail ethanol stations and
their wholesale suppliers, as well as variation in local competition, which lead to cross-sectional
variation in pricing behavior. To exploit this variation in pricing behavior, I construct three sets
of price instruments as described above. These instruments included logged wholesale ethanol
and gasoline prices interacted with: (1) station brand dummies, (2) logged distance to the Benson
refinery, and (3) the logged numbers of ethanol and gasoline stations operating in the same county.
In effect, I am treating as exogenous the price variation that derives from different rule-of-thumb
pricing strategies, different supply relationships, and different levels of market competition interacting with wholesale fuel prices, even though wholesale prices themselves are not necessarily
exogenous. In my OLS estimates, I also retain variation related to the idiosyncratic timing of when
individual stations adjust their rule-of-thumb discounts; this variation is valid so long as the size
and timing of such adjustments is exogenous, conditional on month and station effects.
Additional identification issues arise in the context of an unbalanced and non-random sample
of stations. Stations appear and disappear from my dataset as they open and close pumps, join
the Minnesota survey, or fail to report. As long as these choices are uncorrelated with demand,
conditional on controls, then OLS estimates are consistent (Wooldridge 1995 2002). This seems
plausible, given that I explicitly control for fuel prices, station effects, month dummies, and other
likely determinants of selection. I tested this hypothesis formally by adding leads and lags of
selection indicators to the regression in equation (11). The F-statistic on these variables was highly

28

insignificant, suggesting that standard selection bias is not a problem.21
A separate but related issue is that stations with long panel lengths will weigh heavily in the
estimates relative to stations with short panels, while stations without ethanol pumps receive no
weight at all. This is not a concern if the elasticity function F 0 (·) is the same everywhere. If the
elasticity function varies over time or across stations, however, and if the stations I observe are not
representative, then my estimates of the “average” elasticity function will be biased. I examine this
issue below by estimating price responses separately for different time periods and for different
regions. I find no significant disparities.

5.3
5.3.1

Estimation results
Constant elasticity estimates

Table 2 presents my main OLS and 2SLS estimation results, which impose α = −0.20 and also
assume a constant price elasticity for fuel-switching behavior. I control for station effects using
both fixed-effects and first-difference estimators, which have different efficiency properties in the
presence of serial correlation and different probability limits in the presence of dynamic price
responses. Below, I test the sensitivity of the results to alternative values of α and relax the assumption of a constant fuel-switching elasticity.
Ethanol demand is sensitive to price changes. The coefficient on logged relative prices in
regression (1), which is based on the OLS fixed-effects estimator, implies that the elasticity of
ethanol’s market share with respect to relative prices is 2.730. The same coefficient is 3.484 in
equation (2), which is based on the 2SLS fixed-effects estimator. These results imply that the OLS
estimator is biased toward zero, which is consistent with the usual intuition. The implied bias is
only about 20%, however, which is consistent with my arguments above that most price variation
is orthogonal to demand. The corresponding elasticities based on the first-difference estimator,
in regressions (3) and (4), are about 0.9 smaller in magnitude. Why? One possible explanation
21 I

added one-period leads and lags of a dummy variable, call it sit , that equals one if I observe data for station i in
month t and zero otherwise. I also added ∑Tr>t sir . Wooldridge (1995; 2002) suggests adding ∑Tr6=t sir and ∏Tr6=t sir , but
neither has any time variation in my panel.

29

Table 2: Main estimation results
Variable
ln(gas price / ethanol price)
ln(number flex-fuel vehicles)
ln(number ethanol stations)
month 1 of operation
month 2 of operation
month 3 of operation
month 4 of operation
Number of observations
Number of stations
R-squared
Residuals AR(1)

Fixed effects
(1) OLS
(2) 2SLS

First differences
(3) OLS
(4) 2SLS

2.730
(0.193)
0.048
(0.023)
-0.097
(0.077)
-0.648
(0.100)
-0.075
(0.078)
0.003
(0.068)
-0.014
(0.046)
4825
232
0.18
0.422
(0.029)

1.872
(0.233)
0.095
(0.023)
-0.035
(0.092)
-0.688
(0.112)
-0.105
(0.083)
-0.033
(0.058)
-0.036
(0.032)
4148
202
0.13
-0.249
(0.026)

F-statistic (weak instruments)
(Chi-square p-value)
Hansen’s J-statistic (overidentification)
(Chi-square p-value)

3.484
(0.406)
0.059
(0.024)
-0.092
(0.076)
-0.636
(.099)
-0.069
(0.077)
0.014
(0.068)
-0.007
(0.046)
4825
232
0.444
(0.027)
18.83
(0.00)
45.956
(0.066)

2.613
(0.562)
0.096
(0.023)
-0.013
(0.094)
-0.690
(0.112)
-0.106
(0.083)
-0.032
(0.058)
0.034
(0.033)
4148
202
-0.246
(0.026)
68.61
(0.00)
34.165
(0.412)

Note: Dependent variable is logged monthly ethanol sales volume in gallons; results impose an overall fuel demand
elasticity of −0.20. Clustered standard errors (in parentheses) are robust to arbitrary heteroskedasticity and serial
correlation within stations. All regressions control for station effects, month dummy variables, and station-specific
time trends; R-squared is the fraction of remaining variation explained by the variables above. Residuals AR(1) is the
coefficient from the least-squares regression of the residuals on their lagged values. F-statistic (for weak instruments)
tests the null that excluded instruments have no explanatory power in the first-stage regression; robust p-values are in
parentheses. Hansen’s J-statistic (for overidentification) tests the null that instruments are jointly uncorrelated with the
errors; robust p-values are in parentheses. See text for details.

is that demand does not respond fully to changes in relative fuel prices within the first month, in
which case the fixed-effects and first-difference estimators may give different results. The firstdifference estimator exploits the correlation between price and quantity changes in adjacent time
periods only, while the fixed-effects estimator relates average sales volumes to relative fuel prices
in all time periods. For this reason, fixed-effects estimates may be more robust to delayed price
responses.22
22 Indeed,

when I include lagged price variables, the fixed-effects and first-difference OLS estimates begin to con-

30

The instruments appear to be performing well. The first-stage F-statistics are highly significant: they indicate that the instruments are strong predictors of relative fuel prices, conditional on
covariates. At the same time, the Hansen’s J-statistics for overidentification are not significant: I
am unable to reject the null that the instruments are jointly uncorrelated with the error terms in
the model (and that the price elasticity is constant, as I discuss below), although the statistic is
borderline significant in the fixed-effects 2SLS model.
Standard errors in table 2 are robust to arbitrary heteroskedasticity and serial correlation. The
fixed-effects estimates have slightly narrower confidence intervals than the first-difference estimates. The errors are serially correlated for both estimators, however, and neither estimator is
fully efficient.23
Table 3 presents elasticity estimates when imposing different values of α (in the first four
rows) and estimating α freely (in the last row). The table omits results for the covariates, since
they change little. A clear pattern emerges: as the imposed value of α increases in magnitude, the
fuel-switching elasticity decreases by roughly the same magnitude. This is not surprising: logged
ethanol prices and logged relative prices are almost perfectly collinear; hence, the offsetting effects. When I attempt to estimate α freely, the standard error on the fuel-switching effect increases
substantially, while α itself is estimated imprecisely and has the wrong sign.24 I do not put much
stock in these estimates, however, given the inherent difficulty in pinning down α in this model. In
verge. Another possible explanation is I calculate relative fuel prices based on county-average gasoline prices. While
it is unclear that a different level of aggregation is more appropriate, measurement error will tend to bias the elasticity
estimates toward zero, and this bias is usually more severe in first-difference estimates (Griliches and Hausman 1986).
The 2SLS estimator should correct for this bias, however, and so I suspect this is not the primary explanation.
23 First-order serial correlation in the fixed-effects residuals is about 0.40 and statistically different from zero. Firstorder serial correlation in the first-difference residuals is −0.25. This coefficient is statistically different from zero,
which indicates that the first-difference estimates are not efficient. This coefficient is also statistically different from
−0.5, which confirms the inference based on the fixed-effects residuals that the model’s errors in levels are serially
correlated (Wooldridge 2002). That −0.25 ≈ −(1 − 0.40)/2 is consistent with the model’s errors following an AR(1)
process (Solon 1984).
24 There are several possible explanations. First, a household’s overall fuel demand may be correlated with its fuelswitching price ratio, which would violate my assumption that they are independent. Second, some households may be
responding to linear differences in fuel prices instead of relative prices. When I add the linear difference to the models
estimated using OLS fixed-effects and first-differences, however, its coefficient is insignificant, while α continues to
have the wrong sign and be insignificant. Lastly, if consumers respond to price changes with a delay, and this delay
is longer for ethanol prices, this could manifest as a positive coefficient on α. When I add lagged price effects, the
coefficient on α flips signs for fixed-effects estimation, but remains highly insignificant.

31

Table 3: Sensitivity to different choices for α
Fixed effects
Value of α
α = −0.00
α = −0.10
α = −0.20 (main results)
α = −0.30
α = freely estimated
α itself

OLS
2.927
(0.193)
2.829
(0.193)
2.730
(0.193)
2.632
(0.194)
3.465
(0.616)
0.545
(0.607)

2SLS
3.679
(0.406)
3.582
(0.406)
3.484
(0.406)
3.387
(0.406)
4.320
(3.669)
0.656
(3.739)

First differences
OLS
2SLS
2.069
2.816
(0.232)
(0.561)
1.970
2.715
(0.232)
(0.562)
1.872
2.613
(0.233)
(0.562)
1.774
2.511
(0.233)
(0.563)
2.777
3.613
(0.517)
(1.224)
0.720
0.782
(0.433)
(1.235)

Note: Table replicates the results in table 2 above while imposing different values for α (in the first four rows) and
estimating α freely (in the last row). Clustered standard errors (in parentheses) are robust to arbitrary heteroskedasticity
and serial correlation within stations. See text and the previous table for details.

any case, the fuel-switching response is relatively stable, and I am unable to reject α = −0.20 or
any of the other reasonable values I impose in table 3.
Returning to the estimates in table 2, the coefficients on flexible-fuel vehicle stocks indicate that
a 1% increase in the number of vehicles leads to a 0.05%-0.10% increase in ethanol sales volumes.
I had expected to find coefficients closer to 1, indicating that ethanol sales increase proportionally
with the density of potential buyers. I suspect that this estimate is biased toward zero, however, as
a result of measurement error, which is exacerbated in panel data models (Hausman 2001).25
The coefficients in the next row indicate that a 1% increase in the number of ethanol pumps per
county leads to a 0.01%-0.10% reduction in sales volumes at individual stations; these coefficients
are not statistically different from zero. Conditional on where retailers choose to locate, new pumps
draw only a small fraction of customers away from existing stations. This result is not surprising,
25 Using my monthly panel of flexible-fuel stocks, I regressed the logged number of flexible-fuel vehicles on a vector

of station and month dummy variables. These controls explained 88% of the variation in flexible-fuel stocks. Any
residual variation that remains is likely contaminated by measurement error, given that I construct my panel using a
snapshot of vehicles on the road in 2007. In addition to being noisy, my measure of flexible-fuel stocks is likely biased,
as I systematically undercount vehicles from earlier time periods that may have exited Minnesota or been scrapped
prior to 2007. This is not a problem if the rate of exit and scrappage is similar across counties, however, because I
include month dummies.

32

given the small number of ethanol pumps statewide and the fact that infrastructure subsides targeted
areas where ethanol was not already available.
The last set of coefficients indicate that sales volumes are low in the first several months after
a pump begins operating. Sales volumes are about exp(−0.70) − 1 ≈ 50% lower in the first month
but quickly increase to long-run levels within a month or two. This rapid increase indicates that
market participants are well-informed about ethanol’s availability.

5.3.2

Instrumental variables interpretation

Angrist et al. (2000) show how to interpret linear (in logs) IV estimates of demand when the
underlying demand function is nonlinear. They show that IV returns a weighted average of the
elasticity response over the entire demand function. Roughly, weights are proportional to the
density of the data within the range of prices over which the instruments induce price variation. So,
for example, if the instruments only generate price variation in the high-price region of the demand
function, IV will reflect price elasticities in that region only. This interpretation is analogous to
the local-average treatment effect (LATE) interpretation for IV in the case of a discrete-valued
treatment variable.
This result has two implications. First, OLS and 2SLS estimates may differ, even when OLS is
unbiased, if the estimators are implicitly estimating different sections of the demand function. To
explore this possibility, I calculated the density of predicted prices from my first-stage regression.
Figure 4(a) shows that the density of predicted prices overlaps closely with the density of observed
prices. Next, I calculated for each observation the marginal contribution that the instruments make
toward predicting prices in the first-stage regression (i.e., the absolute value of the inner product of
the instruments with their first-stage coefficients). Figure 6(a) shows that the instruments induce
price variation everywhere, while figure 6(b) shows that the analogous identifying variation in OLS
is similarly distributed (except in the extremes of the data for a handful of observations). Thus,
I conclude that the OLS and 2SLS estimators are applying roughly similar weights to different
sections of the demand function.

33

0.45

7

7

0.15

−0.4

−0.3

−0.2

−0.1

0.0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.30

5
4

0.15

Density

3

0.00

0

0

0.00

1

Residual price variation

0.05

2

0.10

4
3

Residual price variation

6

Density of observed price
Residual price variation vs. predicted price

1

2

Density

5

6

Density of predicted price
Density of observed price
Residual price variation vs. predicted price

0.6

−0.4

log(gasoline price / ethanol price)

−0.3

−0.2

−0.1

0.0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

log(gasoline price / ethanol price)

(a) Identifying variation in 2SLS

(b) Identifying variation in OLS

Figure 6: Identifying variation in 2SLS and OLS estimates
Note: Figures show the identifying variation in 2SLS and OLS. Figure (a) shows: (1) the distribution
of first-stage predicted prices from 2SLS (as well as the distribution of observed prices for comparison)
and (2) the absolute value of the inner product of the instruments with their first-stage coefficients scatterplotted versus the first-stage predicted prices themselves. Figure (b) shows the analogous information for
OLS: (1) the distribution of observed prices and (2) the absolute value of the residuals from a regression
of observed prices on covariates scatter-plotted versus observed prices themselves. Note that 100 times
logged relative price is approximately equal to ethanol’s percent discount. See text for details.

A second, related implication is that different sets of instruments may give statistically different
estimates, either because one or more of the instruments is endogenous (the usual interpretation) or
because the instruments are estimating different sections of the demand function (the LATE-type
interpretation). I explore this issue by estimating model (11) separately using different combinations of instruments. Table 4 presents the estimated fuel-switching price responses from these
2SLS regressions, as well the first-stage F-tests (testing weak instruments) and Hansen’s J-statistics
(testing overidentifying restrictions). The F-statistics are all significant, implying that each subset
of instruments does a good job of predicting prices. Looking down the columns of fixed-effects
and first-difference 2SLS coefficients, there is a noticeable pattern: models that include the brand
instruments have larger estimated elasticities. In general, however, the estimates are fairly consistent across the different sets of instruments, and the J-statistics (with two exceptions) are all
insignificant. I take this as indirect evidence that the elasticity function is roughly constant over
the range of observed prices; I explore this issue in further detail below.

34

Table 4: Robustness to alternative sets of instruments
Instrument set
None (main OLS results)
All (main 2SLS results)
Brand & Benson
Brands & Competition
Benson & Competition
Brand only
Benson only
Competition only

Coefficient

Fixed effects
F-statistic

2.730
(0.193)
3.484
(0.406)
3.756
(0.452)
3.482
(0.400)
2.896
(0.750)
3.814
(0.451)
2.274
(1.040)
2.966
(0.913)

18.83
(0.00)
19.98
(0.00)
18.70
(0.00)
43.12
(0.00)
20.05
(0.00)
47.66
(0.00)
49.95
(0.00)

J-statistic

Coefficient

45.956
(0.066)
35.992
(0.174)
42.234
(0.086)
11.011
(0.051)
27.699
(0.427)
1.337
(0.248)
10.186
(0.017)

1.872
(0.233)
2.613
(0.562)
2.601
(0.543)
2.723
(0.605)
1.503
(0.695)
2.706
(0.616)
1.987
(0.762)
1.558
(0.851)

First differences
F-statistic

68.61
(0.00)
73.08
(0.00)
75.10
(0.00)
6.13
(0.00)
71.15
(0.00)
8.73
(0.00)
9.24
(0.00)

J-statistic

34.165
(0.412)
30.784
(0.376)
32.099
(0.412)
4.594
(0.467)
29.017
(0.360)
0.045
(0.832)
3.372
(0.338)

Note: Table shows 2SLS estimates for the fuel-switching price elasticity estimated using different sets of instruments.
Table also presents first-stage F-statistics for weak instruments (with robust p-values in parentheses) and Hansen’s
J-statistics for overidentifying restrictions (with robust p-values in parentheses). See text for details.

5.3.3

Variable elasticity estimates

In addition to the indirect tests above, I estimate a variable elasticity function directly. Because
OLS does not appear to be severely biased in my application, I use OLS to estimate increasingly
flexible polynomial, cubic spline, and non-parametric approximations for F(·). Coefficient estimates on the covariates are similar to those in table 2 above, so I focus here on the fuel-switching
elasticities. For consistency with the above results, I impose α = −0.20; recall from above that the
magnitudes of the fuel-switching response and imposed α move in opposite directions.
Figures 7(a)–(b) plot the elasticity function based on a cubic polynomial approximation, estimated using the OLS fixed-effects and first-difference estimators. Elasticities decline slightly in
magnitude as the ratio of gasoline to ethanol prices increases, but there is little curvature in the
elasticity function. Because the cubic model would have difficulty revealing sharp peaks in the
elasticity function, I also estimated more flexible polynomial approximations. Elasticities based
on the higher-order polynomial approximations reveal additional non-linearities but are not statis35

8

8

4
−2

0

2

Fuel−switching elasticity

4
2
−2

0

Fuel−switching elasticity

6

Fifteenth−order
Ninth−order
Cubic

6

Fifteenth−order
Ninth−order
Cubic

1.00

1.10

1.20

1.30

1.00

Ratio of gasoline to ethanol prices

1.10

1.20

8

(b) First-differences polynomial

8

(a) Fixed-effects polynomial

4
2
0
−2

−2

0

2

4

Fuel−switching elasticity

6

Bandwidth 0.03
Bandwidth 0.06

6

Knots every 0.05
Knots every 0.10
Knots every 0.20

Fuel−switching elasticity

1.30

Ratio of gasoline to ethanol prices

1.00

1.10

1.20

1.30

1.00

Ratio of gasoline to ethanol prices

1.10

1.20

1.30

Ratio of gasoline to ethanol prices

(c) Cubic-spline

(d) Semi-parametric

Figure 7: Estimated fuel-switching elasticities
Note: Figure shows the fuel-switching elasticity of aggregate ethanol demand based on fixed-effects polynomial, first-differences polynomial, cubic-spline, and semi-parametric estimation. Solid gray lines are
95% confidence intervals for estimates based on cubic polynomials, cubic spline with knots every 0.20,
and semi-parametric estimates with bandwidth 0.06. Confidence intervals for semi-parametric estimates
are based on the standard errors from local polynomial regressions. See text for details.

tically different from the more restrictive cubic estimates.
Polynomial approximations are sensitive to the number of terms and to outliers, and the function in one region is sensitive to the fit in other regions. To test the performance of the polynomials,
I also estimated regression (11) using a cubic-spline approximation with knots at relative price intervals of 0.05, 0.10, and 0.20 (prior to taking logarithms), while controlling for station effects
using fixed-effects estimation. Cubic-spline approximations are more flexible than polynomials

36

and less sensitive to outliers, but they are sensitive to the number and placement of knots. Finally,
I estimated the model semi-parametrically using Yatchew’s (1997) estimator for the partial linear
model with a bandwidth of 0.03 and 0.06.26 Semi-parametric estimators give more detailed local
approximations, but estimates are sensitive to the choice of bandwidth. See Hausman and Newey
(1995) for a discussion of these tradeoffs as applied to gasoline demand.
Figures 7(c)–(d) plot the elasticity estimates from the cubic-spline and semi-parametric approaches. For neither the cubic-spline nor the semi-parametric approaches am I able to reject the
least flexible of the functional forms, although the more flexible semi-parametric approach reveals
additional nonlinearities that the polynomial and cubic-spline approaches obscure.

5.3.4

Preference heterogeneity

My results all point to heterogeneous preferences for ethanol. First, relative prices vary considerably across stations and over time, which would not happen if preferences were literally homogenous, since retailers would be forced to set a single price. At a minimum, fuel-switching behavior
extends over a wide range of relative prices where ethanol is discounted 0%-25% below gasoline.
These results suggest (1) that some consumers are willing to pay a per-mile premium for ethanol,
and (2) that preferences are actually quite diffuse among households that choose ethanol at observed prices. Second, while my 2SLS elasticity estimates are large in magnitude, they are not
26 For

a general partial-linear model given by:
yt = f (xt ) + Zt β + εt ,

Yatchew’s procedure entails: (1) sorting the data by xt , (2) differencing the data to remove the non-linear component
f (xt ) under the assumption that f (xt ) ≈ f (xs ) for xt ≈ xs , (3) estimating β parametrically on the differenced data, (4)
ˆ and
subtracting the predicted value of this parametric regression from the original dependent variable to yield yt − Zt0 β,
finally (5) regressing yt − Zt0 βˆ on xt non-parametically using any number of non-parametric regression techniques. I
employ tenth-order differencing using Yatchew’s (1998) optimal differencing weights, which improves efficiency to
within 5% of Robinson’s (1988) fully efficient procedure. I control for station effects using station dummy variables.
Several hundred observations share the same relative price as another observation, which means the results may be
sensitive to how sorting ties are broken. I therefore estimate the first stage 50 separate times, breaking ties randomly in
each trial, and take the mean coefficient values from these trials as my first-stage estimates. In practice, my estimates
vary negligibly across trials. I then estimate the non-parametric portion of the model using local polynomial regression,
which has attractive properties in the extremes of the data. Polynomials also yield intuitive and convenient estimates
for first derivatives. I use a quadratic local polynomial, which is appropriate for estimating first derivatives (Fan and
Gijbels 1996), and an Epanechnikov kernel weighting function. I calculate an “optimal” bandwidth of 0.03 using a
rule-of-thumb approximation (Fan and Gijbels 1996, p.111).

37

nearly as large as they would be if household preferences for ethanol were more homogeneous, as
in figure 1(a). Third, my linear 2SLS estimates are for the most part consistent across different sets
of instruments, which is consistent with a roughly constant elasticity function. Fourth and finally,
when I estimate flexible elasticity functions directly, I also find that elasticities are roughly constant. These results are all consistent with a flat elasticity function and heterogeneous preferences
for ethanol, as in figure 1(b) above.
Unfortunately, because I rarely observe ethanol discounted less than 0% or more than 25% below gasoline, I am unable to estimate the elasticity function or say anything definitive about preferences in those regions. I can, however, estimate the distribution of preferences over the range of
observed prices. Rough calculations suggest that about 13% of flexible-fuel owners chose ethanol
during my sample period when the price ratio averaged 1.14. Thus, I can impose H(1.14) = 0.13
and use any one of my elasticity estimates to reveal the rest of the distribution (i.e., by integrating
the elasticity function with respect to relative prices), as detailed in the appendix.
One concern is that my estimates, which reflect preferences for ethanol in a particular time and
place, may not be appropriate for out-of-sample simulations. I tested whether preferences have
changed over time (e.g., due to advertising campaigns late in the sample period) by estimating
the model separately on data for 1997–2003 and 2004–2006. I also tested whether preferences
vary cross-sectionally (e.g., with the importance of agriculture in the local economy) by estimating
the model separately for stations in the Twin Cities and stations in greater Minnesota. Fixedeffects polynomial and cubic-spline estimates show no significant differences over time or across
geography, however, which suggests that efforts to make the results more nationally representative
would probably not alter my main findings appreciably.
One final concern is that some of the heterogeneity I observe derives not from variation in
preferences per se but from variation in ethanol’s relative convenience. If so, then my estimates
may give inaccurate predictions when I simulate the effects of an ethanol standard, which would
presumably expand ethanol’s availability beyond current levels. In reality, while there are relatively few ethanol stations statewide, if a given town has an ethanol station at all, it is typically

38

located near other gasoline stations. Thus, while some consumers may be driving out of their way
for ethanol, most are probably not driving very far. Hence, correcting for variation in ethanol’s
convenience also would not alter my main conclusions appreciably.27

6

Policy simulation

I use my model and estimates to simulate the effects of an ethanol content standard, which mandates that denatured ethanol comprise a minimum fraction of the overall gasoline supply. The
simulation model is necessarily stylized and intended to highlight the importance of modeling heterogeneous preferences for ethanol. I simulate 15% and 25% standards. The 25% standard is
consistent with the federal RFS of 36 billion gallons annually for 2022, which represents about
25% of current gasoline consumption.28 I assume in my simulations that industry complies with
the standard by increasing the market share of retail ethanol, although blending with regular gasoline in other ratios would also be a potential compliance strategy.29 My model and estimates could
also be used to evaluate other government policies to promote retail ethanol.
I assume in my simulations that, for price ratios less than 1.35, preferences follow the cdf implied by my 2SLS fixed-effects estimates. Rather than extrapolate forward out of sample, however,
I impose that the remaining mass of households share the same fuel-switching price ratio of 1.35,
which is the average ratio of gasoline to ethanol mileage and therefore consistent with most con27 Within a five-mile radius, 60% of competing stations are within 0.5 miles and half are within 1 mile. At a time
cost of $15 per hour, travel speed of 30 miles per hour, ethanol cost of $1.75 per gallon, fuel economy of 20 miles
per gallon, and refueling rate of 15 gallons, traveling one mile round-trip out of the way for ethanol (the median)
would add only $0.04 to the effective price of ethanol. Adjusting for this extra distance would (given the forgoing
assumptions) shift a price ratio of 1.15 to 1.12.
28 Recall that while this standard mandates a minimum quantity of renewable fuel, the EPA rulemaking that implements the standard sets a minimum percentage of renewable fuel in each compliance period. Gasoline consumption is
not projected to increase much in the coming decades.
29 Although industry has thus far been blending ethanol with gasoline to comply, this strategy will soon be limited
by the fact that regular gasoline vehicles cannot run on ethanol blends higher than 10%. Industry recently requested a
waiver from EPA that would allow ethanol blends higher than 10% in regular gasoline; it is unclear whether this waiver
will be approved and whether automakers would similarly modify vehicle warranties. Given that a sizeable fraction of
households are willing to pay a per-mile premium for ethanol, however, it is possible that industry would eventually
find it profitable to differentiate between the two fuels and recover costs by charging households with flexible-fuel
vehicles a higher price for ethanol.

39

sumers minimizing fuel costs. In effect, I assume that the distribution of preferences has a mass
point at 1.35 and a long left tail consistent with my estimates. For comparison to previous analyses
that assume identical preferences, I also simulate the standards assuming that all households are
massed at 1.35. I close the model by adding a supply side, drawing on previous work by Holland
et al. (2008). I numerically search for retail fuel prices and a shadow value on the ethanol content
constraint such that households maximize utility, suppliers maximize profits, industry complies
with the constraint, and markets clear. See table 5 and the appendix for further details on the
simulation.
Table 5 presents the simulation results. Scenario 1 assumes that households have nearly identical preferences based on ethanol’s mileage relative to gasoline. This constrains the equilibrium
price ratio under the standard to nearly equal the mileage ratio of 1.35. A 15% ethanol content
standard reduces gasoline consumption by about 12% and reduces carbon dioxide emissions by
about 4%. The policy is costly, however, at $12 billion annually. I calculate total costs based on
changes in consumer surplus and producer surplus, with changes in tax revenue (i.e., fuel taxes net
of the federal ethanol subsidy) entering as lump-sum transfers. These impacts are about twice as
high for the 25% standard.
Scenario 2 assumes that households are heterogeneous as implied by my estimates. After
accounting for the fact that some households prefer ethanol, the surplus cost of a 15% ethanol
content standard falls by 10%. Costs are lower in scenario 2 because households with strong
preferences can be induced to purchase ethanol with less severe distortion of market prices, as
evidenced by the lower equilibrium price ratio of 1.1.30 For the 25% standard, surplus costs are
only 3% lower than in scenario 1. A fairly high price ratio of 1.31 is needed to comply with
the standard, and so price distortion is nearly as high. The fuel supply industry benefits quite
substantially under the policy, although producer surplus in the table does not distinguish between
30 In fact, baseline ethanol consumption is actually higher in scenario 2. The expansion of baseline ethanol consumption above current levels occurs because I assume for the simulation that all households own flexible-fuel vehicles,
whereas in reality this fraction is quite small. While conversion costs are low and falling over time, they are not zero,
and so production of these vehicles derives primarily from CAFE incentives. Endogenizing flexible-fuel conversions
by adding conversion costs to the analysis would reduce the difference between scenarios 1 and 2 and increase the cost
of complying with an ethanol content standard.

40

Table 5: Simulation results
Scenario 1: Identical households
ethanol price ($/gallon)
gasoline price ($/gallon)
gasoline / ethanol price
quantity pure ethanol (billion gallons)
quantity pure gasoline (billion gallons)
emissions (million mtCO2 )
change consumer surplus (billion $)
change producer surplus (billion $)
change tax revenue (billion $)
total cost (billion $)
cost per gasoline saved ($/gallon)
cost per emissions reduced ($/mtCO2 )
Scenario 2: Heterogeneous households
ethanol price ($/gallon)
gasoline price ($/gallon)
gasoline / ethanol price
quantity pure ethanol (billion gallons)
quantity pure gasoline (billion gallons)
emissions (million mtCO2 )
change consumer surplus (billion $)
change producer surplus (billion $)
change tax revenue (billion $)
total cost (billion $)
cost per gasoline saved ($/gallon)
cost per emissions reduced ($/mtCO2 )

0%
2.68
2.62
0.98
4.95
136.86
1229.08
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0%
3.29
2.56
0.78
9.34
129.38
1185.10
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

Ethanol standard
15%
2.17
2.90
1.34
21.61
122.44
1185.28
-7.73
3.07
-7.37
-12.03
0.83
274.69
Ethanol standard
15%
2.51
2.75
1.10
20.50
116.35
1126.07
-3.11
-1.11
-6.62
-10.84
0.83
183.70

25%
2.52
3.38
1.34
35.99
108.30
1132.54
-21.00
13.65
-14.59
-21.94
0.77
227.24
25%
2.50
3.27
1.31
34.02
101.93
1066.61
-14.35
6.96
-13.96
-21.35
0.78
180.22

Note: Scenario 1 assumes that fuel-switching price ratios follow a normal cdf with mean 1.35 and standard
deviation 0.01. Scenario 2 assumes that fuel-switching price ratios follow the supremum of (a) a normal
cdf with mean 1.35 and standard deviation 0.01 and (b) the cdf implied by my 2SLS fixed-effects elasticity
estimates with H(1.14) = 0.13; this amounts to adding a long left tail to the distribution in scenario 1.
All simulations assume: that every household owns a flexible-fuel vehicle; a price elasticity for individual
ethanol-equivalent fuel demand of -0.20; price elasticities of 1.25 and 2.5 for pure gasoline and denatured
ethanol supply; 8.8 kilograms of CO2 emissions per gallon of gasoline; and that ethanol’s energy-adjusted,
life-cycle CO2 emissions are 15% lower than gasoline. The aggregate ethanol-equivalent fuel demand
function is calibrated to 2006 gasoline quantities and retail prices. Supply functions are calibrated to 2006
quantities and national-average wholesale spot prices; supply functions also include a constant marginal
cost for distribution, marketing, and taxes net of subsidies. See the appendix for further details.

41

producers of ethanol and gasoline. Consumers and taxpayers split the remaining costs 60-40.
Gasoline consumption and greenhouse gas emissions under the 15% and 25% standards fall by
about the same amount as in scenario 1.
The ethanol content standard remains a costly policy, however, even after accounting for revealed preferences. Surplus costs in scenario 2 average about $0.80 per gallon of gasoline saved.
For comparison, a recent study by Harrington, Parry and Walls (2007) assumes $0.12 per gallon
for the external costs of petroleum dependence, though the studies they review estimate a range of
$0.08–$0.50 per gallon.31 Surplus costs in scenario 2 average more than $200 per ton of carbon
dioxide emissions avoided. Again, these costs exceed most estimates for climate damages from
carbon dioxide emissions. A recent meta-analysis suggests that marginal damages are unlikely to
exceed $15 per ton of carbon dioxide emissions (Tol 2005), while even pessimistic recent estimates
put marginal damages at only $85 per ton (Stern 2006).
These estimates are sensitive to assumptions about ethanol’s life-cycle emissions and other
impacts. If land-use changes eat into ethanol’s moderate climate benefits, as recent studies suggest
is likely, the content standard could actually increase emissions. In addition, most life-cycle studies
assume that ethanol plants use natural gas, while some new plants rely on coal, which is much
dirtier. Lastly, ethanol consumes a lot of water, which may grow scarcer with climate change,
while fertilizer and nutrient runoff from corn production are also damaging.
There are several other limitations to these results. First, my estimates reflect preferences
of households in Minnesota that own flexible-fuel vehicles and live near ethanol pumps. These
households may have stronger preferences. While price responses are not statistically different
over time or across regions, I am unable to verify that the estimates are representative. Second,
it is difficult to determine precisely the fraction of households that choose ethanol at observed
prices, and I can only speculate about preferences outside my sample. Third, any heterogeneity
that derives from variation in ethanol’s convenience will likely diminish over time as the ethanol
31 They include petroleum dependence costs in a comprehensive measure of gasoline-related externalities, which
they estimate at $2.20 per gallon. The majority of these costs depend on miles driven, however, and therefore hit
ethanol even harder due to its poor mileage relative to gasoline.

42

market expands.
On the supply side, previous research has not estimated ethanol and gasoline supply elasticities
as convincingly as one would hope, though this is an active area of research. Second, I do not
consider preexisting distortions, such as agricultural price supports, nor do I consider other general
equilibrium effects. Commodity prices were high in the sample period, however, and price floors
were not binding. Finally, I do not consider new technologies that would facilitate cheap ethanol
production from agricultural waste or other feedstocks. While the RFS actually mandates that a
substantial fraction of the standard be met with such fuels, forcing these technologies prematurely
could increase the cost of the standard. Addressing these various issues would have an ambiguous effect on overall costs, but the key qualitative point remains: accounting for heterogeneous
preferences can (in this case) reduce simulated costs.

7

Conclusion

I develop a model that explicitly links aggregate demand for ethanol in a market to the distribution
of household preferences for ethanol as a gasoline substitute. The model allows me to extract information about micro preferences from aggregate data on ethanol quantities and relative fuel prices.
I need not observe gasoline quantities, in contrast to other methodologies that match predicted
and observed market shares. I estimate the model using panel IV methods and data from a large
number of retail fueling stations. My theoretical model implies that elasticities might vary dramatically with relative prices. Thus, I attempt to determine which part(s) of the demand function are
weighted most heavily in my IV estimates using a heuristic approach, and I test whether different
instruments (operating in different parts of the demand function) give different results. Taking
a more direct approach, I also estimate elasticities that vary flexibly with relative fuel prices using semi-parametric estimation and other flexible methods. Future research could apply this model
and these methodologies to estimate preferences for other goods with perfect substitutes. Imposing
constant elasticities in such contexts may give misleading results.

43

I find that demand for ethanol as a gasoline substitute is sensitive to relative fuel prices, with
elasticities of about 2.5–3.5. Price responses are considerably smaller and less variable, however,
than they would be if preferences were identical. Fuel-switching behavior extends over a wide
range of relative prices where ethanol is discounted 0%–25%, and there is no single price at which
a large mass of consumers suddenly switches to ethanol. The results imply that some households
are willing to pay a premium for ethanol and that preferences among these households are quite
heterogeneous.
These results have important implications for policy. Accounting for households that prefer
ethanol can cut the cost of an ethanol content standard substantially. While the typical household may require a large subsidy, households with stronger preferences choose ethanol with minimal price distortion, reducing costs in some cases. Similar intuition likely applies for policies
to promote other “green” substitutes, such as renewable electricity, energy-efficient lighting and
appliances, hybrid-electric vehicles, or organic foods. Researchers should take care to distinguish
between average and marginal households when assessing the impacts of policy; assuming identical preferences for all households can yield misleading results and (in this case) overstate costs.
The ethanol content standard nevertheless remains a costly policy. Costs per gallon of gasoline
saved or ton of carbon emissions avoided exceed most conventional estimates of external damages, even after revising the analysis in ethanol’s favor. Moreover, to the extent that preferences
for ethanol reflect pure altruism toward farmers, the environment, or national security, then the
behavior I interpret as reducing costs is in fact only shifting costs, at least in part. Finally, some of
the altruism may actually be misplaced. If land-use changes associated with growing feedstocks
negate ethanol’s climate benefits, or if ethanol’s other side effects are not managed carefully, then
the policy could actually damage the environment. Policies that tax or regulate carbon dioxide
emissions directly tend to mitigate such side-effects.

44

References
Alves, Denisard C.O. and Rodrigo De Losso da Silveira Bueno Bueno, “Short-run, long-run
and cross elasticities of gasoline demand in Brazil,” Energy Economics, 2003, 25 (2), 191–199.
Anderson, Soren T. and James M. Sallee, “Using Loopholes to Reveal the Marginal Cost of
Regulation: The Case of Fuel-Economy Standards,” American Economic Review, 2010, Forthcoming.
Angrist, Joshua D., Kathryn Graddy, and Guido W. Imbens, “The Interpretation of Instrumental Variables Estimators in Simultaneous Equations Models with an Application to the Demand
for Fish,” Review of Economic Studies, 2000, 67 (23), 499–527.
Barnett, William A., Douglas Fisher, and Apostolos Serletis, “Consumer Theory and the Demand for Money,” Journal of Economic Literature, December 1992, 30 (4), 2086–2119.
Corts, Kenneth S., “Building out alternative fuel retail infrastructure: Government fleet spillovers
in E85,” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, May 2010, 59 (3), 219–234.
Dahl, Carol and Thomas Sterner, “Analyzing Gasoline Demand Elasticities: A Survey,” Energy
Economics, July 1991, 13 (3), 203–210.
Davis, Lucas W. and Lutz Kilian, “Estimating the Effect of a Gasoline Tax on Carbon Emissions,”
Journal of Applied Econometrics, 2010, Forthcoming.
Ellison, Sara Fisher, Iain Cockburn, Zvi Griliches, and Jerry Hausman, “Characteristics of
Demand for Pharmaceutical Products: An Examination of Four Cephalosporins,” The RAND
Journal of Economics, Autumn 2006, 28 (3), 426–446.
Espey, Molly, “Explaining the Variation in Elasticity Estimates of Gasoline Demand in the United
States: A Meta-Analysis,” Energy Journal, 1996, 17 (3), 49–60.
, “Gasoline Demand Revisited: An International Meta-Analysis of Elasticities,” Energy Economics, 1998, 20 (3), 273–295.
45

Fan, J. and I. Gijbels, Local Polynomial Modelling and Its Applications, Vol. 66 of Monographs
on Statistics and Applied Probability, Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 1996.
Fargione, Joseph, Jason Hill, David Tilman, Stephen Polasky, and Peter Hawthorne, “Land
Clearing and the Biofuel Carbon Debt,” Science, February 2008, 319 (5867), 1235–1238.
Farrell, Alexander E., Richard J. Plevin, Brian T. Turner, Andrew D. Jones, Michael O’Hare,
and Daniel M. Kammen, “Ethanol Can Contribute to Energy and Environmental Goals,” Science, 2006, 311 (5760), 506–508.
Graham, Daniel J. and Stephen Glaister, “The Demand for Automobile Fuel: A Survey of
Elasticities,” Journal of Transportation Economics and Policy, January 2002, 36 (1), 1–26.
Greene, David L., “Motor fuel choice: An econometric analysis,” Transportation Research A,
1989, 23A (3), 243–253.
Griliches, Zvi and Jerry A. Hausman, “Errors in Variables in Panel Data,” Journal of Econometrics, 1986, 31, 93–118.
Harrington, Winston, Ian Parry, and Margaret Walls, “Automobile Externalities and Policies,”
Journal of Economic Literature, 2007, 45, 374–400.
Harris Interactive, “Two-Thirds of Adult Vehicle Owners are Familiar with Flexible
Fuel Vehicles and More than Half are Interested in Purchasing One,” July 26 2006.
http://www.harrisinteractive.com/NEWS/allnewsbydate.asp?NewsID=1074.
Hausman, Jerry, “Mismeasured Variables in Econometric Analysis: Problems from the Right and
Problems from the Left,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Autumn 2001, 15 (4), 57–67.
Hausman, Jerry A. and Whitney K. Newey, “Nonparametric Estimation of Exact Consumers
Surplus and Deadweight Loss,” Econometrica, November 1995, 63 (6), 1445–1476.

46

Holland, Stephen P., Christopher R. Knittel, and Jonathan E. Hughes, “Greenhouse Gas Reductions Under Low Carbon Fuel Standards?,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy,
2008, 1 (1), 106–146.
Hughes, Jonathan E., Christopher R. Knittel, and Daniel Sperling, “Evidence of a Shift in the
Short-Run Price Elasticity of Gasoline Demand,” The Energy Journal, January 2008, 29 (1).
Kennan, John, “Simultaneous Equations Bias in Disaggregated Econometric Models,” The Review of Economic Studies, 1989, 56 (1), 151–156.
Kilian, Lutz, “The Economic Effects of Energy Price Shocks,” Journal of Economic Literature,
December 2008, 46 (4), 871–909.
Minnesota Department of Agriculture, “Economic Impact of the Ethanol Industry in Minnesota,” Technical Report May 2003.
National Petroleum News, “Retail Market: Market Facts,” National Petroleum News, July 2006,
98 (8), 96–109.
Nevo, Aviv, “Measuring Market Power in the Ready-to-eat Cereal Industry,” Econometrica, March
2001, 69 (2), 307–342.
Perkins, Morgan and Sergio Barros, “Brazil Sugar Ethanol Update,” Global Agriculture Information Network Report BR6001, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Foreign Agricultural Service
February 2006.
Phillips, Owen R. and David P. Schutte, “Identifying profitable self-service markets: A test in
gasoline retailing,” Applied Economics, February 1988, 20 (2), 263–272.
Phoenix Automotive, “E85 Ethanol Flexible-Fuel Vehicle Survey,” May 2006. Prepared for the
American Lung Association of Minnesota.
Rask, Kevin N., “Clean Air and Renewable Fuels: The Market for Fuel Ethanol in the U.S. from
1984-1993,” Energy Economics, June 1998, 20 (3), 325–345.
47

Robinson, Peter M., “Root-N-Consistent Semi-parametric Regression,” Econometrica, 1988, 55,
931–954.
Salvo, Alberto and Cristian Huse, “Is Arbitrage Tying the Price of Ethanol to that of Gasoline?
Evidence from the Uptake of Flexible-Fuel Technology,” July 2010. Working Paper.
Searchinger, Timothy, Ralph Heimlich, R. A. Houghton, Fengxia Dong, Amani Elobeid, Jacinto Fabiosa, Simla Tokgoz, Dermot Hayes, and Tun-Hsiang Yu, “Use of U.S. Croplands
for Biofuels Increases Greenhouse Gases Through Emissions from Land-Use Change,” Science,
February 2008, 319 (5867), 1238–1240.
Solon, Gary, “Estimating Autocorrelations in Fixed-Effects Models,” February 1984. NBER
Technical Working Paper 32.
Stern, Nicholas, Stern Review: The Economics of Climate Change, Cambridge, MA: Cambridge
University Press, 2006.
Tol, Richard S.J., “The marginal damage costs of carbon dioxide emissions: an assessment of the
uncertainties,” Energy Policy, November 2005, 33 (16), 622–634. 2064-2074.
U.S. Department of Energy, Handbook for Handling, Storing, and Dispensing E85 April 2006.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Model Year 2000–2006 Fuel Economy Guide 20002006.
Wooldridge, Jeffrey M., “Selection Corrections for Panel Data Models Under Conditional Mean
Independence Assumptions,” Journal of Econometrics, 1995, 68, 115–132.
, Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data, MIT Press, 2002.
Yatchew, Adonis, “An Elementary Estimator of the Partial Linear Model,” Economics Letters,
1997, 57, 135–143.

48

, “Nonparametric Regression Techniques in Economics,” Journal of Economic Literature, June
1998, 36 (2), 669–721.
and Joungyeo Angela No, “Household Gasoline Demand in Canada,” Econometrica, November 2001, 69 (6), 1697–1709.

49

The Demand for Ethanol as a Gasoline Substitute
Appendix: Not for Publication
Soren T. Anderson

A

Aggregate demand and household welfare

I show above that the aggregate ethanol demand is

Qe (pe , pg ) = φNH


pg
q̄(pe ).
pe

(12)

Aggregate demand for gasoline reflects households that own flexible-fuel vehicles but choose
gasoline, as well as households that do not own flexible-fuel vehicles. Gasoline demand for households that own flexible-fuel vehicles is given by
q̄(pg /r)
dH(r).
r
pg /pe

Z ∞

φN

(13)

By similar arguments aggregate demand for households that do not own flexible-fuel vehicles is

(1 − φ)N

Z ∞
q̄(pg /r)

r

−∞

(14)

dH(r),

which is just the total number of households that do not own flexible-fuel vehicles multiplied
by their average gasoline consumption. Here, as above, I rely on the assumption that flexiblefuel vehicles and v(·) are distributed independently of r (and of each other). Adding these two
expressions gives aggregate gasoline demand:
q̄(pg /r)
Ge (pe , pg ) = φN
dH(r) + (1 − φ)N
r
pg /pe
Z ∞

1

Z ∞
q̄(pg /r)
−∞

r

dH(r).

(15)

Maximized utility for an individual household that chooses ethanol is

v(q(pe )) + y − pe q(pe ),

(16)

which holds whenever r ≤ pg /pe , while a household that chooses gasoline has utility given by

v(q(pg /r)) + y − pg

q(pe /r)
,
r

(17)

which holds whenever r > pg /pe . Because I assume that household utility is linearly separable
in the composite good, and because I assume an interior solution with respect to consumption of
this good, each household’s utility function has dollar units. This allows me to compute average
welfare:
Z
φ

pg /pe

−∞




q(pe /r)
dH(r)
[v(q(pe )) + y − pe q(pe )] dH(r) +
v(q(pg /r)) + y − pg
r
pg /pe

Z ∞
q(pe /r)
+(1 − φ)
dH(r)
(18)
v(q(pg /r)) + y − pg
r
−∞
Z ∞

where I have left the averaging over v(·) and q(·) implicit to simplify the notation. The top term
is average welfare for households that own flexible-fuel vehicles weighted by the fraction of these
households, and the bottom term is average welfare for households that do not own flexiblefuel vehicles weighted by the fraction of such households. Average welfare for households that
own flexible-fuel vehicles reflects both households that choose ethanol as well as households that
choose gasoline. Multiplying by the total number of households N gives aggregate welfare.

B

Retail supply behavior

How will a retailer facing the demand functions developed above choose to set prices, and how
will these prices respond to shifting costs? For an ethanol retailer located close to other retailers,

2

competition will drive the retail price of ethanol down to marginal costs:

pe = ce ,

(19)

where ce is the marginal cost of ethanol. The equilibrium ratio of retail gasoline to ethanol prices
is given by:
ρ∗ =

pg
,
ce

(20)

where ρ = pg /pe is the price ratio the retailer chooses, and where I assume for simplicity that
the retail price of gasoline pg is fixed exogenously by conditions in the retail gasoline market.32
Changes in ethanol’s cost relative to gasoline therefore transmit directly to relative retail prices:
∂ρ∗
= 1.
∂(pg /ce )

(21)

When ethanol’s cost relative to the price of gasoline increases, relative retail prices increase accordingly.
Marginal-cost pricing is not a particularly good model for understanding retail ethanol pricing
behavior. Current retail ethanol markets reflect a peculiar mix of monopoly power and competition.
Because relatively few stations offer retail ethanol, customer bases overlap only marginally, if at all,
allowing ethanol retailers to operate largely as local monopolists. At the same time, these retailers
compete directly with nearby gasoline stations in the broader fuels market, because flexible-fuel
vehicle owners are able to switch seamlessly between ethanol and gasoline.
Consider first a monopolist ethanol retailer that only offers ethanol. The retailer chooses the
price of ethanol to maximize profits:

Π(pe ; pg ) = Qe (pe ; pg )pe − ce Qe (pe ; pg ),
32 This

(22)

assumption is consistent with the current fuel market, where relatively few stations offer ethanol and ethanol
sales volumes are low relative to gasoline. This assumption would not be valid for a significantly expanded retail
ethanol market.

3

where Π is retailer profit, which is a function of the retail prices of ethanol pe and regular gasoline
pg , Qe is the quantity of ethanol demanded as a function of retail prices, and ce is the constant
marginal cost of offering ethanol. I assume for simplicity that the retail price of gasoline pg is
fixed exogenously by conditions in the retail gasoline market.
The first-order condition of this maximization problem is given by:
Qe + Q0e pe − ce Q0e ≡ 0,

(23)

where all derivatives are with respect to the retail price of ethanol and I have suppressed the arguments of functions for clarity. Collecting terms that contain Q0e , moving Qe to the right-hand side,
and then dividing by pe and Q0e on both sides yields:
pe − ce
Qe 1
≡− · 0.
pe
pe Qe

(24)

This is equivalent to
µe ≡ −

1
,
ξe

(25)

where µe ≡ (pe − ce )/pe is the percent retail markup of ethanol and ξe is the own-price elasticity
of aggregate ethanol demand. This is the standard monopoly result where the retailer equates the
percent retail markup to the negative reciprocal of the price elasticity of demand.
Now consider a monopolist ethanol retailer that also sells gasoline. Adding profits from gasoline sales to the maximization problem results in a modified first-order condition:

Q0g pg
1
·
µe +
µ
≡
−
,
g
Q0e pe
ξe


where Q0g is the change in gasoline sales volume given a marginal increase in the price of ethanol,
µg ≡ (pg − cg )/pg is the percent retail markup of gasoline, and all other terms are as above. I again
assume that retail gasoline prices are fixed by market competition. When a station’s ethanol price
has no effect on its gasoline sales, so that Q0g = 0, the first-order condition reduces to the simple
4

case above. When Q0g > 0, however, the optimal price of ethanol is higher, because increasing the
price of ethanol drives some consumers to gasoline at the same station. This incentive increases
with Q0g . The incentive to increase ethanol prices and drive consumers to gasoline also increases
with gasoline markups µg .
In areas where overall competition is fierce, retailers that increase the price of ethanol are
unlikely to capture many customers switching to gasoline, since these customers have many competing gasoline stations from which to choose. That is, Q0g will be relatively small in magnitude,
and pricing behavior will tend toward the simple case above. In areas where competition is weak,
however, so that Q0g is large in magnitude, the incentive to increase the price of ethanol and could
be quite strong.
I now return to the case of a monopolist ethanol retailer that only sells ethanol. Restating this
retailer’s first-order condition in terms of the price ratio ρ by making the substitutions pe = pg /ρ
and ξe = −ξg + ξ f yields:
1−

1
ρ
≡−
,
pg /ce
−ξg + ξ f

(26)

where ρ is the price ratio the retailer chooses. Assuming that the price elasticity of individual
ethanol-equivalent fuel demand ξ f is constant, the implicit function theorem gives the following
comparative static for the impact of a change in ethanol’s relative cost on the profit-maximizing
price ratio:
∂ρ∗
=
∂(pg /ce )

ρ∗
pg
ce

−



pg /ce
−ξg +ξ f

2

> 0,

(27)

ξ0g

where ρ∗ is the profit-maximizing price ratio and the inequality assumes that ξ0g < 0 at the optimum.
Recall that ξ f is constant by assumption and that ξg and ξ0g only depend on relative prices.
Expression (27) implies that changes in relative costs will have their largest impact on relative
retail prices when the fuel-switching elasticity is roughly constant near the optimum, so that ξ0g is
close to zero. In contrast, when the elasticity is highly variable near the optimum, which indicates
a large concentration of households near that same fuel-switching price ratio, ξ0g will be large in
magnitude and relative prices will be less responsive to changes in ethanol’s costs. In the extreme
5

1

1

.2

.4

.6

.8

−1/(own−price elasticity)
Markup − more profitable
Markup − less profitable

0

0

.2

.4

.6

.8

−1/(own−price elasticity)
Markup − more profitable
Markup − less profitable

1.0

1.1

1.2

1.3

1.4

1.5

1.0

Ratio of gasoline to ethanol price

1.1

1.2

1.3

1.4

1.5

Ratio of gasoline to ethanol price

(a) r ∼ N(1.25, 0.05)

(b) r ∼ N(1.25, 0.30)

Figure 8: Profit-maximizing retail price ratio
Note: Figure illustrates profit-maximizing price ratios for a monopolist ethanol retailer. Profit-maximizing
price ratios are given by intersection of markups and the negative reciprocal of the own-price elasticity,
as in equation (25). More profitable and less profitable cases assume that marginal ethanol costs are 60%
and 80% the retail price of gasoline. Elasticity functions assume a constant ethanol-equivalent fuel price
elasticity of -0.25.

case where households have identical preferences for ethanol, ξ0g will be infinitely large in magnitude and relative prices will be invariant to underlying costs. Retailers will be reluctant to raise
ethanol prices when costs increase, lest they drive all consumers to gasoline. At the same time,
retailers will have no incentive to reduce prices when costs fall, because lowering prices will not
stimulate any additional demand.
Figure 8 illustrates this first-order condition and comparative static for two hypothetical fuelswitching elasticity functions, where I have set the elasticity of individual ethanol-equivalent fuel
demand to a constant -0.20. The figures illustrate that when household preferences are nearly
homogeneous, so that price elasticities are highly variable, as in figure 8(a), the profit-maximizing
price ratio is insensitive to changes in relative costs. When household preferences are more diffuse,
however, so that price elasticities are less variable, as in figure 8(b), shifts in relative costs lead to
large changes in the profit-maximizing price ratio.

6

3.00
2.00
1.50
1.00
0.00

0.50

Price ($/gallon)

2.50

Retail gasoline
Retail ethanol

Oct97

Oct98

Oct99

Oct00

Oct01

Oct02

Oct03

Oct04

Oct05

Oct06

Month

Figure 9: Retail fuel prices
Note: Retail ethanol price is the monthly volume-weighted average retail price of
ethanol at reporting stations in Minnesota. Retail gasoline price is the monthly
county-average retail price of regular gasoline, weighted by retail ethanol sales
volumes at these same stations. Prices are in 2006 dollars.

C

Aggregate price trends

Figure 9 plots average retail ethanol and regular gasoline prices from October 1997 through November 2006. Average ethanol prices track regular gasoline prices closely, albeit at a noticeable discount for most of the period.
Figure 10 plots average wholesale prices for the same time period. Wholesale spot prices for
denatured ethanol do not always track wholesale gasoline prices closely. This is perhaps not surprising, given that demand for denatured ethanol derives largely from its role as a complement to
gasoline production and less from its role as a gasoline substitute. Opportunities for direct substitution do exist, however, and large price differences can create strong incentives for substitution,
which is one reason that wholesale ethanol prices track wholesale gasoline prices broadly over
time. This is particularly evident in the fall of 2005, when ethanol helped ease gasoline shortfalls

7

3.00
2.00
1.50
1.00
0.00

0.50

Price ($/gallon)

2.50

Wholesale gasoline
Wholesale ethanol

Oct97

Oct98

Oct99

Oct00

Oct01

Oct02

Oct03

Oct04

Oct05

Oct06

Month

Figure 10: Wholesale fuel prices
Note: Wholesale ethanol price is a weighted average of the spot price for denatured
ethanol in Minneapolis and Fargo, less the federal ethanol blending tax credit.
Wholesale gasoline price is the Minnesota volume-weighted average rack price.
Prices are in 2006 dollars.

after Hurricanes Katrina and Rita knocked out Gulf Coast petroleum refineries and distribution
pipelines. Ethanol prices were low relative to gasoline in the first half of 2005 due to a glut of
ethanol. Ethanol prices then spiked to equal gasoline prices as ethanol substituted for gasoline
after the hurricanes. Ethanol’s margin relative to gasoline eventually returned to pre-hurricane levels as refineries and pipelines came back on line and as imports of refined gasoline arrived from
abroad.
A second reason that wholesale prices track broadly is that ethanol and a petroleum-based
chemical fuel additive called methyl tertiary-butyl ether (MTBE) are close substitutes in some
U.S. regions during much of this time period, creating an avenue for petroleum prices to correlate
indirectly with ethanol prices. The importance of this substitution is most evident in the first half of
2006, when fuel suppliers quit using MTBE due to concerns about potential groundwater contamination. Prices surged as ethanol filled the gap left by this key substitute. Ethanol prices fell in the
8

summer months as ethanol refiners scaled up production and as fuel distributors resolved logistical
difficulties in transporting ethanol from refineries in the Midwest, where ethanol is produced, to
markets on the coasts, where MTBE had previously held a large market share.
Figure 5(a) above demonstrates that large fluctuations in relative wholesale prices correlate
with comparatively small changes in retail prices. Note that the scale for the wholesale price ratio
in figure 5(a) above is five times as large as the scale for the retail price ratio. What explains
this behavior? The natural assumption is that ethanol retailers are pricing ethanol based primarily
on what flexible-fuel vehicle owners are willing to pay, relative to gasoline, as opposed to what
the fuel costs. As I show above in appendix section B, when the elasticity is highly variable and
retailers are monopolists, the relative price of ethanol will be insensitive to changes in ethanol’s
costs relative to gasoline. The pricing behavior in figure 5(a) is therefore consistent with a highly
variable elasticity function.
There are alternative explanations. Above, I described rule-of-thumb pricing strategies, supply
relationships that mechanically tie retail ethanol prices to gasoline, and pricing formulae for longterm ethanol contracts, which could all lead retail prices to be less variable than observed spot
prices. In addition, station owners may have an incentive to reduce price volatility by maintaining
retail ethanol prices that are more consistent with the long-run relationship between gasoline prices
and ethanol costs. Short-term profits may suffer, but this strategy helps maintain a consistent
customer base. Indeed, several industry representatives I spoke with indicated that some retailers
were actually pricing ethanol below costs in late 2005 and early 2006. Ethanol costs were high
relative to gasoline, due to the discontinuation of MTBE, but some retailers were willing to incur
temporary losses to maintain favorable relationships with their customers.

D

Evidence of cross-sectional variation in pricing behavior

As I describe in the main text, about one-third of ethanol retailers in Minnesota purchase ethanol
directly from an ethanol refinery in Benson, which is located in the southwestern part of the state.

9

2.50
2.00
1.50
1.00
0.50

Gasoline price / ethanol price

Wholesale price ratio
Retail price ratio − Benson
Retail price ratio − other rural

Oct97

Oct98

Oct99

Oct00

Oct01

Oct02

Oct03

Oct04

Oct05

Oct06

Month

1.00

1.50

2.00

Wholesale price ratio
Retail price ratio − Twin Cities
Retail price ratio − rural

0.50

Gasoline price / ethanol price

2.50

(a) Benson area vs. other rural

Oct97

Oct98

Oct99

Oct00

Oct01

Oct02

Oct03

Oct04

Oct05

Oct06

Month

(b) Twin Cities vs. rural

Figure 11: Relative wholesale prices and relative retail fuel prices
Note: Top figure shows relative retail prices for stations in counties within 50 miles of Benson and for
other rural counties. Bottom figure shows relative retail prices for stations in Twin Cities counties and for
stations in rural counties.

10

Throughout the entire sample period, this refinery supplied retail ethanol at a fixed nominal discount to the spot price of regular gasoline. The ethanol retailers, in turn, agreed to price retail
ethanol at the same discount below regular gasoline at their stations. When retail ethanol prices are
tied directly to the price of gasoline, relative prices will be less responsive to changes in ethanol’s
relative cost. This is apparent in figure 11(a), which plots relative retail prices for stations located
in counties within 50 miles of the Benson refinery, which are most likely to have contracts with
this refinery, and for stations located in other counties outside the Twin Cities. In 2000-2001,
when wholesale ethanol costs were high relative to gasoline, stations near Benson priced ethanol
at a larger percent discount. This happened again in late 2003-2004 and at times in late 2005-2006.
Figure 11(b) plots relative retail prices for stations located inside and outside the Twin Cities,
where the density of retail ethanol stations is higher. Stations in the Twin Cities appear to be more
sensitive to changes in relative costs. When wholesale ethanol costs are low relative to gasoline,
stations in the Twin Cities discount ethanol more heavily than in rural areas. When wholesale
ethanol costs are high relative to gasoline, retailers in the Twin Cities do not discount ethanol as
generously. This pricing behavior is consistent with retailers in the Twin Cities facing greater
competition and therefore being more sensitive to changes in relative costs.

E

Using elasticity estimates to reveal preferences

This section shows how to retrieve the distribution of household preferences from aggregate price
repsonses. Recall that equation (7) above links the distribution of household preferences to aggregate price responses:
ξg (x) =

h(x)
x.
H(x)

(28)

Dividing both sides by x and using the first-derivative rule for logarithms gives:
ξg (x) ∂ ln H(x)
=
.
x
∂x

11

(29)

Assume that an estimate of the elasticity function is available for price ratios ranging from rL to
rH . Then integrating both sides with respect to x through r > rL gives:
Z r
ξg (x)
rL

x

dx =

Z r
∂ ln H(x)

∂x

rL

dx

= ln H(r) − ln H(rL ).

(30)

Finally, taking the exponential of both sides and rearranging yields:

H(r) = H(rL ) · exp

Z

r

rL


ξg (x)
dx .
x

(31)

Given H(rL ) and an econometric estimate of ξg (x) over the interval [rL , rH ], equation (31) yields
an estimate for the cdf of household preferences on the interval.
A boundary condition is required to solve for H(rL ). Suppose one knows that the fraction of
households choosing ethanol at some price ratio r∗ ∈ [rL , rH ] is H(r∗ ). Then it is easy to solve for
H(rL ):
 Z
H(rL ) = H(r ) · exp −
∗

r∗

rL


ξg (x)
dx ,
x

(32)

and equation (31) yields the distribution of preferences on the interval [rL , rH ].
Unfortunately, it is not possible to reveal the full distribution of household preferences for
ethanol, unless one has an estimate for the elasticity function over the entire range of possible
fuel-switching price ratios.
Because I rarely observe ethanol discounted less than 0% or more than 25% below gasoline, I
am unable to estimate the elasticity function or say anything definitive about preferences in those
regions. I can, however, estimate the distribution of preferences over the range of observed prices.
Rough calculations suggest that 5% of flexible-fuel owners in a county choose ethanol on
average during the study period, when the price ratio averaged 1.14.33 This figure likely understate
33 There

are about 3250 flexible-fuel vehicles per county on average. Assuming a flexible-fuel vehicle drives 1000
miles per month and achieves 14 miles per gallon on ethanol (the sales-weighted average based on EPA mileage
estimates), this translates to 1000/14 · 3250 ≈ 230, 000 potential gallons per county. Actual sales average about 3350
gallons per station. With about 3.7 stations per county on average, this translates to 3350 · 3.7 ≈ 12, 400 gallons. Thus,

12

1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4

Share of households choosing ethanol

0.0

0.2

0.30
0.25
0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00

Share of households choosing ethanol

Fixed−effects 2SLS
First−difference 2SLS
Fixed−effects cubic polynomial
First−difference cubic polynomial
Cubic spline (knots every 0.20)
Semi−parametric (0.06 bandwidth)

0.95

1.00

1.05

1.10

1.15

1.20

1.25

1.30

1.35

0.4

Ratio of gasoline to ethanol prices

0.6

0.8

1.0

1.2

1.4

1.6

Ratio of gasoline to ethanol prices

(a) Estimated cdfs

(b) Simulation cdfs

Figure 12: Estimated and simulation cdfs for fuel-switching price ratios
Note: Figure on the left shows cdfs for fuel-switching price ratios based on several alternative estimators
of the fuel-switching elasticity function. Each cdf assumes that H(1.14) = 0.13. See text for further
details. The figure on the right shows the precise cdf used in the simulations, which is based on the 2SLS
fixed-effects constant-elasticity estimates for price ratios less than 1.35. See text for details.

the fraction of flexible-fuel owners that would choose ethanol if given the option, however, since
not all households currently have access to the fuel, given its limited availability. Assuming, based
on somewhat speculative calculations, that only 40% of the households in a county currently have
access on average, then ethanol’s implied market share is actually 2.5 times as high. Thus, I can
impose H(1.14) = 0.13 and use any one my estimated elasticity functions to back out the rest of
the cdf.34 Figure 12(a) does this using the 2SLS constant-elasticity estimates in table 2 and the
OLS variable-elasticity estimates from figure 7 above.
Figure 12(b) plots the precise cdf I use in my simulations below. This cdf is based on my 2SLS
fixed-effects estimation of the constant-elasticity model. Following the calculations above, the cdf
assumes that H(1.14) = 0.13. I then use my elasticity estimates to reveal the cdf for price ratios
less than 1.35. Rather than extrapolate forward out of sample, however, I impose that the remaining
roughly 12, 400/230, 000 ≈ 5% of flexible-fuel owners choose ethanol.
34 The average county in my sample is about 750 square miles. If stations drew households from within a five-mile
radius, which is about 80 square miles, then 3.7 non-overlapping stations per county would cover about 3.7 · 80 ≈ 300
square miles. If households were evenly distributed, then about 300/750 = 40%, or roughly half of consumers would
have access. The fraction with access would be higher if households were more concentrated near stations and lower
if the market radius was smaller than five miles.

13

mass of households share nearly the same fuel-switching price ratio of 1.35, which is the average
ratio of gasoline to ethanol mileage for flexible-fuel vehicles and therefore consistent with most
consumers minimizing fuel costs. While a large mass of households at 1.35 would imply retailers
could have dramatically increased revenues by lowering the relative price of ethanol during the
study period, this rarely would have been profitable given wholesale ethanol costs. Note that a
price ratio of 1.35 is roughly equivalent to a 25% ethanol discount.

F

Simulation details

F.1

Minimum ethanol content standard

An ethanol content standard mandates that denatured ethanol comprise a minimum fraction of the
overall fuel supply:
πe Qe + πg Qg
≥ σ,
Qe + Qg

(33)

where Qe and Qg are the aggregate retail quantities of ethanol and gasoline, πe is the percent
denatured ethanol content of retail ethanol, πg is the percent denatured ethanol content of retail
gasoline, and σ is the minimum fraction of denatured ethanol in the fuel supply as mandated by the
ethanol content standard. I assume that πe ≥ σ ≥ πg , where the leftmost inequality guarantees that
the ethanol content standard is technically achievable, and the rightmost inequality implies that the
standard is not met trivially for any combination of fuels. Rearranging the inequality demonstrates
that the standard is equivalent to a minimum market share for retail ethanol:
πg − σ
Qe
≥−
Qg
πe − σ

(34)

An ethanol content standard is therefore identical to any fuel performance standard that implicitly mandates a minimum market share requirement for ethanol, including a low-carbon fuel
standard met through increased ethanol production.

14

F.2

Model of the fuels market

Following Holland et al. (2008) I assume that a competitive fuel supply industry maximizes profits
given by:
pe Qe + pg Qg −C(Qe , Qg ) + λ[πe Qe + πg Qg − σ(Qe + Qg )],

(35)

where pe and pg are the retail prices of ethanol and regular gasoline, Qe and Qg are the aggregate
retail quantities of ethanol and regular gasoline, C(·, ·) is the fuel industry’s cost function, which is
increasing in both arguments and convex, λ is the shadow value of the ethanol content constraint,
and πe and πg are as above. Note that the total quantity of denatured ethanol required to produce
the given retail quantities is πe Qe + πg Qg , while the total quantity of pure gasoline is (1 − πe )Qe +
(1 − πg )Qg . The cost function reflects denatured ethanol and gasoline refining and distribution
costs, as well as the costs of blending, distribution, and retail marketing. The cost function also
reflects retail fuel taxes, as well as subsidies for denatured ethanol blending.
The first-order conditions from the fuel supplier profit maximization problem and the household utility maximization problem above together characterize market equilibrium:
v0 (e) =

∂C(Qe , Qg )
+ λ[σ − πe ],
∂Qe

(36)

∂C(Qe , Qg )
+ λ[σ − πg ],
∂Qg

(37)

λ[πe Qe + πg Qg − σ(Qe + Qg )] = 0,

(38)

v0 (rg)r =
and

where λ ≥ 0 and where I have assumed that v(·) is identical for all households. The first condition
holds for all consumers with r ≤ pg /pe who choose ethanol and the second condition holds for
all consumers with r > pg /pe who choose gasoline. These equilibrium conditions state that each
household’s marginal willingness to pay for fuel equals the fuel supply industry’s marginal cost.
The third condition is that either the ethanol content constraint is binding or that the shadow value
of the constraint is zero.
15

The ethanol content standard gives an implicit subsidy of λ[πe − σ] for the production of retail
ethanol, because the denatured ethanol content of retail ethanol exceeds the standard. Conversely,
the standard imposes an implicit tax of λ[σ − πg ] on the production of retail gasoline, because the
denatured ethanol content of gasoline is less than the standard. The ultimate effect of the standard
on equilibrium fuel quantities depends on the stringency of the standard, the fuel industry’s cost
function, the household’s ethanol-equivalent fuel demand function, and the distribution of fuelswitching price ratios.
Holland et al. (2008) use a similar model to evaluate a low-carbon fuel standard met through
increased ethanol production. They show that such a standard can never deliver efficient reductions in carbon dioxide emissions, because the standard implicitly subsidizes ethanol while taxing
gasoline. Any first-best policy must tax all fuels that contain carbon, including ethanol, based on
marginal external damages. They also show that a low-carbon fuel standard might actually increase
energy consumption and carbon dioxide emissions, because the fuel supply industry could meet
the standard simply by increasing ethanol production. This is similar to the well-known result that
a pollution performance standard may create incentives to expand output if the rate of pollution
increases less than proportionally with production. These results apply equally to my analysis of
an ethanol content standard.

F.3

Calibrating demand

I assume that the fuel consumption component of individual utility is of the form:

v(e + rg) = k1/ε

ε−1
ε
(e + rg) ε ,
ε−1

(39)

so that the household’s maximization problem above yields the following expression for individual
ethanol-equivalent fuel demand:
q(p) = kp−ε ,

16

(40)

where k is a constant, p is the ethanol-equivalent price, and −ε is the constant price elasticity
of ethanol-equivalent fuel demand. The assumption that individual demand has a constant price
elasticity is consistent with my econometric model, which imposes a constant price elasticity of
individual ethanol-equivalent fuel demand. Maximized individual utility is given by
ε
kp1−ε + y.
ε−1

(41)

From here, it is straightforward to calculate aggregate quantities of retail ethanol and gasoline
demand, as well as aggregate household welfare, based on the general expressions available in
appendix section A. Given the functional form assumption above, these expressions depend on
the price elasticity of individual ethanol-equivalent fuel demand −ε, the scale of fuel demand Nk,
the fraction of households that own flexible-fuel vehicles φ, and the distribution of fuel-switching
price ratios H(r).
I calibrate −ε = −0.2 based previous estimates of this parameter in the literature; this is also
consistent with my main econometric estimates for fuel-switching responses, which impose this
same elasticity. I then calibrate Nk based on aggregate gasoline demand and average retail gasoline
prices in 2006 under the assumption that φ = 0. This is consistent with current market conditions
where few households own flexible-fuel vehicles and those that do have virtually no access to
ethanol. I then reset φ = 1 for the simulations. Simulations therefore reflect market conditions in a
hypothetical world where the scale of ethanol-equivalent fuel demand is equivalent to current levels
but where all households own flexible-fuel vehicles. I calibrate H(r) based on my econometric
estimates, as described above.

F.4

Calibrating supply

I assume that marginal costs in the fuel supply industry are given by
∂C(Qe , Qg )
= πe Ke Be ηe + (1 − πe )Kg Bg ηg + ψe + τe − πe θ
∂Qe
17

(42)

and
∂C(Qe , Qg )
= πg Ke Be ηe + (1 − πg )Kg Bg ηg + ψg + τg − πg θ,
∂Qg

(43)

where: πe and πg are the denatured ethanol content ratios of retail ethanol and gasoline; Be ≡
πe Qe +πg Qg and Bg ≡ (1−πe )Qe +(1−πg )Qg are the quantities of pure ethanol and gasoline blend
stocks required to produce the retail quantities Qe and Qg ; the functions Ke Be ηe and Kg Bg ηg are
marginal costs of denatured ethanol and gasoline production, reflecting all costs through delivery
to fuel terminals, with ηe , ηg , Ke , and Kg parameters to be calibrated; ψe and ψg are the constant
marginal costs of distributing fuels to retail outlets and retail marketing, to be calibrated; τe and τg
are retail fuel taxes remitted by fuel retailers to state and federal governments; and θ is the federal
blending subsidy for denatured ethanol.
I assume that πe = 0.85, because retail ethanol contains 85% denatured ethanol. I calibrate
πg = 0.035, which is the fraction of denatured ethanol in gasoline in 2006. I assume 8.8 kilograms
of CO2 emissions per gallon of gasoline and that replacing gasoline with ethanol reduces CO2
emissions by 15% on an energy-adjusted basis. I assume that the constant price elasticity of denatured ethanol supply is 1/ηe = 2.5 and that the price elasticity of gasoline supply is 1/ηg = 1.25,
which are the midpoints of the ranges considered by Holland et al. (2008) based on their reading
of the previous literature. I then calibrate Ke and Kg based on 2006 production quantities and
wholesale spot prices for denatured ethanol and unblended gasoline. I calibrate distribution and
marketing costs ψe = ψg = $0.16 as the differential between average wholesale prices for retail
gasoline and average pre-tax retail prices. I calibrate τe = τg = $0.50 as the average differential
between pre-tax and tax-inclusive retail prices. Finally, I calibrate θ = $0.51, which is the current
federal subsidy for denatured ethanol blending in 2006.

F.5

Numerical solution algorithm

The numerical solution algorithm is as follows:
(1) Choose an initial fuel price vector p0 = [p0e , p0g ].
18

(2) Set initial shadow value of ethanol content constraint to zero: λ = 0.
(3) Compute quantities supplied based on initial price vector and first-order conditions from industry profit maximization problem. If fuel supply industry is not in compliance, increase λ,
return to step (2), and iterate until industry is exactly in compliance with the ethanol content
standard, yielding retail quantities supplied S0 = [Se0 , Sg0 ]
(4) Compute retail quantities demanded based on initial price vector and first-order conditions
from household maximization problem, yielding retail quantities demanded D0 = [D0e , D0g ].
(5) If the markets clear, that is if

D0 − S0 = [D0e , D0g ] − [Se0 , Sg0 ] = [0, 0],
then stop. Otherwise, update the price vector according to p1 = p0 + κ[D0 − S0 ], where κ is a
positive constant. This moves the price vector in a direction that reduces excess demand. In
practice I decrease κ as the number of iterations increases in order to hone in on the marketclearing price vector. Return to step (1), and iterate.

19

