                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  IDENTIFYING PROVIDER PREJUDICE IN HEALTHCARE

                                          Amitabh Chandra
                                          Douglas O. Staiger

                                        Working Paper 16382
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16382


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2010




This research was funded by the National Institute of Aging (NIA) P01 AG19783-02. We thank Gary
Becker, David Cutler, Kevin Murphy, Jonathan Skinner and many seminar participants for comments
that have greatly improved our paper. We obtained access to the proprietary data used in this paper
through a data use agreement between the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) and
Dartmouth Medical School. Readers wishing to use these data must obtain them from CMS. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Amitabh Chandra and Douglas O. Staiger. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Identifying Provider Prejudice in Healthcare
Amitabh Chandra and Douglas O. Staiger
NBER Working Paper No. 16382
September 2010
JEL No. I12,J15,J16,J71

                                              ABSTRACT

We use simple economic insights to develop a framework for distinguishing between prejudice and
statistical discrimination using observational data. We focus our inquiry on the enormous literature
in healthcare where treatment disparities by race and gender are not explained by access, preferences,
or severity. But treatment disparities, by themselves, cannot distinguish between two competing views
of provider behavior. Physicians may consciously or unconsciously withhold treatment from minority
groups despite similar benefits (prejudice) or because race and gender are associated with lower benefit
from treatment (statistical discrimination). We demonstrate that these two views can only be distinguished
using data on patient outcomes: for patients with the same propensity to be treated, prejudice implies
a higher return from treatment for treated minorities, while statistical discrimination implies that returns
are equalized. Using data on heart attack treatments, we do not find empirical support for prejudice-based
explanations. Despite receiving less treatment, women and blacks receive slightly lower benefits from
treatment, perhaps due to higher stroke risk, delays in seeking care, and providers over-treating minorities
due to equity and liability concerns.


Amitabh Chandra
John F. Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
amitabh_chandra@ksg.harvard.edu

Douglas O. Staiger
Dartmouth College
Department of Economics
HB6106, 301 Rockefeller Hall
Hanover, NH 03755-3514
and NBER
douglas.staiger@dartmouth.edu
I. Introduction
       A vast literature in social-science and medicine finds evidence of race and gender
disparities in wages, hiring decisions, mortgage approvals, and medical treatments. But disparities
cannot by themselves distinguish between two competing explanations for why they exist
[Heckman (1998) and List (2004)]: are employers, lenders, or physicians, consciously or
unconsciously withholding jobs, loans and medical treatment from minority groups despite similar
benefit (prejudice), or is membership in a minority group associated with lower productivity or
benefit (statistical discrimination)? In this paper, we use simple economic insights to develop a
framework for using observational data to distinguish between prejudice and statistical
discrimination.
       We focus our inquiry on the enormous literature on racial and gender disparities in
healthcare where treatment differences are not explained by access, preferences, or severity. While
the explanation for disparities in this context may be different than those in labor and capital
markets, given the scope for human wellbeing and longevity it is of tremendous importance.
Disparities in medical treatment measured using regression adjustment, audit studies and Implicit
Association Tests (IATs) are often ascribed to prejudicial providers [Healy (1991), Bogart et al.
(1994), Schulman et al. (1999), van Ryn and Fu (2003), Fincher et al. (2004) and Green et. al.
(2007)]. This view is shared by the Institute of Medicine’s (IOM) Unequal Treatment report which
concludes that provider bias was among the leading determinants of disparities (Smedley, Stith and
Nelson, 2003).
       The key to our model is the Beckerian intuition that under taste-based prejudice,
providers may consciously or unconsciously use a higher benefit threshold before providing care
to minority patients (for example, recommending a treatment to non-minority patients if it
prolongs their life by at least three months, but only treating minority patients if it prolongs their
life by at least five months). One consequence of this type of prejudice is that minority patients
will have higher marginal returns from being treated. Another form of bias occurs when
providers put too much or too little weight on race and gender or misinterpret other patient
characteristics at the time of determining appropriateness (for example, incorrectly thinking that
a black patient who actually receives 5 months of survival benefit only receives 3 months of
benefit). Both of these forms of prejudice, taste-based and imperfect determination of
appropriateness, result in minority patients receiving less care than is optimal, and both predict



                                                                                                     1
higher benefits from treatment for minority patients. In contrast to this interpretation for why
blacks and women (henceforth referred to as minorities) receive less care, membership in a
minority group may predict lower benefit from treatment because of its statistical association
with biology, pre-hospital delays, provider skill, and follow-up care. If providers are aware of the
correlation between these factors and race and gender, the differential treatment of minorities
may be due to statistical discrimination. While both explanations result in minority groups
receiving less treatment, they imply vastly different policies.1
       While it is intuitive to distinguish between the two possibilities by comparing outcomes
for the marginal patient being treated for minority and majority groups, in the absence of
observing exactly what the physician observes about the patient, it is impossible to identify the
marginal patient and measure the benefit from treatment for this patient. Therefore, we address
this complication by proposing a test for provider prejudice that relies on comparing the
`treatment on the treated’ effect for men to women, and whites to blacks. In the absence of
prejudice, we demonstrate that the treatment on the treated parameter is the same for both groups
conditional on a patient’s appropriateness or propensity to receive treatment. This framework
also allows us to ascertain whether physicians correctly determine patient appropriateness for the
treatment. Our framework offers a test based on observational data that is complementary to that
in List (2004) who used data from field experiments to make the distinction between prejudice
and statistical discrimination.
       Our approach to identifying provider prejudice provides several advantages over
ostensibly simpler methods. Regression adjustment, audit-studies involving patient-actors, and
Implicit Association Tests (IAT) are often used to assess the case for prejudice in lending or
how the providers treat similar patients from different demographic backgrounds (Munnell et al.
1996, Schulman et al., 1999, Smedley, Stith and Nelson, 2003 and Green et al., 2007). But the
fact that providers may offer fewer treatments to women and minorities is not by itself evidence
of prejudice—if the benefit to these groups is in fact lower on average because of lower
appropriateness stemming from biological differences in how the treatment is absorbed, or

1
  The literature often uses the terms prejudice, stereotyping, bias and discrimination
interchangeably. We use the terms prejudice, animus, and bias to refer to provider behavior that
results in allocative inefficiency. We avoid using the term stereotyping because both prejudice
and statistical discrimination involve stereotyping—the key is whether physician behavior leads
to greater efficiency or inefficiency in allocating treatment. We have chosen not to use the term
discrimination to avoid confusion with the alternative hypothesis of statistical discrimination.

                                                                                                    2
behavioral factors such as lower compliance or ambulance delays in being taken to the hospital
(although it could be evidence of more macro prejudice against minorities). Yet because it is
impossible to measure outcomes for simulated patients, it is not possible to distinguish between
the two explanations, and consequently, their very different policy implications. Similarly, it may
be tempting to see how physicians of one race (or gender) treat patients of their demographic
versus others, as has been done in recent studies of racial bias in motor vehicle searches
(Antonovics and Knight, 2005; Anwar and Fang, 2006). However, this approach can only
identify whether there is differential bias across physicians of different race, and previous
evidence has found no difference in the how white and black physicians treat heart attack
patients (Chen et al., 2001). Moreover, since the care of minority patients is highly concentrated
within a small set of physicians, studies (including audit studies) that focus on whether these
physicians treat white and black patients differently exclude the substantial number of physicians
who only treat patients of one race. In theory, such providers may be the most or the least
prejudicial, and patients may sort into providers in way that makes this evidence very
unrepresentative of the discrimination being faced by a typical patient (Heckman, 1998).
       In Section II we develop the theoretical model underlying our analysis. Section III
discusses the etiology of heart attacks and their treatments, and introduces data from the
Cooperative Cardiovascular Project (CCP). In Section IV we detail our estimation strategy,
paying particular attention to how the theoretical model developed in Section II will be evaluated
using the CCP data. Section V presents results that support the statistical discrimination
interpretation of treatment disparities. We do not find empirical support for alternative
explanations based on prejudice or bias. If anything, despite receiving less treatment, women and
blacks receive lower benefits, perhaps due to higher stroke risk, delays in seeking care or
providers caring about equity or liability concerns. Differences in follow-up care or provider skill
do not appear to explain our results. Section VII concludes.


II. Theory
       Our goal is to establish whether disparities in treatment rates represent prejudicial
behavior by providers (implying underuse in blacks and women) or statistical discrimination
against these groups. A simple model of patient treatment choice will guide our empirical work.
We assume that treatment is provided to each patient whenever the expected benefit from the



                                                                                                     3
treatment exceeds a minimal threshold. Thus, in the terminology of Heckman, Urzua and
Vytlacil (2006), our model allows for essential heterogeneity where the decision to provide
treatment to each patient is made with knowledge of their idiosyncratic response to treatment.
Within this framework, there are two ways in which a patient’s race or gender could affect
treatment choice: race or gender could be related to the expected benefit of treatment, or could
alter the minimal threshold that must be met to receive care. We define taste-based prejudice to
exist when the expected benefit from treatment for patients of a certain race or gender must
exceed a higher threshold for them to receive treatment. When this is the case, the treatment of
two patients with the same expected benefit from treatment will differ because of their race or
gender. In this situation, there is underuse of treatment for the group facing a higher threshold. In
the absence of any prejudice, treatment will differ by race or gender only if the expected benefits
of treatment are different.
       We illustrate this idea with the case of prejudicial behavior against women; the case for
prejudice against blacks is analogous, with female being replaced by black. Let B represent the
expected benefit from treatment for a given patient (benefit is the gain or improvement in
survival relative to not receiving a treatment; not the level of survival). We focus on the health
benefits of the treatment, which would include any reduction in mortality or morbidity that was
expected from the treatment, e.g. the impact of the treatment on Quality Adjusted Live Years
(QALYs).2 Suppose that the expected benefit from treatment depends on the patient’s gender
(ignoring race for the moment to simplify the presentation), observable patient characteristics
(X) such as age, medical history, and lab results (all of which are allowed to be interacted with
gender and will be in the empirical work), and other factors that are known to the medical care
provider when making the treatment decision but unobserved by the econometrician (ε):
(1)     B  X1  Female 2  
       At this point, we are assuming that providers are not making errors in their estimation of
patient benefit from treatment and that 1 and 2 are correctly estimated. Note that gender (or
race) could be statistically related to the benefit of treatment in Equation (1) because of
differences in biology, pre-existing medical conditions, follow-up care, presence of family

2
  In principal, the benefit could also incorporate the expected impact of the treatment on the
patient’s medical cost, and capture the health benefits net of costs. However, in our application
the differences in treatment costs by gender and race were estimated to be small and
insignificant, so we focus on survival for simplicity.

                                                                                                     4
member, or quality of the provider. Similarly, factors that are correlated with race and observed
by providers but unobserved to the econometrician, will be absorbed into the coefficient on
gender or race. All such differences by gender and race should be taken into account by the
medical provider if the goal is to maximize the benefit to the patient. Thus, differences in
treatment that arise from differences in expected benefit are not the result of prejudice in the
current treatment decision, even though they may be the result of discrimination more broadly
(for example, in ambulance response times or the fact that the treatment was primarily designed
for males).
           Each patient receives treatment if the expected benefit from treatment exceeds a minimal
threshold (τ), where the threshold can vary by gender (or race):
(2)           1  Female 2
Women experience prejudice if  2  0 in Equation (2), i.e. if the expected benefits must be
higher for women to receive treatment. Equations (1) and (2) follow directly from a Roy model
of treatment allocation, where a patient receives treatment if the gain from the treatment exceeds
a cost hurdle of .
           Note that we assume that providers use the right index in equation (1) to determine the
benefit from care. But providers may be using the wrong index—because of clinical uncertainty,
or inattention, they may place undue importance on gender or use the wrong weights on key
comorbidities. In our model, these two forms of prejudice, taste-based and imperfectly
determining appropriateness, are identical – adding an amount to the hurdle is equivalent to
incorrectly subtracting the same amount from the benefit when determining whether to treat a
patient.
           Equation (1) and (2) imply a very simple tobit structure that determines both the
probability of treatment as well as the expected benefit conditional on being treated (the
treatment-on-the-treated parameter). The probability of receiving treatment is just the
probability that expected benefits exceed the minimum threshold:
(3)        PrTreatment  1  PrB     Pr   I ,
            where I  X1  Female 2   2   1
Equation (3) highlights why differences in treatment rates by gender (or race), holding all else
equal, are not by themselves evidence of prejudice. Women may be less likely to receive



                                                                                                     5
treatment because of lower expected benefits of treatment  2  0 or because of

prejudice  2  0. Conversely, equation (3) demonstrates that it is premature to conclude that
there is no prejudice against women based on estimating a coefficient of zero on female in a
regression of treatment receipt. Such a result could mask the fact that there is prejudice against
minority patients  2  0 and that their benefit from treatment is higher  2  0 . Thus, contrary
to much of the empirical literature, it is not possible to identify the effect of taste-based prejudice
 2  from the coefficient on Female in Equation (3) alone.
       However, the effect of prejudice can be identified if information on the treatment effect
among the treated population is available. The treatment-on-the-treated parameter is defined as:
(4)     E B | Treatment  1  E B |   I   X1  Female 2  E  |   I 

Noting that X1  Female 2  I   1   2 Female , we can rewrite Equation (4) as:

(5)     E B | Treatment  1   2 Female  g I ,
         where g I    1  I  E  |   I 
Equation (5) states that in the absence of prejudice  2  0, two patients receiving treatment who
have the same propensity to get the treatment (same I) will have the same expected benefit from
the treatment. Since the propensity to get the treatment (or equivalently the index I) can be
estimated directly from Equation (3), we can therefore identify prejudice from an estimate of the
treatment-on-the-treated parameter: If there is prejudice  2  0 the treatment-on-the-treated
effect is larger for women than it is for men with the same propensity to get treatment.
       It is important to note that Equation (5) does not imply that the treatment-on-the-treated
parameter is the same for all men and women in the absence of prejudice. In fact, Equation (5)
implies that the treatment-on-the-treated effect will tend to be larger among men if men have a
higher propensity to be treated (since g(I) is increasing in I). The treatment effect is the same
only for men and women with the same propensity to be treated, or equivalently for any
population of men and women that have the same propensity distributions (e.g. are matched on
propensity to be treated). Formally, one can see this by noting that the average benefit to men
and women, across all values of I may be expressed as:

(6a)   Bm = E(Benefit | Male, I) dF(I|Male)
(6b)   Bf = E(Benefit | Female, I) dF(I|Female)


                                                                                                      6
Equation (6) makes it clear that even if the treatment on the treated term is identical for men and
women of the same I, integrating this benefit over different distributions of I will result in
finding that Bf < Bm if women have a lower distribution of I (e.g., their characteristics make them
less appropriate for the treatment). However, if the distributions of I are equalized for men and
women (or whites and blacks) through reweighting, the comparison of average treatment benefits
provides a test for prejudical providers. This is the key empirical implication that we will test in
our empirical work.
       The above test relies on the assumption that g(I) depends only on the index, i.e. we must
assume a single-index selectivity model, so that the truncated mean of the error in equation (5)
depends only on the truncation point (I). This would not be the case if the distribution of the
unobservable factors determining treatment (ε) differed by gender or by race. For example, if
providers spend less time ascertaining a female patient’s appropriateness for treatment, then the
variance of the ε’s () might be smaller for women. A smaller error variance for women would
imply a lower truncated mean for any given truncation point – leading to lower expected benefits
from treatment for women, despite facing the same threshold. This would look like prejudice
against men (even though it is the opposite!) so it is important to rule out.
       While we will maintain the single index assumption for our primary analyses, we will
also test its validity empirically. One test for differences in the variance of unobservables follows
naturally from assuming normality and estimating separate probit models by gender or race for
receiving treatment. Because probit models identify /, we would expect to observe a more
muted relationship (smaller coefficients) between observable patient characteristics and the
propensity to be treated for any group for which unobservable factors played a larger role in
treatment. However, this is at best an indirect test since it relies on the assumption that the true 
is the same across groups. For example, one might believe that inattention lowers the effect of
both observables and unobservables on treatment for minorities, so that / remains unchanged.
Again, simply looking at the treatment propensity without estimating the benefits from treatment
cannot clearly identify prejudice.
       An alternative test for differences in the variance of the unobservables comes from
estimating the effect of treatment on the treated patients (Equation 5). In our model, this
treatment-on-treated effect is simply the mean of the truncated benefit distribution that lies above



                                                                                                       7
the hurdle. Holding constant the proportion of patients lying above the hurdle (i.e., the propensity
to be treated), the benefit for treated patients will tend to lie closer to the hurdle when there is
less variance in the benefit distribution, resulting in a lower mean for the truncated distribution of
benefits. In addition, smaller shifts in the benefit distribution will generate larger changes in the
proportion above the hurdle when there is less variance in the benefit distribution, resulting in a
flatter relationship between the propensity to be treated and the mean of the truncated benefit
distribution. Therefore, if there is less variance in the unobservable factors used to determine
treatment for minority groups, we would expect to see both smaller benefits from treatment and
less of a relationship between benefits and treatment propensity among minority groups.
        The graphical intuition for our model can be seen in Figure 1a for the case of no
prejudice, and in Figure 1b for the case of prejudice against women. The expected benefit from
treatment (B) is given on the vertical axis, while the index I (which determines the propensity of
being treated) is given on the horizontal axis. The thick curve in Figure 1a represents the
treatment-on-the-treated effect for a patient with index I, that is it gives EB | B   . Treatment-
on-the-treated approaches the minimum threshold (τ) for a patient with a low propensity of being
treated (a very negative I), since no patient is ever treated with a benefit below this threshold.
For a patient with a high propensity of being treated (a very positive I), truncation becomes
irrelevant and the treatment-on-the-treated effect asymptotes to the unconditional benefit of
treatment, X1  Female 2  I   . Figure 1b shows how treatment-on-the-treated differs for
men and women when there is prejudice against women. The treatment effect among women is
higher at every point, reflecting the fact that the benefit of treatment must exceed a higher
minimum threshold for women (τw> τm).
        When there is no prejudice, as in Figure 1a, if men have a higher propensity to receive
treatment (IM>IF), then they will also have greater benefits from treatment (BM > BF). But in the
absence of prejudice, any two people with the same propensity will have identical treatment
effects if treated. In contrast, when there is prejudice, as in Figure 1b, for any two people with
the same propensity, the group who is discriminated against (females in this example) will
always have greater treatment effects if treated. Thus, even if men have a higher propensity to
receive treatment (IM>IF), they may have smaller benefits from treatment (BM < BF) if there is
prejudice against women.




                                                                                                       8
       Our model shares the same notion of taste-based prejudice as Knowles, Persico and Todd
(2001), and Balsa and McGuire (2003). In all three papers, the decision to take an action (search
a motorist for contraband or treat a patient) is determined by whether the expected benefit
exceeds a threshold, and prejudice exists when the threshold differs by race or gender. The
model of racial bias in motor vehicle searches developed in Knowles et al. is conceptually
similar to our model of prejudice, but differs in one important respect, which makes our
empirical test of prejudice more complicated. In the Knowles et al. model, the returns to
searching motorists in the absence of prejudice are equalized across all subgroups in equilibrium
– otherwise, police would always search motorists with higher returns and motorists would react
by carrying less contraband. The key difference in our setting is that patients are not choosing
any action analogous to carrying contraband, so there will be some subgroups of patients (those
with high propensity to be treated) who continue to have higher returns in equilibrium even in
the absence of prejudice. By contrast, in Knowles et al. because of an equilibrium condition that
relies on motorists responding to the threat of being searched, there is no distinction between the
marginal and treatment on treated effects in the absence of prejudice. Thus, in the absence of
prejudice, the Knowles et al. model implies that the returns to search are identical across
subgroups unconditionally, while our model implies that the returns to treatment are identical
across subgroups conditional only on the propensity to receive treatment (I).
       Our model differs from Balsa and McGuire (2003) in how we define statistical
discrimination, or the alternative to prejudice. In Balsa and McGuire, statistical discrimination
occurs when providers use different decision rules to determine a patient’s appropriateness for
care; there is no outcomes based test. In our framework, finding evidence of these triage-rule
differences is not informative about prejudice because it may be correct for physicians to use
different triage rules, including using information on race and gender to determine
appropriateness. This is analogous to how statistical discrimination is modeled by labor
economists (Altonji and Pierret, 2001). In our framing, the test of prejudice is whether the benefit
of treatment is larger for minority groups relative to others of the same appropriateness.


III. Heart-Attacks: Biology, Treatments, and Data
Heart-Attack Biology and Treatments




                                                                                                    9
          Heart attacks (more precisely, acute myocardial infarction (AMI)) occur when the heart-
muscle (the myocardium) does not receive sufficient oxygen, because of a blockage in one of the
coronary arteries which supply blood to the heart. The blockage is typically caused by a blood
clot that occurs because of coagulation induced by the rupture of atherosclerotic plaque inside
the coronary arteries. Timely thrombolytics, which are also known as fibrinolytics, are
administered intravenously and break down blood clots by pharmacological means (these drugs
include tissue plasminogen activators, streptokinanse and urokinase). Angioplasty (where a
balloon on a catheter is inflated inside the blocked coronary artery to restore blood flow) and
thrombolytics are two treatments that are used for immediate reperfusion (opening up the
coronary artery). Following the clinical literature, we define a patient to have received
reperfusion if any of these therapies was provided within 12 hours of the heart attack (in our data
from the mid-1990s, over 90 percent of patients receiving reperfusion received thrombolytics).
          We focus our empirical work on the treatment of AMI for a number of reasons. First,
cardiovascular disease, of which heart attacks are the primary manifestation, is the leading cause
of death in the US. A perusal of the leading medical journals would indicate that heart attack
treatments are constantly being refined, and a large body of trial evidence points to significant
therapeutic gains from many of these treatments. In this context, racial and gender disparities in
treatments may directly translate into lost lives, and there is a rich tradition of studying racial and
gender disparities in treatments and outcomes after heart attacks (Allison et al. (1996), Canto et
al. (2000), Barnato et al. (2005), Vaccarino et al. (2005), Rathore et al. (2000), Skinner et al.
(2005), Jha et al. (2007)).
          Second, as a consequence of what is known about heart attack treatments from
randomized controlled trials, and more specifically for our setting, the benefits from reperfusion,
we are able to assess whether our regression estimates of the benefits from reperfusion are
comparable to those found in the medical literature, or whether they are confounded by
selection-bias. We focus on reperfusion, where our use of chart data allows us to replicate the
RCT evidence that is summarized by the Fibrinolytic Therapy Trialists' Collaborative Group
(1994).
          Third, because mortality post-AMI is high (survival rates at one year are less than 70
percent), a well-defined endpoint is available to test the efficacy of heart attack treatments. This




                                                                                                    10
would not be true if we focused on treatment disparities for more chronic conditions such as
diabetes, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, or arthritis.
       Our fourth reason for focusing on heart attacks is that it is an acute condition for which
virtually all patients are hospitalized and receive some medical care, thereby allowing us to
evaluate the case for provider prejudice comprehensively. “911” operators and emergency
medical teams are especially trained to recognize the symptoms of heart attacks. This would be
less true of chronic diseases that progress gradually. Nor do we believe that patient preferences
matter as much for treating heart attacks—at least during the acute phase of the heart attack the
therapeutic emphasis is on maximizing survival, which is achieved by timely reperfusion, and
hospital staff (not patients and their families) make treatment decisions. While providers may
specialize in the use of surgical or medical management of heart attacks, as in Chandra and
Staiger (2007), the fact that patients are generally taken to the nearest hospital for treatment,
renders the nature of treatment received as exogenous to the patient preferences. This feature of
heart attack treatments would not be true of cancer therapies where two clinically identical
patients may chose different therapies based on their idiosyncratic valuation of side-effects and
treatment duration. Finally, one advantage of studying heart attacks in the Medicare population
is that black/white differences in insurance (at least for in-hospital care) aren’t a source of
confounding.

Data
       Because acute myocardial infarction is both common and serious, it has been the topic of
intense scientific and clinical interest. One effort to incorporate evidence-based practice
guidelines into the care of heart attack patients, begun in 1992, is the Health Care Financing
Administration's Health Care Quality Improvement Initiative Cooperative Cardiovascular Project
(CCP). Information about more than 200,000 patients admitted to hospitals for treatment of heart
attacks in 1994/1995 was obtained from clinical records. The CCP is considerably superior to
administrative/claims data (of the type used by McClellan et al. (1994)) as it collects chart data
on the patients—detailed information is provided on laboratory tests, enzyme levels, the location
of the myocardial infarction, and the condition of the patient at the time of admission. Detailed
clinical data were abstracted from each patient’s chart using a standard protocol. Further details
about the CCP data are available in Marciniak et al. (1998), O’Connor et al. (1999), and in the
appendix to this paper. The choice of sample and variables is identical to what we used and


                                                                                                     11
described in Barnato et al. (2005) and Chandra and Staiger (2007).


IV. Estimation
A. Basic Specifications
       We use data on heart attack treatments to estimate the key components of our model,
using receipt of reperfusion within 12 hours of the initial heart attack as our treatment. The
propensity to receive treatment (I in the theoretical model) is estimated by obtaining the index
from a probit model that regresses whether a patient received reperfusion within 12 hours of the
heart attack on gender, race, and all the CCP risk-adjusters (X):

(7) Pr(Reperfusioni)= F(Xi + (Female*Xi) + (Black*Xi) + (Female*Black*Xi) + ui)

       In equation (7), the effect of race and gender on the probability of receiving reperfusion is
allowed to vary across every comorbidity. Differences in the coefficients by race or gender may
reflect ignorance, prejudice, or actual knowledge regarding the benefits of treatment (for
example, the effect of diabetes or age may operate differently in blacks). Alternatively, larger
coefficients on X for women and blacks could reflect lower variance in the unobservable factors
determining treatment (since probit models estimate /). Finally, if providers maximize a
different benefit in one group than another (for example, maximize survival in whites, but
maximize survival minus costs in blacks) then we could observe different probit coefficients for
blacks and whites. To account for these potential concerns in our empirical work, we allow for
full gender-race interactions with X in equation 7. However, as we note in Section V, we find
little support for these concerns in the empirical work: the predicted propensity to receive
reperfusion from the fully interacted model was correlated 0.997 with the propensity from the
model with no race or gender interactions.
       Our test for taste-based prejudice is to determine, among patients with the same
propensity to be treated, whether the survival benefit to reperfusion is greater for women relative
to men, or blacks relative to whites. Survival is measured as a binary variable that measures
survival to a certain date (e.g. survival to 7 days, or survival to 1 year). This suggests estimating
models of the following type for women (equation 8a) and blacks (equation 8b), and focusing on
the interaction term with reperfusion:
(8a)   Survivali = α0 + α1Reperfusion + α2 (Reperfusion*Female) + X + e
(8b)   Survivali = α0 + α1Reperfusion + α2 (Reperfusion*Black) + X + e

                                                                                                   12
In equation 8a, α1 is the survival gain from reperfusion for men, α2 is the differential benefit for
women (α1 = Bm, α2 = Bf - Bm ), and X includes full gender-race interactions (including the main
effect of race and gender) with the CCP risk-adjusters.3 However, as we noted in the theory
section, α2 is estimated over different distributions of the propensity to receive reperfusion for
men and women, and is therefore not a precise test of our model. In other words, evidence that α2
< 0 is not sufficient evidence to conclude that there is no prejudice against women, if women are
generally less appropriate for treatment and consequently, have lower treatment propensities. In
the absence of prejudice, our model states that the treatment on treated (TT) effect is the same
only for men and women with the same propensity to be treated, or equivalently for any
population of men and women that have the same propensity distributions (e.g. are matched on
propensity to be treated).

        To test whether the treatment-on-treated effect is the same for men and women using the
framework of equation (8) it is key that this parameter be estimated for men and women with
similar propensities to treated women. Therefore, we reweight the above equations at the time of
estimation using the method of Barsky et al. (2002) to make the propensity distribution of both
treated and untreated males (or whites) look like the propensity distribution of treated females (or
blacks), and also reweight untreated female (or black) propensities to look like the treated female
(or black) distribution of propensities. In other words, the treatment effect for men and women
(or whites and blacks) is estimated for a population with the propensity distribution observed
among the treated in the female (or black) population. We compute the weights by calculating
the value of the 100 percentiles of the propensity distribution among treated females. By
construction 1 percent of treated women are in each of these percentiles. Suppose that mp percent
of one of the other three groups (treated or untreated men, or untreated women) are in the pth
percentile of the treated female distribution of propensity. For such patients we will assign them
a weight of 1/mp at the time of estimation. We provide evidence of the success of this strategy in
the results section.

B. Allowing for Treatment Effect Heterogeneity

3
  Estimating equation (8) with claims data as opposed to chart data would cause us to
overestimate the effect of the treatment: not only do healthier patients receive treatment, patients
also have to survive to the point of receiving treatment (see McClellan et al., 1994 for a
discussion). In Section V, we demonstrate that our estimates are similar to those of randomized
clinical trials.

                                                                                                     13
       An alternative to the reweighting strategy, which examines whether the treatment-on-
treated effect is the same for men and women (or whites and black) with the same propensity to
be treated, is to allow the treatment effect in equation 8 to depend directly each individual’s
propensity to be treated (i.e. to control for the interaction between the index and treatment
directly). This requires us to estimate equations of the form:

(9a)   Survivali = α0 + α1(Reperfusion*g(I)) + α2 (Reperfusion*Female) + X + e
(9b)   Survivali = α0 + α1(Reperfusion*g(I)) + α2 (Reperfusion*Black) + X + e

       In equation 9a, α1*g(I) is the survival gain from reperfusion for men, and α2 is the
differential benefit for women. Thus, this specification allows the return to reperfusion to depend
on g(I) for both men and women, and estimates whether women have different returns to
reperfusion conditional on their propensity to be treated as captured by g(I). We estimate g(I)
non-parametrically with 100 indicator variables for the percentiles of I interacted with
reperfusion (and included directly in X), thus allowing the return to reperfusion to vary flexibly
with a patient’s propensity to receive reperfusion. In this model, the coefficients of interest are
those on Reperfusion*Female or Reperfusion*Black (the direct effect of reperfusion for each
propensity percentile would be given by the Reperfusion*Percentile indicators).4 Moreover, we
can recover the Reperfusion*Percentile effects to examine whether the benefits of reperfusion
are increasing in the index (as they should if the Roy-model framework underlying our
theoretical model is a correct assumption.) Similarly, we explore the possibility that the g(I)
function exerts different effects on survival by gender and race.

C. Learning from Parametric Structure

       Placing simple parametric structure on g(I) in equations 9a and 9b provides an alternative
way to (a) evaluate whether the estimates of treatment of the treated vary by gender or race, (b)
estimate the degree to which unobservable factors affect the benefit from treatment, and (c)




4
 Because we have controlled for g(I) in the regression, there is no further need to reweight the
distributions of men or whites to look like that of treated women or blacks.

                                                                                                      14
quantify any gender or racial differences in the importance of unobservable factors. We can
estimate g(I) parametrically by assuming normality, which implies a tobit structure:5

                                  I  
(10)       g I    1    I 
                                 I 
We calculate the last term in brackets from the estimated propensity to receive reperfusion
(equation 7), and we allow for the two unknown parameters (τ1, σ) by including reperfusion and
                                          I                                         I  
reperfusion interacted with          I   I     in equations 9 (we also add    I   I     to the controls in X).
                                                                                             

                                                                                                                    I  
The direct effect of reperfusion identifies 1, and the interaction of reperfusion with                        I   I 
                                                                                                                          

identifies  In these models the coefficient on Reperfusion*Female or Reperfusion*Black
continue to identify the presence of prejudice, but in a specification where the benefits to
reperfusion are allowed to vary on the index. Moreover, because the second term picks up the
effect of the index on the survival benefit from treatment, a positive coefficient is consistent with
our model where providers use a single index to rank patients on the basis of their benefit from
reperfusion, so that patients with a higher propensity to receive reperfusion also have a higher
benefit from reperfusion.
         Finally, we explore the possibility that the g(I) function exerts different effects on
survival by gender and race. The parametric analog adds an interaction of Reperfusion

*  I   I   with gender/race. This three-way interaction provides a test of whether the variance
        I 

in unobservable factors affecting the benefits to reperfusion (σ in equation 10) differs by gender
or race. If unobservable factors are more important for one group, the effect of reperfusion on
survival will depend more strongly on their propensity to receive care.



5
 Equation 10 is written in terms of the index (I) estimated from the probit model. Recall that
PrTreatment  1  Pr   I , and g I    1  I  E  |   I . If we assume that
 ~ N 0,  2 , then the index (I) estimated from the probit corresponds to (I*/σ), where I* is the
index in our theoretical model. Inserting this into equation for g(I) yields its parametric version:
                        I             I *  I *               I *  
 g I    1    I 
                         I    1      I *    1  I   I *    1  I  E  |   I
                                                                  *                     *               *
                                                                                                                         
                                                                         

Where the last term reflects the mean of a truncated normal.

                                                                                                                               15
V. Results
       In Table 1 we report some basic characteristics of our sample by sex and race. Women
are older than men at the time of their first heart attack, and perhaps consequently, they’re also
substantially sicker, as measured by the presence of heart failure and hypertension. Blacks are
younger than whites, but have significantly higher rates of heart failure, diabetes, and
hypertension. We summarize how much sicker women and minorities are relative to men and
whites by comparing predicted 30-day survival rates (where the prediction is made using all the
CCP data, but not using race or gender). Predicted survival rates are similar for whites and
blacks, and somewhat lower for women relative to men. Actual survival rates following a heart
attack follow a similar pattern, with whites and blacks having similar survival while women have
somewhat lower survival rates relative to men. Thus, these differences in underlying sickness
translate into small if any difference in survival between the groups. However, there are large
differences in actual reperfusion rates, as can be seen in the last row of Table 1. This average
difference in the propensity to receive reperfusion between groups is the principal reason why
estimation of equation 7 in the absence of weighting does not provide a powerful test for
provider prejudice.
       Table 2 reports probit estimates of the effect of sex and race on the receipt of reperfusion
within 12 hours of arriving at the hospital—marginal effects are reported in brackets.
Unadjusted, women are 4.5 percentage points less likely to receive reperfusion, while blacks are
6.1 percent points less likely to receive this procedure relative to whites. Adjusting for all the
CCP risk-adjusters closes this gap for women but not for blacks. However, as noted in the theory
section, the probit coefficients on race and sex capture both differences in the benefit from
treatment, as well as potential differences in the treatment hurdle for these groups. As such, these
negative coefficients do not provide us with a test of prejudice. Finally, in the last column of
Table 2 we add a Female*Black interaction. This interaction, which is insignificant,
demonstrates that the racial disparity in treatment does not vary by gender.
       In Table 3 we present our key results from the estimation of equation 8 for differences by
gender (Panel A) and race (Panel B). The coefficient on Reperfusion reports the survival benefit
of Reperfusion for men (or whites in Panel B), and the interaction effect with sex or race reports
the differential benefit for women (and blacks in Panel B). Focusing on the unweighted results in
Table 3, we see that Reperfusion improves the probability of surviving 30 days for men by 3.4



                                                                                                     16
percentage points. But for women the effect is 1.4 percentage points less. If there were underuse
in women, we would have expected the opposite – higher returns to reperfusion for women. The
unweighted results by race are similar. The effect of reperfusion is 2.6 percentage points less for
blacks. Thus, the unweighted results find significantly lower effects of reperfusion for both
blacks and women, suggesting that if anything there is overuse among blacks and women
relative to whites and men – that is, the lower returns for blacks and women suggest that they
face a lower hurdle in the decision to treat.
          However, as noted by our theory, this is not a sufficient test for prejudice because the
treatment-on-the-treated effect will tend to be larger among men because men have a higher
propensity to be treated (since g(I) is increasing in I). In column 2, we use the method of Barsky
et al. (2002) to reweight the distributions of propensities in untreated females, treated males, and
untreated females to resemble that of treated females. Panel B performs the analogous weighting
for blacks. As expected, the estimated treatment effect for males and whites (the direct effect of
reperfusion) declines after reweighting, because we are now estimating the treatment effect in a
(reweighted) population with a lower propensity to receive treatment. Correspondingly, the
estimated differences in the treatment effect between men and women or whites and blacks (the
interaction of reperfusion with female or black) is smaller, and we are no longer able to reject the
null hypothesis that the effect of reperfusion for patients receiving reperfusion is the same by
gender and race. These weighted results are the direct test of the theoretical model, and find no
evidence of prejudice. Prejudice and underuse would imply higher returns to treatment for
females and blacks, but our point estimates suggest the opposite. Even the upper bound of the
95% confidence interval on these estimates would suggest very little prejudice against females or
blacks.
          Our estimation strategy relies on using the richness of the CCP data to invoke a `selection
on observables’ assumption to estimate treatment on the treated for reperfusion therapy. To
ascertain the credibility of this assumption we can compare the estimates in Table 2 to those
obtained from clinical trials to evaluate the plausibility this assumption. A summary of nine trials
was published in the journal Lancet by the Fibrinolytic Therapy Trialists' Collaborative Group
(FTTCG, 1994). This was the same time-period as the CCP data and each trial evaluated
fibrinolytic therapy in heart-attack patients. Across these nine trials, reperfusion within 12 hours
reduces 35-day mortality by 1.9 percentage points (an 18 percent reduction in mortality). In the



                                                                                                     17
second column of Table 3 we estimate the effect of reperfusion (pooling across men and women)
on 30-day survival as 1.9 percentage points (s.e.=0.2 percentage points). We focus on the second
column because randomization balances the distribution of characteristics between the treatment
and control arms of the trial.6 We take this evidence as supporting the case for simpler
regression models that invoke a ‘selection on observables’ assumption.
       In Figure 2, we examine the success of our weighting strategy to equalize the distribution
of propensities by gender (Panel A) and by race (Panel B). The unweighted and reweighted
propensity distributions are plotted by gender and race for the untreated (left hand side) and for
the treated (right hand side). For reference, we have also included the propensity distribution for
treated females (or blacks), since this is the target distribution that is being matched with
reweighting. In the unweighted distributions, it is apparent that whites and men have higher
propensities to receive treatment, particularly among patients receiving treatment. Therefore, our
model would predict that unweighted estimates of the treatment effect will tend to be larger for
whites and men, even in the absence of any prejudice. In contrast, the re-weighted distributions
(where greater weight is put on the observations that are similar to those of the treated minority
group) look identical to those for treated women and blacks.
       An alternative to rebalancing the distribution of propensities is to control for g(I) directly.
In column (3) of Table 3 we include 100 indicator variables for the percentiles of I as a non-
parametric way to control for appropriateness. We also included interactions of these indicators
with Reperfusion to test whether the benefits of reperfusion increase with g(I) (this is why we
cannot report the direct effect of reperfusion), as they should if providers are ranking patients
correctly and then working down the distribution of appropriateness. The results of non-
parametric specification column (3) is identical to those obtained from propensity score
reweighting suggesting that concerns about imperfect reweighting aren’t a source of bias.
Moreover, in Figure 3, we plot the estimated benefit from reperfusion at every percentile of I,
using local linear regression to smooth the effect across percentiles. The benefit from reperfusion
is increasing with I, as is required by our model and demonstrates that physicians are able to rank
patients so that patients who benefit most from reperfusion are most likely to receive the

6
  Standard propensity score weighting to make the distribution of propensities for the untreated
resemble that of the treated (that is, weighting the untreated by Pr(Reperfusion)/1-
Pr(Reperfusion)), estimates the effect of reperfusion as 2.1 percentage points which is very
similar to the trial estimate of 1.9 points.

                                                                                                    18
treatment. There is evidence of ‘harm’ for patients with very low propensities of being treated
(suggesting that the hurdle is being set at a level where survival is reduced by the treatment), but
there are very few patients getting treatment in this range of propensities.
       In Table 4 we examine results that rely on parametric structure. In columns (1) and (2)
we control for a (demeaned) parametric version of g(I) that was derived under the assumption of
normality in equation (10). We demeaned the selection term in order to report estimates that are
comparable to Table 3 – the estimated treatment effect for an average patient being treated (if the
selection term were not demeaned, it would identify the value of the hurdle). The negative signs
on the female/black*reperfusion variables indicate that if anything, women and blacks have
lower benefit from treatment, but that we cannot reject the null that the benefits are the same for
minority and non-minority patients. In these models, the interaction of reperfusion*selection
term provides a parametric alternative to evaluating whether the benefits to reperfusion are
increasing in physicians determination of appropriateness (which is captured by the selection
term). The positive and significant coefficients on this interaction confirm that this is true and
reinforce the message in Figure 3. None of these specifications alter the key results of Table 3—
in fact, the estimated effect of reperfusion and estimated difference in this effect for women and
blacks are almost identical to what was estimated with the reweighting strategy reported in Table
3.
       The specifications reported in Table 4, column 2 allow g(I) to have different effects on
the benefits to reperfusion for females and blacks through the triple interaction between g(I),
Reperfusion, and female (or black). There is no significant difference between whites and blacks:
g(I) is associated with larger effects of reperfusion for both groups. In contrast, while the benefits
to reperfusion are significantly increasing in g(I) for men, the effect for women is even larger. In
the context of our model this implies that factors that are used by providers (but unobserved to
us) play a larger role in explaining benefits for women. . We will examine this result in more
detail in the section below.


VI. Understanding Differences in Benefits
       The above results may be summarized as finding no evidence of higher returns from
treatment for women and blacks of similar appropriateness. If anything, we have consistent but
statistically insignificant evidence that the benefits for these groups is lower than that for men



                                                                                                     19
and blacks. Before concluding that this evidence represents evidence of no-prejudice, we have to
rule out a number of other explanations. Some of these reasons may actually reflect prejudice
and it is important to rule them out prior to concluding statistical discrimination.


A. Differences in Triage Rules
       First we consider the idea that physicians are incorrectly using different triage rules to
rank patients (by sex or race) for treatment. If this were true, the reason for the slightly lower
benefits for women and blacks could be that less appropriate patients from these populations
were getting the treatment because physicians spend less time and effort in doing the triage for
these groups. These pressures may be exacerbated by the demands of working in a high-pressure,
time-sensitive environment where the potential for subconscious biases such as ‘implicit
discrimination’ is high (Bertrand, Chugh and Mullainathan, 2005). In such an environment
providers may subconsciously use a higher threshold for minority patients but also be biased in
how patients are ranked as appropriate for care – leading to both fewer women and blacks
receiving reperfusion and less benefit.7 We can evaluate this concern directly by estimating
separate probit models of receiving reperfusion by race and gender (e.g. allowing risk factors to
have different impacts on propensity to treat by gender and race), and then examining whether
the predicted values from this more flexible model is similar to a model in which race and gender
enter only directly (as would be the case if they only effected the threshold). The predicted
values are very similar, suggesting that physicians are not using different triage rules for women
and blacks: in the full sample, the correlation between the fitted values is 0.996. For women it is
0.993 and for males it is 0.9958. Similarly, the correlations are 0.949 for blacks and 0.998 for
whites.8
       The similarity of rankings from the two models also helps us rule out other forms of
triage-bias. If providers were maximizing different dimensions of benefit in different populations

7
  More malevolent versions of this story would involve providers offering treatment to the most
appropriate white patients and randomly offering it to blacks, or, in the extreme, withholding it to
the most appropriate black patients.
8
  In theory, it may be the case that on average, the common-effects model produces estimates of
receiving reperfusion that are similar to those from the race-specific model, but there are
significant departures in the tails of the appropriateness distribution. In Jha et al. (2007), we
explore this possibility for a number of heart attack treatments, and note that the two models give
very similar results across the entire distribution of appropriateness.


                                                                                                     20
(e.g. maximizing survival in blacks but survival and quality of life in whites) then the
coefficients from the separate probits would be different and result in weakly correlated
predictions.
       Finally, the similarity of predictions where the effects of comorbidities are allowed to
vary by race and gender to those where they are not, supports the view that the variance of the
unobservable characteristics (to clarify, unobserved to us, not to the physician) is similar across
minority and majority groups (as we noted in Section IV, probit coefficients identify / so
models estimated separately by gender and race will produce larger coefficients for the group
with the smaller variances, i.e. the group for whom providers spend less time ascertaining
appropriateness). However, this would be a premature assessment if providers are more likely to
underweight all information, both the parts that are observed to us and the parts that are not, at
the time of triaging minority patients. In this case, both the betas and the sigmas would scale
down and the predicted effects across models with and without race and gender specific effects
would be similar. But, as discussed in Section IV, if the variance of unobservables were smaller
in minority groups, then the slope of curve relating treatment benefits to the propensity of
receiving treatment would also be smaller in minority groups. However, as was seen in column
(2) of Table 4, while women and blacks benefit less overall from reperfusion, the benefit for
blacks and women does not depend less on their propensity – and for women appears to depend
more on the propensity to receive reperfusion.


B. Differences in Knowing Who Benefits From Treatment
       An alternative explanation for the fact that minorities and women receive lower returns is
that providers are unaware of how to rank patients: in other words, even though the previous
section demonstrates that providers use the same decision rule to rank patients, they should not.
This form of bias would occur if medical textbooks and clinical trials are biased towards
studying the etiology of disease in whites and men, and physicians assume that this knowledge
applies equally to women and blacks. In this case, the return to reperfusion for women or blacks
would be lower on average, and again would depend less on their propensity to receive care (and
could even cross, e.g., with low propensity women benefiting more from treatment than low
propensity men). However, as was just discussed in the previous section, the benefit for blacks
and women does not depend less on their propensity – and for women appears to depend more


                                                                                                     21
on the propensity to receive reperfusion. Figure 4 examines this possibility graphically by
reporting the estimated benefit from reperfusion at every propensity to receive reperfusion,
estimated as in Figure 3 but done separately by gender and race. The evidence in Figure 4
demonstrates that if anything the benefits to treatment are lower for female and blacks at all
propensities (except the very highest for females). Moreover, while estimates for blacks and
whites are roughly parallel, the relationship between propensity and the effect of reperfusion is
steeper for females than for males – the opposite of what we would expect if physicians were
using the wrong decision rule to treat women.


C. Differences in Follow-up Care
       Next we investigate the concern that reperfusion provides similar short-run benefits to
blacks and women, but that a lack of follow-up care leads to worse outcomes after the patient is
discharged from the hospital (usually within a week of the AMI). If this were the case, we would
expect the effect of treatment on short-term mortality to be similar, while the effect of treatment
on long-term mortality would diverge. We explore the time-path of survival in Table 5 and
Figure 5, where we estimate separate models for survival at horizons of 3 days through 1 year.
We find that for women, receiving reperfusion is actually associated with harm during the acute
phase of treatment (the first 3 days). The clinical literature notes that strokes are a possible side-
effect of reperfusion, and while we cannot directly verify that women are having strokes, the
early mortality at 3 days is consistent with this explanation. After this initial phase, there is no
further deterioration of benefits in women; lower benefits for women are largely the consequence
of higher acute mortality associated with reperfusion. Thus, women appear to face greater acute
risk from the procedure, but then experience similar survival benefits in the post-acute phase.
       Blacks also experience somewhat greater mortality risk from the treatment in the acute
phase, although the difference from whites at 3 days is not significant. In contrast to the result for
women, however, blacks in our sample appear to receive lower (but not harmful) benefit in the
post-acute phase—their estimated benefits of treatment remain small even at one year, and the
gap in the treatment effect between whites and blacks continues to grow through 90 days. Thus,
it appears that (like women) reperfusion may harm blacks more during the acute phase of
treatment, but also (unlike women) blacks may benefit less from the treatment after the acute
phase. One possible reason for the lack of post-acute benefit of reperfusion among blacks could



                                                                                                       22
be a lack of follow-up care. But another possible explanation, which we discuss further in the
conclusion, is that blacks are known to take longer to arrive at the hospital because of ambulance
delays and other factors, and trial evidence suggests that the effectiveness of reperfusion declines
sharply with time since the heart attack.


D. Differences in Hospital Skill
       One potential explanation for the lower benefits for blacks is that blacks and whites go to
different hospitals, and that hospitals which treat blacks are not good at the management of heart
attacks. This explanation is motivated by Chandra and Skinner (2004) and Skinner et al. (2005)
who present evidence that minority serving hospitals aren’t particularly good at the management
of heart-attacks: these hospitals exhibit lower 90-day survival for both black and white patients
(this explanation cannot be a determinant of gender disparities in care, since men and women go
to similar hospitals). To explore this theory, we modified equation 8 to include hospital fixed
effects as well as hospital fixed effects interacted with whether a patient received reperfusion.
With these fixed effects we allow hospitals to vary in quality and also in their reperfusion
specific expertise. The estimates are reported in Table 6. Including these fixed-effects resulted in
nearly identical estimates to the results without fixed-effects reported in Table 5, and
demonstrates that the fact that women and minorities receive slightly lower returns is a within
hospital phenomena.


E. Differences in Cost of Treatment
       Finally, we explored the possibility that the benefit from treatment, and therefore the
decision to treat, may also depend on the costs of treatment. Thinking about the costs as well as
the health benefits of treatment is useful for two reasons. First, differences in the cost of
treatment by race or gender may offset the survival differences, e.g. the larger impact of
reperfusion on survival for men may be offset by higher costs of doing the procedure in men.
Second, prejudice could appear in a more subtle form if medical care providers placed a smaller
weight on costs in the decision to treat whites and men – implicitly placing a higher value on




                                                                                                    23
their life. Empirically, we found that the story about costs did not affect the results – because the
effect of reperfusion on cost was similar for men and women and for whites and blacks.9


VII. Conclusions
       We used a simple economic intuition to develop a framework that provides a way to
distinguish between prejudice and statistical discrimination. Our framework relied on the
Beckerian insight that prejudice can be ascertained by comparing outcomes for the marginal
patient (a test that cannot be implemented without observing everything that providers observe),
but recast this intuition by combining information on the propensity to receive treatment with
estimates of the benefits from treatment for those patients who receive the treatment. This
outcome-based test for prejudice is in contrast to much of the empirical literature on prejudice.
       In contrast to what models of prejudice would predict, we find that providers appear to
know of the lower benefits that accrue to women and blacks and consequently use gender and
race to correctly determine patient appropriateness for care. Even the upper bound of our
estimates does not support the case for prejudice against women and blacks. In fact, if anything,
we find that women and blacks have slightly lower benefits relative to a model of pure statistical
discrimination. There are a number of reasons that we might observe such a pattern. Medical
care providers may be aware of the lower benefits of treatment in minorities, but choose to
increase treatment rates for these groups (or lower treatment for other groups) because of
perceived equity concerns. This behavior may be reinforced by malpractice concerns if
providers worry that their decision not to treat a patient based on their race or gender could
expose them to litigation. Alternatively, since few medical trials separately estimate the benefits
of treatments by race or gender, medical care providers may be unaware of the extent to which
the benefits of treatment are lower among women and minorities, or may be unwilling to make
treatment decisions without a documented medical reason based solely on a statistical association

9
  To perform this test, we redefined benefit as the benefit net of costs from treatment:
B  S   C , with S representing the survival benefit from treatment, and C the cost for a patient.
λ is a measure of survival per dollar tradeoff (when λ=0, the medical care provider focuses solely
on survival benefits). A minimum value for a life year commonly used in cost-effectiveness
studies would be about $20k per life year, which implies a value of λ=0.01. For reasonable
values of λ, between 0 and .1, we were unable to reject the hypothesis that the returns to men and
whites were similar to those for women and blacks. These results are available upon request.




                                                                                                    24
between benefits and gender or race. In fact, the absence of such trials or medical knowledge
may be a form of macro-prejudice against minorities (Healy, 1991), but this is a different
explanation than bias in the clinical encounter.
        Other mechanisms for the slightly lower benefits for women and blacks are less benign.
For example, the returns to any treatment might be low unless other treatments are also being
provided (for example, a provider may be less likely to provide reperfusion to black patients
knowing that they are less likely to receive other complimentary therapies such as high-quality
diabetes care or follow-up care after discharge from the hospital), leading to an equilibrium in
which no treatments are ever provided to minorities. While this remains a possibility, in earlier
work we noted that racial disparities in care within hospitals and within areas are not correlated
(see Baicker et al., 2004). For example, the racial disparity in the receipt of high-quality care was
correlated less that 0.10 with the disparity in colorectal cancer screening or cardiac
catheterization. The lack of correlation in disparities would suggest that explanations grounded
in self-fulfilling equilibria are not first-order. It is also possible that lower levels of provider
effort cause lower benefits in minorities. But we did not find evidence that providers triage
patients into care differently, as would be the case if they used all the information at the time of
admission for men and whites, but not for women and blacks.
        In future work it will be important to document the precise biological mechanism that
leads to the slightly lower returns to treatment for female and black heart attack patients. For
women, we interpret the risk of early mortality from reperfusion as evidence that they are at
higher risk of having a stroke—and while the presence of stroke-risk is consistent with the trial
results (see FTTCG, 1994) this would need to be established more rigorously. Such a mechanism
suggests that alternative treatments must be developed for women that reduce the probability of
early strokes. For blacks, lower long-term benefits from reperfusion may reflect delays in
obtaining treatment. Sheifer et al. (2000) and Ting et al. (2008) demonstrate that it takes blacks
longer to arrive at the hospital because of ambulance delays or because of delays in recognizing
the symptoms of a heart attack. In our data 54 percent of whites arrived within 6 hours of the
start of reported chest pain relative to 43 percent of blacks, and blacks were more likely to be
coded as having no chest pain (22 percent versus 15 percent) or having unknown time since
chest-pain at the time of arrival (9 percent versus 13 percent). Because providers do not know the
exact status of the delay confronting minority patients they may treat black heart attacks



                                                                                                       25
identically to white AMIs, but doing so could result in lower benefits for black patients if they
are less appropriate for reperfusion by virtue of their delayed arrival. Efforts to reduce late
arrivals for minority patients are very different from those that emphasize the prejudice channel.
The policy prescription for prejudice is to reduce underuse by performing more treatment in
minorities or better ranking of patients for treatment. For example, the IOM’s report Unequal
Treatment recommends increasing cultural competency for providers and hiring more minority
physicians as ways to make progress on these channels. Under statistical discrimination,
treatment disparities exist because of lower minority appropriateness for care. Thus, policies
should be focused on improving their appropriateness, rather than increasing their treatment rates
(which will only result in prejudice against the majority and could in theory even harm minority
health).
       While we reject the role of prejudice in explaining treatment disparities for heart attacks,
we are cautious about generalizing these conclusions to treatment disparities across all medical
conditions. It is certainly possible that prejudice may be more pertinent in an ambulatory setting
where patient-doctor communication is more relevant for treatment decisions. Alternatively,
prejudice may be less relevant in ambulatory settings where the physician has more time to make
a decision, which helps to reduce the scope for implicit bias, which is most prevalent in a time-
sensitive environment (Bertrand, Chugh and Mullainathan, 2005). Regardless of the specific
context and explanation, our paper provides a general economic framework to evaluate the role
of a variety of bias-based explanations for disparities in care, versus less pernicious alternatives.
In theory, this framework can be used to assess the role of prejudice in other settings such as
hiring, loan applications, and admissions decisions. In all of these settings, disparities in
treatment rates alone cannot distinguish between prejudice and statistical discrimination, but can
do so when combined with estimates of the benefits from treatment.




                                                                                                    26
References
Altonji, Joseph G, and Charles R. Pierret. 2001. “Employer Learning and Statistical
        Discrimination.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 116(1): 313-350.

Allison, JJ, CI Kiefe, RM Centor, JB Box, RM Farmer. 1996. “Racial Differences in the
       Medical Treatment of Elderly Medicare Patients with Acute Myocardial Infarction.”
       Journal of General Internal Medicine 11(12): 736-43.

Anderson, R. D., and C. J. Pepine. 2007. "Gender Differences in the Treatment for Acute
      Myocardial Infarction: Bias or Biology?" Circulation 115(7): 823-826.

Antonovics, Kate, and Brian Knight. 2009. “A New Look at Racial Profiling: Evidence from
      the Boston Police Department.” The Review of Economics and Statistics 91(1): 163-177.

Anwar, S, H Fang. 2006. “An Alternative Test of Racial Prejudice in Motor Vehicle Searches:
      Theory and Evidence.” The American Economic Review. 96(1): 127-151.

Ayanian, JZ, I Udvarhelyi, C Gatsonis, C Pashos, A Epstein. 1993. “Racial Differences in the
      Use of Revascularization Procedures After Coronary Angiography.” Journal of the
      American Medical Association 269(20): 2642-6.

Baicker, Katherine, Amitabh Chandra, Jonathan Skinner, and John E. Wennberg. 2004. “Who
       You Are and Where You Live: How Race and Geography Affect the Treatment of
       Medicare Beneficiaries.” Health Affairs.
Balsa, Ana I., and Thomas G. McGuire. 2003. “Prejudice, Clinical Uncertainty and Stereotyping
       as Sources of Health Disparities.” Journal of Health Economics 22(1): 89-116.
Barnato, AE, FL Lucas, D Staiger, A Chandra. 2005. “Hospital-Level Racial Disparities in Acute
       Myocardial Infarction Treatment and Outcomes.” Medical Care 43: 308-19.
Barsky, Robert B., John Bound, Kerwin Charles, and J.P. Lupton. 2002. "Accounting for the
       black-white wealth gap: A nonparametric approach." Journal of the American Statistical
       Association 97 (459): 663-673.
Bertrand, Marianne, Dolly Chugh, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2005. "Implicit Discrimination."
       American Economic Review 95(2): 94–98.
Canto, JG, JJ Allison, CI Kiefe. 2000. “Relation of Race and Sex to the Use of Reperfusion
       Therapy in Medicare Beneficiaries with Acute Myocardial Infarction.” New England
       Journal of Medicine 342:1094-1100
Chandra, Amitabh and Jonathan S. Skinner, “Geography and Racial Health Disparities” in
      Anderson, Norman B., Rodolfo A. Bulatao, and Barney Cohen (Eds). 2004. Critical
      Perspectives: on Racial and Ethnic Differences in Health in Late Life. Washington D.C.:
      The National Academies Press.
Chandra, Amitabh and Douglas O. Staiger. 2007. “Productivity Spillovers in Healthcare:
      Evidence from the Treatment of Heart Attacks.” Journal of Political Economy.
Chen, Jersey, Saif S. Rathore, Martha J. Radford, Yun Wang, Harlan M. Krumholz. 2001.


                                                                                               27
       “Racial Differences in the Use of Cardiac Catheterization after Acute Myocardial
       Infarction.” New England Journal of Medicine 344: 1443-1449.
Fibrinolytic Therapy Trialists' Collaborative Group. 1994. “Indications for Fibrinolytic Therapy
       in Suspected Acute Myocardial Infarction: Collaborative Overview of Early Mortality
       and Major Morbidity Results from all Randomised Trials of More Than 1000 patients.”
       Lancet 343(8893): 311-22.
Fincher, C, JE Williams, V MacLean, JJ Allison, CI Kiefe, JG Canto. 2004. “Racial Disparities
       in Coronary Heart Disease: A Sociological View of the Medical Literature on Physician
       Bias.” Ethnicity and Disease 14(3): 360–71.
Green, Alexander, Dana Carney, Daniel Pallin, Long Ngo, Kristal Paymond, Lisa Iezzoni,
       Mahzarin Banaji. 2007. “Implicit Bias among Physicians and its Predictions of
       Thrombolysis for Blacks and Whites Patients.” Journal of General Internal Medicine.
Healy, Bernadine. 1991. “The Yentl Syndrome,” New England Journal of Medicine 325: 274-
       276.
Heckman JH. 1998. “Detecting Discrimination.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 12(2):101-
     116.
Heckman JH, S Urzua, E Vytlacil. 2006. “Understanding Instrumental Variables in Models with
     Essential Heterogeneity.” The Review of Economics and Statistics 88(3):389-432.
Jha, AK, ES Fisher, Z Li, EJ Orav, and AM Epstein. 2005. “Racial Trends in the Use of Major
       Procedures Among the Elderly.” New England Journal of Medicine 353:683- 91.
Knowles, John, Nicola Persico, and Petra Todd. 2001. "Racial Bias in Motor Vehicle Searches:
      Theory and Evidence." Journal of Political Economy 109(1): 203-232.
List, John A. 2004. “The Nature and Extent of Discrimination in the Marketplace: Evidence from
        the Field,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 119(1): 49-89.
Marciniak, TA, EF Ellerbeck, MJ Radford, et al. 1998. “Improving the Quality of Care for
      Medicare Patients with Acute Myocardial Infarction: Results from the Cooperative
      Cardiovascular Project.” Journal of the American Medical Association 279:1351-7.
McClellan, Mark, Barbara J. McNeil, Joseph P. Newhouse. 1994. "Does More Intensive
      Treatment of Acute Myocardial Infarction in the Elderly Reduce Mortality? Analysis
      Using Instrumental Variables." Journal of the American Medical Association 272(11):
      859-866.
Munnell, Alicia H. & Geoffrey M. B. Tootell & Lynn E. Browne & James McEneaney, 1996.
      "Mortgage Lending in Boston: Interpreting HMDA Data," American Economic Review,
      86(1): 25-53.
O’Connor, GT, HB Quinton, ND Traven, et al. 1999. “Geographic Variation in the Treatment of
      Acute Myocardial Infarction: The Cooperative Cardiovascular Project.” Journal of the
      American Medical Association 281: 627-33.
Rathore, SS, AK Berger, KP Weinfurt, et al. 2000. “Race, Sex, Poverty, and the Medical
       Treatment of Acute Myocardial Infarction in the Elderly.” Circulation 102:642-8.
Schulman, KA, JA Berlin, W Harless, et al. 1999. “The Effect of Race and Sex on Physicians’


                                                                                               28
       Recommendations for Cardiac Catheterization.” New England Journal of Medicine
       340(8): 618–26.
Sheifer, S. E., S. S. Rathore, et al. 2000. "Time to Presentation With Acute Myocardial Infarction
       in the Elderly: Associations With Race, Sex, and Socioeconomic Characteristics."
       Circulation 102(14): 1651-1656.
Skinner, Jonathan, Amitabh Chandra, Douglas Staiger, Julie Lee, and Mark McClellan. 2005.
       “Mortality After Acute Myocardial Infarction in Hospitals that Disproportionately Treat
       African Americans.” Circulation.
Smedley, B, A Stith, A Nelson, eds. Unequal Treatment: Confronting Racial and Ethnic
      Disparities in Health Care. Washington DC: Institute of Medicine; 2003.
Ting, H. H., E. H. Bradley, et al. 2008. "Factors Associated With Longer Time From Symptom
       Onset to Hospital Presentation for Patients With ST-Elevation Myocardial Infarction."
       Arch Intern Med 168(9): 959-968.
Vaccarino, V, SS Rathore, NK Wenger. 2005. “Sex and Racial Differences in the Management
       of Acute Myocardial Infarction.” New England Journal of Medicine 353:671-682
Van Ryn, M, and SS Fu. 2003. “Paved With Good Intentions: Do Public Health and Human
      Service Providers Contribute to Racial/Ethnic Disparities in Health?” American Journal
      of Public Health 93(2): 248–55.




                                                                                               29
Appendix
Construction of CCP Estimation Sample:
        The CCP used bills submitted by acute care hospitals (UB-92 claims form data) and
contained in the Medicare National Claims History File to identify all Medicare discharges with
an International Classification of Diseases, Ninth Revision, Clinical Modification (ICD-9-CM)
principal diagnosis of 410 (myocardial infarction), excluding those with a fifth digit of 2, which
designates a subsequent episode of care. The study randomly sampled all Medicare beneficiaries
with acute myocardial infarction in 50 states between February 1994 and July 1995, and in the
remaining 5 states between August and November, 1995 (Alabama, Connecticut, Iowa, and
Wisconsin) or April and November 1995 (Minnesota); for details see O’Connor et al. (1999).
Among patients with multiple myocardial infarction (MIs) during the study period, only the first
AMI was examined. The Claims History File does not reliably include bills for all of the
approximately 12% of Medicare beneficiaries insured through managed care risk contracts, but
the sample was representative of the Medicare fee-for-service (FFS) patient population in the
United States in the mid-1990s. After sampling, the CCP collected hospital charts for each
patient and sent these to a study center where trained chart abstracters abstracted clinical data.
Abstracted information included elements of the medical history, physical examination, and data
from laboratory and diagnostic testing, in addition to documentation of administered treatments.
The CCP monitored the reliability of the data by monthly random reabstractions. Details of data
collection and quality control have been reported previously in Marciniak et al. (1998). For our
analyses, we delete patients who were transferred from another hospital, nursing home or
emergency room since these patients may already have received care that would be unmeasured
in the CCP. We transformed continuous physiologic variables into categorical variables (e.g.,
systolic BP < 100 mm Hg or > 100 mm Hg, creatinine <1.5, 1.5-2.0 or >2.0 mg/dL) and included
dummy variables for missing data.
        Our choice of variables was based on those selected by Fisher et al. (2003a,b) and
Barnato et al. (2005). With the exception of two variables that are both measured by blood-tests,
albumin and bilirubin (where the rates of missing data were 24 percent), we do not have a lot of
missing data (rates were less than 3 percent). Included in our model are the following risk-
adjusters:




                                                                                               30
Age, Race, Sex (full interactions) hx angina missing (ref=no)   no-ambulatory
previous revascularization (1=y) hx terminal illness (1=y)      (ref=independent)
hx old mi (1=y)                    current smoker               ambulatory with
hx chf (1=y)                       atrial fibrillation on       assistance
history of dementia                admission                    ambulatory status
hx diabetes (1=y)                  cpr on presentation          missing
hx hypertension (1=y)              indicator mi = anterior      albumin low(ref>=3.0)
hx leukemia (1=y)                  indicator mi = inferior      albumin
hx ef <= 40 (1=y)                  indicator mi = other         missing(ref>=3.0)
hx metastatic ca (1=y)             heart block on admission     bilirubin high(ref<1.2)
hx non-metastatic ca (1=y)         chf on presentation          bilirubin
hx pvd (1=y)                       hypotensive on admission     missing(ref<1.2)
hx copd (1=y)                      hypotensive missing          creat 1.5-<2.0(ref=<1.5)
hx angina (ref=no)                 shock on presentation        creat >=2.0(ref=<1.5)
                                   peak ck missing              creat missing(ref=<1.5)
                                   peak ck gt 1000              hematocrit low(ref=>30)
                                                                hematocrit
                                                                missing(ref=>30)
                                                                ideal for CATH
                                                                (ACC/AHA criteria)
Figure 1a: Illustration of Unprejudiced Provider Behavior



                                                  Benefit


                                         BM


                                         BF


       E Benefit | Benefit   
                                                                                    
       E Benefit 


      I (Propensity to receive Treatment)     0             IF   IM




Figure illustrates the relationship between the expected benefit from treatment (B) on the
vertical axis, and the index I (which determines the propensity of being treated) on the
horizontal axis. The thick curve represents the treatment-on-the-treated effect for a patient
with index I. It approaches the minimum threshold (τ) for a patient with a low propensity of
being treated.
Figure 1b: Illustration of Taste-Based Prejudice




                                                Benefit




                                       BF

                                     BM

       E B | B   F 

                                                                                  F

       E B | B   M 

                                                                                  M


                                                                                       I
                                            0             IF    IM



Figure illustrates how treatment-on-the-treated differs for men and women when there is
prejudice against women. The treatment effect among women is higher at every point,
reflecting the fact that the benefit of treatment must exceed a higher minimum threshold for
women (τw> τm). Because adding an amount to the hurdle because of prejudice is equivalent
to incorrectly subtracting the same amount from the benefit when determining whether to treat
a patient, this is also equivalent to providers incorrectly ascertaining treatment
appropriateness for women.




                                                                                           33
Figure 2: Reweighting the Distributions of Propensities by Sex and Race

Panel A: Reweighting by Sex




Panel B: Reweighting by Race




Note: the unweighted and reweighted kernal densities of the probability of receiving
reperfusion are plotted by gender (panel A) and race (panel B) for the untreated (left hand
side) and for the treated (right hand side). For reference, we have also included the propensity
distribution for treated females (or blacks), since this is the target distribution that is being
matched with reweighting. All reweighting is done using the method of Barsky et al. (2002).




                                                                                               34
Figure 3: Effect of Reperfusion on 30 Day Survival, by propensity to receive reperfusion




Note: Propensity to receive reperfusion is a patient’s probability of receiving reperfusion
within 12 hours of the heart-attack. It is calculated as fitted values from a probit model that
includes sex, race and all covariates, and all interactions with sex and race. After ranking
patients on this index, we calculated the effect of reperfusion on survival at each percentile of
the index (see Table 3, column 3 and text for details).




                                                                                               35
Figure 4: Effect of Reperfusion on 30 Day Survival, by propensity to receive Reperfusion,
and Sex and Race

Panel A: By Sex




Panel B: By Race




Note: Propensity to receive reperfusion is a patient’s probability of receiving reperfusion
within 12 hours of the heart-attack. It is calculated as fitted values from a probit model that
includes sex, race and all covariates, and all interactions with sex and race. After ranking
patients on this index, we calculated the effect of reperfusion on survival using local linear
regression using a bandwidth of 10% of the sample and a linear kernel.



                                                                                                  36
Figure 5: Effect of Reperfusion on Survival over Time

Panel A: By Sex




Panel B: By Race




Note: Figure reports the effect of reperfusion on the probability of survival at 3-365 days after
the heart-attack. For each day of survival, we estimated a separate regression. The propensity
of receive reperfusion is reweighted to resemble the distribution of treated minority patients
(treated females in Panel A, and treated blacks in Panel B).



                                                                                              37
Table 1: Means by Sex and Race of Selected Variables


                                 Men    Women            Whites      Blacks
Sample Size                      70,154 68,803           130,672       8,285

Age                                75.25     78.08         76.72       75.60
Pr (CHF)                            0.19      0.25          0.21        0.27
Pr (Diabetes)                       0.28      0.33          0.30        0.42
Pr (Hypertension)                   0.56      0.68          0.60        0.80

Predicted (30 day Survival)         0.82      0.80          0.81         0.81

Pr (3 day Survival)                 0.92      0.90          0.91         0.92
Pr (30 day Survival)                0.83      0.80          0.81         0.83
Pr (360 day Survival)               0.70      0.65          0.68         0.67

Pr (Reperfusion <= 12 hours)        0.21      0.16          0.19         0.12


Predicted 30-day survival is a summary measure of patient sickness at the time of the heart-
attack. The prediction is made using all the CCP data, but not using race or gender.




                                                                                               38
Table 2: Probit estimates of the Association between Gender and Race on the Probability of
Receiving Reperfusion with 12 Hours

                 (1)          (2)           (3)
                 No           Full          Full
                 Controls     Controls      Controls

Female           -0.170       -0.043        -0.044
                 (0.008)      (0.009)       (0.010)
                 [-0.045]     [-0.008]      [-0.008]

Black            -0.255       -0.251        -0.260
                 (0.018)      (0.021)       (0.031)
                 [-0.061]     [-0.042]      [-0.044]

Female*Black                                0.017
                                            (0.042)
                                            [0.003]


N                138,957      138,957       138,957

Note: Dependent variable is the whether patient received reperfusion within 12 hours. Table
reports probit coefficients with marginal effects evaluated at the point of full sample means in
square-brackets. Probit model includes all CCP risk-adjusters, but does not allow for further
interactions between sex, race and these covariates.




                                                                                              39
Table 3: Gender and Race Differences in 30 day Survival from Reperfusion within 12 Hours,
                            OLS Estimates using reweighting

                                           Unweighted            Reweighted           Non-
                                                                                    Parametric

                                                (1)                   (2)
A: Gender Difference

    Reperfusion                                0.034                0.024
                                              (0.003)              (0.003)

    Reperfusion*Female                        -0.014               -0.010            -0.009
                                              (0.005)              (0.006)           (0.005)


    N                                        138,957               138,957           138,957



B: Race Difference

    Reperfusion                                0.029                0.013
                                              (0.003)              (0.003)

    Reperfusion*Black                          -0.026               -0.020            -0.019
                                              (0.012)              (0.012)           (0.012)


N                                            138,957               138,957           138,957

Note: Results for each column and in each panel are from a linear regression in which the
dependent variable is a dummy for 30-day survival, and that controls for sex, race and all
covariates, and all interactions with sex and race. Regression in column (2) reweights
everyone using the method of Barsky et al. (2002) to look like treated females (Panel A) or
treated blacks (Panel B). Column 3 includes 100 percentiles of I interacted with the receipt of
Reperfusion. Robust standard errors reported in parentheses.




                                                                                               40
          Table 4: Gender and Race Differences in 30 day Survival from Reperfusion within 12 Hours,
        OLS Estimates using Parametric and Non-Parametric Controls for Propensity to Receive Reperfusion

                                                    Parametric g(I)         Parametric g(I)

                                                          (1)                     (2)
       A: Gender Difference

           Reperfusion                                   0.023                   0.024
                                                        (0.003)                 (0.003)

           Reperfusion*Female                            -0.009                  -0.008
                                                        (0.005)                 (0.005)

           Reperfusion*Selection Term                    0.147                   0.097
                                                        (0.016)                 (0.021)

           Reperfusion*Selection Term*Female                                     0.124
                                                                                (0.034)

           N                                            138,957                138,957


       B: Race Difference

           Reperfusion                                   0.013                   0.013
                                                        (0.003)                 (0.003)

           Reperfusion*Black                             -0.019                 -0.016
                                                        (0.012)                 (0.012)

         Reperfusion*Selection Term                      0.148                   0.147
                                                        (0.016)                 (0.017)

           Reperfusion*Selection Term*Black                                      0.000
                                                                                (0.091)

       N                                                138,957                138,957

Note: Results for each column and in each panel are from a linear regression in which the dependent variable is
a dummy for 30-day survival, and that controls for sex, race and all covariates, and all interactions with sex
and race. The parametric selection term in columns (1) and (2) is (demeaned) I+(I)/(I). Robust standard
errors reported in parentheses.




                                                                                                    41
    Table 5: Gender and Race Differences in the Effect of Reperfusion within 12 hours on
                     Survival at Different Time-points, OLS Estimates

Survival at:                     3-day        7-day        30-day        90-day       360-day

A: Gender Difference

    Reperfusion                 -0.004        0.009         0.024         0.032        0.045
                                (0.003)      (0.003)       (0.003)       (0.004)      (0.004)

    Reperfusion*Female          -0.016       -0.012        -0.010        -0.009       -0.005
                                (0.004)      (0.005)       (0.006)       (0.006)      (0.006)

N                              138,957       138,957      138,957       138,957       138,957


B: Race Differences

    Reperfusion                 -0.020       -0.004         0.013         0.023        0.039
                                (0.002)      (0.003)       (0.003)       (0.003)      (0.004)

    Reperfusion * Black          -0.006       -0.015        -0.020       -0.030       -0.023
                                (0.009)      (0.010)       (0.012)       (0.013)      (0.015)

N                              138,957       138,957      138,957       138,957       138,957

Note: Results for each column and in each panel are from a linear regression in which the
dependent variable is a dummy for survival as indicated, and that controls for sex, race and all
covariates, and all interactions with sex and race. Regression reweight everyone using the
method of Barsky et al. (2002) to look like treated females (Panel A) or treated blacks (Panel
B). Robust standard errors reported in parentheses.
Table 6: Gender and Race Differences in the Effect of Reperfusion within 12 hours on Survival
 at Different Time-points, OLS Estimates with Hospital and Hospital Expertise Fixed-Effects

Survival at:                     3-days       7-days       30-days      90-days      360-days

A: Gender Gap in Benefit

Reperfusion*Female               -0.017       -0.013       -0.010       -0.009        -0.005
                                 (0.004)      (0.005)      (0.006)      (0.006)       (0.006)

Hospital FE                        Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
Hospital FE * Reperfusion          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes

N                                138,957      138,957      138,957      138,957      138,957


B: Race Gap in Benefit

Reperfusion * Black               -0.010       -0.019       -0.020      -0.027        -0.039
                                 (0.009)      (0.010)      (0.012)      (0.012)       (0.014)

Hospital FE                        Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
Hospital FE * Reperfusion          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes

N                                138,957      138,957      138,957      138,957      138,957

Note: Results for each column and in each panel are from a linear regression in which the
dependent variable is a dummy for survival as indicated. Controls are included for sex, race
and all covariates, and all interactions with sex and race, along with hospital and
hospital*reperfusion fixed effects. Regression reweight everyone using the method of Barsky
et al. (2002) to look like treated females (Panel A) or treated blacks (Panel B). Robust
standard errors reported in parentheses.




                                                                                          43
