                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 A 'NEW TRADE' THEORY OF GATT/WTO NEGOTIATIONS

                                               Ralph Ossa

                                         Working Paper 16388
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w16388


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2010




I am grateful to the editor Sam Kortum and two anonymous referees. I would also like to thank Pol
Antras, Kyle Bagwell, Gene Grossman, Chang-Tai Hsieh, Stephen Redding, Frederic Robert-Nicoud,
John Romalis, Robert Staiger, and seminar participants at the LSE, Princeton University, WHU Koblenz,
MPI Bonn, Oxford University, Columbia University, SSE Stockholm, IFN Stockholm, Munich University,
UBC, University of Chicago, University of Toronto, UC San Diego, UC Berkeley, Yale University,
IIES Stockholm, CREI/UPF Barcelona, University of Michigan, UCLA, LBS, the 2008 REStud Tour,
the 2008 NBER ITI summer institute, Georgetown University, and the World Bank for very helpful
comments and discussions. The usual disclaimer applies. The views expressed herein are those of
the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Ralph Ossa. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
A 'New Trade' Theory of GATT/WTO Negotiations
Ralph Ossa
NBER Working Paper No. 16388
September 2010, Revised November 2010
JEL No. F12,F13

                                              ABSTRACT

I suggest a novel theory of GATT/WTO negotiations based on the Krugman (1980) "new trade" model.
It emphasizes international production relocations and is easy to calibrate to bilateral trade data. Focusing
on the major players in recent GATT/WTO negotiations, I find that it implies reasonable noncooperative
tariffs as well as moderate gains from GATT/WTO negotiations.


Ralph Ossa
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
ralph.ossa@chicagobooth.edu
1        Introduction

International trade has been liberalized dramatically since the end of World War II as a

result of multilateral trade negotiations governed by the General Agreement on Tari¤s and

Trade (GATT) and its successor the World Trade Organization (WTO). According to WTO

statistics, industrialized countries have cut their tari¤s on industrial products by an average

36 percent during the …rst …ve GATT rounds (1942-62), an average 37 percent in the Kennedy

Round (1964-67), an average 33 percent in the Tokyo Round (1973-79), and an average 38

percent in the Uruguay Round (1986-94).1

        While the case for free trade provides good reasons for applauding this impressive suc-

cess of GATT/WTO negotiations, it also makes their nature di¢ cult to understand. Why

do countries need to negotiate over tari¤ reductions? And what is the role played by the

GATT/WTO’s institutional design? The GATT/WTO is an institution regulating trade

negotiations through a set of prenegotiated articles. The principles of reciprocity and nondis-

crimination are usually considered to be the essence of these articles. Generally speaking, the

former advises that tari¤ changes keep changes in imports equal across trading partners and

the latter requires that the same tari¤ must be applied against all trading partners for any

given traded product.2

        These questions have motivated what can be called the standard neoclassical theory of

GATT/WTO negotiations. This theory invokes the classic optimal tari¤ argument which

is that countries impose import tari¤s in order to gain at the expense of other countries

by manipulating their terms-of-trade. It originates in the work of Johnson (1953-54) who

demonstrates that countries are trapped in a prisoner’s dilemma if they set optimal tari¤s

noncooperatively. It culminates in the work of Bagwell and Staiger (1999) who show that

the GATT/WTO principles of reciprocity and nondiscrimination can be interpreted as simple
    1
     There is some controversy about the scope of GATT/WTO negotiations. Rose (2004) …nds that
GATT/WTO members did not bene…t more from GATT/WTO negotiations than non-members. However,
Subramanian and Wei (2007) and Tomsz et al. (2007) argue that this …nding is not robust.
   2
     I adopt here Bagwell and Staiger’s (1999) interpretation of the principles of reciprocity and nondiscrimi-
nation which I will discuss in more detail later on.


                                                      2
negotiation rules which help countries escape this prisoner’s dilemma.3

    For all its merits, this standard theory has two important limitations. First, it predicts

that GATT/WTO negotiations should revolve solely around the issue of terms-of-trade manip-

ulation which seems implausible to many observers of real-world trade negotiations. Krugman

(1997: 113), for example, …nds the optimal tari¤ argument so irrelevant to actual disputes

over trade policy that he even concludes one cannot make economic sense of GATT/WTO

negotiations at all. Such concerns are somewhat alleviated by recent work of Broda, Limao,

and Weinstein (2008) and Bagwell and Staiger (forthcoming) which suggests that terms-of-

trade considerations could play a role in governments’tari¤ choices. Yet it is hard to escape

the fact that the optimal tari¤ argument is all but absent from the rhetoric of real-world trade

policy makers which is starkly at odds with the exclusive role it ought to play. Second, it is

based on conventional neoclassical trade models which are di¢ cult to calibrate convincingly

so that little is known about its quantitative implications. This is unfortunate since many

important questions are of a quantitative type. For example, are the noncooperative tari¤s

broadly consistent with the non-cooperative tari¤s observed during the tari¤ war following

the Smoot-Hawley Tari¤ Act of 1930? And how large are the welfare gains from GATT/WTO

negotiations?

    In this paper, I suggest a novel theory of GATT/WTO negotiations which is not subject

to these limitations of the standard theory. My main idea is to depart from the conventional

neoclassical trade model and instead build on a Krugman (1980) ‘new trade’model.4

    I …rst show that in a Krugman (1980) environment GATT/WTO negotiations governed
   3
     See Bagwell and Staiger (2002) for a detailed account of the standard neoclassical theory of GATT/WTO
negotiations. An alternative theory of trade agreements was o¤ered by Maggi and Rodriguez-Clare (1998). It
stresses commitment considerations, pointing out that trade agreements may help governments commit vis-à-
vis domestic special interest groups. It di¤ers fundamentally both from the standard terms-of-trade theory of
GATT/WTO negotiations as well as from the ‘new trade’ theory of GATT/WTO negotiations developed in
this paper in that it does not view trade negotiations as a means to internalize an international trade policy
externality.
   4
     While the argument can be made most cleanly in the context of the simple Krugman (1980) model, it
generalizes to more complicated environments. For example, all results can also be derived in a variant of the
Arkolakis et al (2008) version of Melitz (2003), as I discuss in detail in a separate appendix which is available
upon request.



                                                       3
by the principles of reciprocity and nondiscrimination can be interpreted as helping govern-

ments internalize a production relocation externality. In my model, a production relocation

externality arises in the sense that countries can use import tari¤s to gain at the expense of

other countries by attracting a larger share of manufacturing production. While trade policy-

makers are assumed to maximize domestic welfare in the model, their tari¤ choices are exactly

as if they maximized the number of domestic manufacturing …rms. And since the number of

domestic manufacturing …rms translates directly into the number of domestic manufacturing

jobs, this is equivalent to maximizing the number of domestic manufacturing jobs. In contrast

to the terms-of-trade case for protection, these motivations seem immediately consistent with

real-world trade policy debates.

    I then demonstrate that my model can be calibrated using an extension of the technique

developed by Dekle, Eaton, and Kortum (2007). An attractive feature of this technique is

that it relies directly on bilateral trade data and only requires estimates of a few parameters.

Focusing on the six major players in recent GATT/WTO negotiations, I …nd that the predicted

noncooperative tari¤s are of the same order of magnitude as the tari¤s observed during the

tari¤ war following the Smoot-Hawley Tari¤ Act of 1930.5 I also …nd that the predicted welfare

losses from moving to noncooperative tari¤s are moderate and never exceed 35 percent of the

predicted welfare losses from moving to autarky for any country in any speci…cation.

    While I am, I believe, the …rst to study trade negotiations in a ‘new trade’ model, I

am by no means the …rst to study trade policy in such a model. It is well-known that,

in Krugman (1980) type environments, import tari¤s generally have production relocation

and terms-of-trade e¤ects. Venables (1987) was the …rst to develop a version of the Krugman

(1980) model which isolates production relocation e¤ects. Gros (1987) was the …rst to develop
   5
     In particular, I focus on Brazil, China, the European Union, India, Japan, and the United States as these
countries are typically considered to be the main players in GATT/WTO negotiations. I aggregate all other
countries into a seventh trade bloc referred to as the Rest of the World.




                                                      4
a version of the Krugman (1980) model which isolates terms-of-trade e¤ects.67 Essentially,

the positive pro…ts made by domestic manufacturers as a result of import tari¤s can be

competed away either through entry leading to a production relocation e¤ect or through an

increase in wages leading to a terms-of-trade e¤ect. The relative strength of these two e¤ects

is determined by the elasticity of the labor supply curve facing the manufacturing sector as a

whole. Models with freely traded homogeneous non-manufacturing goods generate a perfectly

elastic labor supply curve and therefore isolate production relocation e¤ects. Models without

non-manufacturing goods at all generate a perfectly inelastic labor supply curve and therefore

isolate terms-of-trade e¤ects. Intermediate cases can be constructed with freely or costly

traded di¤erentiated non-manufacturing goods.

        In order to emphasize the novel features of my ‘new trade’ theory of GATT/WTO ne-

gotiations, I isolate production relocation e¤ects throughout. In the next section, I lay out

the basic model and explain how GATT/WTO negotiations governed by the principles of

reciprocity and non-discrimination can be interpreted as helping governments internalize a

production relocation externality. I keep this analysis deliberately simple with the purpose of

clearly conveying my qualitative point. In the third section, I then calibrate a more realistic

version of the basic model and present my quantitative results.



2        Basic model

In this section, I lay out the basic model and explain how GATT/WTO negotiations gov-

erned by the principles of reciprocity and non-discrimination can be interpreted as helping

governments internalize a production relocation externality. I …rst focus on a two-country case
    6
     Venables (1987) studies unilateral trade policy only. Gros (1987) studies unilateral trade policy and also
characterizes the noncooperative trade policy equilibrium. Neither Venables (1987) nor Gros (1987) consider
trade negotiations.
   7
     My paper is also related to the analysis of Baldwin and Robert-Nicoud (2000) who study Venables (1987)
type trade policy e¤ects in an economic geography model. They show that symmetric liberalization between
asymmetric countries leads to international …rm relocations from the small to the large country. They also
show that the large country needs to liberalize faster than the small country if international …rm relocations
are to be prevented. See also Baldwin et al. (2003).



                                                      5
to highlight the role played by the principle of reciprocity. I then move to a three-country

extension to shed light on the role played by the principle of nondiscrimination.


2.1     Two-country case: GATT/WTO and reciprocity

2.1.1    Setup

There are two countries: country 1 and country 2. Consumers have access to a continuum

of di¤erentiated manufacturing goods and a single homogeneous non-manufacturing good.

Preferences over these goods are identical in both countries. They are given by the following

utility functions
                               0                            1
                                X2 Z                           ¬1
                                                     ¬1
                           = @       (  )            A        1¬                     (1)
                                  =1 0

where  is the quantity of a manufacturing good from country  consumed in country , 

is the quantity of the non-manufacturing good consumed in country ,  is the ‘number’of

manufacturing goods produced in country ,            1 is the elasticity of substitution between

manufacturing goods, and      is the share of income spent on manufacturing goods. Tech-

nologies are also identical in both countries. They are summarized by the following (inverse)

production functions

                                           =  +                                        (2)

                                              =                                          (3)

where  is the labor requirement for producing  units of a manufacturing good in coun-

try ,  is the labor requirement for producing  units of the non-manufacturing good in

country ,  denotes the …xed labor requirement of manufacturing production, and  denotes

the marginal labor requirement of manufacturing production. The manufacturing goods mar-

ket is monopolistically competitive whereas the non-manufacturing good market is perfectly

competitive.

   Tari¤s are introduced as a component of ‘iceberg’trade costs which apply only to interna-


                                                 6
tional manufacturing trade.8 For one unit of a manufacturing good from country  to arrive in

country , (1 +  ) units must be shipped and the remainder ‘melts away’in transit, where

   1 is a transport cost and          0 is the tari¤ imposed by country  against imports from

country . To economize notation, I make frequent use of the shorthand                     1 +  through-

out. Notice that, modeled this way, tari¤s do not generate any revenue. This assumption

is essential for the model’s tractability but naturally restricts tari¤s to be nonnegative. The

results presented in this section of the paper are therefore best compared to a version of the

standard neoclassical model of GATT/WTO negotiations in which tari¤s are also restricted

to be nonnegative. I discuss the implications of allowing for revenue-generating tari¤s in the

context of the quantitative analysis in section 3.

       Motivated by the fact that import tari¤s have always been by far the most important

trade policy instruments in practice, my analysis abstracts from export policy instruments.

The tari¤ war following the Smoot-Hawley Tari¤ Act of 1930 is an important case in point.

It occurred before the use of export policy instruments was constrained by GATT/WTO

regulations suggesting that there are reasons why governments typically refrain from using

them. I do not explore these reasons in this paper but simply assume that import tari¤s are

the only available trade policy instruments.9

       I also make the following three additional assumptions: …rst, I restrict  to be …nite so

that          0 overall, where  is an arbitrarily large but …nite upper bound. This upper
   8
     As will become clear shortly, the production relocation e¤ect is closely related to the home market e¤ect.
Davis (1999) shows that in simple setups like the one developed here, the home market e¤ect disappears if
outside good sector trade costs are su¢ ciently high. However, Krugman and Venables (1999) demonstrate that
this no longer holds in more general environments. Essentially, all that is needed for the home market e¤ect
to survive is a margin through which aggregate manufacturing employment can adjust.
   9
     Bagwell and Staiger (2009) have recently argued that this assumption is crucial to be able to interpret the
production relocation externality as a fundamental problem trade agreements are designed to solve. Allowing
for import and export policy instruments in a framework similar to the one developed here, they show that
the noncooperative equilibrium is ine¢ cient only because of export-tax-induced terms-of-trade e¤ects since all
import-tari¤-induced production relocation e¤ects are exactly undone by export-subsidy induced production
relocation e¤ects. Readers who are therefore uncomfortable with my assumption should best view my analysis
as an examination of the speci…c properties of real-world trade negotiations. In particular, GATT article XVI
prohibits export subsidies for manufacturing goods and the United States constitution prohibits export taxes
so that countries only have access to an incomplete set of trade policy instruments in practice. Fundamental
problem or not, it seems important to understand the implications of this institutional arrangement for the
motivation of trade negotiators and the e¢ ciency of trade negotiations.


                                                       7
bound is purely introduced for technical convenience. Removing it would somewhat compli-

cate the exposition without changing the results in any interesting way (see the appendix

for a detailed discussion of the consequences of letting  ! 1). Second, I assume that the

manufacturing sector is always active in both countries. This assumption requires transport

costs to be su¢ ciently large (see the appendix for the precise restriction on ). It ensures

that countries can never attract all manufacturing …rms through trade policy and thereby

eliminates uninteresting corner solutions. Finally, I assume that the non-manufacturing good

sector is always active in both countries. This assumption requires the demand for manufac-

turing goods to be su¢ ciently small (see the appendix for the precise parameter restriction on

 ). It ensures, together with the assumptions made on market structure, non-manufacturing

good technology, preferences, and trade costs that there is no role for terms-of-trade e¤ects

in this environment. I comment further on this latter point below.


2.1.2     Solution for given trade policy

I choose the price of the non-manufacturing good as the numeraire which implies that wages

are equal to one in both countries since the non-manufacturing good sector is always active

in both countries, the non-manufacturing good market is perfectly competitive, the non-

manufacturing good is produced with unit e¢ ciency everywhere, and is freely traded among

countries. For given tari¤s, the model’s solution is then determined by the market clearing

conditions for manufacturing …rms in country 1 and country 2


                                                                 1¬
                                 = ¬ 1 ¬1 L1 + ¬ (       12 )     2 ¬1 L2                         (4)


                                                1¬
                                 = ¬ (    21 )     1 ¬1 L1 + ¬ 2 ¬1 L2                            (5)

                 ( ¬1)                                                                       
where                    are the break-even outputs determined by free entry,             ¬1   are the
                                                                                                   1
                                                                                            1¬    1¬
ex-factory prices determined by pro…t maximization, 1                 1 1¬ + 2 (p   21 )           and
                                        1
                      1¬               1¬
2      1 (p     12 )      + 2 1¬        are the ideal manufacturing price indices, and 1 and 2


                                                       8
are the numbers of consumers or workers. Equations (4) and (5) can be solved immediately

for the equilibrium manufacturing price indices

                                                                       !   1
                                                1 ¬ ( 12 )1¬             ¬1

                                  1 =                                                                       (6)
                                             L1 1 ¬ ( 21 12 )1¬

                                                                       !   1
                                                1 ¬ ( 21 )1¬             ¬1

                                  2 =                                                                       (7)
                                             L2 1 ¬ ( 21 12 )1¬

If the de…nitions of the manufacturing price indices are substituted, they can also be solved

for the equilibrium numbers of manufacturing …rms
                                                                                 !
                                                                           1¬
                                                 1             2 (   21 )
                              1 =                      1¬    ¬             1¬                               (8)
                                        1¬(       12 )        1¬(     21 )

                                                                                 !
                                                                           1¬
                                                 2             1 (   12 )
                              2 =                      1¬    ¬             1¬                               (9)
                                        1¬(       21 )        1¬(     12 )

Notice that this equilibrium has three special features. First, the world number of manufactur-
                                              (1 +2 )
ing …rms is constant since 1 + 2 =                  .   Second, tari¤s a¤ect welfare only through the

manufacturing price indices since indirect utilities are given by  =                  (1 ¬ )(1¬    )
                                                                                                          ¬
                                                                                                              .

Finally, there can be no role for terms-of-trade e¤ects since ex-factory prices are independent

of trade policy.10 These features all help to clarify the argument but are not crucial for the

main results.


2.1.3    Production relocation e¤ect and import price e¤ect

Equations (6) and (7) reveal that each country’s price index is monotonically decreasing in

its own tari¤ regardless of the other country’s tari¤ but monotonically increasing in the other

country’s tari¤ regardless of the own tari¤ so that each country can always use trade policy
  10
     I follow the literature in de…ning the terms-of-trade as the ratio of ex-factory prices which is equal to 1
in this model. One may object that this is a too narrow de…nition since terms-of-trade e¤ects should really
operate through price indices in this environment. I show below that, even if such a wider de…nition is adopted,
my results can still not be interpreted as terms-of-trade e¤ects.



                                                        9
to gain at the other country’s expense. This trade policy externality is brought about by

a production relocation e¤ect. In particular, a unilateral increase in import tari¤s makes

foreign manufacturing goods more expensive in the domestic market so that domestic con-

sumers shift expenditure towards domestic manufacturing goods. As a consequence, domestic

manufacturing …rms sell more thus making pro…ts and foreign manufacturing …rms sell less

thus making losses which triggers entry into the domestic manufacturing sector and exit out

of the foreign manufacturing sector, as is also re‡ected in equations (8) and (9). This produc-

tion relocation e¤ect reduces the domestic price index but increases the foreign price index

since it reduces the share of manufacturing goods consumed by domestic consumers which is

subject to trade costs but increases the share of manufacturing goods consumed by foreign

consumers which is subject to trade costs.1112 While this production relocation e¤ect is the

only channel through which domestic tari¤s a¤ect foreign welfare, domestic welfare is also

a¤ected by a counteracting but dominated import price e¤ect. In particular, domestic import

tari¤s also directly increase the domestic price index by making still-imported manufacturing

goods more expensive. The reason why the production relocation e¤ect always dominates

the import price e¤ect can be best understood with the help of equations (4) and (5). A

unilateral increase in import tari¤s initially increases the domestic price index because of the

import price e¤ect which increases sales and pro…ts of domestic …rms. To restore equilib-

rium, there has to be entry into the domestic manufacturing sector and exit out of the foreign

manufacturing sector which reduces the domestic price index and increases the foreign price

index. This e¤ect makes it harder for domestic …rms to sell goods in the domestic market but

easier for domestic …rms to sell goods in the foreign market so that the domestic post-tari¤
  11
      Notice that the production relocation e¤ect depends crucially on increasing returns to scale. Essentially,
it is a tari¤-induced change in the pattern of specialization brought about by changes in relative market size
which cannot arise in neoclassical environments.
   12
      Notice that the production relocation gain could still not be interpreted as a terms-of-trade gain even if a
price-index-based de…nition of the terms-of-trade was adopted. This is because country ’s terms-of-trade would
                              exp             1
                                                                       1
                                           1¬
then have to be de…ned as        =   
                                                  since exp
                                                            =  1¬   1¬
                                                                             is the world price index of country ’s
                            
                                                   1
manufacturing exports and 
                                =  1¬       is the world price index of country ’s manufacturing imports
                                                  1¬

and would therefore deteriorate and not improve in country ’s tari¤.



                                                         10
equilibrium price index must be below its pre-tari¤ level. If it merely returned to its pre-tari¤

level, domestic …rms could still export more than before and would therefore make positive

pro…ts.


2.1.4      Noncooperative trade policy

I now consider what happens if governments choose trade policy noncooperatively in an at-

tempt to maximize their citizens’welfare. While welfare maximization is …rst and foremost a

simplifying assumption, it is actually more realistic than one might think. Maggi and Gold-

berg (1999), for example, …nd that the weight of welfare in the government’s objective function

is many times larger than the weight of trade-policy-in‡uencing campaign contributions.

       Notice …rst that the noncooperative equilibrium is maximum protection. This result fol-

lows immediately from the fact that each country’s price index is monotonically decreasing

in its own tari¤ regardless of the other country’s tari¤ and is stated more formally in lemma

1:13


Lemma 1 Suppose that governments choose tari¤ s simultaneously in an attempt to maximize
                                                                           ¬
their citizens’ welfare. Then the unique Nash equilibrium is (21  12 ) =   .


Proof. Follows immediately from equations (6) and (7).


       Observe second that a tari¤ combination is e¢ cient if and only if the tari¤ is zero in at

least one of the countries. Intuitively, there always exists a bilateral tari¤ reduction which

reduces one country’s price index without a¤ecting the other country’s price index by ap-

propriately balancing the import price e¤ect and the production relocation e¤ect. However,

bilateral tari¤ reductions are only possible if tari¤s are positive in both countries so that

Pareto improvements cannot be achieved if the tari¤ is zero in at least one of the countries:14
  13
     This stark result emerges because production relocations are the only motivation for protection in this
environment. In the presence of tari¤ revenue, the noncooperative equilibrium involves less than maximum
protection, as I discuss in detail in the quantitative application in section 3. Nevertheless, the noncooperative
equilibrium remains ine¢ cient in this case since tari¤s continue to entail a production relocation externality.
  14
     Recall that the iceberg trade barriers assumption restricts tari¤s to be nonnegative. Lemma 2 therefore


                                                       11
Lemma 2 The set of Pareto-e¢ cient tari¤ combinations consists of all (21  12 ) such that

either 21 = 0, 12 = 0, or both.


Proof. See the appendix for a formal proof.


   Thus, the noncooperative equilibrium is ine¢ cient. While the details of lemma 1 and 2

clearly re‡ect speci…c modeling assumptions, this result captures a …rst fundamental point:

tari¤s entail a production relocation externality which governments fail to internalize when

setting tari¤s noncooperatively. It is therefore stated as proposition 1:


Proposition 1 The noncooperative equilibrium is ine¢ cient.


Proof. Follows immediately from lemmas 1 and 2.



2.1.5   Trade policy under the GATT/WTO: the principle of reciprocity

I now contrast this noncooperative equilibrium with the outcome achieved under the GATT/WTO

principle of reciprocity as interpreted by Bagwell and Staiger (1999). Generally speaking, the

principle of reciprocity advises that tari¤ changes keep changes in imports equal across trad-

ing partners. However, this principle has two particular applications in GATT/WTO practice

and is not binding to the same degree in both these applications. First, governments are to

seek a ‘balance of concessions’during rounds of trade liberalization in the sense that they cut

tari¤s reciprocally. While this application is considered to be an important negotiation norm

in practice it is actually not encoded in GATT/WTO articles and is therefore not binding in

a legal sense. Second, governments are entitled to ‘withdraw substantially equivalent conces-

sions’if a trading partner increases previously bound tari¤s in the sense that they retaliate

reciprocally. This right is encoded in GATT/WTO articles and therefore has legal status.
characterizes a constrained e¢ ciency frontier. This feature should be kept in mind when comparing this
e¢ ciency frontier to the Mayer locus featuring in the neoclassical theory of GATT/WTO negotiations.




                                                  12
In light of this discussion, I adopt the following formal de…nition of reciprocity, where  

denotes the di¤erence between the value of country ’s manufacturing exports and imports:15

De…nition 1 De…ne a tari¤ change to be reciprocal if it is such that  1 =  2 = 0.

       Notice …rst that the principle of reciprocity completely eliminates all trade policy exter-

nalities. Given aggregate manufacturing market clearing, the number of manufacturing …rms

operating in country  can be decomposed as follows:

                                                     L +  
                                             =                                                          (10)
                                                        

The numerator is just the total expenditure on country ’s manufacturing goods since this can

be decomposed into the total expenditure on country ’s and country ’s manufacturing goods

by country ’s consumers ( L ), plus the total expenditure on country ’s manufacturing goods

by country ’s consumers (manufacturing exports of country ), minus the total expenditure on

country ’s manufacturing goods by country ’s consumers (manufacturing imports of country

). The denominator is just the (constant) sales of country ’s manufacturing …rms. Hence,

if   is …xed by reciprocity, country ’s number of manufacturing …rms is …xed as well.

Intuitively, tari¤-induced changes in country ’s consumer expenditure towards or away from

country ’s manufacturing goods are then exactly o¤set by tari¤-induced changes in country

’s consumer expenditure away from or towards these goods. This result is summarized as

lemma 3:16

Lemma 3 Tari¤ changes leave the number of …rms unchanged in both countries if and only

if they are reciprocal.
  15
     While I follow Bagwell and Staiger’s (1999) interpretation of the principle of reciprocity, I adapt their
formal de…nition to my speci…c setting by applying it only to manufacturing trade. This adaptation makes it
distinct from the de…nition used by Bagwell and Staiger (2001) in the comparable ‘outside good’setting since
they continue to include non-manufacturing trade.
  16
     Of course, reciprocal tari¤ changes only leave the number of …rms unchanged in both countries if the world
number of manufacturing …rms is independent of trade policy. This is the case in this environment but depends
on functional form assumptions. More generally, the principle of reciprocity prevents countries from gaining at
the expense of one another by ruling out changes in the manufacturing trade balance which shift expenditure
away from one country’s manufacturing sector towards the other country’s manufacturing sector.


                                                      13
Proof. Follows immediately from equation (10) and the de…nition of reciprocity.


    Observe second that reciprocal tari¤ concessions increase welfare monotonically in both

countries. Recall that a country’s price index is a¤ected by its own tari¤ through two op-

posing e¤ects: the production relocation e¤ect which tends to make a country’s price index

decreasing in its own tari¤; and the import price e¤ect which tends to make a country’s price

index increasing in its own tari¤. As was discussed above, the production relocation e¤ect

dominates the import price e¤ect so that a country’s price index is decreasing in its own tar-

i¤. However, if the production relocation e¤ect is eliminated by reciprocity, only the import

price e¤ect remains so that a country’s price index then becomes increasing in its own tari¤.

While the details of lemma 3 again re‡ect speci…c modeling assumptions, this result captures

a second fundamental point: the principle of reciprocity makes countries internalize the pro-

duction relocation externality by ruling out changes in the manufacturing trade balance which

shift expenditure away from one country’s manufacturing sector towards the other country’s

manufacturing sector. It is therefore stated as proposition 2:


Proposition 2 Reciprocal trade liberalization monotonically increases welfare in both coun-

tries.


Proof. Follows immediately from lemma 3 and the de…nitions of manufacturing price indices.




    Notice …nally that the principle of reciprocity therefore not only guides countries away from

the ine¢ cient noncooperative equilibrium in a way which monotonically increases welfare in

all countries but also secures negotiated tari¤ concessions by eliminating all incentives to

reverse them. Suppose that, starting at the noncooperative equilibrium, country  assumes

the leadership in trade negotiations. Then, since country  is to respond reciprocally to any

tari¤ reduction by country , i.e. since country  is to seek a ‘balance of concessions’, country

 immediately has an incentive to initiate reciprocal trade liberalization which monotonically


                                               14
increases welfare in both countries. Also, since country  is entitled to respond reciprocally

to any tari¤ increase by country , i.e. since country  is entitled to ‘withdraw substantially

equivalent concessions’, country  never has an incentive to increase its tari¤ so that negotiated

tari¤ concessions can be secured.17 In summary, the principle of reciprocity can thus be seen

as helping governments escape the ine¢ cient noncooperative equilibrium in a way which

monotonically increases welfare in all countries.18


2.2      Three-country case: GATT/WTO and nondiscrimination

While the basic two-country model is thus useful to illustrate the role played by the GATT/WTO

principle of reciprocity, it is too simple to shed light on the role played by the GATT/WTO

principle of nondiscrimination. For this reason, I now consider an extension of this model. In

particular, I focus on the simplest possible setup that allows for discriminatory tari¤ setting.

There are now three countries. Country 1 trades with both country 2 and country 3, but coun-

try 2 and country 3 trade with country 1 only so that only country 1 can set discriminatory

tari¤s. Everything else is just as in the basic model.

       All results regarding noncooperative trade policy naturally generalize to the three-country

case. Most importantly, the noncooperative equilibrium is still ine¢ cient because tari¤s entail

a production relocation externality which governments fail to internalize when setting tari¤s

noncooperatively. Readers interested in the details of the noncooperative equilibrium can …nd

the solution of the three-country model together with the three-country versions of lemma 1,

lemma 2, and proposition 1 in the appendix.

       However, this similarity conceals that tari¤s now have more complicated international

implications. Besides the import price e¤ect, there is now both a bilateral as well as a
  17
      Thus, any tari¤ combination can be sustained under reciprocity in this environment. Together with
lemma 2, this result implies that all e¢ cient tari¤ combinations can be sustained under reciprocity. This
…nding di¤ers from the …nding of Bagwell and Staiger (1999) that, absent political economy forces, free trade
is the only e¢ cient tari¤ combination which can be sustained under reciprocity. Recall, however, that lemma
2 characterizes constrained e¢ cient tari¤s so that this di¤erence should not be overemphasized.
   18
      In fact, the principle of reciprocity not only helps governments escape the ine¢ cient equilibrium but also
directly guides them to e¢ cient tari¤s. This is because countries can liberalize their trade reciprocally unless
one country has completely eliminated all its tari¤s which is su¢ cient for e¢ ciency from lemma 2.


                                                       15
multilateral production relocation e¤ect. The bilateral production relocation e¤ect is an

e¤ect between the two countries directly a¤ected by the tari¤ and is just the production

relocation e¤ect familiar from the two-country model: for example, a tari¤ imposed by country

1 against country 2 leads to production relocations from country 2 to country 1 since this

increases the sales and pro…ts of manufacturing …rms in country 1 and reduces the sales and

pro…ts of manufacturing …rms in country 2. The multilateral production relocation e¤ect is

an additional e¤ect on the third country which is not directly a¤ected by the tari¤. This

multilateral production relocation e¤ect works through changes in country 1’s manufacturing

price index: for example, since a tari¤ imposed by country 1 against country 2 leads to

production relocations from country 2 towards country 1, country 1’s manufacturing price

index falls. If country 1’s manufacturing price index falls, country 1’s market becomes more

competitive which makes it harder for …rms in country 3 to sell their products to country 1.

If it becomes harder for …rms in country 3 to sell their products to country 1, the number of

…rms operating in country 3 has to fall in equilibrium so that a tari¤ imposed by country 1

against country 2 does not only lead to production relocations from country 2 to country 1

but also from country 3 to country 1.

   The presence of this multilateral production relocation e¤ect implies that the properties of

the principle of reciprocity only all generalize to the three-country case if countries engage in

multilateral trade negotiations. In particular, the principle of reciprocity now only completely

eliminates all trade policy externalities if it is applied in multilateral trade negotiations. Also,

the principle of reciprocity now only ensures that negotiated tari¤ concessions increase welfare

monotonically in all countries if it is applied in multilateral trade negotiations. Adapting the

earlier de…nition of reciprocity to the three country case, tari¤ changes are now to be bilat-

erally reciprocal in bilateral trade negotiations and multilaterally reciprocal in multilateral

trade negotiations, where bilaterally reciprocal and multilaterally reciprocal tari¤ changes are

formally de…ned as follows:


De…nition 2 De…ne a tari¤ change to be bilaterally reciprocal between country 1 and country

                                                16
2 if it is such that  2 = 0 and bilaterally reciprocal between country 1 and country 3 if it

is such that  3 = 0. De…ne a tari¤ change to be multilaterally reciprocal if it is such that

 1 =  2 =  3 = 0.

   Given aggregate manufacturing market clearing, the number of manufacturing …rms op-

erating in country  can again be decomposed as follows:

                                            L +  
                                        =                                                  (11)
                                               

Hence, if country 1 and country 2 change tari¤s in a bilaterally reciprocal way, the number of

…rms in country 2 remains unchanged. Therefore, the principle of reciprocity completely elim-

inates the bilateral production relocation e¤ect if it is applied in bilateral trade negotiations.

Also, if all countries change tari¤s in a multilaterally reciprocal way, the number of …rms

remains unchanged in all countries. Therefore, the principle of reciprocity completely elimi-

nates both the bilateral as well as the multilateral production relocation e¤ect if it is applied

in multilateral trade negotiations. Although not obvious from equation (11), the principle of

reciprocity is not su¢ cient to also eliminate the multilateral production relocation e¤ect if it

is applied in bilateral trade negotiations. This is because bilaterally reciprocal tari¤ changes

between country 1 and country 2 change country 1’s price index thereby a¤ecting the sales

of …rms in country 3. In particular, if country 1 and country 2 liberalize in a bilaterally

reciprocal way, country 1’s price index falls which makes it harder for …rms in country 3 to

export their goods to country 1. As a consequence, …rms in country 3 make losses unless some

production relocates to country 1. This result is summarized in lemma 6:

Lemma 4 Tari¤ changes leave the number of …rms unchanged in all countries if and only if

they are multilaterally reciprocal. Moreover, bilaterally reciprocal trade liberalization between

country 1 and country 2 leaves the number of …rms unchanged in country 2 but monotonically

increases the number of …rms in country 1 at the expense of country 3. Similarly, bilaterally

reciprocal trade liberalization between country 1 and country 3 leaves the number of …rms

                                               17
unchanged in country 3 but monotonically increases the number of …rms in country 1 at the

expense of country 2.

Proof. See the appendix for a formal proof.

       Moreover, if country 1 and country 2 liberalize in a bilaterally reciprocal way, only the

bilateral production relocation e¤ect is neutralized so that country 2 gains because of the

import price e¤ect, country 1 gains because of the import price e¤ect and the multilateral

production relocation e¤ect, but country 3 loses because of the multilateral production relo-

cation e¤ect. If, instead, country 1, country 2, and country 3 liberalize in a multilaterally

reciprocal way, the multilateral production relocation e¤ect is also neutralized so that all

countries gain because of the import price e¤ect. This result is summarized in proposition 4:

Proposition 3 Multilaterally reciprocal trade liberalization monotonically increases welfare

in all countries. Moreover, bilaterally reciprocal trade liberalization between country 1 and

country 2 monotonically increases welfare in country 1 and country 2 but monotonically de-

creases welfare in country 3. Similarly, bilaterally reciprocal trade liberalization between coun-

try 1 and country 3 monotonically increases welfare in country 1 and country 3 but monoton-

ically decreases welfare in country 2.

Proof. See appendix A2 for a formal proof.

       Hence, the principle of reciprocity alone is now only su¢ cient to help countries overcome

the ine¢ cient noncooperative equilibrium in a way which monotonically increases welfare in

all countries if it is applied in multilateral trade negotiations. This observation suggests that

an important role played by the principle of nondiscrimination simply is to multilateralize

trade negotiations.1920 Under the principle of nondiscrimination, country 1 has to impose the
  19
     Notice that countries do not necessarily have an incentive to engage in multilateral trade negotiations.
For example, it is easy to show that country 1 would always prefer sequential bilateral trade negotiations to
simultaneous multilateral trade negotiations in the special case of symmetric countries. This is because country
1 gains only because of the import price e¤ect in simultaneous multilateral trade negotiations but also because
of the multilateral production relocation e¤ect in sequential bilateral trade negotiations.
  20
     GATT/WTO articles allow countries to sign preferential trade agreements as an important exception to the


                                                      18
same tari¤ against country 2 and country 3 so that country 1 cannot change its tari¤ against

country 2 or country 3 only. As a consequence, country 2 and country 3 are then both autho-

rized to respond to any tari¤ change by country 1 in a way which keeps their manufacturing

trade balances unchanged so that multilateral reciprocity prevails. This simple interpretation

actually squares well with the justi…cation given by US Secretary of State Cordell Hull for

making the principle of nondiscrimination a cornerstone of the US Reciprocal Trade Agree-

ments Act of 1934 on which the GATT/WTO is largely based. As summarized by Bagwell

and Staiger (2002: 72), Hull regarded the principle of nondiscrimination as bene…cial "since

it o¤ered a way to multilateralize the reciprocal tari¤ reductions that governments might

negotiate bilaterally". It is important to emphasize that, according to this interpretation,

the principle of reciprocity alone continues to reverse all incentives for protection so that the

principle of nondiscrimination plays no e¢ ciency enhancing role. Instead, it only ensures that

all trade policy externalities are eliminated so that governments cannot gain at the expense

of one another and welfare increases monotonically in all countries during all stages of the

liberalization process.2122
principle of nondiscrimination. This exception has generated a debate on whether preferential trade agreements
are ‘building blocs’ or ‘stumbling blocs’ on the way to multilateral free trade. See Panagariya (2000) for a
survey of the literature.
   21
      Notice that the principle of nondiscrimination plays a di¤erent role in Bagwell and Staiger (1999). There,
it does not neutralize the multilateral terms-of-trade e¤ect by multilateralizing trade negotiations but instead
by equalizing all bilateral terms-of-trade. In fact, multilateralizing trade negotiations would not be su¢ cient
to neutralize the multilateral terms-of-trade e¤ect because the multilateral terms-of-trade are a trade-weighted
average of the bilateral terms-of-trade and thus depend on trade shares unless the bilateral terms-of-trade
are equalized. One implication of this di¤erence is that the principles of reciprocity and nondiscrimination
neutralize all third party externalities without requiring any third party response in Bagwell and Staiger
(1999).
   22
      Notice that reciprocal trade liberalization no longer necessarily leads to e¢ cient tari¤s if the principle of
nondiscrimination is imposed. This is because reciprocity and nondiscrimination can only be satis…ed if all
tari¤s are lowered simultaneously, as can be easily established by di¤erentiating the three-country versions of
the manufacturing market clearing conditions. But this is impossible if at least one of the tari¤s is equal to
zero which is not su¢ cient for e¢ ciency, as can be seen from the three-country version of lemma 2. Recall,
however, that the requirement to liberalize reciprocally is not binding in a legal sense so that this feature of
the principle of nondiscrimination should not be overemphasized.




                                                        19
3     Quantitative application

In this section, I calibrate a more realistic version of the basic model and present my quanti-

tative results. This version is more realistic in four ways. First, there are now  countries and

trade can ‡ow between all of them. Second, tari¤s now generate revenue which is distributed

in a lump-sum fashion to consumers. Third, production and trading technologies are now

asymmetric in the sense that marginal costs  and …xed costs  are allowed to vary across

countries and transport costs are allowed to vary across exporter-importer pairs. And …nally,

there are now aggregate trade imbalances captured by an exogenous trade surplus parameter

  . Everything else is just as in the basic model.

    For given tari¤s, the model’s solution is now determined by the following equations which

represent manufacturing market clearing conditions, manufacturing price index de…nitions,

and consumer expenditure conditions, respectively

                                 
                                 X
                           =         ¬
                                        
                                               1¬
                                               
                                                     ¬
                                                         ¬1 X                = 1                          (12)
                                 =1


                                  
                                                                   ! 1¬1
                                  X                        1¬
                          =             (       )                        = 1                         (13)
                                   =1

                                       
                                       X                      1¬      ¬
               =  ¬   +                 (    )            ¬1 X           = 1              (14)
                                       =1

The key di¤erence compared to the basic model is that consumer expenditure now consists of

labor income minus the aggregate trade surplus plus tari¤ revenue necessitating the introduc-

tion of the consumer expenditure variable  and the consumer expenditure condition (14).23
                                                                                                                        0
Denoting the counterfactual value of  by 0 and counterfactual changes in                             by b     
                                                                                                                        

et cetera, it is easy to verify using the technique of Dekle, Eaton, and Kortum (2007) that
  23
     Also,  and  are now country speci…c since marginal costs and …xed costs are allowed to vary across
countries,  is exporter-importer-pair speci…c, and  enters only with a coe¢ cient of ¬ into the manufac-
turing market clearing condition since it is no longer part of the iceberg trade barriers and therefore does not
generate any indirect demand.



                                                             20
equations (12) - (14) can be rewritten in changes as

                                             
                                             X                                     ¬1
                                   1=                     (b )¬    b
                                                                                       b
                                                                                                      = 1                 (15)
                                             =1


                                                   
                                                                               ! 1¬1
                                                   X
                                   b =
                                                               b (b )1¬
                                                                                                    = 1                 (16)
                                                   =1

                                                
                                                X                                        ¬1
                         b =
                                          +               0
                                                               b (b )¬
                                                          
                                                                                   b
                                                                                                b
                                                                                                            = 1           (17)
                                                 =1

where       ,    ,   ,   and          are simple functions of , tari¤s, and trade ‡ows only. In particular,
                                                ¬                           
         ,                  X    ,           where  denotes the total value of
                                                         ,          and              ,
                                                                        P
trade ‡owing from country  to country  evaluated at world prices,     =1  denotes

the total value of manufacturing sales of …rms from country  evaluated at world prices,
        1 P
           =1   denotes the total expenditure of consumers in country , and 
P
  =1   denotes the tari¤ revenue of country . Given estimates of     and    as well

as data on tari¤s and trade ‡ows only, equations (15) - (17) can be used to compute the
                                                      b  , numbers of manufacturing …rms 
counterfactual changes in manufacturing price indices                                    b ,
                          b induced by counterfactual tari¤s 0 . Counterfactual changes
and consumer expenditures                                     
                                                                                             ¬
in welfare can then be calculated from b = 
                                             b 
                                                b                                               since indirect utility is now given by

 =       (1 ¬ )(1¬          )
                                    ¬
                                        .

       I use trade and tari¤ data for the year 2004. I focus on the main players in recent

GATT/WTO negotiations - Brazil, China, the European Union, India, Japan, and the United

States - and aggregate all other countries into a seventh trade bloc which I refer to as the

Rest of the World.24 I construct the matrix of trade ‡ows exactly as in Dekle, Eaton, and

Kortum (2007) and also work with their parameter estimates                                                    = 0188 and   = 928 or
  24
    I aggregate Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg,
The Netherlands, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, and the United Kingdom into the European Union as these were
the member states at the beginning of 2004. The European Union is a customs union and therefore sets a
common external tari¤. I include Hong Kong in my de…nition of China.




                                                                            21
alternatively     = 460.25 I construct the matrix of tari¤s by taking simple averages over the

applied manufacturing protection rates reported by Boumellassa, Laborde, and Mitaritonna

(2009).26 I present my trade and tari¤ data in Tables 1 and 2.

       Before implementing the full seven-trade-bloc-case, it is instructive to turn to a simple

two-trade-bloc example to illustrate the implications of tari¤ revenue and to motivate the

algorithm used for computing Nash tari¤s. I generate such an example by keeping the US

only and aggregating all other countries into the Rest of the World. Figure 1 shows how US

welfare varies in the US tari¤ and reveals that there is now an interior optimal tari¤. The

reason is that tari¤ revenue is hump-shaped in the tari¤ and the welfare loss due to a reduction

in tari¤ revenue dominates the welfare gain due to additional production relocations at some

point. Figure 2 plots the US optimal tari¤ against the tari¤ of the Rest of the World and vice

versa and suggests that Nash tari¤s can be computed using a simple iterative algorithm. In

particular, the Nash equilibrium can be found by …rst computing the US optimal tari¤ given

a guess of the Rest of the World’s optimal tari¤, then computing the Rest of the World’s

optimal tari¤ given the US optimal tari¤, and so on, as this procedure quickly converges to

the point at which both reaction functions cross. Both …gures take all factual tari¤s to be

zero for simplicity and focus on the case            = 928 only but look similar under alternative

assumptions.

       Tables 3 and 4 report the Nash tari¤s for the full seven-trade-bloc case computed using

this simple algorithm under the assumption of               = 928 and       = 460, respectively. Nash

tari¤s are predicted to be relatively similar across trade-bloc pairs. They range between 10.3

percent and 13.0 percent in the case of         = 928 and between 25.6 percent and 28.9 percent in

the case of      = 460. The tari¤s observed during the trade war following the Smoot-Hawley

Tari¤ Act of 1930 are typically reported to be around 50 percent.27 While a direct comparison
  25
     In particular, I downloaded their GDP data, trade balance data, and international trade data from the
website of Sam Kortum and followed their exact procedure to compute internal trade ‡ows. Notice that
compares to in their paper and compares to 1 + in their paper.
  26
     Consistent with the principle of nondiscrimination, these manufacturing protection rates vary by importer
only.
  27
     See, for example, Bagwell and Staiger (2002: 43).


                                                     22
is di¢ cult given the di¤erences in the set of players and the timing of the experiment, it is

still noteworthy that my stylized production relocation model generates Nash tari¤s which

are of the same order of magnitude as these actual noncooperative tari¤s. In contrast, the

stylized terms-of-trade model calibrated by Perroni and Whalley (2000) predicts Nash tari¤s

of up to 1000 percent.28

       Table 5 presents the counterfactual welfare changes from moving to the predicted Nash

tari¤s. They range between 0.01 percent and -0.36 percent in the case of               = 928 and between

-0.05 percent and -1.20 percent in the case of             = 460. With one exception, all countries are

always predicted to be strictly worse o¤ in the case of a tari¤ war.29 This table also reports the

counterfactual welfare changes from moving to autarky and puts the counterfactual welfare

changes from moving to the predicted Nash tari¤s in relation to them. These ratios range

between -3.06 percent and 23.31 percent in the case of                = 928 and between 6.49 percent

and 34.86 percent in the case of         = 460. On average, the losses from moving to Nash tari¤s

amount to a sizable fraction of the losses from moving to autarky. Notice that these ratios

are robust to misspeci…cations of the model if these misspeci…cations a¤ect the losses from

moving to Nash tari¤s and the losses from moving to autarky proportionately. One apparent

misspeci…cation is the absence of intermediate goods. Intermediate goods are di¢ cult to

include in the speci…c setup developed here since they turn the model into a version of the

Krugman and Venables (1995) ‘new economic geography’model featuring multiple equilibria

if a reasonable value for manufacturing value added is chosen.30
  28
     To the best of my knowledge, Perroni and Whalley (2000) is the only quantitative study of noncooperative
trade policy which is of similar scope than the analysis provided here. Earlier studies such as Whalley (1985:
231-249) were forced to restrict attention to simple two country cases due to computational constraints faced
at the time.
  29
     It is well-known from Johnson (1953-54) that countries may win a tari¤ war in the sense that they are
better o¤ under noncooperative tari¤s than under free trade. Of course, there then still exist Pareto-improving
tari¤ reductions so that noncooperative tari¤s continue to be ine¢ cient.
  30
     In particular, entry leads to a reduction in the price index due to an increase in the number of goods.
Without intermediate goods, this only decreases pro…ts by increasing competition and thereby discourages
further entry. With intermediate goods, however, it also increases pro…ts by reducing costs and thereby
encourages further entry. If intermediate goods are su¢ ciently important, the latter e¤ect dominates which
gives rise to a process of cumulative causation. Notice that the absence of wage e¤ects makes this scenario
particularly likely in the speci…c setup developed here.



                                                      23
4    Conclusion

In this paper, I developed a novel theory of GATT/WTO negotiations based on the Krugman

(1980) ‘new trade’ model. Unlike the standard terms-of-trade theory, it emphasizes inter-

national production relocations and is easy to calibrate to bilateral trade data. Focusing

on the major players in recent GATT/WTO negotiations, I found that it implies reasonable

noncooperative tari¤s and moderate gains from GATT/WTO negotiations.

    Many of the arguments made in the context of the neoclassical theory of GATT/WTO

negotiations could be revisited in the context of this ‘new trade’theory of GATT/WTO ne-

gotiations. For example, one could introduce political economy forces into the model as in

Bagwell and Staiger (1999) to see whether GATT/WTO negotiations can be viewed as a

response to politically motivated protectionism. Or one could consider labor and environ-

mental standards as in Bagwell and Staiger (2001) to assess whether they should be part of

the GATT/WTO agreement. Or one could introduce domestic production subsidies into the

model as in Bagwell and Staiger (2006) to evaluate the GATT/WTO rules on production

subsidies.




                                           24
References

[1] Arkolakis, K., S. Demidova, P. Klenow, and A. Rodriguez-Clare. 2008. "The Gains from

   Trade with Endogenous Variety." American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings,

   98(4): 444-450.

[2] Bagwell, Kyle, and Robert W. Staiger. 1999. "An Economic Theory of GATT." American

   Economic Review, 89(1): 215-248.

[3] Bagwell, Kyle, and Robert W. Staiger. 2001. "Domestic Policies, National Sovereignty,

   and International Economic Institutions." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(2): 519-

   562.

[4] Bagwell, Kyle, and Robert W. Staiger. 2001."Reciprocity, Non-discrimination and Pref-

   erential Agreements in the Multilateral Trading System." European Journal of Political

   Economy, 17(2): 281-325.

[5] Bagwell, Kyle, and Robert W. Staiger. 2002. The Economics of the World Trading Sys-

   tem. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

[6] Bagwell, Kyle, and Robert W. Staiger. Forthcoming. "What Do Trade Negotiators Ne-

   gotiate About? Evidence from the World Trade Organization." American Economic

   Review.

[7] Bagwell, Kyle, and Robert W. Staiger. 2006. "Will International Rules on Subsidies

   Disrupt the World Trading System?" American Economic Review, 96(3): 877-895.

[8] Bagwell, Kyle, and Robert W. Staiger. 2009. "Firm Delocation and Trade Agreements

   in Imperfectly Competitive Markets." Unpublished.

[9] Baldwin, Richard E., and Frederic Robert-Nicoud. 2000. "Free Trade Agreements without

   Delocation." Canadian Journal of Economics, 33(3): 766-786.



                                          25
[10] Baldwin, Richard E., Rikard Forslid, Philippe Martin, Gianmarco I. P. Ottaviano, and

    Frederic Robert-Nicoud. 2003. Economic Geography and Public Policy. Princeton, NJ:

    Princeton University Press.

[11] Boumellassa, Houssein, David Laborde, and Christina Mitaritonna. 2009. "A Picture of

    Tari¤ Protection Across the World in 2004." International Food Policy Research Institute

    Discussion Paper 00903.

[12] Broda, Christian, Nuno Limao, and David Weinstein. 2008. "Optimal Tari¤s and Market

    Power: The Evidence." American Economic Review, 98(5): 2032-2065.

[13] Davis, Donald R. 1999. "The Home Market, Trade, and Industrial Structure." American

    Economic Review, 88(5): 1264-1276.

[14] Dekle, Robert, Jonathan Eaton, and Samuel S. Kortum. 2007. "Unbalanced Trade."

    American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 97: 351-355.

[15] Gros, Daniel. 1987. "A Note on the Optimal Tari¤, Retaliation and the Welfare Loss

    from Tari¤ Wars in a Framework with Intra-Industry Trade." Journal of International

    Economics, 23(3-4): 357-367.

[16] Johnson, Harry G. 1953-1954. "Optimum Tari¤s and Retaliation." Review of Economic

    Studies, 21(2): 142-53.

[17] Krugman, Paul. 1980. "Scale Economies, Product Di¤erentiation, and the Pattern of

    Trade." American Economic Review, 70(5): 950-959.

[18] Krugman, Paul. 1997. "What Should Trade Negotiators Negotiate About?" Journal of

    Economic Literature, 35(1): 113-120.

[19] Krugman, Paul, and Anthony J. Venables. 1995. "Globalization and the Inequality of

    Nations." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110(4): 857-880.



                                            26
[20] Krugman, Paul, and Anthony J. Venables. 1999. "How Robust is the Home Market

    E¤ect?" Unpublished.

[21] Maggi, Giovanni, and Pinelopi K. Goldberg. 1999. "Protection for Sale: An Empirical

    Investigation." American Economic Review, 89(5): 1135-1155.

[22] Maggi, Giovanni, and Andres Rodriguez-Clare. 1998. "The Value of Trade Agreements

    in the Presence of Political Pressures." Journal of Political Economy, 106(3): 574-601.

[23] Melitz, Marc. 2003. "The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate

    Industry Productivity." Econometrica 71(6): 1695-1725.

[24] Panagariya, Arvind. 2000. "Preferential Trade Liberalization: The Traditional Theory

    and New Developments." Journal of Economic Literature, 38(2): 287-331.

[25] Perroni, Carlo, and John Whalley. 2000. "The New Regionalism: Trade Liberalization

    or Insurance." The Canadian Journal of Economics, 33(1): 1-24.

[26] Rose, Andrew K. 2004. "Do We Really Know That the WTO Increases Trade?" American

    Economic Review, 94(1): 98-114.

[27] Subramanian, Arvind, and Shang-Jin Wei. 2007. "The WTO Promotes Trade, Strongly

    but Unevenly." Journal of International Economics, 72(1): 151-175.

[28] Tomz, Michael, Judith L. Goldstein, and Douglas Rivers. 2007. "Do We Really Know

    That the WTO Increases Trade? Comment." American Economic Review, 97(5): 2005-

    2018.

[29] Venables, Anthony J. 1987. "Trade and Trade Policy with Di¤erentiated Products: A

    Chamberlinian-Ricardian Model." The Economic Journal, 97(387): 700-717.

[30] Whalley, John. 1985. Trade Liberalization among Major World Trading Areas. Cam-

    bridge, MA: MIT Press.


                                            27
5       Appendix

5.1     Basic model: Two-country case

5.1.1       Parameter restrictions

The manufacturing sector is active in both countries for all possible (21  12 ) if and only if
                   1                                 1
          1      1¬                    2          1¬
        1 +2          and           1 +2                . The non-manufacturing good sector is active in both
                                                                                           1¬
countries for all possible (21  12 ) if and only if                              1¬          .


5.1.2       Proof of lemma 2

Proof. A tari¤ combination (21  12 ) cannot be Pareto e¢ cient if there exist possible Pareto

improving tari¤ changes (21  12 ) at (21  12 ). This includes tari¤ changes (21  12 ) such
                                                                                                                1               1
that 2  0 and 1 = 0. From total di¤erentiation, 1 =                                                      21 21     +   12 12     and
            2             2
2 =       21 21   +   12 12 .     Therefore, 1 = 0 if 21 = ¬ 21 1
                                                                           1 12 12 so that 2 =
 2        2 21 1                                                             2       2 21 1
 12   ¬   21 1 12      12 along 1 = 0. Notice that                       12   ¬  21 1 12  0             for all (21  12 ).
                                                    ¬                                      (1¬( 21 )1¬ )( 12 )¬
This is because         1
                        21   = ¬ (1¬(21    12 )
                                                           1¬
                                                             12
                                                                  1 ,   1
                                                                         12   =                  1¬                        1¬       1 ,   2
                                                                                                                                             21   =
                                            21      12 )                            (1¬(    12 )        )(1¬(    21   12 )        )
                 1¬            ¬
     (1¬( 12 ) )( 21 )                                   ¬
                                     2
                              , and    = ¬ (1¬(21 12 ) )1¬21 2 so that 
                                                                           2    2 21 1
                                                                                ¬              =
(1¬( 21 )1¬ )(1¬( 21 12 )1¬ ) 2        12           21   12                  12      21 1 12

2
 12
    . Hence, there exist Pareto improving tari¤ changes (21  12 ) for all (21  12 ). These

(21  12 ) are such that 21  0 and 12  0 and are thus possible if and only if 21  0

and 12  0. Therefore, only (21  12 ) such that either 21 = 0, 12 = 0, or both can be Pareto

e¢ cient. It is easy to verify that for none of these (21  12 ) there exists another (21  12 ) which

makes one country better o¤ without making the other country worse o¤. Therefore, they are

also indeed Pareto e¢ cient.




                                                                         28
5.2          Basic model: Three-country case

5.2.1         Parameter restrictions

The manufacturing sector is active in all countries for all possible (21  31  12  13 ) if and only
                              1                            1                             1
                  1         1¬                  2       1¬                     3     1¬
if            1 +2 +3          and         1 +22            and            +23         .31 The non-manufacturing
                                                                                                                          1¬
good sector is active in all countries for all possible (21  31  12  13 ) if and only if                    1¬2         .


5.2.2         Solution for given trade policy

For given tari¤s, the model’s solution is determined by the manufacturing market clearing

conditions


                                                            1¬                                   1¬
                   = ¬ 1 ¬1 L1 + ¬ (                12 )      2 ¬1 L2 + ¬ (            13 )      3 ¬1 L3           (18)


                                                      1¬
                                    = ¬ (       21 )         1 ¬1 L1 + ¬ 2 ¬1 L2                                     (19)

                                                      1¬
                                    = ¬ (       31 )         1 ¬1 L1 + ¬ 3 ¬1 L3                                     (20)

                    ( ¬1)                   
where                       and          ¬1   as in the two-country case but the ideal manufacturing
                                                                                                                   1
                                                                                      1¬                     1¬   1¬
price indices are now given by 1                         1 1¬ + 2 (p          21 )       + 3 (p     31 )          , 2
                                       1                                                        1
                  1¬                  1¬                                   1¬                  1¬
     1 (p    12 )     + 2 1¬            , and 3        1 (p       13 )      + 3 1¬             . Equations (18) - (20)

can be solved immediately for the equilibrium manufacturing price indices

                                                                            1
                                                                     1    ¬1
                                                  1 =                                                                    (21)
                                                                  L1

                                                                            1
                                                                     2    ¬1
                                                  2 =                                                                    (22)
                                                                  L2
     31
    Notice that this restriction gets stronger the more countries are featured in the analysis. It should, however,
not be taken literally empirically since wage adjustments are ruled out in order to cleanly isolate production
relocation e¤ects. If positive pro…ts could also be competed away by wage adjustments instead of entry, a
milder parameter restriction would be su¢ cient to guarantee diversi…ed manufacturing production.




                                                                 29
                                                                                  1
                                                                        3       ¬1
                                                      3 =                                                                      (23)
                                                                   L3

where
                                                                     1¬                    1¬
                                         1            1¬(        12 )     ¬(           13 )                                     (24)

                                            1¬                       1¬                   1¬                    1¬
                      2     1¬(         21 )           ¬(        13 )         (       31 )       ¬(         21 )                (25)

                                            1¬                       1¬                   1¬                    1¬
                      3     1¬(         31 )           ¬(        12 )         (       21 )       ¬(         31 )                (26)

                                                                   1¬                              1¬
                                         1¬(              21   12 )       ¬(          31       13 )                             (27)

It is easy to verify that     1    2       3   and           0 given the assumed parameter restrictions. If

the de…nitions of manufacturing price indices are substituted, they can also be solved for the

equilibrium numbers of manufacturing …rms
                                                                                                             !
                                                                       1¬                            1¬
                                             1           2 (     21 )               3 (       31 )
                           1 =                       ¬                           ¬                                             (28)
                                                1                 2                            3


                      0                                                                                                     1
                                                          1¬
                          2 1 ¬ (       31           13 )              3 (                    1¬                       1¬
                      @                                                           12        31 )            1 (     12 )   A
          2 =                                                     +                                    ¬                       (29)
                                        2                                             3                            1

                      0                                                                                                     1
                                                          1¬
                          3 1 ¬ (       21           12 )              2 (                    1¬                       1¬
                      @                                                           21        13 )            1 (     13 )   A
          3 =                                                     +                                    ¬                       (30)
                                        3                                             2                            1


As in the two-country case, the world number of manufacturing …rms is constant, tari¤s

a¤ect welfare only through the manufacturing price indices, and there can be no role for

terms-of-trade e¤ects.


5.2.3   Three-country version of lemma 1

Suppose that governments choose tari¤ s simultaneously in an attempt to maximize their citi-
                                                                            ¬
zens welfare. Then the unique Nash equilibrium is (21  31  12  13 ) =     

Proof. Follows immediately from equations (21) - (23).

                                                                   30
5.2.4       Three-country version of lemma 2

The set of Pareto-e¢ cient tari¤ combinations consists of all (21  31  12  13 ) such that either

12 = 13 = 0, 21 = 31 = 0, or both.


Proof. A tari¤ combination (21  31  12  13 ) cannot be Pareto e¢ cient if there exist possi-

ble Pareto improving tari¤ changes (21  31  12  13 ) at (21  31  12  13 ). This includes

tari¤ changes (21  31  12  13 ), 31 = 13 = 0, such that 2  0 and 1 = 3 =
                                                                                  1                      1                            2                     2
0. From total di¤erentiation, 1 =                                               21 21         +      12 12 ,       2 =        21 21           +   12 12 ,    and
            3                     3
3 =       21 21      +        12 12 .              Therefore, 1 = 0 if 21 = ¬ 21 1
                                                                                            1 12 12 and 3 = 0

if 21 = ¬ 21 3
            3 12 12 . Notice that these two conditions are identical. This is because
                               ¬                                                           ¬                                                   ¬                      1¬
1
21   = ¬(    21      12 )            12
                                              1 ,       1
                                                         12    =           2(     12 )
                                                                                     1
                                                                                                   1 ,     3
                                                                                                            21   =         1(   21    12 )
                                                                                                                                                   3
                                                                                                                                                       12 (    31 )
                                                                                                                                                                             3 , and
                           ¬                 1¬
3           2(    12 )        (     31 )
12   =¬                       3
                                                        3 so that ¬ 21 1     21 3
                                                                     1 12 = ¬ 3 12 . Hence, along 1 = 3 = 0,
            2        2 21 1                                                             2            2 21 1
2 =       12   ¬   21 1 12                    12 . Notice that                      12       ¬   21 1 12            0 for all (21  31  12  13 ).
                                                                     ¬
                                                                                                                     1 (1¬( 31           13 )
                                                                                                                                              1¬
                                                                                                                                                 )( 21 )¬
This is because            2
                           12       = ¬(              21    12 )           21
                                                                                    2 and                2
                                                                                                          21 =                            2
                                                                                                                                                            2 which,
                                                                                                                           2        2 21 1                    2
together with the derivatives given above, implies that                                                                    12   ¬   21 1 12           =        12
                                                                                                                                                                            . Hence,

there exist Pareto improving tari¤ changes (21  31  12  13 ), 31 = 13 = 0, such

that 2  0 and 1 = 3 = 0 for all (21  31  12  13 ). These (21  31  12  13 )

are such that 21  0 and 12  0 and are thus possible if and only if 21  0 and

12  0. This also includes tari¤ changes (21  31  12  13 ), 31 = 12 = 0, such that
                                                                                                                                       1                    1
2  0 and 1 = 3 = 0. From total di¤erentiation, 1 =                                                                            21 21        +     13 13 ,     2 =
2           2                                             3               3
21 21   + 13
                   13 , and 3 =                           21 21       + 13
                                                                                     13 . Therefore, 1 = 0 if 13 = ¬ 13 1
                                                                                                                           1 21 21

and 3 = 0 if 13 = ¬ 13 3
                        3 21 21 . Notice that these two conditions are identical. This
                                                    ¬                                                                  ¬
                                      3(     13 )
is because     1
               13        =                  1
                                                             1 and          3
                                                                             13        = ¬(              31   13 )         31
                                                                                                                                  3 which, together with the

derivatives given above, implies that ¬ 13 1     13 3
                                        1 21 = ¬ 3 21 . Hence, along 1 = 3 = 0,
            2        2 13 1                                                             2             2 13 1
2 =       21   ¬   13 1 21                    21 . Notice that                      21       ¬    13 1 21          0 for all (21  31  12  13 ).
                                                                     ¬              1¬
                               2                      3(    13 )       (   21 )
This is because                13    = ¬                               2
                                                                                               2 which, together with the derivatives given
                                                                                                      ¬
                                    2             2 13 1                         1(    21 )
above, implies that                 21      ¬     13 1 21            =                 2
                                                                                                             2 . Hence, there exist Pareto improving



                                                                                               31
tari¤ changes (21  31  12  13 ), 31 = 12 = 0, such that 2  0 and 1 = 3 = 0

for all (21  31  12  13 ). These (21  31  12  13 ) are such that 21  0 and 13  0 and

are thus possible if and only if 21  0 and 13  0. Symmetric arguments can be made for tar-

i¤ changes (21  31  12  13 ), 21 = 12 = 0, such that 3  0 and 1 = 2 = 0 and

tari¤ changes (21  31  12  13 ), 21 = 13 = 0, such that 3  0 and 1 = 2 = 0.

Therefore, only (21  31  12  13 ) such that either 12 = 13 = 0, 21 = 31 = 0, or both can be

Pareto e¢ cient. It is easy to verify that for none of these (21  31  12  13 ) there exists another

(21  31  12  13 ) which makes one country better o¤ without making at least one of the other

countries worse o¤. Therefore, they are also indeed Pareto e¢ cient.


5.2.5    Three-country version of proposition 1

The noncooperative equilibrium is ine¢ cient.


Proof. Follows immediately from the three-country versions of lemmas 1 and 2


5.2.6    Proof of lemma 4

Proof. The statement that tari¤ changes leave the number of …rms unchanged in all countries

if and only if they are multilaterally reciprocal follows immediately from equation (11) and

the de…nition of multilateral reciprocity. Similarly, the statement that bilaterally reciprocal

trade liberalization between country 1 and country 2 (country 3) leaves the number of …rms

unchanged in country 2 (country 3) follows immediately from equation (11) and the de…nition

of bilateral reciprocity. Finally, the statement that bilaterally reciprocal trade liberalization

between country 1 and country 2 (country 3) monotonically increases the number of …rms in

country 1 at the expense of country 3 (country 2) follows from the fact that 1 +2 +3 = 0
                                         3                                   2
together with the observation that       21    0 if 31 = 13 = 2 = 0 ( 31
                                                                                     0 if 21 = 12 =

3 = 0) which can be easily established from equation (20) (equation (19)).




                                                      32
5.2.7       Proof of proposition 3

Proof. Follows immediately from lemma 4 and the de…nitions of manufacturing price indices.




5.3        E¤ects of  ! 1

If  ! 1, the two-country version of lemma 1, the three-country version of lemma 1, lemma

4, and proposition 3 would have to be modi…ed as follows:
                                                             ¬
       E¤ect on the two-country version of lemma 1: If  ! 1,   would no longer be the

unique Nash equilibrium but instead the unique trembling-hand perfect Nash equilibrium. In
                  1                         2
particular,       21   ! 0 if 12 ! 1 and  ! 0 if 21 ! 1 as can be seen from equations (6) and
                                              12
                                                         ¬                             ¬
(7). Therefore, all (21  12 ) such that (21  12 ) = any 21   or (21  12 ) =  any 12 would
                                                     ¬
then also be Nash equilibria. However, only   would be robust to small perturbations in
                                                1                                 2
the governments’ strategies because             21    0 as soon as 12  1 and   12    0 as soon as

21  1.

   E¤ect on the two-country version of lemma 1: This is analogous to the e¤ect on the
                                          ¬
two-country version of lemma 1. If  ! 1,     would no longer be the unique Nash

equilibrium but instead the unique trembling-hand perfect Nash equilibrium since all other

Nash equilibria would not be robust to small perturbations in the governments’strategies.

       E¤ect on lemma 4: If  ! 1, the statement on bilaterally reciprocal trade liberalization

would have to be quali…ed. In particular, bilaterally reciprocal trade liberalization between

country 1 and country 2 would then leave the number of …rms unchanged in country 2 but

increase the number of …rms in country 1 at the expense of country 3 if 31  1 and leave

the number of …rms unchanged in all countries if 31 ! 1. The latter case arises because
3        3
21   =   12   = 0 if 31 ! 1, as can be seen from equation (23). Similarly, bilaterally reciprocal

trade liberalization between country 1 and country 3 would then leave the number of …rms

unchanged in country 3 but increase the number of …rms in country 1 at the expense of

country 2 if 21  1 and leave the number of …rms unchanged in all countries if 21 ! 1.


                                                         33
                                 2        2
The latter case arises because   31   =   13   = 0 if 21 ! 1, as can be seen from equation (22).

   E¤ect on proposition 3: This follows directly from the e¤ect on lemma 4. If  ! 1,

the statement on bilaterally reciprocal trade liberalization would have to be quali…ed. In

particular, bilaterally reciprocal trade liberalization between country 1 and country 2 would

then monotonically increase welfare in country 1 and country 2 but monotonically decrease

welfare in country 3 if 31  1 and monotonically increase welfare in country 1 and country

2 but leave welfare unchanged in country 3 if 31 ! 1. Similarly, bilaterally reciprocal trade

liberalization between country 1 and country 3 would then monotonically increase welfare

in country 1 and country 3 but monotonically decrease welfare in country 2 if 21  1 and

monotonically increase welfare in country 1 and country 3 but leave welfare unchanged in

country 2 if 21 ! 1.




                                                      34
6   Figures and tables

                                                                      0.16


                                                                      0.14
            Welfare Change of United States in %



                                                                      0.12


                                                                          0.1


                                                                      0.08


                                                                      0.06


                                                                      0.04


                                                                      0.02


                                                                           0
                                                                                0                50                               100                           150
                                                                                                      Tariff of United States in %




                                                                                    Figure 1: Optimal tari¤ with tari¤ revenue




                                                                          25
                                                                                                                               Best Response of Rest of World
                                                                                                                               Best Response of United States

                                                                          20
                                           Tariff of Rest of World in %




                                                                          15




                                                                          10




                                                                           5




                                                                           0
                                                                                0         5              10                  15              20                 25
                                                                                                      Tariff of United States in %



                                                                           Figure 2: Reaction functions and Nash equilibrium


                                                                                                               35
                 ROW     EU                 Brazil      China        India      Japan    US
          ROW 3907.4 551.6                   15.1       434.4         20.4       91.2  550.8
          EU     656.9 6372.9                14.3        83.6         16.9       48.3  235.9
          Brazil 24.1   9.3                 314.6        2.1          0.3        1.0    16.4
          China 349.7 161.6                  3.9        801.7         7.0        82.4  212.2
          India 18.6    17.3                 0.4         6.2         387.0       1.4    14.6
          Japan 191.8   96.1                 2.9        123.1         2.9       3074.1 128.4
          US     390.4 177.4                 10.7        45.6         5.5        44.0 5201.3
                   Notes: Entry(i,j) are factual exports from i to j in US$ billion in 2004

      Table 1: Aggregated trade matrix from Dekle, Eaton, and Kortum (2007)




                 ROW             EU         Brazil      China        India      Japan          US
          ROW     0.0            2.5         12.7        4.2          14.8       1.3           2.2
          EU      7.0            0.0         12.7        4.2          14.8       1.3           2.2
          Brazil  7.0            2.5         0.0         4.2          14.8       1.3           2.2
          China 7.0              2.5         12.7        0.0          14.8       1.3           2.2
          India   7.0            2.5         12.7        4.2          0.0        1.3           2.2
          Japan 7.0              2.5         12.7        4.2          14.8       0.0           2.2
          US      7.0            2.5         12.7        4.2          14.8       1.3           0.0
             Notes: Entry (i,j) is factual tariff imposed by j against imports from i in % in 2004


Table 2: Aggregated tari¤ matrix from Boumellassa, Laborde, and Mitaritonna (2009)




                                                     36
            ROW              EU        Brazil      China       India       Japan         US
     ROW     0.0            13.0        12.1        11.6        12.0        12.4        12.4
     EU     11.0            0.0         12.1        11.9        12.0        12.1        12.0
     Brazil 11.6            12.5        0.0         12.0        12.1        12.2        12.3
     China 10.3             11.5        12.0        0.0         12.0        12.5        10.9
     India 12.2             12.5        12.1        12.0        0.0         12.1        12.1
     Japan 11.3             12.0        12.1        11.6        12.1        0.0         11.9
     US     11.4            12.1        12.1        12.0        12.1        12.1        0.0
      Notes: Entry (i,j) is counterfactual Nash tariff imposed by j against imports from i in %


                         Table 3: Nash tari¤s with                = 928


            ROW              EU        Brazil      China       India       Japan         US
     ROW     0.0            28.7        27.8        26.2        27.7        28.3        27.8
     EU     26.3            0.0         27.7        27.6        27.8        27.8        27.7
     Brazil 26.7            28.2        0.0         27.6        27.8        27.9        27.8
     China 28.4             26.9        27.7        0.0         27.7        28.9        25.6
     India 27.5             28.0        27.8        27.5        0.0         27.8        27.6
     Japan 26.6             27.5        27.8        26.9        27.8        0.0         27.5
     US     27.0            27.8        27.8        27.8        27.8        27.9        0.0
      Notes: Entry (i,j) is counterfactual Nash tariff imposed by j against imports from i in %


                         Table 4: Nash tari¤s with                = 460


                            sigma=9.28                                  sigma=4.60
                 Nash         Autarky Relative                Nash        Autarky Relative
ROW              -0.28         -1.19   23.31                  -0.65        -2.23   29.22
EU               -0.03         -0.41    6.42                  -0.18        -0.86   21.20
Brazil           -0.12         -0.67   18.68                  -0.34        -1.13   30.18
China            -0.36         -1.94   18.77                  -1.20        -3.97   30.36
India            -0.12         -0.66   19.07                  -0.34        -1.08   31.60
Japan            -0.08         -0.39   20.87                  -0.30        -0.87   34.86
US               0.01          -0.35   -3.06                  -0.05        -0.71    6.49
Notes: Entries under "Nash" are counterfactual welfare changes from moving to Nash tariffs in %.
Entries under "Autarky" are counterfactual welfare changes from moving to autarky in %. Entries
under "Relative" are entries under "Nash" relative to entries under "Autarky" in % (computed from
non-rounded values).


              Table 5: Welfare losses from moving to Nash tari¤s


                                                37
