NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

RISK, UNCERTAINTY AND MONETARY POLICY
Geert Bekaert
Marie Hoerova
Marco Lo Duca
Working Paper 16397
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16397
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2010

We thank Gianni Amisano, Bartosz Mackowiak, Frank Smets, José Valentim and seminar participants
at the European Central Bank, the FRB Philadelphia, the 2010 Midwest Macroeconomics Meetings
(East Lansing) and the Fifth Annual Seminar on Banking, Financial Stability and Risk (Sao Paulo)
for helpful comments and suggestions. Falk Bräuning and Francesca Fabbri provided excellent research
assistance. The views expressed do not necessarily reflect those of the European Central Bank, the
Eurosystem, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Geert Bekaert, Marie Hoerova, and Marco Lo Duca. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Risk, Uncertainty and Monetary Policy
Geert Bekaert, Marie Hoerova, and Marco Lo Duca
NBER Working Paper No. 16397
September 2010, Revised July 2012
JEL No. E32,E44,E52,G12
ABSTRACT
The VIX, the stock market option-based implied volatility, strongly co-moves with measures of the
monetary policy stance. When decomposing the VIX into two components, a proxy for risk aversion
and expected stock market volatility (“uncertainty”), we find that a lax monetary policy decreases
both risk aversion and uncertainty, with the former effect being stronger. The result holds in a structural
vector autoregressive framework, controlling for business cycle movements and using a variety of
identification schemes for the vector autoregression in general and monetary policy shocks in particular.
Geert Bekaert
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
3022 Broadway, 411 Uris Hall
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
gb241@columbia.edu
Marie Hoerova
European Central Bank
Kaiserstrasse 29 D-60311
Frankfurt am Main, Germany
marie.hoerova@ecb.int

Marco Lo Duca
European Central Bank
Kaiserstrasse 29 D-60311
Frankfurt am Main, Germany
marco.lo_duca@ecb.int

1. Introduction
A popular indicator of risk aversion in financial markets, the VIX index, shows strong
co-movements with measures of the monetary policy stance. Figure 1 considers the crosscorrelogram between the real interest rate (the Fed funds rate minus inflation), a measure
of the monetary policy stance, and the logarithm of end-of-month readings of the VIX
index. The VIX index essentially measures the “risk-neutral” expected stock market
variance for the US S&P500 index. The correlogram reveals a very strong positive
correlation between real interest rates and future VIX levels. While the current VIX is
positively associated with future real rates, the relationship turns negative and significant
after 13 months: high VIX readings are correlated with expansionary monetary policy in
the medium-run future.
The strong interaction between a “fear index” (Whaley (2000)) in the asset markets
and monetary policy indicators may have important implications for a number of
literatures. First, the recent crisis has rekindled the idea that lax monetary policy can be
conducive to financial instability. The Federal Reserve’s pattern of providing liquidity to
financial markets following market tensions, which became known as the “Greenspan
put,” has been cited as one of the contributing factors to the build-up of a speculative
bubble prior to the 2007-09 financial crisis.1 Whereas some rather informal stories have
linked monetary policy to risk-taking in financial markets (Rajan (2006), Adrian and Shin

1

Investors increasingly believed that when market conditions were to deteriorate, the Fed would step in and
inject liquidity until the outlook improved. Such perception may encourage excessive risk-taking and lead
to higher valuations and narrower credit spreads. See, for example, “Greenspan Put may be Encouraging
Complacency,” Financial Times, December 8, 2000.

1

(2008), Borio and Zhu (2008)), it is fair to say that no extant research establishes a firm
empirical link between monetary policy and risk aversion in asset markets.2
Second, Bloom (2009) and Bloom, Floetotto and Jaimovich (2009) show that
heightened “economic uncertainty” decreases employment and output. It is therefore
conceivable that the monetary authority responds to uncertainty shocks, in order to affect
economic outcomes. However, the VIX index, used by Bloom (2009) to measure
uncertainty, can be decomposed into a component that reflects actual expected stock
market volatility (uncertainty) and a residual, the so-called variance premium (see, for
example, Carr and Wu (2009)), that reflects risk aversion and other non-linear pricing
effects, perhaps even Knightian uncertainty. Establishing which component drives the
strong co-movements between the monetary policy stance and the VIX is therefore
particularly important.
Third, analyzing the relationship between monetary policy and the VIX and its
components may help clarify the relationship between monetary policy and the stock
market, explored in a large number of empirical papers (Thorbecke (1997), Rigobon and
Sack (2004), Bernanke and Kuttner (2005)). The extant studies all find that expansionary
(contractionary) monetary policy affects the stock market positively (negatively).
Interestingly, Bernanke and Kuttner (2005) ascribe the bulk of the effect to easier
monetary policy lowering risk premiums, reflecting both a reduction in economic and
financial volatility and an increase in the capacity of financial investors to bear risk. By
using the VIX and its two components, we test the effect of monetary policy on stock
market risk, but also provide more precise information on the exact channel.
2

For recent empirical evidence that monetary policy affects the riskiness of loans granted by banks see, for
example, Altunbas, Gambacorta and Marquéz-Ibañez (2010), Ioannidou, Ongena and Peydró (2009),
Jiménez, Ongena, Peydró and Saurina (2009), and Maddaloni and Peydró (2010).

2

This article characterizes the dynamic links between risk aversion, economic
uncertainty and monetary policy in a simple vector-autoregressive (VAR) system. Such
analysis faces a number of difficulties. First, because risk aversion and the stance of
monetary policy are jointly endogenous variables and display strong contemporaneous
correlation (see Figure 1), a structural interpretation of the dynamic effects requires
identifying restrictions. Monetary policy may indeed affect asset prices through its effect
on risk aversion, as suggested by the literature on monetary policy news and the stock
market, but monetary policy makers may also react to a nervous and uncertain market
place by loosening monetary policy. In fact, Rigobon and Sack (2003) find that the
Federal Reserve does systematically respond to stock prices.3
Second, the relationship between risk aversion and monetary policy may also reflect
the joint response to an omitted variable, with business cycle variation being a prime
candidate. Recessions may be associated with high risk aversion (see Campbell and
Cochrane (1999) for a model generating counter-cyclical risk aversion) and at the same
time lead to lax monetary policy. Our VARs always include a business cycle indicator.
Third, measuring the monetary policy stance is the subject of a large literature (see,
for example, Bernanke and Mihov (1998a)); and measuring policy shocks correctly is
difficult. Models featuring time-varying risk aversion and/or uncertainty, such as Bekaert,
Engstrom and Xing (2009), imply an equilibrium contemporaneous link between interest
rates and risk aversion and uncertainty, through precautionary savings effects for
example. Such relation should not be associated with a policy shock. However, our

3

The two papers by Rigobon and Sack (2003, 2004) use an identification scheme based on the
heteroskedasticity of stock market returns. Given that we view economic uncertainty as an important
endogenous variable in its own right with links to the real economy and risk premiums, we cannot use such
an identification scheme.

3

results are robust to alternative measures of the monetary policy stance and of monetary
policy shocks. In particular, the results are robust to identifying monetary policy shocks
using a standard structural VAR, high frequency Fed funds futures changes following
Gürkaynak, Sack and Swanson (2005), and monthly surprises based on the daily Fed
funds futures following the approach in Bernanke and Kuttner (2005).
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we detail the
measurement of the key variables in the VAR, including monetary policy indicators,
monetary policy shocks and business cycle indicators. First and foremost, we provide
intuition on how the VIX is related to the actual expected variance of stock returns and to
risk preferences. While the literature has proposed a number of risk appetite measures
(see Baker and Wurgler (2007) and Coudert and Gex (2008)), our measure is
monotonically increasing in risk aversion in a variety of economic settings. This
motivates our empirical strategy in which we split the VIX into a pure volatility
component (“uncertainty”) and a residual, which should be more closely associated with
risk aversion. In Section 3, we analyze the dynamic relationship between monetary policy
and risk aversion and uncertainty in standard structural VARs. The results are remarkably
robust to a long list of robustness checks with respect to VAR specification, variable
definitions and alternative identification methods. In Section 4, we use two alternative
methods to identify monetary policy shocks relying on Fed futures data.
Our main findings are as follows. A lax monetary policy decreases risk aversion in
the stock market after about nine months. This effect is persistent, lasting for more than
two years. Moreover, monetary policy shocks account for a significant proportion of the
variance of risk aversion. The effects of monetary policy on uncertainty are similar but

4

somewhat weaker. On the other hand, periods of both high uncertainty and high risk
aversion are followed by a looser monetary policy stance but these results are less robust
and much weaker statistically. Finally, it is the uncertainty component of the VIX that has
the statistically stronger effect on the business cycle, not the risk aversion component.
2. Measurement
This section details the measurement of the key inputs to our analysis: risk aversion
and uncertainty; the monetary policy stance and monetary policy shocks; and finally,
business cycle variation. Our data start in January 1990 (the start of the model-free VIX
series) but we perform our analysis using two different end-points for the sample: July
2007, yielding a sample that excludes recent data on the crisis; and August 2010. The
crisis period presents special challenges as stock market volatilities peaked at
unprecedented levels and the Fed funds target rate reached the zero lower bound. We
detail how we address these challenges below. Table 1 describes the basic variables we
use and assigns them a short-hand label.
2.1 Measuring Risk Aversion and Uncertainty
To measure risk aversion and uncertainty, we use a decomposition of the VIX index.
The VIX represents the option-implied expected volatility on the S&P500 index with a
horizon of 30 calendar days (22 trading days). This volatility concept is often referred to
as “implied volatility” or “risk-neutral volatility,” as opposed to the actual (or “physical”)
expected volatility. Intuitively, in a discrete state economy, the physical volatility would
use the actual state probabilities to arrive at the physical expected variance, whereas the
risk-neutral variance would make use of probabilities that are adjusted for the pricing of
risk.

5

The computation of the actual VIX index relies on theoretical results showing that
option prices can be used to replicate any bounded payoff pattern; in fact, they can be
used to replicate Arrow-Debreu securities (Breeden and Litzenberger (1978), Bakshi and
Madan (2000)). Britten-Jones and Neuberger (2000) and Bakshi, Kapadia and Madan
(2003) show how to infer “risk-neutral” expected volatility for a stock index from option
prices. The VIX index measures implied volatility using a weighted average of Europeanstyle S&P500 call and put option prices that straddle a 30-day maturity and cover a wide
range of strikes (see CBOE (2004) for more details). Importantly, this estimate is modelfree and does not rely on an option pricing model.
While the VIX obviously reflects stock market uncertainty, it conceptually must also
harbor information about risk and risk aversion. Indeed, financial markets often view the
VIX as a measure of risk aversion and fear in the market place. Because there are wellaccepted techniques to measure the physical expected variance, we can split the VIX into
a measure of stock market or economic uncertainty, and a residual that should be more
closely associated with risk aversion. The difference between the squared VIX and an
estimate of the conditional variance is typically called the variance premium (see, e.g.,
Carr and Wu (2009)).4 The variance premium is nearly always positive and displays
substantial time-variation. Recent finance models attribute these facts either to nonGaussian components in fundamentals and (stochastic) risk aversion (see, for instance,
Bekaert and Engstrom (2010), Bollerslev, Tauchen and Zhou (2009), Drechsler and
Yaron (2011)) or Knightian uncertainty (see Drechsler (2009)). In the Appendix, we use
a one-period discrete economy with power utility to illustrate the difference between
4

In the technical finance literature, the variance premium is actually the negative of the variable that we
use. By switching the sign, our indicator increases with risk aversion, whereas the variance premium
becomes more negative with risk aversion.

6

“risk neutral” and “physical” expected volatility and demonstrate that the variance
premium is indeed increasing in risk aversion.
To decompose the VIX index into a risk aversion and an uncertainty component, we
first estimate the expected future realized variance. It is customary in the literature to do
so by projecting future realized monthly variances (computed using squared 5-minute
returns) onto a set of current instruments. We follow this approach using daily data on
monthly realized variances, the squared VIX, the dividend yield and the real three-month
T-bill rate. By using daily data, we gain considerable statistical power relative to the
standard methods employing end-of-month data. For example, forecasting models
estimated from daily data easily “beat” models using only end-of-month data, even for
end-of-month samples.
To select a good forecasting model, we conduct a horserace between a total of eight
volatility forecasting models. The first five models use OLS regressions with different
predictors: a one-variable model with either the past realized variance or the squared
VIX; a two-variable model with both the squared VIX and the past realized variance; a
three-variable model adding the past dividend yield; and a four-variable model adding the
past real three-month T-bill rate. We also consider three models that do not require
estimation: half-half weights on the past squared VIX and past realized variance; the past
realized variance; the past squared VIX. We consider two model selection criteria: outof-sample root-mean-squared error and mean absolute errors, and, for the estimated
models, stability (especially through the crisis period).
This procedure leads us to select a two-variable model where the squared VIX and the
past realized variance are used as predictors. The performance of the three and four

7

variable models is very comparable to this model, but the univariate estimated models
and the non-estimated models perform consistently and significantly worse. Moreover,
the model that we selected is the most stable of the well-performing forecasting models
we considered, with the coefficients economically and statistically unaltered during the
crisis period. In the online Appendix, we give a detailed account of the forecasting
horserace. The resulting coefficients from the two-variable projection are as follows:5
RVARt=-0.00002 + 0.299 VIX2t-22 + 0.442 RVARt-22+et
(0.00012) (0.067)
(0.130)

(1)

The standard errors reported in parentheses are corrected for serial correlation using 30
Newey-West (1987) lags.
The fitted value from the two-variable projection is the estimated physical expected
variance (“uncertainty”). We use the logarithm of this estimate in our analysis and label it
UC. We call the difference between the squared VIX and UC “risk aversion” (the
logarithm of which is labeled as RA). We plot the risk aversion and uncertainty estimates
in Figure 2, along with 90% confidence intervals.6 To construct the confidence bounds,
we retain the coefficients from the forecasting projection together with their asymptotic
covariance matrix. We then draw 100 alternative parameter coefficients from the
distribution of these estimates, which generates alternative RA and UC estimates. In
Section 3.2.4, we use these bootstrapped series to account for the sampling error in the
risk aversion and uncertainty estimates in our VARs.
2.2 Measuring Monetary Policy

5

This estimation was conducted using a winsorized sample but the estimation results for the nonwinsorized sample are in fact very similar.
6
The estimated uncertainty series is less “jaggedy” than it would be if only the past realized variance would
be used to compute it (as in Bollerslev, Tauchen and Zhou, 2009), which in turn helps smooth the risk
aversion process.

8

To measure the monetary policy stance, we use the real interest rate (RERA), i.e., the
Fed funds end-of-the-month target rate minus the CPI annual inflation rate. In Section
3.2.1, we consider alternative measures of the monetary policy stance for robustness. Our
first such measure is the Taylor rule residual, the difference between the nominal Fed
funds rate and the Taylor rule rate (TR rate). The TR rate is estimated as in Taylor
(1993):
TRt = Inft + NatRatet + 0.5 (Inft - TargInf) + 0.5 OGt

(2)

where Inf is the annual inflation rate, NatRate is the “natural” real Fed funds rate
(consistent with full employment), which Taylor assumed to be 2%, TargInf is a target
inflation rate, also assumed to be 2%, and OG (output gap) is the percentage deviation of
real GDP from potential GDP; with the latter obtained from the Congressional Budget
Office. As other alternative measures of the monetary policy stance, we consider the
nominal Fed funds rate instead of the real rate, and (the growth rate of) the monetary
aggregate M1, which is commonly assumed to be under tight control of the central bank.
We multiply M1 (growth) by minus one so that a positive shock to this variable
corresponds to monetary policy tightening, in line with all other measures of monetary
policy we use.
Measuring the monetary policy stance is challenging since late 2008, as the Fed funds
rate reached the zero lower bound (the Fed funds target was set in the range 0-0.25% as
of December 2008) and the Federal Reserve turned to unconventional monetary policies,
such as large-scale asset purchases. We approximate the “true” nominal Fed funds rate in
the period December 2008 - August 2010 by taking it to be the minimum between
0.125% (i.e., the mid-point of the 0-0.25% range) and the TR rate, estimated using

9

equation (2) above. Rudebusch (2009) has also advocated using the TR rate estimate as a
proxy for the “true” Fed funds rate post-2008.
In our analysis in Sections 4.1 and 4.2, we use monetary policy surprises derived
from Fed funds futures data. In Section 4.1, we rely on monetary policy surprises
proposed by Gürkaynak, Sack and Swanson (2005), henceforth GSS.7 GSS compute the
monetary policy surprises as high-frequency changes in the futures rate around the
FOMC announcements. Their “tight” (“wide”) window estimates begin ten (fifteen)
minutes prior to the monetary policy announcement and end twenty (forty-five) minutes
after the policy announcement, respectively. The data span the period from January 1990
through June 2008. In Section 4.2, we use the unexpected change in the Fed funds rate on
a monthly basis, defined as the average Fed funds target rate in month t minus the onemonth futures rate on the last day of the month t-1. This approach follows Kuttner (2001)
and Bernanke and Kuttner (2005) (henceforth BK); see their equation (5). As pointed out
by BK, rate changes that were unanticipated as of the end of the prior month may well
include a systematic response to economic news, such as employment, output and
inflation occurring during the month. To overcome this problem, we calculate “cleansed”
monetary surprises that are orthogonal to a set of economic data releases. They are
calculated as residuals in a regression of the “simple” monetary policy surprise, onto the
unexpected component of the industrial production index, the Institute of Supply
Management Purchasing Managers Index (the ISM index), the payroll survey, and
unemployment (see Section 2.3 below for a description). Finally, in the regression, we
allow for heterogeneous coefficients before and after 1994, to take into account a change
in the reaction of the Fed to economic data releases, as documented in BK.
7

We are very grateful to R. Gürkaynak for sharing the data with us.

10

To extend the sample of monetary policy surprises until August 2010, we proceed in
two steps. First, we collect data on monetary policy surprises at the zero lower bound
from Wright (2011, Table 5). The surprises are based on a structural VAR in financial
variables at the daily frequency, starting in November 2008 (and calculated beyond the
end of our sample in August 2010). The shocks are positive (negative) when monetary
policy is unexpectedly accommodative (restrictive). They also have a standard deviation
equal to one by construction. For comparability with the GSS data, we rescale Wright’s
shocks by multiplying them by minus the standard deviation of the GSS’s shocks, before
appending them to the time series of GSS shocks. Second, to fill the gap between the data
from GSS (June 2008) and Wright (November 2008), we calculate monetary policy
surprises using Federal funds futures, following BK.
2.3 Measuring Business Cycle Variation
We use industrial production as our benchmark indicator of business cycle variation
at the monthly frequency. In a robustness exercise in Section 3.2.2, we also consider nonfarm employment and the ISM index as alternative business cycle indicators.
In Sections 4.1 and 4.2, we use data on economic news surprises following the
methodology in Ehrmann and Fratzscher (2004).8 In our analysis, we rely on unexpected
components of news about the industrial production index, the ISM index, the payroll
survey, and unemployment. The unexpected component of each news release is
calculated as the difference between the released data and the median expectation
according to surveys. We use the Money Market Survey (MMS) for the period 19902001 and Bloomberg for the period 2002-2010. The shocks are standardized over the
sample period.
8

We are very grateful to M. Ehrmann and M. Fratzscher for sharing their dataset with us.

11

3. Structural Monetary VARs
In this Section, we follow the identified monetary VAR literature and interpret the
shock in the monetary policy equation as the monetary policy shock. Our benchmark
VAR, analyzed in Section 3.1, consists of four-variables: our risk aversion and
uncertainty proxies (rat and uct), the real interest rate as a measure of monetary policy
stance (mpt), and the log-difference of industrial production as a business cycle indicator
(bct). We consider alternative VARs as part of an extensive series of robustness checks
discussed in Section 3.2. The business cycle is the most important control variable as it is
conceivable that, for example, news indicating weaker than expected growth in the
economy may simultaneously make a cut in the Fed funds target rate more likely and
cause people to be effectively more risk averse, because their consumption moves closer
to their “habit stock,” or because they fear a more uncertain future.
3.1 Structural Four-Variable VAR
We collect the four variables of our benchmark VAR in the vector Zt = [bct, mpt, rat
uct]'. Without loss of generality, we ignore constants. Consider the following structural
VAR:
A Zt = Φ Zt-1 + εt

(3)

where A is a 4x4 full-rank matrix and E[εt εt'] = I. Of main interest are the dynamic
responses to the structural shocks εt. Of course, we start by estimating the reduced-form
VAR:
Zt = B Zt-1 + C εt

(4)

where B denotes A-1 Φ and C denotes A-1. Our estimated VARs include 3 lags. In the
Online Appendix, we include a table with some key reduced-form VAR statistics,

12

showing that the Schwarz criterion selects a one-lag VAR, whereas the Akaike criterion
selects three lags. Moreover, residual specification tests (Johansen, 1995) show that the
VAR with 3 lags clearly eliminates all serial correlation in the residuals.
We need 6 restrictions on the VAR to identify the system. Our first set of restrictions
uses a standard Cholesky decomposition of the estimate of the variance-covariance
matrix. We order the business cycle variable first, followed by the real interest rate, with
risk aversion and uncertainty ordered last. This captures the fact that risk aversion and
uncertainty, stock market based variables, respond instantly to monetary policy shocks,
while the business cycle variable is relatively more slow-moving. Effectively, this
imposes six exclusion restrictions on the contemporaneous matrix A, making it lowertriangular.
Our second set of restrictions combines five contemporaneous restrictions (also
imposed under the Cholesky decomposition above) with the assumption that monetary
policy has no long-run effect on the level of industrial production. This long-run
restriction is inspired by the literature on long-run money neutrality: money should not
have a long run effect on real variables.9 Following Blanchard and Quah (1989), the
model with a long-run restriction (LR) involves a long-run response matrix, denoted by
D:
D  (I - B)-1 C.

(5)

The system with five contemporaneous restrictions and one long-run exclusion restriction
corresponds to the following contemporaneous matrix A and long-run matrix D:10

9

Bernanke and Mihov (1998b) and King and Watson (1992) marshal empirical evidence in favor of money
neutrality using data on money growth and output growth.
10
Both identification schemes satisfy necessary and sufficient conditions for global identification of
structural vector autoregressive systems (see Rubio-Ramírez, Waggoner and Zha (2010)).

13

 a11 a12
a
a 22
A =  21
a31 a32

a 41 a 42

0
0
a33
a 43

0 
0 
and D =
0 

a 44 

 d11 0
d
 21 d 22
d 31 d 32

d 41 d 42

d13
d 23
d 33
d 43

d14 
d 24 
d 34 

d 44 

(6)

We couch our main results in the form of impulse-response functions (IRFs
henceforth), estimated in the usual way, and focus our discussion on significant
responses. We compute 90% bootstrapped confidence intervals based on 1000
replications. Figure 3 graphs the complete results for the pre-crisis sample but in our
discussion we mention the corresponding full sample (till August 2010) results in
parentheses. A complete graph for the full sample, mimicking Figure 3, is reproduced in
the Online Appendix (Figure OA1).
Panels A and B show the interactions between the real rate (RERA) and risk aversion
(RA). A one standard deviation negative shock to the real rate, a 34 (42) basis points
decrease under both identification schemes, lowers risk aversion by 0.032 (0.019) in the
model with contemporaneous restrictions and by 0.035 (0.019) in the model with
contemporaneous/long-run restrictions after 9 (19) months. The impact reaches a
maximum of 0.056 (0.020) after 20 (23) months and remains significant up and till lag 40
(40) in both models. So, laxer monetary policy lowers risk aversion under both
identification schemes and in both the pre-crisis and full samples. The impact in the full
sample is quantitatively weaker, and is only statistically significant at the 68% confidence
level. However, such tighter confidence bounds are common in the VAR literature (see
Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (1996), Sims and Zha (1999)). The impact of a one
standard deviation positive shock to risk aversion, equivalent to 0.347 (0.363) on the real
rate is mostly negative but not statistically significant in both models,

14

As Panel C shows, a positive shock to the real rate increases uncertainty (UC) in the
medium-run (after a short-lived negative impact), between lags 11 and 38 in the model
with contemporaneous restrictions and between lags 11 - 40 in the model with
contemporaneous/long-run restrictions. The maximum positive impact is 0.060 and 0.063
at lag 21 in the models with contemporaneous and contemporaneous/long-run
restrictions, respectively (in the full sample, the max impact is 0.018 and it is borderline
statistically insignificant even at the 68% confidence level). In the other direction,
reported in Panel D, the real rate decreases in the short-run following a positive one
standard deviation shock to uncertainty, equivalent to 0.244 (0.274). In both models, the
impact is (borderline) statistically insignificant in the pre-crisis sample (in the full
sample, the impact is significant at the 90% confidence level between lags 7 and 47,
reaching a maximum of 19 basis points at lag 18).
As for interactions with the business cycle variable (Panels E through J), a
contractionary monetary policy shock leads to a decline in industrial production growth
(DIPI) in the medium-run, but the impact is statistically insignificant in all specifications.
In the other direction, monetary policy reacts as expected to business cycle fluctuations: a
one standard deviation positive shock to industrial production growth, equivalent to 0.005
(0.006), leads to a higher real rate. Specifically, in the model with contemporaneous
restrictions, the real rate increases by a maximum of 14 (15) basis points after 6 (11)
months, with the impact being significant between lags 1 and 20 (at lag 1, and between
lags 3-31). The impact is also positive in the model with contemporaneous/long-run
restrictions but it is not statistically significant. Interactions between risk aversion and
industrial production growth are mostly statistically insignificant. Positive uncertainty

15

shocks lower industrial production growth between lags 6-15 (2-18), while the impact in
the opposite direction is statistically insignificant. This is consistent with the analysis in
Bloom (2009), who found that uncertainty shocks generate significant business cycle
effects, using the VIX as a measure of uncertainty.11
Finally, increases in risk aversion predict future increases in uncertainty under both
identification schemes (Panel L). Uncertainty has a positive, albeit short-lived effect on
risk aversion (Panel K).
Our main result for the pre-crisis sample is that monetary policy has a medium-run
statistically significant effect on risk aversion. This effect is also economically
significant. In Figure 4, we show what fraction of the structural variance of the four
variables in the VAR is due to monetary policy shocks. They account for over 20% of the
variance of risk aversion at horizons longer than 37 and 29 months in the models with
contemporaneous and contemporaneous/long-run restrictions, respectively. Monetary
policy shocks also increase uncertainty and Figure 4 shows that they are only marginally
less important drivers of the uncertainty variance than they are of the risk aversion
variance. Finally, while monetary policy appears to relax policy in response to both risk
aversion and uncertainty shocks, these effects are statistically weaker.
The results for the full sample including the crisis period overall confirm our results
for the pre-crisis sample but are less statistically significant. Given the measurement
problems mentioned before, and the rather extreme volatility the VIX experienced, this is
not entirely surprising.
11

Popescu and Smets (2009) analyze the business cycle behavior of measures of perceived uncertainty and
financial risk premia in Germany. They find that financial risk aversion shocks are more important in
driving business cycles than uncertainty shocks. Gilchrist and Zakrajšek (2011) document that innovations
to the excess corporate bond premium, a proxy for the time-varying price of default risk, cause large and
persistent contractions in economic activity.

16

3.2 Robustness
In this subsection, we consider five types of robustness checks: 1) measurement of the
monetary policy stance; 2) measurement of the business cycle variable; 3) alternative
orderings of variables; 4) accounting for the sampling error in RA and UC estimates; and
5) conducting the analysis using a six variable monetary VAR with the Fed funds rate
and price level measures CPI and PPI entering as separate variables. We also verified that
our results remain robust to the use of both shorter and longer VAR lag-lengths. We
estimated a VAR with 1 lag, as selected by the Schwarz criterion, as well as a VAR with
4 lags (we did not go beyond four lags as otherwise the saturation ratio, the ratio of data
points to parameters, drops below 10). Our results were unaltered.
3.2.1 Measuring Monetary Policy
Table 2 reports summary statistics on the interaction of alternative measures of the
monetary policy stance with risk aversion (Panel A) and with uncertainty (Panel B). The
results confirm that a looser monetary policy stance lowers risk aversion in the short to
medium run. This effect is persistent, lasting for about two years. In some cases, the
immediate effect has the reverse sign however. In the other direction, monetary policy
becomes laxer in response to positive risk aversion shocks but the effect is statistically
significant in less than half the cases. As for the effect of monetary policy on uncertainty,
monetary tightening increases uncertainty in the medium run but this effect is not
significant when using the Fed fund rate. In the other direction, higher uncertainty leads
to laxer monetary policy in all specifications but the effect is only significant when using
the Fed fund rate under contemporaneous identifying restrictions.
3.2.2 Measuring Business Cycle Variation

17

We consider the log-difference of employment and the log of the ISM index as
alternative business cycle indicators. Unlike industrial production and employment, the
ISM index is a stationary variable, implying that VAR shocks do not have a long run
effect on it. Our long-run restriction on the effect of monetary policy is thus stronger
when applied to the ISM: it restricts the total effect of monetary policy on the ISM to be
zero. Nevertheless, our main results from Section 3.1 are confirmed for each specification
with an alternative business cycle variable. We present a full set of IRFs (the equivalent
of Figure 3) for the VARs with the log-difference of employment and the log of the ISM
index as business cycle measures in the Online Appendix (Figures OA4 and OA5,
respectively).
3.2.3 Alternative Orderings of Variables
In one alternative ordering, we reverse the order of risk aversion and uncertainty in
our benchmark VAR. In another robustness check, we order the real interest rate last,
thus allowing it to respond instantaneously to RA and UC shocks. We consistently find
that looser monetary policy lowers risk aversion and uncertainty in a statistically
significant fashion in the medium-run. In the other direction, the effects are less robust. In
the specification with RA and UC reversed, monetary policy mostly responds to UC
shocks, but the response to RA shocks is statistically insignificant. In the specification
with RERA ordered last, monetary policy responds to both positive RA and UC shocks
by loosening its stance, and the effect is statistically significantly different from zero. We
present a full set of IRFs for the reversed ordering of RA and UC and for the
specification with RERA ordered last in the Online Appendix (Figures OA6 and OA7,
respectively).

18

3.2.4 Sampling Error in RA and UC
We check that our VAR results are robust to accounting for the sampling error in the
RA and UC estimation. We draw 100 alternative RA and UC series from the distribution
of RA and UC estimates (as described in section 2.1), and feed those into our
bootstrapped VAR. We estimate 100 VAR replications per set of alternative RA and UC
series. We then construct the usual 90% confidence bounds. The results are very similar
to those obtained without taking uncertainty surrounding RA and UC estimates into
account, and are presented in the Online Appendix (Figure OA8).
3.2.5 Six-variable Monetary VAR
We also estimate a six-variable monetary VAR following Christiano, Eichenbaum
and Evans (1999) and featuring the nominal Fed funds rate as the measure of monetary
policy stance and price level measures CPI and PPI as additional variables.12 To identify
monetary policy shocks, we use a Cholesky ordering with CPI and industrial production
ordered first, followed by the Fed funds rate and PPI, and risk aversion and uncertainty
ordered last.
We present impulse-responses to monetary policy shocks in Figure 5. Again, we
discuss results for the pre-crisis sample, but summarize the full sample results in
parentheses. A positive monetary policy shock corresponds to a 15 basis points (30 in the
full sample) increase in the Fed funds rate. A contractionary monetary shock leads to a
statistically significant decrease in the CPI between lags 3 and 23 (2 and 8) and in the PPI
between lags 23 and 50 (effect insignificant in the full sample). Furthermore, in the precrisis sample, industrial production declines following a monetary contraction after about
12

We estimate the model with four lags, as suggested by the Akaike criterion. All variables are in
logarithms except for the Fed funds rate. Note that industrial production now enters the VAR in levels.

19

10 months, though the effect is not statistically significant (similarly, the effect is
insignificant in the full sample). Importantly, the reactions of both risk aversion and
uncertainty are remarkably similar to those uncovered in our benchmark four-variable
VARs. Looser monetary policy decreases risk aversion by 0.024 (0.023) after 12 (19)
months. The effect reaches a maximum of 0.040 (0.025) at lag 23 (24), and remains
statistically significant till lag 35 (till lag 37, significant under 68% confidence bounds).
The effects remain economically important as monetary policy shocks account for over
12% (3%) of the variance of risk aversion at horizons longer than 40 months (see Panel F
of Figure 5) but these percentages are nonetheless lower than in our four-variable VAR.
As for uncertainty, a higher Fed funds rate increases uncertainty between lags 12 and 31
(16 and 36), with the maximum impact of 0.040 (0.033) at lag 23 (22), which is also
consistent with our previous findings. In non-reported results, monetary policy responds
to both positive RA and UC shocks by loosening its stance. The effect is statistically
significant under 90% confidence bounds between lags 2 and 7 (6 and 15) for RA and
between lags 5 and 26 (3 and 20) for UC.
4. Alternative Identification of Monetary Policy Shocks
In this Section, we employ two alternative methodologies to identify monetary policy
shocks: 1) monetary surprises based on high-frequency Fed funds futures and 2) monthly
surprises calculated using daily Fed funds futures.
4.1 Identification using High-Frequency Fed Funds Futures
Our VAR set-up to identify monetary policy shocks and their structural relationship
with risk aversion and uncertainty follows the Sims (1980, 1998) identification tradition.
With financial market values changing continuously during the month, the use of

20

monthly data for this purpose certainly may cast some doubt on this identification
scheme. We therefore use an alternative identification methodology that makes use of
high frequency data to infer restrictions on the monthly VAR. The approach, inspired by
and building on the procedure described in D’Amico and Farka (2011), consists of three
steps.
In the first step, we measure the structural monetary policy and business cycle shocks
directly. For monetary policy, we rely on a well-established literature that uses high
frequency changes in Fed funds futures rates (see, for example, Faust, Swanson and
Wright, 2004) to measure monetary policy shocks, and we detailed their measurement in
Section 2. Likewise, for business cycle shocks, we use news announcements. Under
certain assumptions, these shocks can be viewed as measuring the structural shocks εt in
the VAR. For monetary policy shocks, this is plausible because usually only one shock
occurs per month, and the use of high frequency futures data helps ensure that the
identified shock is plausibly orthogonal to other shocks. As to the business cycle shocks,
there are a number of potentially important complicating issues, such as the correlation
between the different news announcements and the structural shock to the actual business
cycle variable used in the VAR, and the scale of the shocks when more than one occurs
within a particular month. However, these issues become moot when business cycle
shocks do not generate significant contemporaneous effects on our financial variables,
which ends up being the case.
In the second step, we measure the high frequency effects of monetary policy and
economic news surprises on risk aversion and uncertainty. We regress daily changes in
risk aversion and uncertainty (as proxies for unexpected changes to these variables),

21

respectively, on the monetary policy surprises based on high-frequency futures (using the
“tight” window shocks)13 and the four monthly economic news surprises concerning
industrial production (ΔIP), the ISM index (ΔISM), non-farm payroll and employment
(ΔEMP), as described in Section 2.3.14 The resulting coefficients for the pre-crisis sample
(with heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in parentheses) are as follows:
ΔRAt = -0.039 + 0.047 ΔMPt – 0.005 ΔIPt – 0.004 ΔISMt – 0.004 ΔEMPt
(0.007) (0.020)
(0.014)
(0.016)
(0.017)

(7)

ΔUCt = -0.009 + 0.013 ΔMPt + 0.002 ΔIPt – 0.002 ΔISMt – 0.008 ΔEMPt
(0.003) (0.010)
(0.005)
(0.005)
(0.011)

(8)

The coefficients on the business cycle news surprises are not statistically different
from zero and economically small. However, the responses to the monetary policy
surprises are quantitatively larger and statistically significant at the 5% level for RA and
at the 16% level for UC. The coefficients on ΔMP give us direct evidence on the
contemporaneous responses of RA and UC to structural disturbances in MP. We already
note that these responses confirm that risk aversion reacts positively to monetary policy
shocks and does so more strongly than uncertainty. By the same token, we conclude that
the contemporaneous responses of RA and UC to a business cycle shock in our VARs are
equal to zero.
In the third step, we use the estimates of structural responses of RA and UC to
monetary policy and business cycle shocks in our VAR analysis. This requires a number
of additional assumptions. In particular, we assume that there are no further policy or
business cycle shocks during the month and thus that the monthly shock equals the daily

13

Results for the monetary policy surprises calculated using the “wide” window are very similar.
We treat both the non-farm payroll and the negative of the unemployment surprises as news about
employment (ΔEMP) as they have similar information content. Whenever then come out on the same day
(which is mostly the case), we sum them up.
14

22

shock identified from high frequency data. Furthermore, we assume that the
contemporaneous daily change in risk aversion and uncertainty identifies the monthly
change in unexpected risk aversion and uncertainty due to these policy and business cycle
shocks. In other words, we assume that the high-frequency regressions effectively yield
four coefficients in the A-1 matrix of our structural VAR. Because we need 6 restrictions
in total, we impose two more restrictions from a Cholesky ordering to achieve
identification. In one identification scheme (Model 1), we impose that both industrial
production and monetary policy do not instantaneously respond to RA; in another
scheme, we impose the same restrictions on the reaction to UC (Model 2).15 Because the
identifying assumptions on monetary policy shocks have more support in the extant
literature than the assumptions we made regarding the business cycle shocks, we also
consider a robustness check where we only impose the high-frequency responses to
monetary policy surprises in the monthly VAR. We then need four additional restrictions
from a Cholesky ordering to complete identification and use the three contemporaneous
restrictions in the BC equation (the usual assumption on sluggish adjustment of macro to
financial data) and a zero response by monetary policy to either RA (Model 3) or UC
(Model 4).
For the full sample, all the estimated coefficients in the second step regressions are
not statistically different from zero, but the effect of monetary policy shocks on risk
aversion is again positive with a t-stat of close to 1. If we were to impose that the
contemporaneous responses of RA and UC to monetary policy and business cycle shocks
are all equal to zero, models 1 and 2 would be under-identified. We thus estimate only
15

Imposing zero-response restrictions to RA and UC in the BC equation would lead to an under-identified
model.

23

models 3 and 4 for the full sample, i.e., imposing the zero-response to monetary policy
surprises from the second step regression, plus three contemporaneous restrictions in the
BC equation and a zero response by monetary policy to either RA or UC. As before, we
report results for the full sample in parentheses (and present IRFs in the Online
Appendix, Figure OA2).
For the two models imposing four restrictions from the first step, we present impulseresponses to monetary policy shocks in Figure 6. Looser monetary policy (corresponding
to a 29 basis points decrease in the real rate) lowers risk aversion on impact and between
lags 8 and 12, with a maximum impact of 0.055 in the model with no contemporaneous
response of business cycle and monetary policy to RA. The maximum impact is 0.061
and the effect is significant between lags 7 and 17 in the model with no contemporaneous
response of business cycle and monetary policy to UC.
As Panel B shows, a positive shock to the real rate increases uncertainty on impact in
the model with no contemporaneous response of the business cycle and monetary policy
to RA. The effect is positive but not statistically significant in the medium run. In the
model with no contemporaneous response of business cycle and monetary policy to UC,
the positive effect of the real rate shock on uncertainty is statistically significant on
impact and between lags 10-14, with a maximum impact of 0.059 at lag 14.
Lastly, the impact of monetary policy on industrial production growth is not
statistically significant (Panel C). Note that with different measures for the business
cycle, such as employment, the VAR does produce the expected and statistically
significant response to monetary policy.

24

For the two models imposing two restrictions (for the monetary policy shocks only)
from the first step, we present impulse-responses to monetary policy shocks in Figure 7.
Looser monetary policy, corresponding to a 33 (42) basis points decrease in the real rate,
lowers risk aversion on impact and between lags 4-36 (14-37, significant at 68%
confidence bounds), with a maximum impact of 0.055 at lag 15 (0.023 at lag 17) both in
the model with no contemporaneous response of monetary policy to RA and in the model
with no contemporaneous response of monetary policy to UC (and the three zero
restrictions in the BC equation).
As Panel B shows, a positive shock to the real rate increases uncertainty on impact
and between lags 4-36, with a maximum impact of 0.058 at lag 16 both in the model with
no contemporaneous response of monetary policy to RA and in the model with no
contemporaneous response of monetary policy to UC (and the three zero restrictions in
the BC equation). (The impact of the monetary policy shock on uncertainty is positive but
not statistically significant at 68% confidence bounds for the full sample.)
Lastly, the impact of monetary policy on industrial production growth is again not
statistically significant (Panel C).
4.2 Identification using Daily Fed Funds Futures
In this section, we adopt the approach of Bernanke and Kuttner (2005) to study the
dynamic response of risk aversion and uncertainty to monetary policy. The key feature of
their approach is the calculation of a monthly monetary policy surprise using Federal
funds futures contracts. This variable identifies the monetary policy shock and is included
in the VAR as an exogenous variable. The endogenous variables in the VAR are RA, UC
and the log difference of industrial production (DIPI).

25

We present impulse-responses to “cleansed” monetary policy shocks16 in Figure 7 for
the pre-crisis sample and in the Online Appendix for the full sample (Figure OA3). As
before, below we discuss results for the full sample in parentheses. The results generally
confirm that monetary policy surprises have a positive impact on both RA and UC, and
have the expected negative effect on industrial production. However, the results are less
strong statistically than under our other identification schemes.
A one standard deviation negative shock to the “cleansed” surprise, equivalent to 8.6
basis points (9 basis points), decreases RA on impact by 0.061 and UC by 0.054
(decreases RA by 0.053 and UC by 0.026). The IRFs are significant on impact at the 80%
confidence level for RA and at the 70% level for UC (at the 80% level for RA; not
statistically significant for UC). These results are robust to the use of alternative business
cycle indicators (non-farm employment and the ISM index).
5. Conclusions
A number of recent studies point at a potential link between loose monetary policy
and excessive risk-taking in financial markets. Rajan (2006) conjectures that in times of
ample liquidity supplied by the central bank, investment managers have a tendency to
engage in risky, correlated investments. To earn excess returns in a low interest rate
environment, their investment strategies may entail risky, tail-risk sensitive and illiquid
securities (“search for yield”). Moreover, a tendency for herding behavior emerges due to
the particular structure of managerial compensation contracts. Managers are evaluated
vis-à-vis their peers and by pursuing strategies similar to others, they can ensure that they
do not under perform. This “behavioral” channel of monetary policy transmission can
16

The monetary policy surprise is standardized by subtracting the mean and dividing by the standard
deviation.

26

lead to the formation of asset prices bubbles and can threaten financial stability. Yet,
there is no empirical evidence on the links between risk aversion in financial markets and
monetary policy.
This article has attempted to provide a first characterization of the dynamic links
between risk, uncertainty and monetary policy, using a simple vector-autoregressive
framework. We decompose implied volatility into two components, risk aversion and
uncertainty, and study the interactions between each of the components and monetary
policy under a variety of identification schemes for monetary policy shocks. We
consistently find that lax monetary policy increases risk appetite (decreases risk aversion)
in the future, with the effect lasting for more than two years and starting to be significant
after nine months. The effect on uncertainty is similar but the immediate response of
uncertainty to monetary policy shocks in high frequency regressions is weaker than that
of risk aversion. Conversely, high uncertainty and high risk aversion lead to laxer
monetary policy in the near-term future but these effects are not always statistically
significant. These results are robust to controlling for business cycle movements.
Consequently, our VAR analysis provides a clean interpretation of the stylized facts
regarding the dynamic relations between the VIX and the monetary policy stance
depicted in Figure 1. The primary component driving the co-movement between past
monetary policy stance and current VIX levels (first column of Figure 1) is risk aversion
but uncertainty also reacts to monetary policy. Both components of the VIX lie behind
the negative relation in the opposite direction (second column of Figure 1).
We hope that our analysis will inspire further empirical work and research on the
exact theoretical links between monetary policy and risk-taking behavior in asset

27

markets. A recent literature, mostly focusing on the origins of the financial crisis, has
considered a few channels that deserve further scrutiny. Adrian and Shin (2008) stress the
balance sheets of financial intermediaries and repo growth; Adalid and Detken (2007)
and Alessi and Detken (2008) stress the buildup of liquidity through money growth and
Borio and Lowe (2002) emphasize rapid credit expansion.17 Recent work in the
consumption-based asset pricing literature attempts to understand the structural sources
of the VIX dynamics (see Bekaert and Engstrom (2010), Bollerslev, Tauchen and Zhou
(2009), Drechsler and Yaron (2011)). Yet, none of these models incorporates monetary
policy equations. In macroeconomics, a number of articles have embedded term structure
dynamics into the standard New-Keynesian workhorse model (Bekaert, Cho, Moreno
(2010), Rudebusch and Wu (2008)), but no models accommodate the dynamic
interactions between monetary policy, risk aversion and uncertainty, uncovered in this
article.
The policy implications of our work are potentially very important. Because monetary
policy significantly affects risk aversion and uncertainty and these financial variables
may affect the business cycle, we seem to have uncovered a monetary policy
transmission mechanism missing in extant macroeconomic models. Fed chairman
Bernanke (see Bernanke (2002)) interprets his work on the effect of monetary policy on
the stock market (Bernanke and Kuttner (2005)) as suggesting that monetary policy
would not have a sufficiently strong effect on asset markets to pop a “bubble” (see also
Bernanke and Gertler (2001), Gilchrist and Leahy (2002), and Greenspan (2002)).

17

In fact, we considered the effects of repo, money and credit growth on our results by including them in a
four-variable VAR together with RA, UC, and RERA (replacing the BC variable). We consistently found
that the direct effect of monetary policy on risk aversion and uncertainty we uncovered in our benchmark
VARs is preserved.

28

However, if monetary policy significantly affects risk appetite in asset markets, this
conclusion may not hold. If one channel is that lax monetary policy induces excess
leverage as in Adrian and Shin (2008), perhaps monetary policy is potent enough to weed
out financial excess. Conversely, in times of crisis and heightened risk aversion,
monetary policy can influence risk aversion and uncertainty in the market place, and
therefore affect real outcomes.

Acknowledgements
We thank Tobias Adrian, Gianni Amisano, David DeJong, Bartosz Mackowiak,
Frank Smets, José Valentim and Jonathan Wright for helpful comments and suggestions.
Falk Bräuning and Carlos Garcia de Andoain Hidalgo provided excellent research
assistance. The views expressed do not necessarily reflect those of the European Central
Bank or the Eurosystem.

29

REFERENCES
Adalid, R. and C. Detken (2007). “Liquidity Shocks and Asset Price Boom/Bust Cycles,”
ECB Working Paper No. 732.
Adrian, T. and H. S. Shin (2008). “Liquidity, Monetary Policy, and Financial Cycles,”
Current Issues in Economics and Finance 14 (1), Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Alessi, L. and C. Detken (2009). “Real-time Early Warning Indicators for Costly Asset Price
Boom/Bust Cycles - A Role for Global Liquidity,” ECB Working Paper No. 1039.

Altunbas, Y., L. Gambacorta and D. Marquéz-Ibañez (2010). “Does Monetary Policy
Affect Bank Risk-taking?”, ECB Working Paper No. 1166.
Baker, M. and J. Wurgler (2007). “Investor Sentiment in the Stock Market,” Journal of
Economic Perspectives 21, pp. 129-151.
Bakshi, G. and D. Madan (2000). “Spanning and Derivative-Security Valuation,” Journal
of Financial Economics 55 (2), pp. 205-238.
Bakshi, G., N. Kapadia and D. Madan (2003). “Stock Return Characteristics, Skew Laws,
and Differential Pricing of Individual Equity Options,” Review of Financial Studies 16
(1), pp. 101-143.
Bekaert, G., S. Cho and A. Moreno (2010). “New Keynesian Macroeconomics and the
Term Structure,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 42 (1), pp. 33-62.
Bekaert, G. and E. Engstrom (2010). “Asset Return Dynamics under Bad EnvironmentGood Environment Fundamentals,” working paper, Columbia GSB.
Bekaert, G., E. Engstrom, and Y. Xing (2009). “Risk, Uncertainty, and Asset Prices,”
Journal of Financial Economics 91, pp. 59-82.
Bernanke, B. (2002). “Asset-Price ‘Bubbles’ and Monetary Policy,” speech before the
New York chapter of the National Association for Business Economics, New York, New
York, October 15.
Bernanke, B. and M. Gertler (2001). “Should Central Banks Respond to Movements in
Asset Prices?” American Economic Review 91 (May), pp. 253-57.
Bernanke, B. and K. N. Kuttner (2005). “What Explains the Stock Market’s Reaction to
Federal Reserve Policy?” Journal of Finance 60 (3), pp. 1221-1257.
Bernanke, B. and I. Mihov (1998a). “Measuring Monetary Policy,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 113 (3), pp. 869-902.
Bernanke, B. and I. Mihov (1998b). “The Liquidity Effect and Long-run Neutrality,”
Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 49 (1), pp. 149-194.
Blanchard, O. (2009). “Nothing to Fear but Fear Itself,” Economist, January 29.

30

Blanchard, O. and D. Quah (1989). “The Dynamic Effects of Aggregate Demand and
Supply Disturbances,” American Economic Review 79 (4), pp. 655-73.
Bloom, N. (2009). “The Impact of Uncertainty Shocks,” Econometrica 77 (3), pp. 623685.
Bloom, N., M. Floetotto and N. Jaimovich (2009). “Real Uncertain Business Cycles,”
working paper, Stanford University.
Bollerslev, T., G. Tauchen and H. Zhou (2009). “Expected Stock Returns and Variance
Risk Premia,” Review of Financial Studies 22 (11), pp. 4463-4492.
Borio, C. and P. Lowe (2002). “Asset Prices, Financial and Monetary Stability: Exploring the
Nexus,” BIS Working Paper No. 114.
Borio, C. and H. Zhu (2008). “Capital Regulation, Risk-Taking and Monetary Policy: A
Missing Link in the Transmission Mechanism?” BIS Working Paper No. 268.

Breeden, D. and R. Litzenberger (1978). “Prices of State-contingent Claims Implicit in
Option Prices,” Journal of Business 51 (4), pp. 621-651.
Britten-Jones, M. and A. Neuberger (2000). “Option Prices, Implied Price Processes, and
Stochastic Volatility,” Journal of Finance 55, pp. 839-866.
Campbell, J. Y and J. Cochrane (1999). “By Force of Habit: A Consumption Based
Explanation of Aggregate Stock Market Behavior,” Journal of Political Economy 107 (2),
pp. 205-251.
Carr, P. and L. Wu (2009). “Variance Risk Premiums,” Review of Financial Studies 22
(3), pp. 1311-1341.
Chicago Board Options Exchange (2004). “VIX CBOE Volatility Index,” White Paper.
Christiano, L. J., M. Eichenbaum and C. L. Evans (1996). “The Effects of Monetary
Policy Shocks: Evidence from the Flow of Funds,” The Review of Economics and
Statistics 78(1), pp. 16-34.
Christiano, L. J., M. Eichenbaum and C. L. Evans (1999). “Monetary Policy Shocks:
What Have We Learned and to What End?” In J. B. Taylor and M. Woodford (eds.),
Handbook of Macroeconomics, Vol. 1A, pp. 65-148, North-Holland.
Coudert, V. and M. Gex (2008). “Does Risk Aversion Drive Financial Crises? Testing
the Predictive Power of Empirical Indicators,” Journal of Empirical Finance 15, pp. 167184.
D’Amico and Farka (2011). “The Fed and the Stock Market: An Identification Based on
Intraday Futures Data,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 29(1), pp. 126-137.

31

Drechsler, I. (2009). “Uncertainty, Time-Varying Fear, and Asset Prices,” working paper,
Wharton School.
Drechsler, I. and A. Yaron (2011). “What’s Vol Got to Do with It,” Review of Financial
Studies 24(1), pp. 1-45.
Ehrmann, M. and M. Fratzscher (2004). “Exchange Rates and Fundamentals: New
Evidence from Real-time Data,” ECB Working Paper No. 365.
Faust, J., E. Swanson, and J. Wright (2004). “Identifying VARs Based on High
Frequency Futures Data,” Journal of Monetary Economics 51(6), pp. 1107-1131.
Gilchrist, S. and J.V. Leahy (2002). “Monetary Policy and Asset Prices,” Journal of
Monetary Economics 49 (1), pp. 75-97.
Gilchrist, S. and E. Zakrajšek (2012). “Credit Spreads and Business Cycle Fluctuations,”
American Economic Review 102(4), pp. 1692–1720.
Greenspan, A. (2002). “Economic Volatility,” speech before a symposium sponsored by
the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August 30.
Gürkaynak, R. S., B. Sack and E. T. Swanson (2005). “Do Actions Speak Louder Than
Words? The Response of Asset Prices to Monetary Policy Actions and Statements,”
International Journal of Central Banking 1 (1), pp. 55-92.
Ioannidou, V. P., S. Ongena and J.-L. Peydró (2009). “Monetary Policy, Risk-Taking and
Pricing: Evidence from a Quasi Natural Experiment,” European Banking Center
Discussion Paper No. 2009-04S.
Jiménez, G., S. Ongena, J.-L. Peydró and J. Saurina (2009). “Hazardous Times for
Monetary Policy: What do Twenty-Three Million Bank Loans Say About the Effects of
Monetary Policy on Credit Risk?”, CEPR Discussion Paper No. 6514.
Johansen, S. (1995). Likelihood-Based Inference in Cointegrated Vector Auto-Regressive
Models. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
King, R. and M. W. Watson (1992). “Testing Long Run Neutrality,” NBER Working
Papers No. 4156, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Kuttner, K. N. (2001). “Monetary Policy Surprises and Interest Rates: Evidence from the
Fed Funds Futures Market,” Journal of Monetary Economics 47 (3), pp. 523-544.
Maddaloni, A. and J.-L. Peydró (2010). “Bank Risk-Taking, Securitization, Supervision,
and Low Interest Rates: Evidence from Lending Standards,” forthcoming in the Review
of Financial Studies.
Newey, W. and K. West (1987). “A Simple, Positive Semi-definite, Heteroskedasticity
and Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix,” Econometrica 55(3), pp. 703-708.

32

Popescu, A. and F. Smets (2009). “Uncertainty, Risk-taking and the Business Cycle in
Germany,” CESifo Economic Studies 56(4), pp. 596-626. Rajan, R. (2006). “Has Finance
Made the World Riskier?” European Financial Management 12 (4), pp. 499-533.
Rigobon, R. and B. Sack (2003). “Measuring the Reaction of Monetary Policy to the
Stock Market,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (2), pp. 639-669.
Rigobon, R. and B. Sack (2004). “The Impact of Monetary Policy on Asset Prices,”
Journal of Monetary Economics 51 (8), pp. 1553-1575.
Rubio-Ramírez, J. F., D. F. Waggoner and T. Zha (2010). “Structural Vector
Autoregressions: Theory of Identification and Algorithms for Inference,” Review of
Economic Studies 77(2), pp 665-696.
Rudebusch, G. D (2009). “The Fed’s Monetary Policy Response to the Current Crisis,”
The Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Economic Letter, May 2009.
Rudebusch, G. D. and T. Wu (2008). “A Macro-Finance Model of the Term Structure,
Monetary Policy and the Economy,” Economic Journal 118 (530), pp. 906-926.
Sims, C.A. (1980). “Macroeconomics and Reality,” Econometrica 48(1), pp. 1-48.
Sims, C.A. and T. Zha (1998). “Comment on Glenn Rudebusch’s “Do measures of
monetary policy in a VAR make sense," International Economic Review 39(4), pp. 933941.
Sims, C.A. and T. Zha (1999). “Error Bands for Impulse Responses," Econometrica
67(5), pp. 1113-1155.
Taylor, J. B. (1993). “Discretion Versus Policy Rules in Practice,” Carnegie-Rochester
Conference Series on Public Policy 39, pp. 195–214.
Thorbecke, W. (1997). “On Stock Market Returns and Monetary Policy,” Journal of
Finance 52 (2), pp. 635-654.
Whaley, R. E. (2000). “The Investor Fear Gauge,” Journal of Portfolio Management,
Spring, pp. 12-17.
Wright, J. H. (2011). “What does Monetary Policy do to Long-Term Interest Rates at the
Zero Lower Bound?” working paper, Johns Hopkins University.

33

Figure 1: Cross-correlogram LVIX RERA

Notes: The first column presents the (lagged) cross-correlogram between the log of the VIX (LVIX) and
past values of the real interest rate (RERA). The second column presents the (lead) cross-correlogram
between LVIX and future values of RERA. Dashed vertical lines indicate 95% confidence intervals for the
cross-correlation. The third column presents the cross-correlation values. The index i indicates the number
of months either lagged or led for the real interest rate variable.

34

Table 1: Description of variables
Name

Label

Description (source)

Consumer price index

CPI

Consumer price index, all items

Dividend yield

Dividend yield of the Standard & Poor 500
index

Fed funds rate

FED

Fed funds target rate

Implied volatility

LVIX

Implied volatility of options on the
Standard & Poor 500 index, Log (VIX
/ 12 )

(Growth of) Industrial production

(D)IPI

Log (difference of) total industrial
production index

ISM index

ISM

ISM Purchasing Managers index

M1 money aggregate growth

M1

Month-on-month growth of M1

(Growth of) Non-farm employment

(D)EMP

Log (difference of) non-farm employment

Producer price index

PPI

Producer price index for intermediate
materials

Real interest rate

RERA

FED minus annual CPI inflation rate

Realized variance

RVAR

Realized variance [see Section 2.1]

Risk aversion

RA

Log (risk aversion) [see Section 2.1]

Taylor Rule deviations

TRULE

FED minus Taylor rule rate [see Section
2.2]

Three-month T-bill
Uncertainty (conditional variance)

Secondary market yield
UC

Log (uncertainty) [see Section 2.1]

Notes: Monthly frequency, end-of-the-month data (seasonally adjusted where applicable). Unless otherwise
mentioned, the data are from Thomson Datastream.

35

Figure 2: Risk aversion and uncertainty
Panel A: Risk aversion

120

Russian / LTCM
Crisis

Euro Area
Debt Crisis
Lehman
Aftermath

100
Asian
Crisis

80

Corporate
Scandals

Gulf War I

60

09/11
High Risk
Appetite

Mexican
Crisis

40

20

0
2010m1

2009m1

2008m1

2007m1

2006m1

2005m1

2004m1

2003m1

2002m1

2001m1

2000m1

1999m1

1998m1

1997m1

1996m1

1995m1

1994m1

1993m1

1992m1

1991m1

1990m1

Panel B: Uncertainty

180
Lehman
Aftermath

160
140
Russian / LTCM
Crisis

120

Corporate
Scandals

100
09/11

Asian
Crisis

80

Low
Uncertainty

Gulf War I

60

Euro Area
Debt
Crisis

Mexican
Crisis

40
20
0

2010m1

2009m1

2008m1

2007m1

2006m1

2005m1

2004m1

2003m1

2002m1

2001m1

2000m1

1999m1

1998m1

1997m1

1996m1

1995m1

1994m1

1993m1

1992m1

1991m1

1990m1

Notes: Plots of risk aversion and uncertainty for our sample period (January 1990 – August 2010).

36

Figure 3: Structural-form IRFs for the 4-variable VAR (DIPI, RERA, RA, UC)
Panel A: Impulse RERA, response RA
Contemporaneous restrictions
Contemporaneous/long-run restrictions

Panel B: Impulse RA, response RERA
Contemporaneous restrictions
Contemporaneous/long-run restrictions

Panel C: Impulse RERA, response UC
Contemporaneous restrictions
Contemporaneous/long-run restrictions

Panel D: Impulse UC, response RERA
Contemporaneous restrictions

Contemporaneous/long-run restrictions

37

Panel E: Impulse RERA, response DIPI
Contemporaneous restrictions
Contemporaneous/long-run restrictions

Panel F: Impulse DIPI, response RERA
Contemporaneous restrictions
Contemporaneous/long-run restrictions

Panel G: Impulse RA, response DIPI
Contemporaneous restrictions
Contemporaneous/long-run restrictions

Panel H: Impulse DIPI, response RA
Contemporaneous restrictions
Contemporaneous/long-run restrictions

38

Panel I: Impulse UC, response DIPI
Contemporaneous restrictions
Contemporaneous/long-run restrictions

Panel J: Impulse DIPI, response UC
Contemporaneous restrictions
Contemporaneous/long-run restrictions

Panel K: Impulse RA, response UC
Contemporaneous restrictions
Contemporaneous/long-run restrictions

Panel L: Impulse UC, response RA
Contemporaneous restrictions
Contemporaneous/long-run restrictions

Notes: Estimated structural impulse-response functions (black lines) and 90% bootstrapped confidence
intervals (grey dashed lines) for the model with 3 lags (selected by Akaike), based on 1000 replications.
Panels on the left present results of the model with contemporaneous (Cholesky) restrictions, panels on the
right present results of the model with contemporaneous/long-run restrictions.

39

Figure 4: Structural variance decompositions
Impact of RERA shocks
Contemporaneous restrictions

Contemporaneous/long-run restrictions

Notes: Fractions of the structural variance due to RERA shocks for the four variables DIPI, RERA, RA and
UC (model with 3 lags, selected by Akaike). The panel on the left presents results of the model with
contemporaneous restrictions, the panel on the right presents results of the model with
contemporaneous/long-run restrictions.

40

Table 2: Robustness to monetary policy measures
Panel A: Monetary policy instrument – risk aversion pair
MP instrument
Real interest rate
- COR
- CLR
Taylor rule
- COR
- CLR
Fed funds rate
- COR
- CLR
(-1) M1 growth
- COR
- CLR
(-1) M1
- COR

Impulse MP, response RA

Impulse RA, response MP

sign

significant from-to (month)

sign

significant from-to (month)

/+
/+

0 - 2 (), 9 - 40 (+)
2 (), 9 – 40 (+)




-12 - 24

/+
+

0 (), 8 - 44 (+)
9 – 44




---

+
+

21 - 38
19 - 38




0 - 10
0-7

/+
/+

---




---

+

5 - 26



--

Panel B: Monetary policy instrument – uncertainty pair
MP instrument
Real interest rate
- COR
- CLR
Taylor rule
- COR
- CLR
Fed funds rate
- COR
- CLR
(-1) M1 growth
- COR
- CLR
(-1) M1
- COR

Impulse MP, response UC

Impulse UC, response MP

sign

significant from-to (month)

sign

significant from-to (month)

/+
+

0 - 1 (), 11 - 38 (+)
0 - 3 (), 11 - 40 (+)




---

/+
/+

0 - 1 (), 15 - 42 (+)
0 - 1 (), 17 - 43 (+)




---

/+
/+

---




14 - 31
--

+
+

3 - 12
3 - 12




---

+

5 - 19



--

Notes: Table 4 summarizes results for the interactions between monetary policy (as represented by four
different measures) and risk aversion (RA) in Panel A and between monetary policy and uncertainty (UC)
in panel B in the four-variable model with DIPI, MP, RA and UC. The MP measures considered are: real
rate, Taylor rule deviations, Fed funds rate, the negative of the M1 growth. Each Panel lists the range of
months for which impulse-response functions (VARs with contemporaneous (COR) and
contemporaneous/long-run (CLR) restrictions, respectively) were statistically significant within the 90%
confidence interval in the direction indicated in the column “sign”. The last row in each panel considers a
specification with M1 and industrial production both entering in levels rather than growth rates (COR
restrictions only).

41

Figure 5: Monetary policy shock in the 6-variable VAR (CPI EMP FED PPI RA UC)
Panel A: Impulse FED, response CPI

Panel B: Impulse FED, response PPI

Panel C: Impulse FED, response RA

Panel D: Impulse FED, response UC

Panel E: Impulse FED, response IPI

Panel F: Structural Variance Decompositions

Notes: Panels A-E: Estimated structural impulse-responses (black lines) to a monetary policy shock in the
6-variable model and 90% bootstrapped confidence intervals (dashed grey lines), for the model with 4 lags
(selected by Akaike), based on 1000 replications. Panel F: Fractions of the structural variance due to FED
shocks for the six variables.

42

Figure 6: Identification using high-frequency futures and business cycle news
announcements
Model 1

Model 1

Model 1

Panel A: Impulse MP, response RA

Panel B: Impulse MP, response UC

Panel C: Impulse MP, response DIPI

Model 2

Model 2

Model 2

Notes: Estimated structural impulse-response functions (black lines) and 90% bootstrapped confidence
intervals (grey dashed lines) for the model with 3 lags (selected by), based on 1000 replications. Four
restrictions are derived from high frequency data. Panels on the left present results of Model 1 (BC and MP
do not respond instantaneously to RA), panels on the right present results of Model 2 (BC and MP do not
respond instantaneously to UC).

43

Figure 7: Identification using high-frequency futures
Model 3

Model 3

Model 3

Panel A: Impulse MP, response RA

Panel B: Impulse MP, response UC

Panel C: Impulse MP, response DIPI

Model 4

Model 4

Model 4

Notes: Estimated structural impulse-response functions (black lines) and 90% bootstrapped confidence
intervals (grey dashed lines) for the model with 3 lags (selected by), based on 1000 replications. Panels on
the left present results of Model 3, panels on the right present results of Model 4. Both models assume zero
contemporaneous responses of the BC shocks to the other variables. Model 3 (Model 4) assumes that
monetary policy does not instantaneously react to RA (UC).

44

Figure 8: Identification using daily futures
Panel A: Impulse MP, response RA

Panel B: Impulse MP, response UC

Panel C: Impulse MP, response DIPI

Notes: Estimated impulse-response functions to “cleansed” MP surprise (black lines) and 90%
bootstrapped confidence intervals (grey dashed lines).

45

Appendix: The VIX and Risk
To obtain intuition on how the VIX is related to the actual (“physical”) expected
variance of stock returns and to risk preferences, we analyze a one-period discrete state
economy. Imagine a stock return distribution with three different states x i , as follows:
Good state: x g    a with probability (1  p) / 2 ,
Bad state : xb    a with probability (1  p) / 2 ,
Crash state: xc  c with probability p ,
where   0 , a  0 and p  0 are parameters to be determined. We set them to match
moments of US stock returns - the mean, the variance (standard deviation) and the
skewness - while fixing the crash return at an empirically plausible number.
The mean is given by:

X 

1 p
1 p
xg 
xb  pc  (1  p)   pc .
2
2

(1)

The variance is given by:

V 2 

1 p
1 p
(  a  X ) 2 
(   a  X ) 2  p (c  X ) 2
2
2

(2)

and the skewness ( Sk ) by:
3
2

V Sk 

1 p
1 p
(   a  X ) 3  p (c  X ) 3 .
(  a  X ) 3 
2
2

(3)

Consider an investor with power utility over wealth in a one-period world, so that in
equilibrium she invests her entire wealth in the stock market:
~
 (W0 R )1 
~
U (W )  E 
(4)
,
 1  
~
where R is the gross return on the stock market, W0 is initial wealth and  is the
coefficient of relative risk aversion.
The “pricing kernel” in this economy is given by marginal utility, denoted by m , and
~
is proportional to R  . Hence, the stochastic part of the pricing kernel moves inversely
with the return on the stock market. When the stock market is down, marginal utility is
relatively high and vice versa.
46

The physical variance of the stock market is exogenous in this economy, and is
simply given by V . This variance is computed using the actual probabilities. The VIX
represents the “risk-neutral” conditional variance. It is computed using the so-called
“risk-neutral probabilities,” which are simply probabilities adjusted for risk.
In particular, for a general state probability  i for state i , the risk-neutral probability
is:

mi
R 
 i i .
Em
Em

 iRN   i

(5)

So, for a given  , we can easily compute the risk-neutral probabilities since Ri  xi  1 .
For an economy with K states, the risk-neutral variance is then given by:
K

VIX 2    iRN ( xi  X ) 2

(6)

i 1

and the variance premium is:
K

VP  VIX 2  V   ( iRN   i )( xi  X ) 2 .

(7)

i 1

In our economy, the risk-neutral probability puts more weight on the crash state and
the crash state induces plenty of additional variance, rendering the variance premium
positive. The higher is risk aversion, the more weight the crash state gets, and the higher
the variance premium will be. The expression for the variance premium has a particularly
simple form:

VP  ( gRN 
where  gRN 

1 p
1 p
)( x g  X ) 2  ( bRN 
)( xb  X ) 2  ( cRN  p)( xc  X ) 2
2
2

(8)

1  p (   a  1) 
1  p (   a  1) 
(c  1) 
,  bRN 
and  cRN  p
.
2
Em
2
Em
Em

Numerical Examples
Suppose the statistics to match are as follows: X  10% ,   15% , both on an
annualized basis; and Sk  1 on a monthly basis. We set c  25% (a monthly number).
This crash return is in line with the stock market collapses in October 1987 and October
2008. The implied crash probability to match the skewness coefficient of -1 is given
by p  0.5 % . With a monthly investment horizon, the crash probability implies a crash
every 200 months, or roughly once every two decades. Panel A of Appendix Table 1
47

provides, for different values of the coefficient of relative risk aversion  , the values for
the VIX on an annualized basis in percent (VIX), the log of the VIX on a monthly basis
(LVIX), i.e., log(VIX / 12 ), the annualized variance premium (VP), and our risk
aversion proxy computed on a monthly basis (RA), i.e., log(VIX 2 / 12   2 / 12 ). Note
that the variance premium and our risk aversion measure are monotonically increasing in
the coefficient of relative risk aversion  .
In structural models,  is typically assumed to be time-invariant, and the time
variation in the variance premium is generated through different mechanisms. For
example, in Drechsler and Yaron (2011), who formulate a consumption-based asset
pricing model with recursive preferences, the variance premium is directly linked to the
probability of a “negative jump” to expected consumption growth. The analogous
mechanism in our simple economy would be to decrease the skewness of the return
distribution by increasing the crash probability p . This obviously represents “risk”
instead of “risk aversion”. Yet, it is the interaction of risk aversion and skewness that
gives rise to large readings in our risk aversion proxy. To illustrate, let us consider an
example with lower skewness. Setting skewness equal to -2 requires a higher crash
probability of p  1 % . Panel B of Appendix Table 1 shows that the VIX increases, and
increases more the higher the coefficient of relative risk aversion, both in absolute and in
relative terms. The variance premium roughly doubles for all  levels, whereas our risk
aversion proxy increases by about 0.7.
In Bekaert and Engstrom (2010), when a recession becomes more likely, the
representative agent also becomes more risk averse through a Campbell-Cochrane
(1999)-like external habit formulation. The recession fear then induces high levels of the
VIX. We can informally illustrate such a mechanism in our one-period model. Imagine
that the utility function is over wealth relative to an exogenous benchmark wealth level

Wbm . Normalizing the initial wealth W0 to 1, the pricing kernel is now given by

R~  W 



bm





~ ~
, and the coefficient of relative risk aversion is  R / R  Wbm . Consequently,

~
risk aversion is state dependent and increases as R decreases towards the benchmark
level. It is easy to see how a dynamic version of this economy, for instance with a slow-

48

moving Wbm , could generate risk aversion that is changing over time as return
realizations change the distance between actual wealth and the benchmark wealth level.
To illustrate this mechanism, Panel C considers three different benchmark levels for

Wbm (0.05, 0.25 and 0.5) with  fixed at 4 and Sk  1 , implying p  0.5 % . The
second column shows expected relative risk aversion in the economy (CRRA), weighting
the three possible realizations for risk aversion with the actual state probabilities. The
other columns are as in the panels above. Clearly, for Wbm  0 , CRRA = 4 and we
replicate the values in Panel A for   4 . Keeping  fixed and increasing Wbm , effective
risk aversion increases. For example, CRRA increases from 4.21 to 7.97 as Wbm increases
from 0.05 to 0.5. The VIX increases from 17.87 to 27.93 and our risk aversion proxy RA
increases from 2.06 to 3.83. In sum, our risk aversion measure monotonically increases
with true risk aversion in the underlying economy.
Appendix Table 1: The VIX and Risk Aversion
Panel A: Varying  , Sk  1 , p  0.5 %
Parameters
Sk  1,   2
Sk  1,   4
Sk  1,   6

VIX

LVIX

VP

RA

15.987
17.612
20.139

1.529
1.626
1.760

0.003
0.008
0.018

0.936
1.960
2.711

Panel B: Varying  , Sk  2 , p  1 %
Parameters
Sk  2,   2
Sk  2,   4
Sk  2,   6

VIX

LVIX

VP

RA

16.908
19.841
24.075

1.585
1.745
1.939

0.006
0.017
0.036

1.624
2.643
3.386

Panel C: Varying Wbm ,   4 , Sk  1 , p  0.5 %
Parameters
  4, Wbm  0
  4, Wbm  0.05
  4, Wbm  0.25
  4, Wbm  0.50

CRRA

VIX

LVIX

VP

RA

4.000

17.612

1.626

0.008

1.960

4.209

17.868

1.641

0.009

2.061

5.323

19.598

1.733

0.016

2.584

7.968

27.934

2.087

0.056

3.835

Notes: Values of the VIX on an annualized basis in percent (VIX), the log of the VIX on a monthly basis
(LVIX), the annualized variance premium (VP), and our proxy for risk aversion on a monthly basis (RA)
for different values of the underlying parameters, while keeping the crash return c fixed at -25%. In Panel
A, the varying parameter is the coefficient of relative risk aversion γ while skewness Sk is fixed at -1. In
Panel B, skewness Sk is fixed at -2. Panel C computes, for γ fixed at 4 and Sk fixed at -1, expected risk
aversion (CRRA) and the other four variables for different values of the benchmark wealth level Wbm.

49

