NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ARE ALL TRADE PROTECTION POLICIES CREATED EQUAL? EMPIRICAL
EVIDENCE FOR NONEQUIVALENT MARKET POWER EFFECTS OF TARIFFS
AND QUOTAS
Bruce Blonigen
Benjamin H. Liebman
Justin R. Pierce
Wesley W. Wilson
Working Paper 16391
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16391

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2010

Blonigen and Wilson were supported by a National Science Foundation grant (Number 0416854).
Any opinions and conclusions expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily represent
the views of the U.S. Census Bureau. All results have been reviewed to ensure that no confidential
information is disclosed. We thank Rob Feenstra, Tom Prusa, Kathryn Russ, Peter Schott, Deborah
Swenson and participants of seminars at the U.S. Census Bureau and Rutgers for helpful comments.
Any remaining errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Bruce Blonigen, Benjamin H. Liebman, Justin R. Pierce, and Wesley W. Wilson. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Are All Trade Protection Policies Created Equal? Empirical Evidence for Nonequivalent
Market Power Effects of Tariffs and Quotas
Bruce Blonigen, Benjamin H. Liebman, Justin R. Pierce, and Wesley W. Wilson
NBER Working Paper No. 16391
September 2010
JEL No. F13,F23,L11
ABSTRACT
Over the past decades, the steel industry has been protected by a wide variety of trade policies, both
tariff- and quota-based. We exploit this extensive heterogeneity in trade protection to examine the
well-established theoretical literature predicting nonequivalent effects of tariffs and quotas on domestic
firms’ market power. Robust to a variety of empirical specifications with U.S. Census data on the population
of U.S. steel plants from 1967-2002, we find evidence for significant market power effects for binding
quota-based protection, but not for tariff-based protection. There is only weak evidence that antidumping
protection increases market power.

Bruce Blonigen
Department of Economics
1285 University of Oregon
Eugene, OR 97403-1285
and NBER
bruceb@uoregon.edu

Justin R. Pierce
Center for Economic Studies
U.S. Census Bureau
4600 Silver Hill Road
Washington, DC 20233
justin.r.pierce@census.gov

Benjamin H. Liebman
Department of Economics
Saint Joseph's University
5600 City Avenue
Philadelphia, PA 19131-1395
bliebman@sju.edu

Wesley W. Wilson
Department of Economics
1285 University of Oregon
Eugene, OR 97403-1285
wwilson@uoregon.edu

1. Introduction
An extensive literature dating back to at least Bhagwati (1965) demonstrates that tariffs
and quotas that limit imports in an identical way may have nonequivalent effects on economic
behavior and outcomes. One of the most well-known examples of this nonequivalence is that
tariffs and quotas can have quite different effects on the degree of market power exercised by
domestic and foreign firms. This result was demonstrated by Harris (1985) and Krishna (1989) in
oligopoly settings where a foreign firm and a domestic firm compete for the domestic market.
The key result is that the strict quantitative limit set by a quota restricts the foreign firm’s best
response in a systematic way that facilitates collusive pricing by the firms, therefore raising
prices, market power and profits. In contrast, tariffs do not impose any binding constraints on
prices and quantities and, thus, have no predicted effects on market power.
Despite this theoretical literature establishing the nonequivalent market-power effects of
quotas vis-à-vis tariffs, there has been virtually no work to examine this hypothesis empirically.1
A number of studies, including Berry, Levinsohn, and Pakes (1999) and Goldberg and Verboven
(2001), have estimated significant market impacts of quantitative restrictions on exports of
automobiles in U.S. and European markets, but they do not examine whether tariffs have
equivalent effects. Winkelmann and Winkelmann (1998) use the experience of a large trade
protection liberalization event in New Zealand to estimate significant negative terms-of-trade
effects to New Zealand for products that were formerly protected by quotas, but no such effects
for those that were tariff-protected. However, since the authors do not have cost data and identify
estimates from primarily cross-sectional variation, it is difficult to connect their results to market
power effects. Kim (2000) estimates the impact of trade protection programs on productivity,

1

A predecessor paper to this one by a subset of the authors (Blonigen, Liebman and Wilson, 2007) also considers
these issues, but with industry-level data that does not allow the precision and robustness of this paper’s results using
highly detailed plant-level data.
1

market power, and scale efficiency for the Korean industrial sectors from 1966 through 1988.
The analysis finds that quotas have a statistically significant impact on market power, whereas
price-based forms of protection do not, but cannot conclude that their impacts are different due to
the size of the standard errors.
In this paper, we directly examine the hypothesis of nonequivalent market-power effects
of quotas and tariffs using a detailed panel of US steel plants and a control group of non-ferrous
metal plants from 1967 through 2002. The US steel industry has been the recipient of practically
every form of trade protection over this time period (see Table 1 for a timeline of events). In fact,
the steel industry accounts for over one-third of the over 1400 US AD and CVD cases since 1980,
and steel is one of only a few high-profile industries that have enjoyed quotas or safeguard
remedies. In addition, there has been significant heterogeneity in trade protection across various
steel products and at different points in time, providing a rich variation to identify our estimates.
Our plant-level data includes detailed measures of inputs, production, and prices, allowing us to
use well-established techniques to estimate market power for the population of U.S. steel-makers,
and the panel nature of the data allow us to control for unobserved plant-level fixed effects. We
are also careful to account for the potential endogeneity of trade protection and market power.
While a primary focus of our analysis is the difference in market-power effects of tariffs
and quotas, our data allow us to also estimate market-power effects of a variety of other trade
protection programs, including antidumping (AD) duties and countervailing duties (CVD).2
2

There is a literature that has analyzed the impacts of various trade protection programs in the steel industry, though
the frequent focus is to analyze just one type of trade protection program, rather than compare effects across trade
protection programs. Crandall (1981) and Canto (1984) examine the effect of the US VRAs from 1969-1974, finding
that these VRAs had only a very modest effect in raising import prices for US steel firms. Lenway, Rehbein and
Starks (1990) and Lenway, Morck, and Yeung (1996) provide event study analysis evidence that steel firms’
profitability was increased by the announcement of voluntary restraint agreements (VRAs) in 1982 and 1984. More
recently, Chung (1998) finds that AD and CVD duties from 1982 through 1993 had only modest impacts on import
penetration, while Bown (2004) and Durling and Prusa (2006) find that AD and safeguards significantly decrease
trade in targeted products. Liebman (2006) finds little evidence that the 2002-2003 safeguard actions affected US
steel prices. In addition to the literature cited that uses econometric techniques to evaluate trade policies ex post, there
is also a significant literature that examines these policies with computable general (or partial) equilibrium models,
2

Staiger and Wolak (1989), Prusa (1994), and Veugelers and Vandenbussche (1999) provide
models that indicate that the structure of AD investigations and duty determination can facilitate
collusion amongst domestic and foreign firms serving a domestic market and, thus, also raise
market power of these firms. Konings and Vandenbussche (2005) analyze a firm-level data set of
European firms who petitioned and received AD protection in the 1990s and find that there was a
significant increase in market power of firms after the imposition of AD duties. Similarly, Pierce
(2010) finds that U.S. manufacturing plants responded to antidumping duties by increasing prices
and markups. In contrast, Nieberding (1999) examines whether the withdrawal of 1982 US AD
cases against imported steel affected market power for three large US steel producers and finds
only mixed evidence for any positive effects.
We are unaware of any theoretical models that suggest CVDs would increase market
power. CVDs are designed to countervail subsidization by a foreign government and, therefore,
the calculation of the CVD is unaffected by firm behavior. In contrast, the calculation of AD
duties are directly affected by foreign firm pricing behavior, and it is these well known rules by
which AD duties adjust to foreign firm pricing that allows the domestic and foreign firms to
potentially coordinate collusive pricing. Given this, we propose a second related nonequivalence
hypothesis that AD duties increase market power of domestic firms, whereas CVDs do not. Our
analysis will be able to directly examine whether there are any differential market-power effects
of AD duties and CVDs, as well as the extent to which these trade protection programs differ in
their effects from tariffs and quotas.
Unlike AD or CVD duties, which are country and even firm-specific, safeguard tariffs
provide protection across a wide array of import sources and are applied uniformly against
foreign firms in targeted countries. Thus, individual foreign firms have little incentive to alter

including de Melo and Tarr (1990) and many US federal government agency reports. These studies also typically
3

their pricing behavior in order to reduce their tariffs, as contrasted with the previously discussed
dynamics that may arise with foreign firms facing AD duties. Thus, our expectation is that
safeguard tariffs will not have an effect on markups.
Our paper’s econometric results provide a number of important results. First, we find
significant support for nonequivalent effects of quotas and tariffs as theory would suggest. The
various forms of tariff-based protection programs (ad valorem tariffs, CVD duties, and safeguard
tariffs) show no evidence of positive market power effects, while quantitative restrictions in the
form of voluntary restraints agreements (VRAs) in our sample (when binding) are associated with
increases in market power that are both statistically and economically significant. The evidence
suggests that the significant market power effects associated with quotas are similar for both types
of steel production plants (minimill and integrated), but do not exist for steel processing plants
where broad-based quota programs affected not only their final product, but also their purchased
primary steel inputs. The evidence for a market power effect of AD duties is less conclusive. We
estimate a significant positive effect of AD duties using one of the two main methods by which
we estimate market power effects, but not when using the other method.
The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. In the next section, we briefly describe
the US steel industry and its substantial history of trade protection. Section 3 describes our
empirical methodology and data, section 4 presents our empirical results, and section 5 concludes.

focus on only single trade protection instances and do not explore differing effects of trade protection programs.
4

2. US Steel Industry and Its History of Trade Policies
2.1. US Steel Producers
The US steel industry is composed of two major types of producers: integrated mills and
mini-mills. Integrated mills use large blast furnaces to make pig iron from iron and coke, which
is then melted into raw steel in basic oxygen furnaces. Until recently, integrated mills accounted
for the majority of steel production in the United States. Integrated mills often include on-site or
nearby finishing and rolling mills that further finish the semi-finished steel forms, such as ingots,
slabs, and billets, into finished products, such as bars and sheets. Over time, a process of
“continuous casting”, whereby molten steel is formed directly into finished products has spread
throughout the industry. Examples of integrated steel companies include US Steel and Bethlehem
Steel.
The past three decades have also seen an ever-increasing share of steel production due to
mini-mill steel plants which melt recycled steel scrap with electric arc furnaces (EAFs) into raw
steel and steel products.3 There are a number of cost efficiencies possible from mini-mill
production, particularly in the much smaller plant size and hence, capital costs, required for an
EAF. Historically, mini-mill producers have primarily produced lower-quality steel products,
such as wire rods and steel bar products, because of the greater impurities in steel made from
recycled scrap steel, rather than iron ore. However, over time, technologies have been developed
that have begun to allow mini-mill producers to break into higher-quality steel markets, such as
plate and sheet products. While Nucor is the well-known example of a mini-mill-based steel
company, there are scores of smaller mini-mill steel plants across the United States.
In addition to these steel producing plants, there are also steel processing plants that
produce many of the same basic steel products as the integrated and minimill plants using

5

purchased steel. Steel processors differ substantially from integrated and minimill plants,
however, in that they do not produce raw steel and instead purchase it from steelmaking plants for
use as their primary input. Products that are made at steel processors include steel pipes and
tubes, as well as wire and related wire products.
Since trade policies do not discriminate on the type of plant producing these products, we
include all three types of steel plants in our analysis. However, there are certainly economic
reasons to suggest that the effect of trade policies may differ across these types of plants. This is
particularly true of the processors, since steel trade policies may not only raise import protection
on their final good, but also their main input. After presenting full sample results, we will also
explore heterogeneity in trade policy impacts across these three types of steel plants.

2.2. Brief History of US Steel Trade Policies
Prior to the 1960s, the US steel industry was far more concerned with fending off antitrust charges than securing trade relief from the federal government.4 A string of factors, however,
led to the industry’s permanent shift from dominant world exporter to net importer.5
In reaction to pressure from the large, integrated steel producers and the United Steel Workers
Union (USW), President Johnson negotiated the industry’s first VRA with Japan and the
European Community (EC) in 1969. While the VRA expired in 1974, a surge of imports in 1977
led to renewed calls for quantitative restrictions as well as AD and CVD petitions. In order to
avoid either outcome, President Carter implemented the Trigger Price Mechanism (TPM), which

3

Data from various issues of the American Iron and Steel Institute’s Annual Statistical Yearbook show that percent of
US domestic steel produced by using EAFs has increased from about 15% in 1970 to around 50% today.
4
This confrontation even led to President Truman’s unsuccessful attempt to nationalize the industry in 1952.
5
These factors included: 1) a crippling strike in 1959 that required downstream users to seek non-domestic sources,
2) increasingly efficient, subsidized European and Japanese operations, 3) the discovery of large iron ore deposits
outside the US, and 4) a strong dollar. As such, between 1960 and 1968, US import penetration climbed from 4.7
percent to 16.7 percent of total US steel consumption. See Moore (1996) for a more detailed discussion of the history
of steel trade protection in the US through the early 1990s.
6

was implemented in 1978. Under the TPM the domestic industry agreed to refrain from filing AD
and CVD petitions as long as import prices did not fall below Japanese production costs (the
world’s lowest-cost industry) plus an 8 percent profit margin.
The TPM was renewed in 1980, but the industry was convinced that the policy was failing
to provide sufficient protection from subsidized European imports and began filing petitions for
AD and CVD protection in January of 1982 which terminated the TPM program. In order to
avoid trade frictions that would result from significant AD and CVDs, President Reagan
negotiated VRA agreements across a wide range of steel products with the EC in October of
1982.
Although European steel imports were not permitted to exceed 5.5 percent of the US
market, overall import penetration remained high due to a strong dollar and import diversions to
non-EC sources. This likely contributed to the industry filing a large set of AD and CVD
petitions in early 1984 and ultimately filing a safeguard petition (historically known as a Section
201 Escape Clause action in the US) in 1984. These trade protection actions led to the
negotiation of a comprehensive VRA for all finished steel products and limiting total import
market share to 18.4 percent in the last couple months of 1984. The VRAs were put into place for
a roughly five-year period to end in October of 1989.
In late 1989, citing the industry’s strong performance, President George H. Bush decided
to renew the VRAs for only two-and-a-half additional years, rather than the full five years
requested by the industry. When the VRAs ended in early 1992, the steel industry immediately
filed a large number of AD and CVD petitions once again. While many industry observers
expected intervention by the administration, President Bush instead allowed the cases to reach
their completion. In July of 1993, affirmative AD and CVD determinations were ruled in favor of
the domestic industry in only about a half of the value of imports under review. In several
7

instances, competition from mini-mills, rather than imports, were seen as the real cause of injury
by the US International Trade Commission. The ruling was perceived as a major defeat for the
industry and was cited by Moore (1996) as an indication of the industry’s loss of political clout.
Through the rest of the 1990s, steel producers used AD and CVD actions targeted at a
limited number of specific products to secure trade relief. One possible reason for such limited
action was the strong economy and modernized US operations. For the first time in decades,
integrated producers were globally competitive, touted by some experts as an industry that had
survived its austere, rationalization period and which was now enjoying a much-deserved
“renaissance.” (Ahlbrandt, Fruehan, and Giarratani, 1996)
A string of unexpected shocks in 1998 brought this period quickly to an end. Most
notable were currency crises in East Asia and Russia which led to import surges and subsequent
AD and CVD filings in the late 1990s. By the early 2000s, about one-third of the industry had
fallen into bankruptcy, leading President George W. Bush to implement safeguard tariffs ranging
from 8-30% on many major steel products in 2002. However, a number of major import sources
were excluded including Canada and Mexico, as well as less-developed countries. Moreover,
downstream industries successfully lobbied for exceptions over the ensuing safeguard period
further watering down the amount of affected imports. Finally, the safeguard tariffs were
terminated prematurely in early 2004 due to a WTO dispute panel ruling against the US safeguard
action.

8

3. Methodology and Data
3.1. Empirical Specification
Our focus in this paper is on the ability of US steel plants to price above marginal cost and
how this ability varies with trade policy changes.6 There are a couple standard ways in which the
previous literature estimates market power using plant- or firm-level data (see Tybout, 2003) and
we employ both of them here.
The first method stems back to Hall (1988), which was then extended by Roeger (1995) to
overcome an endogeneity issue. Konings and Vandenbussche (2005) use this Roeger
methodology in their estimation of the effect of AD duties on mark-ups and we use their notation
here to sketch out the model and resulting estimating equation.
Assume that each plant i producing product j in year t has a production function,

F ( N ijt , K ijt , M ijt ), that is linear homogeneous in three factors – labor ( N ijt ), capital ( K ijt ), and
materials ( M ijt ) – and that output ( Qijt ) for a plant is given by

Qijt  ijt F ( N ijt , K ijt , M ijt ),

(1)

where ijt is a plant- and year-specific productivity shock.
From this set-up, Hall (1988) derives the Solow residual for plant i in product j in year t
( SRijt ) as
ˆ ,
SRijt  Qˆ ijt   N ijt Nˆ ijt   M ijt Mˆ ijt  (1   N ijt   M ijt ) Kˆ ijt   ijt (Qˆ ijt  Kˆ ijt )  (1   ijt )
ijt

(2)

where the cavats denote growth rates, ’s are the associated factor shares of total revenues, and

 ijt  1  (1 / ijt ) . The variable ijt  Pijt / cijt , where Pijt is the price and cijt is the marginal cost,
and thus measures the price-cost markup for plant i in product j in year t. As in Hall (1988), one

6

While the theory also suggests that trade policy may affect foreign firms’ market power, we do not examine this
because we do not have the data to do so.
9

can estimate equation (2), though much care needs to be taken to control for potential
endogeneity, as the productivity shock term may be at least partly composed of anticipated shocks
that affect the plant’s choice of inputs.
Due to the difficulty of finding appropriate instruments to control for this endogeneity
issue, Roeger (1995) derives an equation to estimate the markup that is free from this source of
endogeneity. The methodology is to simply derive a dual Solow residual and difference the
primal and dual expressions for the Solow residual to eliminate the common productivity shock
term in each. In particular, the dual Solow residual ( DSRijt ) can be derived as
ˆ ,
DSRijt   N ijt PˆN ijt   M ijt PˆM ijt  (1   N ijt   M ijt ) Rˆijt  Pˆijt    ijt ( Pˆijt  Rˆijt )  (1   ijt )
ijt

(3)

where PM ijt , PN ijt , and Rijt are the factor prices for materials, labor, and capital, respectively.
Differencing equations (2) and (3) and re-arranging yields
ˆ  Pˆ  (Kˆ  Rˆ )]), (4)
(Qˆ ijt  Pˆijt )  (Kˆ ijt  Rˆ ijt )  ijt { N ijt [(Nˆ ijt  PˆN ijt )  (Kˆ ijt  Rˆ ijt )]   M ijt [( M
ijt
M ijt
ijt
ijt

This equation can easily be estimated using our plant-level data and has a number of nice
properties. First, the productivity shock term has been differenced away and, thus, is no longer a
source of endogeneity bias. Second, assuming a mean-zero error term, it is easily interpretable as
the regression of sales growth on weighted factor expenditure growth after netting out capital
expenditure growth from both sides, with the regression coefficient a direct estimate of the pricecost markup.
Our hypotheses in this paper concern the differential impacts that trade protection policies
imposed on foreign competitors of the plants in our sample can have on a plant’s ability to price
above marginal cost. To empirically examine this, we propose a varying-coefficients model
where the estimated markup parameter in equation (4) is a function of an intercept and a linear
combination of K product-specific trade policies ( TPjtk ),
10

K

 jt   0    k TPjtk ,

(5)

k 1

where the ’s are parameters to be estimated. Given our earlier discussions, we would expect
both quotas and AD duties to significantly increase the markup parameter,  jt , while tariffs and
CVDs have no significant effect. An important feature of the theoretical analysis proposing
nonequivalence between tariffs and quota is that these types of protection programs have different
effects on market power for the same level of import penetration. Thus, we also include an
import penetration measure ( IM jt ) on the right-hand side of equation (5) so that we can estimate
the impact of various trade protection programs on markups controlling for the level of import
penetration.7 We expect the coefficient on import penetration to be negative. An additional
variable that we add to the right-hand side of equation (5) is a measure of downstream demand
growth ( GR jt ). Gallet (1997) finds that markups in the steel industry can vary with the business
cycle and Konings and Vandenbussche (2005) also finds this is an important control variable for
their estimation. We also include the product’s Herfindahl index of market concentration ( HI jt )
as a control variable, since market structure will affect competitiveness and, hence, markups.
Finally, we include a plant’s capital intensity ( KI ijt ), as it is typically included (especially in what
we call the PCM estimation approach described below) as a control in past studies.
Denoting the left-hand side of equation (4) as Yijt , the term in brackets on the right-hand
side of equation (4) as X ijt , a mean-zero error term as ijt , and incorporating our varying
coefficients modeling of the effects of trade policies, import penetration, downstream demand
growth, Herfindahl index and capital intensity, we obtain the final Roeger-style estimating
equation that we will take to the data:

11

K

Yijt   0 X ijt    k (TPjtk  X ijt )   k 1 ( IM jt  X ijt )   k 2 (GR jt  X ijt )

(6)

k 1

  k 3 ( HI jt  X ijt )   k 4 ( KI ijt  X ijt )   i   ijt .
The estimated parameter, 0 , provides a baseline estimate of the price-cost markup by plants in
our sample, while the other estimated  parameters measure how much these other variables
(trade policies, import penetration, downstream demand growth, and Herfindahl index) increase
or decrease a plant’s baseline markup. We also include plant-level fixed effects, i .
One limitation of the Roeger derivation is an assumption of constant returns to scale.
Klette (1999) provides an extension to the approach of Hall and Roeger to relax this assumption.
However, when we implement Klette’s specification with our sample, our estimates cannot reject
constant returns to scale. Thus, we follow the simpler Roeger specification for our analysis.
An alternative specification to the Roeger approach to estimate the effect of various
factors on a firm’s or plant’s markup (and perhaps even more common in the literature) is to
simply construct a proxy for the markup using observable accounting data and regress this on
explanatory factors. Following previous studies we construct the price-cost markup proxy
( PCM ijt ) as total revenues minus variable costs over sales and estimate the following PCM
regression equation8:
K

PCM ijt   0    k TPijtk   k 1 IM jt   k 2GR jt   k 3 HI jt   k 4 KI ijt   i   ijt

(7)

k 1

where i are estimated plant-level fixed effects and  ijt is an assumed mean-zero error term.
For both the Roeger and PCM specifications, endogeneity of trade policies is a concern.
One obvious source of endogeneity is the increased propensity of firms to lobby or petition for

7

There is a related literature that looks at imports as “market discipline,” in that greater import penetration likely
correlates with a more competitive market, lower markups for all firms/plants (e.g., see Kee and Hoekman, 2007).
8
See, for example, equation 13.2 and related discussion in Tybout (2003) and equation 8 and related discussion in
Konings and Vandenbussche (2005).
12

trade relief when facing a degradation of their markups. This would bias us from identifying a
positive effect of trade policies on markups. After presenting our base estimates below, we then
provide instrumental-variables (IV) estimates where we employ a number of instruments to
control for the potential endogeneity of our trade policy variables. These instruments include lags
of all our trade policy variables and exogenous control variables. We also include a dummy
variable for any year prior to the completion of the Uruguay Round, after which quota-based trade
protection programs were essentially eliminated for use by member countries, as well as
interactions of this variable with our lagged variables as instruments. Finally, we include a
dummy variable for years after the conclusion of a major General Agreement on Tariffs and
Trade (GATT) round, when specific trade protection reductions were being phased in, as well as
interactions with our lagged variables. Years after GATT rounds lead to mandated decreases in
some of the trade protection programs, but may then create increased demand for trade protection
programs not covered by the recent GATT round.

3.2. Variables and Data

We rely on the U.S. Census Bureau’s Census of Manufactures (CM) for the data used in
this analysis. The CM is conducted every five years and collects plant-level data for all U.S.
manufacturers9 including the total value of shipments, book value of capital, raw material usage
and employment. In addition, the CM tracks the full set of products produced by each plant,
which allows us to identify the plants producing steel products that received trade protection. Our
panel dataset includes CM data from 1967, 1972, 1977, 1982, 1987, 1992, 1997 and 2002.

9

The CM collects limited data for small manufacturers, which are referred to as “administrative records.” Because
output and input data may be imputed for these plants, however, they are excluded from this analysis, as is standard
in research utilizing the CM.
13

Our sample consists of two main groups of plants. The first is our focus group of U.S.
steel plants producing products in SIC 331 (Steel Works, Blast Furnaces, and Rolling and
Finishing Mills). A few of the steel wire-related products also have associated SIC 349
(Miscellaneous Fabricated Steel Products) product codes when the product is produced by a steel
processor, rather than a steel-producing plant. For example, wire cloth produced by a steelproducing plant is coded as SIC 33157, whereas wire cloth produced by a steel-processor plant is
coded as SIC 34964. This distinction is what allows us to identify steel processors from steel
producers in our data.
The second group of observations is plants producing non-ferrous metal and primary
products listed under SIC categories 333, 334, and 335 (Primary Nonferrous Metal, Secondary
Nonferrous Metal, and Nonferrous Rolling and Drawing, respectively). These non-ferrous metal
producing plants are included to serve as a control group. The level of trade protection activity in
these products is quite minimal relative to the steel (i.e., ferrous) metal industries, yet they have
analogous product categories and production processes as the steel plants in SIC 331. Having a
control group is particularly important with respect to the VRA trade policies where virtually all
of the steel categories fell under a VRA, making it problematic to identify the effect of the VRA
on steel plants from an unobserved year effect. While using the full CM as a control group might
provide an interesting robustness check, data availability and collection difficulties make this
infeasible.
We then match trade policy and other control variables to the plants’ 5-digit SIC product
codes within the SIC three-digit categories 331, 333, 334, and 335. There are five different types
of protection programs that were applied to steel products in our database over our sample period.
The first program we examine is standard ad valorem tariffs ( Tariff jt ), which were in place for
the majority of the sample, though some had fallen to zero by the last year of the sample. The
14

relevant data were collected from the NBER Trade Database (www.nber.org/data/) and tariff
duties were calculated by dividing duties collected by the customs value of the imports for the
associated product codes.10 Tariffs by import product codes (Tariff Schedule of the United States
of Annotated (TSUSA) or Harmonized System (HS)) were aggregated to five-digit SIC (SIC5)
categories using concordances in various issues of Current Industrial Reports: Steel Mill

Products, published by the U.S. Census Bureau of the U.S. Department of Commerce.
Second, are voluntary restraint agreements or quotas ( VRA jt ), which happened over two
distinct periods. The first was from 1969 through 1974, which were placed on all steel products,
including steel pipes and tubes. Only one year of our sample is during this period, 1972, and, thus,
we create a “1” for any product subject to a VRA in 1972 and a “0” otherwise. The second VRA
period on steel products was in effect from the end of 1984 to early 1992.11 Again, only one year
of our sample fully overlaps with this period, 1987, and, thus, we create a “1” for any product
subject to a VRA in 1987 and a “0” otherwise. A key condition for nonequivalence between
tariffs and quotas with respect to market power is that the quota truly constrains (or binds) the
total quantity imported. It is difficult to measure how much a quota binds. However, there is
anecdotal evidence that the steel VRAs in 1972 did not significantly constrain imports (see Kiers,
1980, and Scheuerman, 1986), while 1987 was a year when quota “fill rates” of the VRAs across
all covered steel products were at their peak and, thus, quite binding (see Moore, 1996). Thus,
our ex ante expectations are that it is more likely that we find significant market power effects of
VRAs in 1987 than in 1972.

10

The NBER Trade Database currently only goes through the year 2001, and so we rely on purchased official
merchandise import data from the Foreign Trade Division of the U.S. Census for the year 2002.
11
Products covered under the VRAs are listed in the U.S. International Trade Commission (USITC) publication 1729
(August 1985), Annual Survey Concerning Competitive Conditions in the Steel Industry and Industry Efforts to
Adjust and Modernize.
15

The third and fourth types of protection programs were antidumping ( AD jt ) and
countervailing duties ( CVD jt ). Information on these investigations and duties were gathered from
relevant Federal Register notices. In particular, we gather information on affected import product
codes (TSUSA or HS), foreign country source, applied duty rates and length of time these duties
were in place, and then construct average trade-weighted AD and CVD duty rates for our SIC5
sectors using the import volume of the affected product and country source in the year prior to the
case available from the NBER Trade Database and the concordance between import product
codes and SIC5 products available in Current Industrial Reports: Steel Mill Products, mentioned
above.
The fifth trade protection program during our sample that we examine is the steel
safeguard tariffs ( SafeTariffs jt ) that were put into place in March 2002; i.e., early in the last year
of our sample. Steel safeguard tariff rates are reported and available from the U.S. Department of
Commerce at http://www.ita.doc.gov/media/FactSheet/0303/fs_steel_ex_032103.html. We
constructed trade-weighted average safeguard tariffs for our SIC5 products in the same fashion as
our AD and CVD duties, being sure to take into account the imports from country sources that
were exempt from the safeguard remedy, such as the North American Free Trade Agreement
partner countries.
There are a few trade protection programs applied to the steel industry during our sample
years that we do not include in our reported regression estimates. The TPM ran from January
1978 to January 1982, and thus does not overlap with any of our sample’s closest years – 1977 or
1982. Second, there were two special safeguard actions that led to trade protection in the form of
tariff-rate quotas on wire rods and circular welded line pipe from March 2000 to March 2003.
These programs overlap with our last sample year, 2002. However, they also pertain to very
specific products that comprise only a small share of one of our SIC5 products, particularly
16

circular welded line pipe. Not surprisingly, when we include dummy variables indicating the
affected SIC5 products in 2002, we estimate statistically insignificant effects on markups and
none of our other variables are qualitatively affected. Thus, we do not present results from
specifications with these variables in our empirical tables below.
Beyond the trade protection variables, we rely on four main control variables. The first is
a measure of import penetration for a product in a given year ( IM jt ), which we construct as the
share of imports in the sum of imports plus domestic shipments. We rely on data from various
annual yearbooks of the American Iron and Steel Institute for products where there is a direct
correspondence to our SIC5 products. For a handful of our products (particularly wire-related
products), there is not a clear correspondence, and so we use data on imports from the NBER
Trade Database for imports and Current Industrial Reports: Steel Mill Products for domestic
shipment data.
The second control variable is a real demand growth measure which we calculate as the
weighted average of real GDP growth by downstream sectors. We gather real GDP growth by
sector and year from table B-13 of the Economic Report of the President, 2006, and then weight
by the share of total shipments purchased by the downstream sector as reported in the 1992 U.S.
input-output tables. The product codes in the input-output tables are not as detailed as our SIC5
products, so we often have to apply the same demand growth values across multiple SIC 5
product codes. We construct changes in growth over the prior year, but also report estimation
results below when we calculate growth over the prior 5 years. Table 2 provides a list of the SIC5
products covered in our sample and average trade policy coverage over our sample years by
product and trade policy.
The third and fourth variables—product-level Herfindahl index and plant-level capital
intensity—are calculated using data from the CM. The product-level Herfindahl index is
17

calculated as the sum of plant-level market shares for all plants producing the product in a given
year. Capital-intensity is defined as plant-level book value of capital divided by total value of
shipments.

4. Empirical Results
4.1. Roeger estimates

Column 1 of Table 3 presents results from estimating equation (6) – which we term our
“base model” of estimates from the Roeger specification. The data fit the model well, with an R2
statistic of 0.91 and an F-statistic that easily rejects the null hypotheses of jointly zero
coefficients. The coefficient on the X ijt variable is highly statistically significant and also
statistically greater than 1.0, suggesting that the steel plants in our sample enjoy the ability to
price about 18.3% above cost on average.
The next set of regressors listed in Table 3 is our main focus in this paper – the trade
policy variables. As discussed above, prior theory suggests that the VRA and AD duties will
have a positive impact on plants’ market power, while strictly tariff-based trade policy programs –
tariffs, CVDs, and safeguard tariffs – to show no effects on market power. Our estimated
coefficients in Column 1 of Table 3 largely support these predictions. Both the 1972 and 1987
VRAs show positive, statistically significant coefficients at the 10% level, while the estimated
coefficients on strictly tariff-based trade policy variables are not statistically different from zero at
standard confidence levels. The estimated effects of the VRAs are economically significant,
suggesting that VRAs were associated with a 14.6 percentage point higher price-cost markup in
1987, while the VRAs raised markups by 38.1 percentage points in 1972. The one unexpected
result in our base results is that we do not find any significant effects of AD duties on markups,
inconsistent with prior theory and empirical work. One issue with both AD and CVD trade
protection is that they can be quite targeted to narrowly defined products or a subset of import
18

sources. This may make it difficult to identify the impacts of these programs with our data. On
the other hand, such narrow targeting would also limit the ability of the trade action to have a
significant impact on the market and, thus, make our findings not unexpected.
The final regressors listed in Table 3 control for import penetration, downstream demand
growth, the Herfindahl index, and capital intensity. While the coefficients on import penetration
and the Herfindahl index take the expected sign, they are both statistically insignificant from zero.
The coefficient on downstream demand is surprisingly negative and statistically significant. This
runs counter to Gallet (1997) that finds that market power goes up in periods of greater demand.
To explore this more, we tried alternative measures of real demand growth, including a 5-year
change in our downstream demand variable (rather than a one-year change) and get qualitatively
identical estimates.
A more general way to control for not only demand growth changes, but any other
macroeconomic factors affecting all products and plants, is to include year dummies. We add
year dummies to our base specification and report results in Column 2 of Table 3. Coefficient
estimates are qualitatively similar to those in Column 1, though the coefficient on the 1987 VRA
falls enough (0.1464 to 0.1004) to be below standard levels of statistical significance. Relatedly,
the coefficient on the 1987 year dummy variable is statistically significant and suggests that all
plants experienced almost a 9% increase in price-cost markups that year, ceteris paribus.
We note that it is possible that our control group of firms – non-ferrous metal producing
plants – is not ideal for identifying the impact of a broad-based trade protection program (like the
VRAs) on our focus (steel plants) from other macroeconomic events. A number of the nonferrous metals (e.g., aluminum and copper) are reasonably close substitute products for steel in a
number of downstream industries. Thus, when a trade protection program raises market power
broadly across steel products, it may also do so in non-ferrous substitutes from the demand shift
19

into non-ferrous products. In this way, our control group may bias our estimates from verifying a
significant positive effect of the VRAs. We think this is much less of an issue for AD and CVD
trade protection programs in our sample where only a very specific product (e.g., steel wire) is
targeted, as identification comes from a much larger set of unaffected non-ferrous and steel
products which are clearly not substitute products. However, we note that we estimate
qualitatively similar empirical results when we eliminate the aluminum, brass, and copper
products from our sample that are the closest substitutes for steel products.
These base results ignore the possible endogeneity of trade policies and markups. For
example, as discussed above, firms may be more likely to lobby for and gain trade protection
when market power is low. This would bias us from finding positive effects of trade policies on
price-cost markups. Column 3 of Table 3 provides our IV estimates for the Roeger specifications
with year dummies included. As before, the coefficients for tariff-based measures of protection
continue to be statistically insignificant. The VRA effect in 1987 is now estimated to be
significant at the 10% level and substantially larger in magnitude than before (47.8 percentage
point increase in the price-cost markup over a base of 32.7%). In contrast, the estimated impact
of the VRA in 1972 is insignificant. This difference in the VRA impact in 1987 and 1972 may be
related to the anecdotal evidence that the VRAs were not binding in 1972, in contrast to high fill
rates in 1987.

4.2. PCM estimates

We next turn to estimating market power effects using a PCM specification as presented
in equation (7) above. Table 4 presents results in analogous fashion to Table 3; Column 1
presents base results, column 2 presents estimates when we include year dummies, and column 3
presents our IV estimates with year dummies included. The pattern of coefficients from the PCM
20

estimates provides similar evidence on our hypotheses as those of the Roeger estimates, with a
few differences. Tariff-based trade protection programs do not have positive effects on price-cost
margins as hypothesized, though some are not insignificant, but unexpectedly negative (in the IV
estimates). Once again, the VRA effect in 1987 is positive and statistically significant at the 10percent level, even after controlling for year dummies in the IV estimates. The 1972 VRA effect,
however, is insignificant in all specifications in Table 4, which – again – is consistent with the
anecdotal evidence that the VRAs were not binding that year. Unlike the Roeger estimates, there
is evidence for a significant positive effect of AD duties on price-cost margins in our IV
specification.
The estimated market power effects in the PCM specification are generally smaller in
magnitude than the Roeger estimates, though still economically significant. Using the IV
estimates, the 1987 effect of the VRAs is a price-cost markup that is 5.9 percentage points higher,
whereas each percentage point increase in the AD duty increases the price-cost margin by 0.3
percentage points. These are economically significant relative to an estimated base markup of
around 33% for the sample. The control variables have generally insignificant coefficient
estimates, except for evidence that higher capital intensity is associated with lower price-cost
markups.
In summary, we find no significant positive effects of tariff-based trade protection
programs on market power, while finding positive and significant effects of VRAs in a year
(1987) when the anecdotal evidence suggests they were binding. Importantly, these results are
robust to calculation of markups with two different methodologies, which have been used
extensively in the empirical literature examining the effects of policy changes on market power.
The results are thus consistent with the theoretical literature that has demonstrated the nonequivalent market-power effects of tariffs and quotas. We find some evidence that antidumping
21

duties are associated with an increase in market power, although this result is only present when
measuring markups with the price-cost margin.

4.3. Differences across integrated, minimill, and processing steel plants

An important issue for our estimates is one of heterogeneous effects across types of steel
plants. Particularly in the beginning of our sample, the large integrated steel producers were often
the only type of firms publicly instigating petitions for trade protection. While this may suggest
they were the ones most likely to gain from trade protection, it may also be due to their relatively
large size in the industry and incentives for smaller minimill plants to free ride even though the
benefits from trade protection were proportionally as large as for the integrated plants. Also, as
mentioned, processing plants are quite different from the other two because they purchase basic
steel—their primary input—rather than produce it on-site. With trade protection often applied
simultaneously across a number of steel products, the processing plants’ reliance on purchased
steel may translate into different market power effects as well, as both their input and output
products may gain varying levels of trade protection.
To explore this issue, we re-estimate our earlier specifications (including year dummies)
and include interactions between our regressors and dummy variables for each type of plant
(excluding one type to avoid perfect multicollinearity).12 Using these estimates we can
decompose the trade policy effects by type of plant for both the Roeger and PCM specifications,
which we present in Table 5.
There are a number of results to highlight in Table 5. First, there continues to be no
evidence of positive market power effects from tariff-based protection. Second, the significant
12

Minimill plants are not explicitly identified in the CM data. However, production capacities of minimill plants are
significantly smaller than for integrated plants – a fact that is well documented and can be seen in the bi-modal nature
of capacities in our sample’s distribution of plant capacities. We use this feature of the data to identify minimill
plants.
22

market power effects of the binding VRAs in 1987 are clearly for the steel-producing plants
(integrated and minimills), not for the steel-processors. This is consistent with the notion that the
VRAs are increasing costs for the primary steel products purchased by the steel-processors,
mitigating the impact of VRAs on their final product. An interesting result is that the evidence
suggests that both the integrated and minimill producers gained from the VRA in 1987. The
estimated effects for the minimill producers are smaller, but we cannot reject the hypothesis of
equal effects across integrated and minimill producers for both the PCM and Roeger
specifications. As before, there is little evidence for any market-power effects of the VRA in
place in 1972, consistent with the anecdotal evidence that they were not binding at that point in
time. Finally, our PCM estimates show the positive market power effects of AD duties to be
limited to integrated producers, while the Roeger estimates do not find significant AD duty effects
for any of the different types of steel plants.

5. Conclusion

This paper provides one of the first empirical analyses of the hypothesis of nonequivalent
market power effects of tariffs and quotas using a more comprehensive and detailed dataset than
any previous study on this issue. We use plant-level Census data to examine changes in the
market power of U.S. steel plants as they were buffeted by a wide variety of trade protection
policies during our sample years of 1967 through 2002. We find evidence that binding
quantitative restrictions significantly increase market power, while tariff-based policies do not.
These results are consistent with a theoretical literature that predicts that binding quotas, unlike
tariffs, can facilitate collusive pricing by domestic and foreign firms. As expected, these results
hold for the steel-producing plants in our sample, but not for the steel-processing plants that rely
on purchased steel for inputs. We find only weak evidence that AD duties have positive effects
on market power, a possibility that has been discussed in a prior literature.
23

References

Ahlbrandt, Roger S., Richard J. Fruehan, and Frank Giarratani. (1996) The Renaissance of
American Steel: Lessons for Managers in Competitive Industries. New York, NY: Oxford
University Press.
Berry, Stephen, James Levinsohn, and Ariel Pakes. (1999) “Voluntary Export Restraints on
Automobiles: Evaluating a Trade Policy,” American Economic Review, Vol. 89(3): 400-30.
Bhagwati, Jagdish N. (1965) “On the Equivalence of Tariffs and Quotas,” in R.E. Baldwin et al.,
eds., Trade, Growth and the Balance of Payments: Essays in Honor of Gottfried Haberler,
Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Blonigen, Bruce A., Benjamin H. Liebman, and Wilson, Wesley W. (2007) “Trade Policy and
Market Power: The Case of the US Steel Industry,” NBER Working Paper No. 13671.
Boorstein, Randi, and Robert C. Feenstra. (1991) “Quality upgrading and its welfare cost in US
steel imports.” In: Helpman, E., Razin, A. (Eds.), International Trade and Trade Policy, MIT
Press, pp. 167–86.
Bown, Chad P. (2004) “How Different Are Safeguards from Antidumping? Evidence from US
Trade Policies Toward Steel,” Mimeo, Brandeis University.
Canto, Victor A. (1984) “The Effect of Voluntary Restraint Agreements: A Case Study of the
Steel Industry, Applied Economics, Vol. 16(2): 175-86.
Chung, Jae W. (1998) “Effects of US Trade Remedy Law Enforcement under Uncertainty: The
Case of Steel,” Southern Economic Journal, Vol. 65(1): 151-9.
Crandall, Robert W. (1981). The US Steel Industry in Recurrent Crisis. Washington, DC:
Brookings Institution.
de Melo, Jaime, and David Tarr. (1990) “Welfare Costs of US Quotas in Textiles, Autos and
Steel,” Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 72(3): 489-97.
Durling, James P., and Thomas J. Prusa. (2006) “The Trade Effects Associated with an
Antidumping Epidemic: The Hot-Rolled Steel Market, 1996-2001,” European Journal of
Political Economy, Vol. 22(3): 675-95.
Falvey, Rodney E. (1979) “The Composition of Trade within Import-Restricted Categories,”
Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 87(5): 1105-14.
Feenstra, Robert C. (1988) “Quality Change under Trade Restraints in Japanese Autos,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 103(1): 131-46.

24

Gallet, Craig A. (1997) “Cyclical Fluctuations and Coordination in the US Steel Industry,”
Applied Economics, Vol. 29 (1997) 29, 279-85.
Goldberg, Pinelopi K., and Frank Verboven. (2001) “The Evolution of Price Dispersion in the
European Car Market,” Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 68(4): 811-48.
Hall, Robert E. (1988) “The Relation Between Price and Marginal Cost in U.S. Industry,”
Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 96(5): 921-47.
Harris, Richard. (1985) “Why Voluntary Export Restraints are ‘Voluntary,’” Canadian Journal
of Economics, Vol. 18(4): 799-809.
Kee, Hiau Looi, and Bernard Hoekman. (2007) “Imports, Entry, and Competition Law as Market
Disciplines,” European Economic Review, Vol. 51(4): 831-58.
Kiers, Luc. (1980) The American Steel Industry: Problems, Challenges, Perspectives. Boulder,
Colorado: Westview Press.
Kim, Euysung. (2000) “Trade Liberalization and Productivity Growth in Korean Manufacturing
Industries: Price Protection, Market Power, and Scale Efficiency,” Journal of Development
Economics, Vol. 62(1): 55-83.
Klette, Tor J. (1999) “Market Power, Scale Economies and Productivity: Estimates from a Panel
of Establishment Data,” Journal of Industrial Economics, Vol. 47(4): 451-76.
Konings, Jozef, and Hylke Vandenbussche. (2005) “Antidumping Protection and Markups of
Domestic Firms,” Journal of International Economics, Vol. 65(1): 151-65.
Krishna, Kala. (1989). “Trade Restrictions as Facilitating Practices,” Journal of International
Economics. 26(3-4): 251-270.
Lenway, Stephanie, Rehbein, Kathleen, and Starks, Laura. (1990) “The Impact of Protectionism
on Firm Wealth: The Experience of the Steel Industry,” Southern Economic Journal, Vol. 56(4):
1079-93.
Lenway, Stephanie, Randall Morck, and Bernard Yeung. (1996) “Rent Seeking, Protectionism
and Innovation in the American Steel Industry,” Economic Journal, Vol. 106(435): 410-21.
Liebman, Benjamin H. (2006) “Safeguards, China, and the Price of Steel,” Weltwirtschaftliches
Archiv, Vol. 142(2): 354-73.
Moore, Michael O. (1996) “Steel Protection in the 1980s: The Waning Influence of Big Steel?”
in Anne O. Krueger, ed., The Political Economy of Trade Protection. National Bureau of
Economic Research Project Report Series. Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press,
15-34.

25

Nieberding, James F. (1999) “The Effect of US Antidumping Law on Firms’ Market Power: An
Empirical Test,” Review of Industrial Organization, Vol. 14 (1): 65-84.
Pierce, Justin R. (2010) “Spare the Rod, Spoil the Firm? A Plant-Level Analysis of the Effects of
Temporary Protection,” Mimeo, U.S. Census Bureau.
Prusa, Thomas J. (1994) “Pricing in the Presence of Antidumping Law,” Journal of Economic
Integration, 9(2): 260-89.
Rodriguez, Carlos Alfredo. (1979) “The Quality of Imports and the Differential Welfare Impacts
of Tariffs, Quotas, and Quality Controls as Protective Devices,” Canadian Journal of
Economics, Vol. 12(3): 439-49.
Roeger, Werner. (1995) “Can Imperfect Competition Explain the Difference between Primal and
Dual Productivity Measures? Estimates for U.S. Manufacturing,” Journal of Political Economy,
Vol. 103(2): 316-30.
Scheuerman, William. (1986) The Steel Crisis: The Economics and Politics of a Declining
Industry, New York, NY: Praeger.
Staiger, Robert W. and Frank Wolak. (1989) “Strategic Use of Antidumping Law to Enforce
Tacit Collusion,” NBER Working Paper Number 3016.
Tybout, James R. (2003) “Plant- and Firm-level Evidence on “New” Trade Theories.” In: E.
Kwan Choi and James Harrigan (Eds.), Handbook of International Trade. Blackwell Publishing,
Malden, Oxford, UK, 388-415.
Veugelers, Reinhilde, and Hylke Vandenbussche. (1999) “European Anti-dumping Policy and
the Profitability of National and International Collusion,” European Economic Review, Vol.
43(1): 1-28.
Winkelmann, Liliani and Ranier Winkelmann. (1998) “Tariffs, Quotas, and Terms of Trade: The
Case of New Zealand,” Journal of International Economics, Vol. 46(2): 313-32.

26

Table 1: US Steel Trade Protection Events
1969-1974

Voluntary Restraint Agreements
(VRAs) with Japan and the EC.

1978-1981

Trigger Price Mechanism applied to
all imports.

1982

Antidumping (AD) and countervailing
duty (CVD) cases filed against EC
countries. Subsequently terminated
for VRAs on EC imports.

1984

AD and CVD cases filed against nonEC countries. Subsequently terminated for comprehensive VRAs.

1984-1989

Comprehensive VRAs with all significant import sources.

1989-1992

Extension of VRAs.

1992-1993

AD and CVD cases filed against significant import sources after VRAs
expire. AD and CVD remedies
applied to only subset of products.

1998-2000

Multiple AD and CVD cases against
Japan and other Asian countries.

2002-2003 Safeguard remedies in form of tariffs
placed on steel imports, excluding
FTA partners and developing countries.

27

Table 2: Average Values of Trade Policy Variables Over Sample Years by Product
Tariff Rate
Ad Valorem
5.50%
4.19%
6.05%
3.84%
5.23%
6.81%
6.40%
0.52%
5.25%
0.92%
0.54%
7.39%
0.77%
1.18%

AD Duty
Ad Valorem
0.00%
3.45%
3.86%
5.33%
0.00%
4.92%
2.16%
5.05%
0.43%
2.78%
0.00%
0.00%
0.00%
0.00%

CVD
Ad Valorem
0.00%
0.03%
0.13%
0.63%
0.00%
0.42%
0.07%
15.89%
0.00%
0.00%
0.00%
0.00%
0.00%
0.00%

1987 VRA
Binary
0.125
0.125
0.125
0.125
0.125
0.125
0.125
0.125
0.125
0.125
0.125
0.000
0.000
0.000

1972 VRA
Binary
0.125
0.125
0.125
0.125
0.125
0.125
0.125
0.125
0.125
0.125
0.125
0.125
0.000
0.000

Safeguard
Tariffs
Ad Valorem
0.00%
0.73%
1.93%
1.16%
0.01%
2.39%
1.97%
0.00%
0.00%
0.00%
0.00%
0.00%
0.00%
0.00%

Aluminum ingot
Aluminum extrusion billet
Zinc residues and other zinc
smelter products

1.61%
1.61%
4.34%

0.00%
0.00%
0.00%

0.00%
0.00%
0.00%

0.000
0.000
0.000

0.000
0.000
0.000

0.00%
0.00%
0.00%

33392
33395

Refined primary zinc
Precious metals and precious
metal alloys

1.87%
0.00%

0.00%
0.00%

0.00%
0.00%

0.000
0.000

0.000
0.000

0.00%
0.00%

33398

Other primary nonferrous metals,
N.E.C.

0.97%

0.43%

0.06%

0.000

0.000

0.00%

33412
33413
33414

Copper (secondary refining)
Lead (secondary refining)
Zinc (secondary refining)

1.18%
2.96%
1.87%

0.00%
0.00%
0.00%

0.00%
0.00%
0.00%

0.000
0.000
0.000

0.000
0.000
0.000

0.00%
0.00%
0.00%

SIC5

Product

33122
33126 & 33170
33123
33124
33125 & 33155
33127 & 33167
33128 & 33168
3312C
33151 & 34961
33152
33156 & 34966
33157 & 34964
33311
33312

Steel ingot, blooms, slabs, etc
Steel pipe and tubes
Hot-rolled steel sheet and strip
Hot-rolled steel products
Steel wire
Cold-rolled steel sheet and strip
Cold-formed steel bars
Steel rails
Steel wire rope, cable, and strand
Steel nails and staples
Steel fencing and gates
Steel wire cloth
Copper smelter products
Refined primary copper and
copper-base alloy

33347
33348
33391

28

33415

Precious metals and precious
metal alloys (secondary refining)

0.00%

0.00%

0.00%

0.000

0.000

0.00%

33416

Other nonferrous metals, N.E.C.
(secondary refining)

0.77%

0.00%

0.00%

0.000

0.000

0.00%

33417

Aluminum ingot (secondary
refining)

1.61%

0.00%

0.00%

0.000

0.000

0.00%

33418

Aluminum extrusion billet
(secondary refining)

1.61%

0.00%

0.00%

0.000

0.000

0.00%

33511

Copper wire, bare and tinned
(non-electrical)

4.04%

0.02%

0.00%

0.000

0.000

0.00%

33513

Copper and copper-base alloy rod,
bar, and shapes

2.87%

0.05%

0.00%

0.000

0.000

0.00%

33514

Copper and copper-base alloy
sheet, strip, and plate

3.10%

5.45%

0.29%

0.000

0.000

0.00%

33515

Copper and copper-base alloy pipe
and tube

2.51%

0.00%

0.00%

0.000

0.000

0.00%

33531
33532
33533
33534
33541

Aluminum plate
Aluminum sheet and strip
Plain aluminum foil
Aluminum welded tube
Extruded aluminum rod, bar, and
other extruded shapes

3.27%
3.27%
4.87%
6.79%
2.83%

0.00%
0.00%
0.00%
0.00%
0.36%

0.00%
0.00%
0.00%
0.00%
2.41%

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

0.00%
0.00%
0.00%
0.00%
0.00%

33542

Extruded and drawn aluminum
tube

6.79%

0.00%

0.00%

0.000

0.000

0.00%

33551

Aluminum and aluminum-base
alloy wire and cable (except
covered or insulated) - Produced
in rolling mills

3.50%

0.00%

0.00%

0.000

0.000

0.00%

33552
33553

Rolled aluminum bar and rod
Aluminum ingot

2.76%
1.61%

0.48%
0.00%

3.15%
0.00%

0.000
0.000

0.000
0.000

0.00%
0.00%

29

33554
33561

Aluminum extrusion billet
Nickel and nickel-base alloy mill
shapes (including nickel-copper
alloys)

1.61%
5.34%

0.00%
0.00%

0.00%
0.00%

0.000
0.000

0.000
0.000

0.00%
0.00%

33562

Titanium and titanium-base alloy
mill shapes (excluding wire)

13.70%

0.00%

0.00%

0.000

0.000

0.00%

33563
33569

Precious metal mill shapes
All other nonferrous metal mill
shapes

0.40%
7.13%

0.00%
0.00%

0.00%
0.00%

0.000
0.000

0.000
0.000

0.00%
0.00%

33571

Aluminum and aluminum-base
alloy wire and cable (except
covered or insulated) - Produced
in drawing mills

3.50%

0.00%

0.00%

0.000

0.000

0.00%

33572

Copper and copper-base alloy
wire, strand, and cable (for
electrical transmission)

4.81%

0.00%

0.00%

0.000

0.000

0.00%

33573

Other bare nonferrous metal wire

5.69%

0.00%

0.00%

0.000

0.000

0.00%

33575

Nonferrous wire cloth and other
woven wire products

6.36%

0.00%

0.00%

0.000

0.000

0.00%

30

Table 3: Roeger-style Estimation of the Effects of Various Trade Policies
on Steel Plant Markups

Predicted
Sign

OLS
Estimates

OLS
Estimates

Instrumental
Variable
Estimates

Xijt

+

1.183***
(0.071)

1.171***
(0.071)

1.327***
(0.183)

Trade Policy Effects
Tariffjt  Xijt

0

1972 VRAjt  Xijt

+

1987 VRAjt  Xijt

+

ADDutyjt  Xijt

+

CVDutyjt  Xijt

0

Safeguardjt  Xijt

0

-0.006
(0.008)
0.381*
(0.204)
0.146*
(0.082)
-0.003
(0.007)
0.002
(0.002)
0.004
(0.009)

-0.008
(0.008)
0.377*
(0.218)
0.100
(0.073)
-0.002
(0.007)
0.003
(0.002)
0.004
(0.010)

0.013
(0.023)
0.026
(0.519)
0.478**
(0.241)
-0.007
(0.026)
0.004
(0.023)
0.078
(0.083)

Other Controls
IMjt  Xijt

-

GRjt  Xijt

+

HIjt  Xijt

+

KIijt  Xijt

?

-0.000
(0.000)
-0.008***
(0.002)
0.382
(0.495)
0.002
(0.007)

-0.000
(0.000)
-0.005
(0.003)
0.344
(0.494)
0.003
(0.007)

0.001*
(0.001)
-0.026*
(0.015)
-0.233
(0.976)
-0.003
(0.002)

No

Yes

Yes

0.91
2781.04***
7893

0.92
2700.51***
7893

12866.92***
7893

Year Dummies

R2
F-Test (or Chi-Squared)
Observations

Notes: All regressions include plant-specific fixed effects. Robust standard errors are in
parentheses and ***, **, and * denote statistical significance of a coefficient at the 1%, 5% and
10% levels, respectively.

31

Table 4: Price-Cost Margin (PCM) Estimation of the Effects of Various Trade
Policies on Steel Plant Markups.

Predicted
Sign

OLS
Estimates

OLS
Estimates

Instrumental
Variable
Estimates

Trade Policy Effects
Tariffjt

0

1972 VRAjt

+

1987 VRAjt

+

ADDutyjt

+

CVDutyjt

0

Safeguardjt

0

0.003**
(0.001)
0.006
(0.005)
0.034***
(0.010)
-0.000
(0.001)
-0.002***
(0.001)
-0.001
(0.001)

0.001
(0.002)
0.004
(0.009)
0.014
(0.017)
-0.001
(0.001)
0.000
(0.001)
-0.001
(0.001)

-0.006
(0.003)
-0.026
(0.040)
0.059*
(0.033)
0.003*
(0.002)
-0.006***
(0.002)
-0.005**
(0.002)

Other Controls
IMjt

-

GRjt

+

HIjt

+

KIijt

?

0.000
(0.000)
-0.000
(0.001)
0.021
(0.074)
-0.020*
0.011)

0.000
(0.000)
0.002
(0.002)
0.008
(0.068)
-0.020*
(0.012)

0.000
(0.000)
0.003
(0.002)
-0.441
(0.275)
-0.035**
(0.003)

No

Yes

Yes

0.61
3.67***
14542

0.61
3.70***
14542

41053.94***
14542

Year Dummies
R2
F-Test (or Chi-Squared)
Observations

Notes: All regressions include plant-specific fixed effects. Robust standard errors are in
parentheses and ***, **, and * denote statistical significance of a coefficient at the 1%, 5% and
10% levels, respectively.

32

Table 5: Trade Policy Effects on Market Power by Integrated, Minimill, and
Processor Steel Plants
Variable
Roeger Specification
Tariffjt
1972 VRAjt
1987 VRAjt
ADDutyjt
CVDutyjt
Safeguardjt

PCM Specification
Tariffjt
1972 VRAjt
1987 VRAjt
ADDutyjt
CVDutyjt
Safeguardjt

Integrated

Minimills

Processors

-0.012
(0.634)
1.111
(0.384)
0.885*
(0.059)
-0.012
(0.735)
0.004
(0.884)
0.118
(0.238)

0.030
(0.494)
-1.265
(0.441)
0.492
(0.102)
-0.022
(0.373)
0.022
(0.208)
0.019
(0.788)

-0.041
(0.659)
0.116
(0.733)
-0.081
(0.793)
-0.001
(0.982)
-0.296
(0.628)
0.050
(0.371)

-0.007**
(0.033)
-0.167*
(0.098)
0.155**
(0.014)
0.005*
(0.088)
-0.006***
(0.003)
-0.008**
(0.028)

-0.002
(0.623)
0.009
(0.842)
0.108***
(0.000)
0.000
(0.966)
0.002
(0.651)
-0.007*
(0.062)

-0.007
(0.115)
-0.001
(0.964)
0.011
(0.538)
-0.001
(0.672)
0.010
(0.724)
0.003
(0.145)

Notes: P-values in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote statistical significance of a coefficient at the
1%, 5% and 10% levels, respectively.

33

