NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

LIQUIDITY RISK OF CORPORATE BOND RETURNS:
A CONDITIONAL APPROACH
Viral V. Acharya
Yakov Amihud
Sreedhar T. Bharath
Working Paper 16394
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16394

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2010
Revised August 2014

Published in the Journal of Financial Economics 110(2), 2013, pp. 358-386. We thank an anonymous
referee for useful comments. We thank Jason Sturgess and Yili Zhang for diligent research assistance.
We are grateful to Banque de France grant for this study, and to Ruslan Goyenko for sharing with
us his illiquidity series for the US treasuries. We are grateful for comments from Mark Seasholes and
seminar participants at Moody’s KMV Annual Credit Risk conference (2007) hosted at NYU Stern,
IRC risk management conference in Florence (2008), Arizona State University, Hong Kong University
of Science and Technology, McGill, Tel Aviv University, University of Notre Dame, Barclays Global
Investors (London), Southern Methodist University, Nanyang Technological University of Singapore,
Penn State University, University of Houston, University of Texas at Dallas, University of Virginia
(Darden), and University of Toronto (Rotman). This paper won the 2012 Crowell Memorial Prize
(second place). All errors remain our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Viral V. Acharya, Yakov Amihud, and Sreedhar T. Bharath. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Liquidity Risk of Corporate Bond Returns: A Conditional Approach
Viral V. Acharya, Yakov Amihud, and Sreedhar T. Bharath
NBER Working Paper No. 16394
September 2010, Revised August 2014
JEL No. G12,G13,G32,G33
ABSTRACT
We study the exposure of the US corporate bond returns to liquidity shocks of stocks and Treasury
bonds over the period 1973 - 2007 in a regime - switching model. In one regime, liquidity shocks have
mostly insignificant effects on bond prices, whereas in another regime, a rise in illiquidity produces
significant but conflicting effects: Prices of investment-grade bonds rise while prices of speculative-grade
(junk) bonds fall substantially (relative to the market). Relating the probability of these regimes to
macroeconomic conditions we find that the second regime can be predicted by economic conditions
that are characterized as “stress.” These effects, which are robust to controlling for other systematic
risks (term and default), suggest the existence of time-varying liquidity risk of corporate bond returns
conditional on episodes of flight to liquidity. Our model can predict the out-of-sample bond returns
for the stress years 2008 - 2009. We find a similar pattern for stocks classified by high or low book-tomarket ratio, where again, liquidity shocks play a special role in periods characterized by adverse
economic conditions.

Viral V. Acharya
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West 4th Street, Suite 9-84
New York, NY 10012
and CEPR
and also NBER
vacharya@stern.nyu.edu
Yakov Amihud
New York University
Stern School of Business
44 West Fourth Street, Suite 9-190
New York, NY 10012
yamihud@stern.nyu.edu

Sreedhar T. Bharath
Department of Finance
University of Michigan
Room D7606 ER
701 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1234
sbharath@asu.edu

1. Introduction
This paper shows that the pricing of liquidity risk in the bond market is conditional on the
state of the economy, with liquidity risk becoming more important in times of financial and
economic distress. Using a regime-switching model, we find a significant (absolute) increase
in the exposure (“beta”) of corporate bond returns to liquidity shocks in stocks and Treasury
bonds, after controlling for term and default risks. We provide an econometric time-series
model that predicts the likelihood of regime in which liquidity matters more for asset pricing,
show that the likelihood is greater in times of macroeconomic and financial distress, and use
the prediction to generate a conditional forecast of bond returns. We further find that stocks
with high book-to-market ratio, which reflects persistent distressed performance and lower
liquidity, also exhibit an increase in their (absolute) liquidity betas in times of economic
distress.
Liquidity shocks affect realized returns because expected liquidity affects expected returns
(Amihud and Mendelson, 1986, 1991). Given the persistence of illiquidity, a positive illiquidity
shock raises future expected illiquidity and expected return which in turn lowers prices. This
usually generates a negative liquidity beta.1 These relations between illiquidity shocks and
returns have been documented for stocks by Amihud (2002), Pastor and Stambaugh (2003),
Acharya and Pedersen (2005), and Sadka (2006), and for corporate bonds by de Jong and
Driessen (2007), and Lin, Wang, and Wu (2011). This paper contributes to these studies by
showing that the impact of liquidity shocks on asset prices is conditional, being significantly
stronger in adverse economic times.
The relation between liquidity shocks and adverse economic and financial episodes has
been noted by Acharya and Pedersen (2005).2 In times of adverse economic and financial
conditions, the greater demand for liquidity and the rise in its value reduces asset prices
1

This holds under reasonable assumptions on the asset cashflows; see a formal model in Acharya and
Pedersen (2005).
2
Over the period 1963 to 1999, Acharya and Pedersen (2005) identify these shocks to be 5/1970 (Penn
Central commercial paper crisis), 11/1973 (oil crisis), 10/1987 (stock market crash), 8/1990 (Iraqi invasion
of Kuwait), 4 - 12/1997 (Asian crisis), and 6 - 10/1998 (Russian default, LTCM crisis).

1

by more than usual, and this applies particularly for the less liquid assets. Yet, these
episodes may be coupled by a flight to liquidity, by which securities with higher liquidity
become relatively more valuable. Then, unexpected rise in illiquidity may raise, rather
than depress, the prices of assets that provide greater liquidity in adverse economic times
relative to the prices of less liquid assets. This is indeed what we find for investment-grade
(IG) corporate bonds, which are known to be more liquid than speculative (junk) bonds.
Analogously, we also find that in times of economic distress, the effect of adverse liquidity
shocks is positive (relative to the market) for stocks with low book-to-market ratio, which
have stronger sustained profitability and higher liquidity, whereas the effect is negative for
stocks with high book-to-market ratio.
Formally, we estimate a regression model of bond returns on four pricing factors—term
spread returns, default spread returns (or the bond market excess returns), and liquidity
shocks on stocks and Treasury bonds. We study the association between changes in corporate
bond price shocks and changes in the illiquidity of stocks and Treasury bonds. We show
that this response varies over time, switching between two regimes which we characterize as
“normal” and “stress.” Employing Hamilton’s (1989) methodology, we first identify statistically
the two regimes between which there are variations in the liquidity betas as well as the betas
of the term risk and default risk. We then show that these two regimes can be predicted by
macroeconomic and financial variables. The regime which we call “stress” is associated with
adverse macroeconomic conditions such as recessed economic activity and adverse financial
market conditions such as negative stock market returns, heightened volatility, and shrinking
balance-sheets of financial intermediaries.
Employing our economic prediction model of being in the normal or in the stress regime,
we provide an out-of-sample forecast of corporate bond returns for the years 2008 - 2009.
In regressions of monthly realized returns on predicted returns that are conditional on the
pricing factors, R2 is 76% and 77% for junk and IG bonds, respectively, and the coefficients
indicate unbiased prediction: the slope coefficients are close to one and the intercepts are

2

close to zero. As shown in Fig. 5, the predicted return does a reasonable job at predicting the
returns of March 2008 (Bear Stearns’ collapse) and September to December 2008 (Lehman
Brothers’ collapse and the post-Lehman phase). In another out-of-sample test for the second
half of the sample,3 we again obtain that the prediction has significant power with an
accuracy of over 88%.
Importantly, we find that in the stress regime, the sign of liquidity betas is quite the
opposite for IG and junk bonds. Junk bond returns respond negatively to illiquidity shocks
while IG bond returns respond in a positive and significant way (these effects are relative
to the effect of liquidity shocks on the bond market excess return). In this regime, there
is a large significant difference in the return-illiquidity shock relation between IG and junk
bonds, whereas in the normal regime, this difference is smaller and less significant. This
pattern is robust to controlling for maturity and default risk. The evidence thus suggests
that in the stress regime there is a “flight to liquidity” wherein investors prefer (or price
more favorably) more liquid assets such as IG bonds rather than the less liquid junk bonds.
To further confirm this flight to liquidity, we show that Treasury bill yields fall relative to
the federal funds rate during the stress regime and become more sensitive to bond liquidity
shocks.
This analysis is extended to stocks sorted on their book-to-market ratio. Fama and French
(1995) show that the profitability of stocks with high book-to-market ratio is persistently
distressed, with the opposite holding for stocks with low book-to-market ratio. And, Fang,
Noe, and Tice (2009) show that stocks with higher book-to-market ratio are associated
with lower liquidity, because lower liquidity depresses stock value. Thus, stocks with higher
book-to-market ratio are similar to junk bonds in the sense that they have greater economic
distress and lower liquidity. Similar to our findings for corporate bonds, we identify statistically
two regimes which differ mainly in the effect of stock liquidity shocks on the excess returns
3

For each month, we progressively estimate the best econometric fit using macroeconomic and
financial-market variables that explain the model-implied probability of being in the stress regime until
the previous month, and use it to predict the statistically identified probability of being in the stress regime
in that month obtained from the time-series regressions of bond returns on the pricing factors.

3

of stock portfolios constructed based on their book-to-market ratio. Again, we find that the
probability of being in these regimes is predictable by the same macroeconomic and financial
market variables that predict the liquidity risk regimes for corporate bond returns. The
probability of being in the regime where stocks – particularly those with high book-to-market
ratio—have greater stock liquidity risk is significantly related to market conditions that
indicate economic and financial stress.
Finally, we directly relate the returns on stocks sorted by their book-to-market ratio to
returns on stocks sorted on their likelihood of default, using Altman’s Zscore as modified
by Hillegeist et al. (2004). We form portfolios of high and low default-risk stocks. Then
we relate the return on high-minus-low book-to-market stocks (HMLBM) to returns on
high-minus-low default-risk stocks (HMLDEF), adding the two liquidity shock variables.
This enables us to test the effect of liquidity risk after controlling for default risk, captured by
HMLDEF. We obtain that the control for default risk completely accounts for the well-known
HMLBM premium, while the risk of stock liquidity shocks is highly significant in times of
adverse economic conditions but not otherwise. The time periods in which the liquidity
risk is significant are strongly related to the time periods associated with adverse economic
conditions for liquidity risk in returns on bonds and stocks. This further substantiates our
proposition that liquidity risk is conditional on the state of the economy.
In summary, our conditional approach to modeling the liquidity risk of securities exposed
to default risk and distressed performance yields new explanations for understanding asset
prices. A large body of recent literature (e.g., Brunnermeier and Pedersen, 2009; He and
Krishnamurthy, 2012; Acharya and Viswanathan, 2011, among others discussed in Section
4), has stressed that financial intermediaries reduce liquidity provision in response to adverse
liquidity shocks, especially in times of economic and financial stress, when they exhibit a
flight to liquid assets. The results in our paper are consistent with some of the theoretical
predictions.
(a) There is a conditional response and differential response (between junk and IG bonds,

4

or between stocks with low and high book-to-market ratios) of default-risky securities to
market-wide liquidity shocks;
(b) There is a phenomenon of “flight to liquidity” that is separate from flight to quality;
(c) There is a highly significant relation between the probability of the distress regime,
during which liquidity shocks have the greatest impact, and dealers’ (or financial intermediaries’)
inventories and their interaction with market volatility.
Our analysis shows that default exposure as regimes change is really separate from
exposure to illiquidity shocks. Therefore, the exposure that otherwise would have been
attributed to default risk is in fact exposure to liquidity risk.
We also provide a new methodological procedure to study episodic changes in exposure of
securities prices and their economic and financial causes. We begin with a statistical first-step
to identify significant “regime” shifts in exposures in a statistical first-step and then, in a
second-step analysis, we relate the probability of being in regimes to macroeconomic and
financial conditions. The second step enables an unconstrained examination of the factors
affecting the regimes, which is more flexible and broad than in methods that incorporate
predetermined factors into the one-step regime-switching analysis. This methodology could
be used in future work for conditional analysis of other factor exposures of asset prices.
The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the data we employ. Sections 3 and 4
present results for our unconditional and conditional liquidity risk tests, respectively. Section
4 also reports results of the out-of-sample tests. Section 5 presents results on stock portfolios
constructed according to their book-to-market ratio. Section 7 discusses additional related
literature. Section 8 offers final conclusions.

2. Data
Our bond data are extracted from the Lehman Brothers Fixed Income Database distributed
by Warga (1998) and supplemented by the Merrill Lynch corporate bond index database
used by Schaefer and Strebulaev (2008). We follow closely the data extraction methodology
5

outlined by Bharath and Shumway (2008) for the Warga (1998) database. The Warga
(1998) database contains monthly price, accrued interest, and return data on all corporate
and government bonds over the period January 1971 - March 1997. We use the data from
the 1973 - 1997 period when coverage became widespread. This is the database used by
Elton et al. (2001) to explain the yield spread on corporate bonds, and by Gebhardt et
al. (2005) in their study of the cross-section of bond returns. In addition, the database
contains descriptive data on bonds, including coupons, ratings, and callability.
This study uses a subset of the data in the Warga database by employing several
selection criteria. First, we include only bonds that were priced by traders or dealers and
eliminate bonds that were matrix-priced.4 This rule is similar to that behind the CRSP
government bond file, which is the standard academic source of government bond data.
Next, we eliminate all bonds with special features that would result in them being priced
differently. This means that we eliminate all bonds with options (e.g., callable bonds or
bonds with a sinking fund), with floating rates, with an odd frequency of coupon payments,
and inflation-indexed bonds. In addition, we eliminate all bonds not included in the Lehman
Brothers bond indexes, because researchers in charge of the database at Lehman Brothers
indicated that the care in preparing the data was much less for bonds not included in their
indexes. This also results in eliminating data for all bonds with a maturity of less than one
year.
These data are supplemented by data on monthly prices of corporate bonds that are
included either in the Merrill Lynch Corporate Master Index or in the Merrill Lynch Corporate
High Yield Index used by Schaefer and Strebulaev (2008). These indexes include most rated
US publicly issued corporate bonds. The data cover the period from December 1996 to
December 2007. The selection criteria used for the Lehman database were also used with the
4
For actively traded bonds, dealers quote a price based on recent trades of the bond. We eliminate bonds
for which a dealer did not supply a price because they have prices determined by a rule of thumb relating
the characteristics of the bond to dealer-priced bonds. These rules of thumb tend to change very slowly over
time and do not respond to changes in market conditions. For matrix prices, all that our analysis uncovers
may be the rule used to matrix-price bonds rather than the economic influences at work in the market.

6

Merrill database. Thus, during the overlapping period between the two databases (December
1996 to March 1997), the constituent bonds in the two databases are nearly identical. In
the Lehman database all bonds have missing data in August 1975 and December 1984, and
their prices are replaced by interpolated prices. Most bond issues are rated by both S&P
and Moody’s and the ratings agree with each other. We eliminate unrated bonds and bonds
whose rating by S&P and Moody’s is not the same for the broad letter-based categories.
The monthly corporate bond return as of time τ + 1, rτ +1 is computed as

rτ +1 =

Pτ +1 + AIτ +1 + Cτ +1 − Pτ − AIτ
.
Pτ + AIτ

(1)

Pτ is the quoted price in month τ ; AIτ is accrued interest, which is just the coupon payment
scaled by the ratio of days since the last payment date to the days between last payment and
next payment; and Cτ +1 is the semiannual coupon payment (if any) in month τ + 1. For the
bond return indexes that we use, we value-weight the monthly returns of all eligible bonds in
each rating class by the total amount outstanding of each bond. This reduces significantly
price errors for particular bonds. In our sample over the period 1973 - 2007, there were on
average 2,234 bonds in each month, with a minimum number of 245 and a maximum number
of 9,286. The maximum number of months in our sample period is 420, but data are missing
for some rating classes in some months.
ENTER TABLE 1
Table 1 Panel A reports the summary statistics of the value-weighted returns on corporate
bonds aggregated into portfolios by rating classes. The weights are based on face value
outstanding and returns are in basis points, denoted bps. As expected, the mean and
standard deviation of bond returns are greater for bonds with greater default risk. The
monthly mean return on AAA-rated bonds is 67.2 bps with standard deviation of 134.5 bps,
and for CCC bonds, the mean and standard deviation are, respectively, 160.3 bps and 332.0
bps. For most of our analysis, we rely on groupings into investment-grade (“IG,” BBB-rated
7

and above) and high-yield speculative (“junk,” below BBB-rated) bonds. For this grouping,
we find that the returns on IG and junk bonds are, respectively, 67.6 and 97.6 bps and the
respective standard deviations are 127.3 and 177.9 bps.
We follow Fama and French (1993) in using two common factors for corporate bonds,
TERM and DEF, which reflect unexpected changes in the term structure of interest rates
and in default risk. Fama and French (1993) justify these choices by an Intertemporal
CAPM setting in which these two factors are hedging portfolios.5 Following Gebhardt et al.
(2005), we calculate the factor TERM as the difference in the monthly long-term 30-year
government bond return (from Ibbotson Associates) and one-month T-bill returns (from
the Center for Research in Security Prices, CRSP), and the factor DEF as the difference
between the monthly return on an equally weighted market portfolio of all corporate bonds
with at least one year to maturity and the average return on government bonds. The latter
is the average returns on one-year and 30-year government bonds because corporate bonds
whose returns are used to construct DEF have maturities from one to 30 years. Thus, DEF
is the bond market excess return; the equal-weighting better captures the extreme default
outcomes each month.
We add to the model two liquidity risk factors which are innovations in the illiquidity on
stocks and bonds. The stock illiquidity index is the market’s average price-impact measure
of Amihud (2002), as modified by Acharya and Pedersen (2005). It is calculated as the
equally weighted average of the daily ratio of absolute stock return to its daily dollar volume,
and averaged over the days of the month to provide the monthly stock illiquidity measure,
using NYSE and Amex stocks.6 The bond illiquidity measure is the equally weighted quoted
bid-ask spread on on-the-run short maturity Treasuries.7 The innovations in the stock (bond)
5

Following the suggestion and results in Gebhardt et al. (2005, footnote 2), we do not include the stock
market factor which they found empirically to have almost no explanatory power for corporate bond returns
in the presence of default and term risk factors.
6
To make ILLIQ stationary, the series is modified by the normalization formula due to Pastor and
Stambaugh (2003) and Acharya and Pedersen (2005): the ratio of the capitalizations of the market portfolio
at the end of month t - 1 and of the market portfolio at the end of July 1962.
7
These data are as in Goyenko (2006). We thank Ruslan Goyenko for providing us the data.

8

indexes are the residuals from an autoregressive model with AR(3) (AR(2)) specification,
with the lag length being selected to ensure that the residuals are serially uncorrelated.8 We
call the innovations in the stock and bond illiquidity indexes Silliq and Billiq, respectively.
Panel B of Table 1 presents summary statistics on the four factors that we use in this
study. The mean risk premium for the default factor (DEF) is 9.5 bps per month with t =
1.72, while the average risk premium for the term factor (TERM) is 17.7 basis points per
month, which is insignificantly different from zero. The mean of the two liquidity factors
is practically zero. Panel C of Table 1 shows the pairwise correlations between TERM,
DEF, and the two liquidity risk factors. TERM and DEF are highly negatively correlated
(correlation = -0.529), whereas the two liquidity risk factors are less correlated with each
other (correlation = 0.086), and they are also not highly correlated with TERM and DEF
(the correlations of DEF with Billiq is -0.057 and with Silliq it is -0.153). This helps with
a clean interpretation of the liquidity risk effects we identify.
ENTER FIGURES 1-3
Fig. 1 plots the investment-grade and junk bond returns over time which appear to
be more variable during the early 1980s, the early 1990s recession, and late 1990s. Fig. 2
plots the time-series of TERM and DEF. Finally, Fig. 3 plots the standardized bond and
stock market illiquidity innovations. The measured innovations in market illiquidity are
high during periods that were characterized by liquidity crises, for instance, the oil shock of
1973, the 1979 - 1982 period of high interest rates, the stock market crash of 1987, the 1990
recession, and the 1998 LTCM crisis.
3. Unconditional liquidity risk of bond returns
In this section, we first examine as a benchmark the unconditional effect of liquidity
factors on corporate bond returns divided into categories by ratings.
8

The estimated AR model coefficients employ the Shaman-Stine (1988) correction for finite sample
coefficients. The estimation period of this model coincides with the data period.

9

3.1. Methodology and results
First, we estimate the following time-series specification:

Rj,t = αj + βj,T × T ERM + βj,D × DEF
+ βj,Si × Silliq + βj,Bi × Billiq + ǫj,t ,

(2)

for Rj,t being the value-weighted return on corporate bonds of rating class j in excess of the
30-day T-bill return j ∈ {AAA, ..., CCC & below}. This specification is similar to that of
Fama and French (1993), augmented with the two liquidity risk factors.
ENTER TABLE 2
Table 2 Panel A presents the coefficient estimates. For all ratings, the loadings on TERM
and DEF are positive. The TERM factor loading is statistically significant for all rating
classes and it is higher for the IG group of bonds (BBB and higher) than it is for junk bonds
because the duration of IG bonds is generally higher. The DEF loadings are monotonically
increasing down the rating groups (except for the CCC group), consistent with worsening of
credit quality.
Of primary interest to this paper, the liquidity risk loadings βSi and βBi for both stocks
and bonds, Silliq and Billiq, are negative for all ratings below BBB and are positive for
highly rated bond classes (the coefficient of Silliq is positive for all investment-grade bonds
and the coefficient of Billiq is positive for bonds above A-rating). Notably, the model
includes the factor DEF, the bond market excess return over government bond return,
which itself is negatively affected by illiquidity shocks (shown in Table 7 below). Then,
the coefficients βSi and βBi measure the effects of liquidity shocks on returns in each rating
class (conditional on the effects of these shocks on DEF, the bond market excess return). The
positive coefficients βSi and βBi then mean that the effects of illiquidity shocks on returns of
highly rated bonds is less negative than their effect on the average bond market return and

10

the negative coefficients βSi and βBi on junk bonds mean that these bond prices fall by more
than average in response to illiquidity shocks. Overall, the coefficients on liquidity risks are
almost monotonically declining from positive to negative values as we move from AAA down
to CCC bonds. This pattern suggests a “flight to liquidity” phenomenon: When illiquidity
rises, there is a flight from low-rated bonds which are generally less liquid to the more liquid
higher-quality bonds. Consequently, the prices of high-rated corporate bonds rise and the
prices of low-rated bonds fall, both effects being measured relative to the average bond
market return. The explanatory power of our model is reasonably high for bonds rated BBB
and above (adj-R2 is between 75% and 82%), but it deteriorates substantially for below-BBB
bonds (adj-R2 falls from 51% for BBB to 11% for CCC and below).9
Table 2 Panel B reports the economic magnitudes of the different factor loadings. In
particular, it reports for each factor loading and each rating class how many standard
deviation in returns arise from a standard deviation shock to the factor. The calculations
employ the summary statistics reported in Table 1 and the coefficients estimated in Panel
A of Table 2. For BBB and above, the liquidity risks are not economically significant: a
one standard deviation shock to liquidity risks produces a meagre 0.6% to 9% of standard
deviation in returns for these rating classes. The effects of TERM and DEF appear much
more significant than those of liquidity risks for BBB and above, with the effect of TERM
being the largest. But for junk bonds (BB and below), liquidity risk has greater economic
significance for bond returns than its significance for IG bond returns (between 10% to 40%),
while the effect of TERM declines. Notably, the effect of DEF does not rise substantially for
bonds with rating lower than BBB.
In summary, Table 2 shows the existence of unconditional liquidity risk in corporate bond
9

de Jong and Driessen (2007) estimate a bond return model with similar liquidity factors, using the stock
market excess return instead of our two bond-market-based control variables, TERM and DEF, which render
the market factor insignificant; see Gebhardt et al. (2005). Unlike in our results, their estimated coefficients
of the illiquidity factors do not switch from positive for high-rated bonds to negative for lower-rated bonds
which suggests flight to liquidity, and their liquidity factor coefficients are not as monotonic in the rating
classes as we show them to be. This may be because their model does not include the bond market excess
return factor DEF which itself has negative βSi and βBi , as we show in Table 10, Panel A, column 1.

11

returns, which is substantially higher for junk bonds than it is for investment-grade bonds.
The switching signs of the liquidity risk as we move from high-rated to low-rated bonds
suggests the phenomenon of flight to liquidity which we analyze in detail below.

4. Conditional liquidity risk of bond returns
Most of the current academic literature has focused on unconditional liquidity risk as
we have also analyzed thus far. However, recent theoretical literature suggests that market
liquidity and its impact on asset prices should be conditional as they fluctuate due to funding
conditions. Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009) show that funding illiquidity in the market
adversely affects market liquidity when negative wealth shocks make margin constraints
binding for financial intermediaries and force liquidations, or if margin constraints rise in
times of higher volatility. Acharya and Viswanathan (2011) propose an endogenous link
between wealth shocks and adverse market illiquidity. In their model, negative value shocks
raise the leverage of financial intermediaries, which in turn can induce their managers
to risk-shift (“gamble for resurrection”) in order to gain at the expense of debt holders.
As these firms need to roll over their short-term debt which continuously matures, they
become capital-constrained because lenders are less willing to provide capital, knowing the
risk-shifting propensity of the managers. Then, highly leveraged intermediaries are forced to
liquidate their risky positions and asset markets can clear only at “cash-in-the-market” prices
(see Shleifer and Vishny, 1992, Allen and Gale, 1994, 1998). He and Krishnamurthy (2012a,b)
consider households which invest through intermediaries. Then, a negative wealth shock
makes households rebalance their portfolios and allocate money away from risky to riskless
assets, thus lowering intermediary wealth, causing capital constraints on intermediaries, and
forcing asset sales and systemic liquidity problems.
This recent literature suggests that a given market liquidity shock generates greater
effects on asset prices following negative wealth shocks to the economy (which are generally
coincident with a rise in aggregate volatility) and especially shocks to financial intermediary
12

capital. In normal times, liquidity shocks can be absorbed by financial intermediaries as
they are far from their funding constraints and thus have ready capital for this purpose. But
in times of adverse economic conditions and financial sector stress, financial intermediaries
become more capital-constrained. Then, a given-size liquidity shock generates a greater
effect on asset prices because liquidity providers are constrained all at the same time and
require a higher liquidity premium, which in turn means greater asset price discount for a
given liquidity shock. Further, in a bid to improve the liquidity of their balance sheets in
such times, financial intermediaries exhibit greater aversion to holding less liquid assets and
opt for more liquid ones.
This generates a link between adverse economic shocks and financial sector stress on
the one hand and the return-liquidity risk relation on the other. Of particular relevance to
corporate bonds is the fact that financial institutions are usually the marginal price-setters in
these markets, so that this link should be more pronounced.10 We therefore test the following
conditional effect of liquidity risk on corporate bonds: In episodes of adverse economic
conditions, a rise in market illiquidity leads to a decline in all bond prices; however, in
such periods investors substitute from less liquid to more liquid bonds, so that the effect
of liquidity risk is exacerbated for less liquid (junk) bonds, while liquid (investment-grade)
bonds become more desirable.11
4.1. Regime-switching model of bond betas
We perform a regime-switching analysis of corporate bond betas on various risk factors,
separately for investment-grade and junk bonds. In essence, we let the data tell us whether
there is a set of times when betas are substantially different than in other times. This method
is used by Hamilton (1989) to study the apparent tendency of gross domestic product (GDP)
10

This intuition is consistent with Garleanu and Pedersen (2009) who show that an asset’s required return
depends not only on traditional risk factors, but also on the asset’s exposure to conditions that cause some
of its marginal investors to face rising funding constraints, and on the share of such constrained investors
among the asset holders.
11
Amihud (2002, p. 45) provides a similar analysis for stocks.

13

growth to behave quite differently during economic downturns. This differential behavior
is a prevalent feature of financial data as well and the regime-switching approach has been
used to examine how they could be detected in asset prices, as in Ang and Bekaert (2002a).
Watanabe and Watanabe (2008) suggest a regime-switching pattern of the cross-sectional
pricing of liquidity risk of stock returns, with the regime-switching being based on market
turnover. Ang and Timmermann (2011) estimate regime-switching models for stocks (the
S&P 500 excess returns), the three-month T-bill yields, and the foreign exchange excess
return, suggesting that financial markets often change their behavior abruptly with the new
behavior of financial variables persisting for several periods after such a change.
4.1.1. Methodology
We estimate a Markov regime-switching model for corporate bond betas, allowing the
intercepts and the slope coefficients (betas) of bond return models to vary between two
regimes. The model also allows the variance-covariance matrix to change between the two
regimes. We use two value-weighted portfolio return series, one of investment-grade (IG)
bonds and one of junk bonds.
Investment-grade bond excess returns (over the 30-day T-bill return) in Regime k (st = k)
for k ∈ {1, 2}, are assumed to be generated by the process:

k
k
k
RIG,t = αIG
+ βIG,T
× T ermt + βIG,D
× Deft
k
k
+ βIG,Si
× Silliqt + βIG,Bi
× Billiqt + ǫkIG,t .

(3)

The state variable st determines whether it is regime 1 or regime 2 and the Markov
switching probability for state transition is specified as:

P (st = 1 | st−1 = 1) = p , and

(4)

P (st = 2 | st−1 = 2) = q .

(5)

14

Similarly, junk grade bond excess returns (over the 30-day T-bill return) in Regime k
(st = k) for k ∈ {1, 2}, are assumed to be generated by the process:
k
k
k
RJunk,t = αJunk
+ βJunk,T
× T ermt + βJunk,D
× Deft
k
k
+ βJunk,Si
× Silliqt + βJunk,Bi
× Billiqt + ǫkJunk,t .

(6)

The Regime Dependent Variance-Covariance Matrix is specified as (st = 1,2):




Ωst = 



2
σIG,s
t

ρst σIG,st σJunk,st

ρst σIG,st σJunk,st 
.
2
σJunk,s
t

This flexible covariance structure is intended to capture the notion that variance of both
the IG and junk returns as well as the correlation between the two can be different across
the two regimes. The model is estimated using maximum likelihood estimation. Since the
estimation procedure is standard (Hamilton, 1994), we do not provide details here but only
the results. We test for linear hypothesis about the coefficients H0 : Lβ = c where L is a
matrix of coefficients for the hypotheses and c is a vector of constants. The Wald chi-squared
statistic for testing H0 is computed as χ2W = (Lβ̂ − c)′ [LV̂ (β̂)L′ ]−1 (Lβ̂ − c). Under H0 , χ2W
has an asymptotic chi-squared distribution with r degrees of freedom where r is the rank of
L and V is the variance-covariance matrix of the coefficients. Two points are in order before
we proceed. One, the probabilities of state transition are assumed to be constant rather
than varying with some exogenous condition. In this sense, the conditionality of this model
arises purely from the regime switch rather than from the likelihood of the regime switch
being based on some economic variable. We will however relate the estimated probability of
being in regimes to macroeconomic and financial market variables. Second, the model also
allows for residuals to be heteroskedastic across the two regimes.

15

4.1.2. Results
The results in Table 3 Panel A show a clear pattern of two regimes in IG and junk bonds
with the factor betas varying, especially for the two liquidity variables. In regime 1, the
liquidity betas are mostly insignificant. For IG bonds, both liquidity betas are statistically
insignificant and for junk bonds, the beta of Silliq is significant while that of Billiq is not.
The liquidity betas in regime 2 present quite a different picture than they do in regime 1.
For junk bonds, the betas of Silliq and Billiq become more negative with high statistical
significance. The beta of Silliq rises threefold and that of Billiq rises fivefold compared to
their magnitude in regime 1. In contrast, for IG bonds, both liquidity betas become positive
with high statistical significance. The coefficient of Silliq rises more than fourfold and that
of Billiq turns from practically zero to positive. This means that the effect of illiquidity
shocks on IG bond returns is significantly less negative than the effect of these shocks on the
bond market excess return DEF.
ENTER TABLE 3
Panels B and C of Table 3 show statistical tests of significance for the differences in the
liquidity betas. Importantly, the joint effect of the two liquidity variables is significantly
different between the two regimes for both IG and junk bonds (Panel B), and it is also
significantly different between IG and junk bonds in either regime 1 or regime 2 (Panel C).
The difference between IG and junk bonds is less significant in regime 1 than it is in regime
2.
The factors TERM and DEF too have some of their coefficients changing between regimes.
Notably, while the beta of DEF rises in regime 2 for IG bonds, it remains practically
unchanged for junk bonds. Comparing IG and junk bonds in regime 2 (Panel C), we note
that while there is a significant difference between the effect of DEF on their values in regime
1, this difference disappears in regime 2. Then, both IG and junk bonds are similarly affected
by DEF, in spite of their different likelihoods of default. The same applies to the betas of
16

TERM: in regime 1, they are significantly different between IG and junk bonds while in
regime 2 there is no significant difference between them. We examine whether there are
lagged effects of the four explanatory variables by adding their two lagged values to the
regime-switching model. We find that the lagged variables are not statistically significant.
A noteworthy difference between the two regimes is captured by the change in the sign of
ρSt which measures the correlation of residual returns between IG and junk bonds. While in
regime 1 we obtain a small positive estimated value, estimate ρ = 0.10, in regime 2 we obtain
quite the opposite: ρ = -0.40. That is, in regime 2, the returns which remain unexplained
by our model go in opposite directions.12 This pattern is consistent with flight to quality
and to liquidity in regime 2 by which investors switch from the riskier and less liquid junk
bonds into IG bonds which are better in these two characteristics.
The picture that emerges from the results is as follows:
1. There is a sharp difference in regime 2 between the effects of liquidity shocks on prices
of IG and junk bonds. The effects go in opposite directions, being positive for IG bonds
and negative for junk bonds. This directional difference is absent in regime 1.
2. There is no significant difference in the effects of TERM and DEF between IG and junk
bonds in regime 2, while in regime 1 there is a significant difference between them.
The model’s alpha (the intercept), which measures the excess return after accounting for
the TERM and DEF premiums, is higher for junk bonds than for IG bonds, being statistically
significant only in regime 1. The higher alpha of junk bonds may reflect a premium for
liquidity risk, which is higher for these bonds. The smaller premium (alpha differential
between junk and IG bonds) in regime 2 may be caused by the negative realizations in junk
bond returns in that regime, which is associated with economic stress (see below).13
12

Pastor and Stambaugh (2003) show that in months when liquidity falls severely there is negative
correlation between stock and fixed-income returns.
13
Our model’s results are robust if we control for default risk using each firm’s equity returns
value-weighted in the portfolio as in Shaefer and Strebulaev (2008) instead of DEF and change in equity
market volatility as additional control variables.

17

Next, we assess the contribution of the regime-switching model to the in-sample accuracy
of estimation by regressing actual bond returns in each regime on predicted returns. Ideally,
the intercept in this regression should be zero and the slope coefficient should obviously be
1.0. We generate predicted returns in two ways: (a) from the regime-switching model for
that regime, and (b) from an unconditional model whose coefficients are the same for the
entire sample period, obtained by estimating our model with fixed coefficients over 1973 2007.
Table 3 Panel D shows the estimated coefficients from the regression of actual returns on
predicted returns. There are four regressions: for each of the two regimes, we do a regression
for IG and junk bonds. Whereas the conditional model produces predicted returns that
result in a slope coefficient of practically 1.0 (as trivially expected) and an intercept of zero,
the predicted returns from the unconditional model result in a slope coefficient which is away
from 1.0. In regime 1, the coefficients of the predicted returns are significantly below 1.0 for
both IG and junk bonds, meaning an underestimation of positive returns and overestimates
of negative returns. In regime 2, it is the opposite. The predicted slope coefficient is greater
than 1.0, implying that the predicted returns overestimate positive returns and underestimate
negative returns. Altogether, the results from this table show the extent of improvement in
the predictive power of the model when using our regime-switching regression.
As for the economic significance of the effect of liquidity risk on bond returns, we obtain
that the effect roughly doubles in the stress regime.14 We measure the economic significance
of the liquidity factors as Coef f ∗ σf actor /σreturn , where Coef f is the slope coefficient of
the respective factor. Coef f and the two standard deviations are calculated separately for
regimes 1 and 2. We observe that the economic significance of the effects of the two liquidity
factors, Silliq and Billiq, is quite low in regime 1 but it greatly rises in regime 2. For IG
bonds, the effect of Silliq rises from 2% to 8% and that of Billiq rises from 0.9% to 7%. For
junk bonds, the rise in the effect of Silliq is from 8% to 14% and for Billiq the rise is from
14

Detailed results are available upon request.

18

4% to 13%.
4.1.3. The economic identification of regimes: Stress and macroeconomic factors
So far we have derived the regimes from a purely statistical procedure without any
economic input. The greater sensitivity of bond prices to default risk and liquidity risk
in regime 2 suggests that regime 2 is associated with periods of economic stress. We now
formally investigate this important issue. We undertake an economic identification of the
regimes, using macroeconomic variables and confirm that regime 2 is indeed associated with
economic conditions that can be collectively defined as “stress.”
ENTER FIGURE 4
In Fig. 4, we plot the model-implied probability of being in the stress regime.15 The
stress regime picks up most data points of being in a recession during the 1970s (picking
up the oil-price shock of the mid-70s and the high interest-rate regime of the late 70s) and
early 1980s (again, during the high interest-rate environment) and the financial market stress
and the ensuing recession during the period 1998 - 2003. The regime-switching model also
appears to pick up stress in 1989 leading up to the NBER recession of 1990 and 1991, and
does not identify the mid-90s as a stress period. Yet, the Russian default and LTCM episode
of 1998 are identified as being in the stress regime. The collapse of the Internet bubble
in March 2000 and the economic downturn that followed (including the aftermath of the
9/11/2001 attack) are also identified as stress regimes. Finally, the probability of being in a
stress regime rises starting in 2007 but not as dramatically (we later present out-of-sample
analysis for 2008 - 2009).
We formally estimate the economic determinants of being in regime 2 by a multivariate
regression model where the dependent variable is the probability of being in regime 2, denoted
15

This probability of being in state 2 is calculated at time t as the sum of two products: the product of
the transition probability from state 1 to state 2 with the probability of being in state 1 at time t-1, and
the product of the transition probability from state 2 to state 2 with the probability of being in state 2 at
time t-1. This sum is then multiplied by the ratio of the density under state 2 at time t to the conditional
density of the t th observation. See Hamilton (1994) for details.

19

P 2. This probability is modeled as a function of economic and financial variables associated
with market conditions and business cycles, observed with (at least) one-month lag. These
variables are as follows (described in greater detail in Appendix A):
(i) NBER recession dummy variable: equals one in quarters defined by the NBER to
be a recession. We exclude this variable from some of our estimations because the NBER
declares a recession ex post with significant delay, while we want the information about the
variables to be contemporaneous.
(ii) SW index: the Chicago Fed’s CFNAI index a follow-up measure of the Stock and
Watson (1989, 2002) recession index. Larger numbers indicate better business conditions.
(iii) Prob(Recession)-Hamilton: a dummy variable that equals one if the probability of
recession estimated from a Hamilton (1989) model on US GNP growth rates is greater than
70% (see Appendix B for its construction, also employing a regime-switching model).
(iv) Negative market return dummy variable: equals one if there have been three consecutive
months of negative market returns (including the given month), based on the CRSP value-weighted
market return.
(v) Business conditions index, due to Aruoba, Diebold, and Scotti (2009): it is designed
to track real business conditions at high frequency. The average value of this index is zero.
Bigger positive values indicate better-than-average conditions.
(vi) Paper-bill spread: the difference between the three-month nonfinancial commercial
paper rate and the three-month T-bill secondary market rate. This spread indicates adverse
financial and economic conditions.
(vii) TED spread: the difference between the interbank loan rate and the T-bill rate.
This spread indicates adverse financial and economic conditions. Since the TED spread is
highly correlated with the paper bill spread, we use the component that is orthogonal to the
paper bill spread.
(viii) EE measure: the growth in balance-sheet of broker-dealers, as a measure of risk
appetite of financial intermediaries motivated by Adrian and Shin (2010), and employed

20

by Etula (2009). We use the growth in intermediaries’ (aggregate broker-dealer) assets
relative to household asset growth as a measure of aggregate speculators’ ease of access to
capital. This variable is constructed from the US Flow of Funds data which are available
only at quarterly frequency for the full sample period. In our prediction, we use the growth
rates based on the past one year’s data. A rise in EE measure indicates expectations of
good business conditions. However, when growth in this variable is coupled with equity
market volatility, it indicates worsening conditions and involuntary increase in broker-dealer
inventory.
(ix) Equity market volatility: the square root of the monthly average of the squared daily
returns on the CRSP value-weighted index with dividends.
We do a pair of tests using two dependent variables. One is the probability of regime 2
for month t, P 2t , which is estimated from our regime-switching model (see Hamilton, 1994).
We employ a standard logit transformation of this probability, log[(P 2t + c)/(1 − P 2t + c)],
where c = 0.5/419 is a constant that is added in order to accommodate the cases where we
estimate P 2 = 1 or P 2 = 0.16 The second is a dummy variable that equals 1.0 if P 2t > 0.70
(this threshold is also used by Hamilton, 1989). The first model is estimated by OLS and
the second by logit.
ENTER TABLE 4
The estimation results, presented in Table 4, show that regime 2 is associated with
economic downturns. The signs of all the macroeconomic and financial variables are consistent
with the probability of regime 2 being higher in times of adverse economic conditions. We
obtain positive coefficients for the NBER recession, Prob(Recession)-Hamilton, Negative
market return dummy, Paper-bill spread, TED spread, and Equity volatility. These variables
increase in value under economic stress. And, we obtain negative coefficients for SW index
and for Business conditions index that rise in value in economic upturn, so their negative
coefficients mean that the probability of regime 2 is associated with economic downturn. The
16

See Cox (1970, p. 33).

21

negative coefficient of the EE measure suggests that as broker-dealers foresee the good times
and increase their inventories, or increase their risk appetite when the economy is headed
into good times, regime 2 is less likely. But the interaction between Equity volatility and
the EE measure is positive and significant.17 This means that in times of high volatility,
a rise in the EE measure may indicate involuntary increase in intermediaries’ inventories
which is associated with a greater likelihood of the stress regime, which subsequently induces
deleveraging events as observed in 2007 and 2008 in financial markets.
In general, the robust conclusion that emerges is that regime 2 is associated with adverse
macroeconomic and stock market conditions. Hence, we call it the “stress” regime and
regime 1 the “normal” regime. When employed in isolation, the explanatory power (R2 ) of
the regime determinants is of the order of 11% to 28%. When all variables are used to explain
the model-implied probability of being in the stress regime, the R2 exceeds 40%. In the model
with all variables (excluding the NBER recession dummy, which is known only ex post), those
that emerge as having the greatest statistical significance are Prob(Recession)-Hamilton,
Business conditions index, TED spread, EE measure, Equity volatility, and the interaction
of the last two. In the logit regression with the stress regime dummy variable, the variable
Negative market return dummy is also significant.
These results provide a measure of confidence that our regime-switching results on liquidity
betas of bonds (Table 3) have sound economic foundations. In this light, it is clearer why in
regime 2-the stress regime-there is greater sensitivity of bond returns to liquidity shocks and
why bond returns become more sensitive to TERM and DEF, the term factor and the default
risk factor. These two factors already reflect information about the business cycle.18 Notably,
our result on shifts in regimes as business conditions change is obtained after controlling for
the business cycle information captured by the changing values of TERM and DEF.
17

See Comerton-Forde et al. (2010) on the interaction between dealers’ inventories, liquidity, and volatility.
For example, Fama and French (1989) identify the default spread as a business cycle variable, and Ang
and Bekaert (2002b) find that short- and long-term government-bond interest rates exhibit regime-switching
behavior which corresponds to business cycles (recessions) in the US
18

22

4.2. Out-of-sample regime prediction during 1990–2007
The economic foundations of the stress regime (regime 2) enable us to predict its probability
based on economic time-series and subsequently to predict corporate bond returns. We
provide a prediction of the probability of being in regime 2 of the Markov regime-switching
model of Table 3 using the economic variables identified in Table 4. First, we use a model
similar to model (14) in Table 4 that includes all the economic indicators except the NBER
recession (which is determined with hindsight) to predict the stress regime, employing only
the data for the first half of our sample period, 1/1973 to 12/1989. After estimating the
coefficients in this model, we predict the probability of being in the stress regime, P̂ 2, for
the second half of the sample period, 1/1990 to 12/2007, using a rolling estimation, month
by month. That is, we roll forward every month, using the data available until the previous
month to develop a predictive model for the stress regime and then use this model to predict
stress regime for the current month, repeating this process until the end of the sample. For
example, we predict the stress regime for the month 1/1990 using data until 12/1989 and
coefficient estimates of a model similar to model (14) in Table 4. Then, for month 2/1990,
we use all data until 1/1990 to re-estimate this model and generate P̂ 2, and so on.
After having obtained the series P̂ 2 for the period 1/1990 - 12/2007, we do a logit
regression of the likelihood of being in regime 2, obtained from our statistical model of
Table 3, Panel A, on the predicted probability P̂ 2. The dependent variable is a dummy
variable that equals one if the actual probability of being in regime 2, estimated from the
regime-switching model, is above 70%.
ENTER TABLE 5
The results in Table 5 show how well the likelihood of being in regime 2 is predicted by the
economic series-based estimated regime-2 probability P̂ 2. The coefficient of P̂ 2 is positive
and significant, and its pseudo R-squared is 27%. We demonstrate the performance of the
model by its accuracy in discriminating regime-2 months from normal months, employing
23

Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve analysis. The ROC curve analysis works
as follows. For every possible cut-off point or criterion value selected in the logit model
to discriminate between the two regimes, there is some fraction of cases with the stress
months correctly classified as “True Positive” (TP) and some fraction of cases with the
stress months classified “False Negative” (FN). Also, some fraction of normal months will
be correctly classified as non-stress months or “True Negative” (TN) while some fraction of
normal months will be classified as stress months or “False Positive” (FP). In an ROC curve,
the TP rate (Sensitivity) is plotted as a function of the FP rate (1-Specificity) for different
cut-off points of P̂ 2. Each point on the ROC plot represents a sensitivity/specificity pair
corresponding to a particular decision threshold. A completely random guess would produce
a point along a diagonal line (called line of no-discrimination) from the left-bottom to the
top-right corners. A test with perfect discrimination (no overlap in the two regimes) has
an ROC plot that passes through the upper-left corner (100% specificity, 100% sensitivity).
Therefore, the closer the ROC plot is to the upper-left corner, the higher the overall accuracy
of the test.
We present a figure that displays the ROC curve to assess the accuracy of this logit
model to predict regime 2, the stress regime. In the Y -axis we plot the true positive rate
(sensitivity), i.e., the proportion of actual stress regime months correctly classified by the
model. In the X -axis we plot the false positive rate (1-specificity), the proportion of normal
regime months, incorrectly classified as stress regime months by the model. Points above
the diagonal (random guess) indicate good classification results. The area under the curve
measures the accuracy of the model. The model has an accuracy rate which is quite high,
88.81%. That is, using lagged economic conditions in real time, the model is able to predict
the stress regimes in corporate bond returns with high accuracy.

24

4.3. Out-of-sample predictions of bond returns during 2008–2009
We now test the accuracy of out-of-sample prediction of bond returns based on our
regime-switching model during the financial crisis of 2008 and the relatively less stressed
period of 2009. We predict the probability of a given month during 2008 and 2009 being
in the stress regime by using the macroeconomic and financial market variables included in
model (14) in Table 4 and the coefficients of that estimation model to obtain the predicted
probability of being in regime 2. Then, we calculate the predicted bond returns for each
regime in each month of 2008 and 2009 using the coefficients estimated on TERM, DEF,
and liquidity risk factors in each regime shown in Table 3 Panel A and employing the realized
values of TERM, DEF, and liquidity risk factors. Finally, we calculate the average return
in the month by weighting the regime 1- and regime 2-predicted returns by the respective
regime probabilities obtained in the previous step. This weighted-average return constitutes
the predicted bond return for that month, conditional on the realized values of the four
factors. For realized bond returns in each month of 2008 and 2009 for IG and junk bonds,
we use data on iShares investment-grade and high-yield bond index, which are the most
recent data available to us.19
ENTER TABLE 6, and ENTER FIGURE 5
In Table 6 Panel A we present the estimated values of P̂ 2, the regime-2 probability.
Notably, the period with the cluster of values equal or close to 1.0 is the second half of 2008,
especially following the Lehman Brothers collapse in September 2008. Later in 2009, P̂ 2 is
mostly lower.
Table 6, Panel B presents results on the test of the quality of the predicted returns. We
do that in a regression model of the actual bond return as function of the predicted bond
return. In such a regression with an ideal predictor, the intercept should be zero and the
slope coefficient should be 1.0. Our results satisfy these criteria. The slope coefficients on the
19

The Merrill Lynch data on corporate bonds available to us end in December 2007.

25

predicted returns are statistically indistinguishable from 1.0 (at the 0.10 level) for both IG
and junk bond grades, and the constant is not different from zero in both these regressions.
The regression has a reasonably good fit of 77% for the IG bonds and 76% for the junk grade
bonds. Fig. 5 plots the actual-predicted return relation against the 45% line of perfect fit
and shows that the two are quite close. In addition, the root mean squared error (RMSE) of
the regression is very close to the RMSE of the 100% fit, again suggesting that the predicted
returns do a good job in explaining the actual returns.
Overall, we conclude that our regime-switching model provides a good description of
bond returns during the financial crisis year of 2008 as well as the relatively less stressed
period of 2009. The model captures the dynamics of corporate bond returns both in regime
2, which in 2008 corresponds to all months except January and June, as well as in regime 1,
corresponding to six months in the year 2009.

5. Conditional liquidity risk of stock returns
We extend our examination of conditional liquidity risk to stock returns of firms classified
by their book-to-market ratio. Fama and French (1995, p. 154) state: “Firms with high
BE/ME (a low stock price relative to book value) tend to be persistently distressed. They
have low ratios of earnings to book equity for at least 11 years around portfolio formation.
Conversely, low BE/ME (a high stock price relative to book value) is associated with
sustained strong profitability.” This follows from their finding that firms with high book-to-market
ratio tend to have low earnings on book equity which persist for at least five years before
and five years after book-to-market equity is measured. High book-to-market stocks are
also associated with lower liquidity. Fang, Noe, and Tice (2009) find in a cross-firms study
that stocks which have higher illiquidity (measured by the effective bid-ask spread or by the
Amihud illiquidity measure) have significantly lower market-to-book ratio (or, conversely,
have higher book-to-market ratio) after controlling for firms’ characteristics. It follows
that high book-to-market stocks share the same characteristics as junk bonds: They are
26

associated with greater economic distress and greater illiquidity. We test whether the impact
of liquidity shocks on returns of stocks classified by their book-to-market ratio varies over
time in the same way that it does for bonds, and whether these variations are also related
to macroeconomic and financial conditions of stress, as we find that it is for bonds.
5.1. Methodology
We construct two portfolios of stock returns differentiated by book-to-market ratio and
apply our regime-switching methodology to estimating the factors that affect their return.
In every month (between 1973 - 2007), we use the classification of Fama and French of
non-financial firm stocks in the CRSP database (NYSE, Amex, and Nasdaq) into the lowest
and the highest book-to-market (BM) quintile portfolios and their returns in excess of the
risk-free rate as our dependent variables in our regime-switching model.
We then estimate the following model that includes two sets of equations (Eq. 7 and Eq.
10), one for excess returns on low BM stocks and one for excess returns on high default-risk
stocks. The model allows the coefficients as well as the variance-covariance matrix to change
between the regimes. BM stock portfolio excess returns (over the 30-day T-bill return) in
Regime k (st = k) for k ∈ {1, 2}, are assumed to be generated by the process:

k
k
k
k
rLow,t = αLow
+ βLow,Rmt
(Rm,t − Rf,t ) + βLow,T
T ERMt + βLow,D
DEFt
k
k
+ βLow,Sit
Silliqt + βLow,Bit
Billiqt + ǫkLow,t .

(7)

The state variable st determines whether it is regime 1 or regime 2 and the Markov
switching probability for state transition is specified as:

P (st = 1 | st−1 = 1) = p , and

(8)

P (st = 2 | st−1 = 2) = q .

(9)

27

Similarly, high book-to-market stock portfolio excess returns (over the risk-free rate) in
Regime k (st = k) for k ∈ {1, 2}, are assumed to be generated by the process:
k
k
k
k
rHigh,t = αHigh
+ βHigh,Rmt
(Rm,t − Rf,t ) + βHigh,T
T ERMt + βHigh,D
DEFt
k
k
+ βLow,Sit
Silliqt + βLow,Bit
Billiqt + ǫkLow,t .

(10)

The Regime Dependent Variance-Covariance Matrix is specified as (st = 1,2):




Ωst = 



2
σLow,s
t

ρst σLow,st σHigh,st

ρst σLow,st σHigh,st 
.
2
σHigh,s
t

The explanatory variables include the market excess return Rm − Rf , the value-weighted
return on all NYSE, Amex, and Nasdaq stocks (from CRSP) in excess of the one-month
Treasury bill rate (from Ibbotson Associates). We also include the variables TERM, DEF,
Silliq, and Billiq that have been included in the bond return models. TERM and DEF
are documented to have significant effects on stock returns (see Chen, Roll, and Ross, 1986;
and Fama and French, 1989). Fama and French (1989, p. 48) state: “[t]he default spread
is a business-conditions variable” and “the term spread is related to shorter-term measured
business cycles.” Indeed, the default yield spread (between AAA and BAA corporate bonds)
is used by Bernanke (1983) as a proxy for financial and economic crisis, and the term yield
spread is shown by Estrella and Mishkin (1998) and Estrella and Hardouvelis (1991) to
predict real economic activity (particularly recessions). Stock and Watson (2002) review
the extensive literature on the use of the default yield spread and of the term yield spread
as predictors of output growth. In the context of our model, which estimates the effects
of illiquidity shocks on stock expected returns, DEF and TERM serve to control for future
business conditions which affect firms’ expected cash flows.

28

5.2. Results
The estimation results of the regime-switching model of stock returns are presented in
Table 7, which is analogous to Table 3 in its structure. Here, returns on stocks with low
and high book-to-market (BM) ratio replace the returns on bonds that are of investment
grade and junk rating, respectively. We first focus on the coefficients of Silliq and Billiq
which measure the effects of shocks in stock and bond illiquidity. In general, these effects
have the opposite signs for the two stock portfolios. The coefficients of Silliq and Billiq are
positive for low BM stocks and negative for high BM stocks (all conditional on the market).
In regime 2, the effects of Silliq are significant and the difference between the coefficients
for high and low BM stocks is significant as well (see the test in Panel C). The result here
on the opposite relative effects of Silliq on stocks with high and low BM is similar to the
result on the opposite relative effect of Silliq on junk and IG bonds, respectively, reported
in Table 3. The coefficient of Silliq changes significantly between regimes only for the high
BM stocks (see Panel B). In regime 2, the effect of Silliq on high BM stock returns becomes
about five times more negative than it is in regime 1. As noted earlier, in regime 2, the effect
of Silliq differs significantly between the low and high BM stocks at the 1% level whereas
in regime 1, there is no significant difference in the effect of Silliq between the low and high
BM stocks (see Panel C).
ENTER TABLE 7
Notably, the documented effects of Silliq are conditional on the positive effect of Rm −Rf ,
which itself is negatively affected by both Silliq and Billiq. Thus, the results mean that the
effect of Silliq on returns of stocks with low BM is less negative than it is for the market, and
the effect on high BM stocks is more negative than it is for the market. Estimating a model
with only the two liquidity variables, Silliq and Billiq, we obtain that both variables have
negative coefficients for both stock portfolios in both regimes. It is indeed expected that
the beta of illiquidity shocks is negative because expecting higher illiquidity in the future
29

following a rise in illiquidity, stock prices fall (see Amihud, 2002; and Acharya and Pedersen,
2005).
In this model, the coefficients of Silliq in regime 1 for low BM and high BM stocks are
-267 and -273, respectively, and in regime 2 they are -484 and -933. All coefficients are
significantly different from zero. These results mean that while in regime 1 the coefficients
of Silliq are almost the same for both stock portfolios, in regime 2 the liquidity beta of high
BM stocks is twice larger (more negative) than it is for low BM stocks. Also, the impact
of illiquidity shocks is much higher in regime 2 than in regime 1, particularly for high BM
stocks. It follows that in normal times, illiquidity shocks have low and similar effects on both
stock portfolios whereas in times of adverse economic conditions, there is “flight to liquidity”
which makes low BM stocks relatively more desirable. This offsets part of the negative effect
of Silliq for low BM stocks and augments its negative effect for high BM stocks.
The variable DEF does not have its effect changing between the two regimes for either
portfolio but its effect is significantly different between the low and high BM stocks in both
regime 1 and regime 2 (at the 1% and 10% levels, respectively). The effect of TERM also does
not change significantly between the two regimes. The market excess return has a highly
significant effect on the returns of both stock portfolios, but this effect does not change
between the regimes.
To summarize, the significant rise in the effect of Silliq in regime 2 for high BM stocks
and the difference in its effect between the two stock portfolios in regime 2, highlight the
importance of liquidity risk, given that we control for the effects of business conditions and
the likelihood of default. The effect of Billiq does not change significantly between the
regimes but it is significantly different between the two portfolios in regime 1.
It is well known that the return on stocks with high book-to-market ratio is higher than
the return on stocks with low book-to-market ratio—this is the well-know HML premium. In
our regime-switching model, we compare the conditional means of the two stock portfolios,
measured by the models’ intercepts (alphas), which measure the return in excess of the

30

premium due to Rm − Rf , TERM, and DEF. Here, we observe that the difference between
the intercepts is significant only in regime 1 but not in regime 2. Given our result on
higher liquidity betas for high BM stocks, the higher conditional mean on HML may reflect
compensation for the greater liquidity risk of high BM stocks.

In regime 2, which is

associated with adverse economic conditions, the difference in the conditional means becomes
insignificant because of greater realized losses on the high BM stocks which Fama and French
(1995) classify as distressed stocks.
It is therefore possible to regard the well-known HML premium as compensation (at
least in part) for higher liquidity risk, earned mainly in the “normal” regime, regime 1. This
premium disappears in regime 2. We observe in Panel C that the constant of the model—the
excess return after accounting for the risk premia—is significantly higher for high BM stocks
in regime 1, whereas in regime 2 the difference in the constants is quite insignificant.
5.3. The economic identification of regimes: Stress and macroeconomic factors
Next, in Table 8 we estimate the economic determinants of being in regime 2 in the
case of stocks by a multivariate regression model, similar to that presented in Table 4 for
the case of corporate bonds. The dependent variable is the probability of being in regime
2, denoted P 2. This probability is plotted in Fig. 6, with the NBER recession indicator
which shows a good overlap between these variables. Thus, this probability is modeled as a
function of economic and financial variables associated with market conditions and business
cycles with one-month lag, the same as those that we have used for the corporate bond-based
regime-switching model. We do two estimations, one is an OLS estimation of a standard
logistic transformation20 of P 2, and the other is a logit estimation of a dummy variable that
equals 1.0 if P 2t > 0.70 a threshold used by Hamilton (1989).
ENTER TABLE 8
20

We again employ log[(P 2t + c)/(1 − P 2t + c)], where c = 0.5/419 is a constant. See discussion of Table

4.

31

The estimation results show again that regime 2 is associated with times of adverse
economic conditions. This is consistent across all variables. We obtain positive coefficients
for Prob(Recession)-Hamilton, Negative market return dummy, and Equity volatility. These
variables rise in value under economic stress. And, we obtain negative coefficients for SW
index and for Business conditions index, which rise in value in economic upturns. The
negative coefficient on the EE measure suggests that as broker-dealers foresee good times
and increase their inventories or increase their risk appetite, regime 2 is less likely. But
during volatile times, greater broker inventory growth is associated with a greater likelihood
of subsequent stress regime (the interaction between Equity volatility and the EE measure
is positive and significant), similar to the deleveraging events observed in 2007 and 2008 in
financial markets.
When all variables are used to explain the model-implied probability of being in the
stress regime (excluding the NBER recession indicator, which is known only ex post), the
R2 is 30% in the OLS regression of the probability of regime 2, and 21% for the logit
regression. The evidence thus shows that regime 2, in which illiquidity shocks as well as
default shocks become significantly more important in pricing stocks of high and low default
risk, is associated with worsening macroeconomic and financial market conditions.
5.4. Direct relation to default risk
The model estimated in Table 7 uses conventional measures to control for cash-flow risk
and default risk. We now provide direct control for default risk, calculated as the return
premium on stocks sorted on their default probability. With this control we test whether the
book-to-market return is explained by the default premium and whether, after controlling
for default, we still observe conditional liquidity risk in times of adverse economic conditions.
This will then highlight the fact that liquidity risk has a separate effect from default risk.
We construct two portfolios of stock returns differentiated by default risk. In every
month (between 1973 - 2007), we classify non-financial firm stocks in the CRSP database

32

(NYSE, Amex, and Nasdaq) into 25 (5x5) portfolios sorted on stock return volatility and on
their modified Z -score (an estimate of the likelihood of default, not based on stock market
values). This is done so as not to confound the effect of default with that of volatility,
given the positive correlation between them across firms, documented by Campbell et al.
(2008), and the negative effect of return volatility on expected return, shown by Amihud
(2002) and Ang et al. (2006).21 For each month we calculate for each stock the modified
Z -score,22 using the most recent accounting data and end-of-month market value data, and
the standard deviation of daily stock returns from that month. Then we sort stocks into five
equal volatility-based quintiles and within each quintile we sort the stocks into five equal
portfolios based on the modified Z -score. We then calculate the value-weighted return for
each of the 25 portfolios. The low (high) default-risk stock return is the average return
of the five portfolios with the highest (lowest) modified Z -score, respectively. We use an
accounting-based measure of default risk in order to avoid issues with stock return-based
measures of default-risk, given that our dependent variable is itself a stock return. For
example, because debt levels change very little in the short run, using a stock-market-based
measure of default probability, which is based on equity market value and volatility, may
capture the effects of past stock returns and volatility on current returns even if this is
unrelated to default.
The excess return on high book-to-market stocks is known to be positive and significant
(Fama and French, 1993), and so it is in our sample. We calculate the excess return HMLBM
which stands for high-minus-low book-to-market, the differential return on the two extreme
quintile stock portfolios Hi BM and Lo BM. The mean HMLBM is 50 basis points (per
21

By classifying on both volatility and the likelihood of default, we follow the methodology of Fama and
French (1993, pp. 8 - 9) who construct their HML index so as not to confound the book-to-market effect
with the size effect.
22
The modified Z-score, which relates to that of Altman, follows the specification of Hillegeist et al.
(2004): -4.34-0.08*wcta+0.04*reta-0.1*ebitta-0.22*mvliab+0.06*sata. wcta is the ratio of working capital
to total assets (Compustat item (actq-lctq)/atq). reta is the ratio of retained earnings to total assets
(Compustat item req/atq). ebitta is the ratio of earnings before interest and taxes to total assets (Compustat
item (piq+xintq)/atq). mvliab is the ratio of market value of equity to total liabilities (Compustat item
prccq*cshoq/ltq). sata is the ratio of sales to total assets (Compustat item saleq/atq).

33

month) with t = 2.96. We also calculate HMLDEF, the differential return on the two
extreme quintile stock portfolios sorted on their default probability. HMLDEF thus captures
the return premium due to default risk, unrelated to liquidity risk. We examine the relation
between HMLDEF and liquidity shocks by regressing it on Silliq and Billiq and find that
the coefficients are insignificantly different from zero. The mean HMLDEF is 58 basis points
with (t = 2.42), about the same as that HMLBM.
We then estimate a regime-switching model where HMLBM is regressed on HMLDEF,
Silliq, Billiq, and a constant, allowing for the estimated parameters to vary between the
regimes as we do in Eqs. (7) - (9) (we skip the detailed presentation to save space). The
estimation results are presented in Table 9.
ENTER TABLE 9
The positive and highly significant coefficient of HMLDEF in both regimes suggests that
the well-known HMLBM return premium is largely explained by the default premium. The
models’ intercepts, the alphas, become insignificantly different from zero in both regimes; in
regime 1, the “normal” regime, the intercept is even negative though quite insignificant. The
coefficient of HMLDEF rises in regime 2, but the difference between the coefficients is not
statistically significant (see Panel B). The only significant difference between the estimated
coefficients in the two regimes is observed for Silliq. Its coefficient is 9.38 in regime 1 with
t = 0.05, being practically zero, whereas in regime 2 the Silliq coefficient becomes highly
negative, -433.39, with t = 4.89, highly significant. The difference between the coefficients
of Silliq in the two regimes is statistically significant (see Panel B). The coefficient of Billiq
also becomes more negative in regime 2, but it is insignificantly different from zero in both
regimes.
In conclusion, the difference between the two regimes is mainly driven by the significant
increase in the stock liquidity risk: its coefficient becomes negative and highly significant in
regime 2, which is associated with adverse economic conditions, after accounting for default

34

risk, which is captured by HMLDEF.
5.5. Relation between stress regimes for bonds and stocks
The estimations of the three regime-switching models in Tables 3, 7, and 9 produce
monthly estimates of the probability of being in regime 2. We now relate these estimates of
the probability of the “stress” regime-regime 2-to each other. Notably, they are estimated
separately from corporate bond and stock returns in different models. For convenience,
denote the variable P rob(Regime 2)Bond
, estimated from the model for bond returns in
t
Table 3, by BP 2, the variable P rob(Regime 2)Stock
, obtained from the model for stock
t
ault
returns in Table 8 by SP 2, and the variable P rob(Regime 2)Def
, obtained from Table
t

9, by Def P 2. If these three series indeed reflect similar economic conditions, they should
be positively correlated. Indeed, Tables 4 and 9 show that BP 2 and SP 2 are predicted by
the same economic variables. This can also be seen by visually inspecting BP 2 and SP 2 in
Figs. 4 and 6, respectively. Confirming this, we find the following:
Corr(BP 2t , SP 2t ) = 0.57
Corr(BP 2t , Def P 2t ) = 0.48
Corr(SP 2t , Def P 2t ) = 0.52
These correlations are highly significant with p-values of less than 0.01. However, all
three series are highly serially correlated, so we use their first difference, denoted by ∆BP 2t ,
∆SP 2t , and ∆Def P 2t whose serial autocorrelations are low. Regressing ∆BP 2t on ∆SP 2t
(and a constant), the coefficient is 0.15 with t=2.98, statistically significant. Again, we
observe that the two estimates of the probability of regime 2, obtained from separate sets of
securities - stocks and bonds - are positively and significantly correlated. Finally, we regress
∆Def P 2t on the other two first differences in probability of regime 2 (and a constant). The
coefficient of ∆SP 2t is 0.10 (t = 4.73) and the coefficient of ∆BP 2t is 0.08 (t = 3.51),
both are highly significant. The strong link between the estimated probabilities of being in

35

regime 2 for both bonds and stocks suggests that these probabilities are driven by common
underlying factors.
5.6. The co-movement of asset returns in the stress regime
A popular hypothesis states that asset returns co-move more closely together in stress
periods caused by liquidity shocks. We examine this hypothesis by creating two variables,
RJunk rHigh which is the product of return on junk bonds and returns of the high BM stock
portfolio, both related to firms that are in financial distress (see Fama and French, 1995), and
we create an analogous series, RIG rLow , the product of returns on investment-grade bonds
and on low BM stocks, both associated with firms that are in better financial condition. A
positive product implies that the two asset returns move more closely together in the same
direction.
We estimate a regression model of RIG rLow or RJunk rHigh on BP 2 (and a constant). A
positive coefficient of BP 2 is then consistent with the above hypothesis. We obtain that
indeed when the dependent variable is RJunk rHigh , the coefficient of BP 2 is positive and
highly significant: it is 51,254 (in bp) with t = 3.53.23 The coefficient of BP 2 with RIG rLow as
the dependent variable is quite insignificant (t = -0.44). When adding Rm − Rf to the model
with RJunk rHigh as dependent variable, the coefficient of BP 2 remains positive, 56,068, with t
= 3.96, highly significant, and the coefficient of Rm −Rf is positive and significant (t = 4.92).
The coefficient of BP 2 with RIG rLow as the dependent variable remains insignificant (t =
-0.03) when Rm −Rf is added to the model. Similar results are obtained when replacing BP 2
by B̂P 2 from Table 4, estimated by specification (14). These results support the hypothesis
that returns on distressed assets co-move more closely together in times of economic stress
whose likelihood is estimated by our regime-switching model.
23

The t-statistics are calculated using robust standard errors.

36

6. Discussion
6.1. Flight to liquidity, default risk, and T-bill returns
One interpretation of our results is that, consistent with the literature on asset pricing
with frictions discussed in Section 4, stressed macroeconomic and financial conditions make
investors more averse to illiquidity shocks and they respond by switching from illiquid assets,
such as junk bonds, to investment-grade bonds which are known to be more liquid.24 An
alternative explanation is that the rise in the effect of liquidity shocks on bond prices proxies
for heightened investor risk-aversion to extreme events or rare disasters (Rietz, 1988; and
Barro, 2006). Such events are argued to affect consumption significantly or are argued to be
not well understood, so that an increase in their likelihood induces an aversion to riskier assets
such as junk bonds. Similar to this second explanation is the volatility feedback explanation
of Campbell and Hentschel (1992) by which increases in aggregate volatility necessitate a
reduction in investor holdings of risky assets, which in general equilibrium, implies lower
contemporaneous returns. In what follows, we test for distinct effects of risk and liquidity on
bond prices which imply, respectively, flight-to-quality/safety or flight-to-liquidity (or both).
ENTER TABLE 10
Column 1 in Table 10, Panel A, shows that the factor DEF captures only the common
part of the illiquidity effect on IG and junk bond returns, but not the part that is associated
with regime 2. While both Billiq and Silliq effects are statistically significant, Adj R2
is quite low, only 3%, and the interaction of liquidity factors and Prob(Regime 2)Bonds is
insignificant. The pattern that emerges is that default risk is distinct from liquidity risk,
especially in the stress regime identified using corporate bond returns.
In columns 2 and 3, the dependent variable is -(T-bill yield minus Fed funds rate). This
variable, which rises with the price of T-bills, is immune to default risk, reflecting only
24

Chen, Lesmond, and Wei (2007) show that generally, investment-grade bonds have lower bid-ask spread,
(quoted or implied) than junk bonds. Also, the frequency of zero-return days, another common proxy of
illiquidity, is of the order of 6% - 10% for investment-grade bonds and 20% - 40% for junk bonds.

37

liquidity risk. It is also immune to policy effects and to maturity risk because the Fed funds
rate is for very short maturities.25 If a rise in illiquidity generates flight to liquidity, then
investors will switch from all types of risk and illiquid investments to short-term T-bills which
are the least risky and most liquid instrument. Then, their price will rise and their yield will
fall and -(T-bill yield minus Fed funds rate) will rise. It is worth noting that the inclusion of
Prob(Regime 2)Bonds and its association with bond illiquidity greatly raises the explanatory
power of the model, from Adj R2 of 3% to Adj R2 of 12%, demonstrating the importance of
our estimates of Prob(Regime 2)Bonds on the pricing of Treasury bills, which become a haven
for liquidity seekers in times of stress. Also notable is the result that T-bills’ prices rise with
an increase in illiquidity only in regime 2—the coefficient of Billiq is practically zero while
the coefficient of Prob(Regime 2)Bonds * Billiq is positive and significant. This shows that the
behavior of Treasury bills’ prices is similar to that of investment-grade bonds. In contrast,
T-bill returns do not vary with an increase in default risk in the stress regime (Prob (Regime
2)Bonds * DEF is insignificant). This is also consistent with a flight-to-liquidity phenomenon
rather than a flight-to-quality.
Comparing specifications (2) and (4), it is worth noting that the inclusion of Prob(Regime
2)Stocks and its association with bond illiquidity greatly raises the explanatory power of the
model: Adj R2 rises from 3% to 6%. This demonstrates the importance of our estimates
of Prob(Regime 2)Stocks as well on the pricing of Treasury bills, and, while T-bill returns
are insensitive to Prob(Regime 2)Bonds *DEF, they do react significantly to Prob(Regime
2)Stocks *DEF.
6.2. Flight to liquidity and bond maturity
In Table 10, Panel B, we first study how the differential bond return—Junk return
minus IG return—is explained by default and liquidity risks in normal times and in times
of stress (regime 2) identified in the bond return regime-switching model. The estimation
25

This is similar to the test of Amihud and Mendelson (1991) on the yield spread between T-bills and
Treasury notes of the same maturity.

38

in column 1 omits the liquidity variables, which are included in column 2. Two points are
noteworthy. First, the inclusion of the liquidity variables greatly raises (by almost two-thirds)
the explanatory power of the model, from Adj R2 = 11% to Adj R2 = 18%. This attests to
the importance of liquidity risk in determining the junk-IG differential return. Second, the
effect of the two liquidity variables is significant mainly when associated with Prob(Regime
2), the probability of the stress regime. The negative and significant coefficients of the
liquidity risk factors in stress times indicate flight to liquidity, in addition to the flight to
safety which is captured by the negative coefficient of Prob(Regime 2)*DEF.
We expect that the effects of liquidity shocks on bond returns that we have documented
are greater for longer-maturity bonds, which have greater duration in the sense of having
greater price elasticity to yield change. Also, because long-term corporate bonds are less
liquid than short-term bonds (see Chen et al., 2007), we expect that long-term bond returns
are more sensitive to liquidity shocks than are short-term bond returns. To test this, we
create three portfolios of junk-minus-IG returns for three different maturities: short—less
than four years to maturity, medium—between four and nine years to maturity, and long—more
than nine years to maturity. We expect that in the stress regime (regime 2), the effects of
liquidity shocks will increase with maturity.
The results in the last three columns (3, 4, and 5) of Table 10 Panel B are consistent
with our expectations. The coefficients of Silliq and Billiq are all negative, because a
rise in illiquidity lowers the prices of the less-liquid junk bond relative to that of the more
liquid IG bonds. Notably, the effects of both Silliq and Billiq become much more negative
and highly significant when interacting with Prob(Regime 2), with the effect being stronger
for longer-maturity bonds. This means that in the stress regime, the differential effect of
illiquidity shocks on the junk-IG return spread is particularly high. These effects of liquidity
risk are present after controlling for the effect of default risk (captured by the factor DEF),
in both normal times and stress times.

39

7. Related literature on bond yields and liquidity
The effect of liquidity on bond yields is shown for government securities that have the
same risk but differ in their liquidity by Amihud and Mendelson (1991), Boudoukh and
Whitelaw (1993), Kamara (1994), Elton and Green (1998), and Longstaff (2004). They all
find that the bond yield rises as a function of illiquidity.
For corporate bonds, Chen, Lesmond, and Wei (2007) find that less liquid bonds (mostly
speculative-grade bonds) have higher yield after controlling for default risk and other bond
features. de Jong and Driessen (2007), Downing, Underwood, and Xing (2009), and Lin,
Wang, and Wu (2011) find that expected return on corporate bonds is increasing in their
liquidity risk (beta), following the analysis for stocks in Pastor and Stambaugh (2003) and
Acharya and Pedersen (2005).
Recent studies, for example, Goldstein, Hotchkiss, and Sirri (2007), Edwards, Harris, and
Piwowar (2007), Dick-Nielsen, Feldhutter, and Lando (2008), Bushman, Le, and Vasvari
(2009), and Friewald, Jankowitsch, and Subrahmanyam (2009), use newly available daily
trading data on corporate bonds from TRACE platform in the United States (starting in
2002). Some of these studies show that liquidity worsened substantially for corporate bonds
from the onset of the crisis (3Q/2007) and that this contributed to an enhanced response
of bond spreads or returns to liquidity. Chacko (2005) and Mahanti et al. (2008) measure
liquidity of corporate bonds by the turnover of portfolios that contain them, construct a
bond return factor based on high and low liquidity bonds, and find that its beta coefficient
explains the cross-section of bond returns.
Our study differs from the above studies on the effects of liquidity on corporate bonds
in that we use liquidity measures that enable the study of long time-series, spanning several
economic cycles, allowing more robust inference on expected returns. Goyenko (2006) also
studies the cross-market effect of liquidity over a long time-series and finds that stock returns
as well as Treasury bond returns are affected by both stock and bond liquidity shocks. In
contrast, we study the effect of liquidity conditional on the state of the economy and find
40

the conditional effects to be substantial, both for corporate bond returns and for returns on
portfolios of stocks sorted by default risk.
Finally, recent work (Panyanukul, 2009) has also found liquidity risk to be a priced
factor in explaining sovereign bond returns, especially during the period 2007 to 2009. We
conjecture that there is a strong conditional component to liquidity effects in sovereign bond
returns too, whereby during times of macroeconomic and financial market stress, better-rated
and more liquid sovereign bonds (e.g., the US treasuries and German Bunds) appreciate in
value whereas the worse-rated and less-liquid ones decline.

8. Concluding remarks
Our analysis of the effect of conditional liquidity risk on corporate bond returns shows
that during economic and financial stress periods, liquidity risk becomes a significant determinant
of bond prices, appreciably more so than in normal times. We find that investors exhibit
“flight to liquidity” wherein liquidity shocks raise the prices of investment-grade bonds
while depressing the prices of junk bonds (all, relative to the effect on the general bond
market). This pattern is most strongly pronounced in times of economic stress. Thus, using
unconditional or normal-time models entails significant errors for researchers and investors
in corporate bonds. For instance, the risk management of corporate bond portfolios should
consider not only their liquidity risk, but also the risk that this risk will change in stressed
market and economic conditions.
We also find that the conditional liquidity risk patterns observed in corporate bond
returns are mirrored in returns of stocks aggregated in portfolios of firms with high and
low book-to-market ratio. Since high book-to-market ratio indicates persistent distressed
profitability (Fama and French, 1995) as well as lower stock liquidity (Fang, Noe, and Tice,
2009), this suggests that the rise in liquidity risk of distressed securities is coincident between
corporate bond and stock markets. We indeed find that the very same economic and financial
factors that explain the regimes in the bond market do that for regimes in the stock market.
41

We also show that the return premium on a high-minus-low book-to-market stock portfolio
is largely explained by the default premium. However, when economic conditions change,
the exposure to the default factor remains unchanged while the exposure to liquidity shocks
increases under adverse economic conditions.

Appendix A. Recession dates (year-month) based on macroeconomic data.
NBER business cycles: The economic expansions and recessions are determined by the
NBER business-cycle dates. The expansions (recessions) begin at the peak (trough) of the
cycles and end at the trough (peak). The following provides periods and durations (in
months) of each business-cycle phase during our sample period, January 1973 to December
2007. The business-cycle dates are available from the NBER Web site: www.nber.org/cycles.html.
The dates are 12/73 - 03/75;02/80 - 07/80;08/81 - 11/82;08/90 - 03/91; 03/01 - 11/01; and
12/07.

Prob(Recession)-Hamilton: Following Hamilton (1989), we estimate the growth in GNP
as a regime switching model (details in Appendix B). Hamilton (1989) interprets the probability
of being in regime 1 as the recession regime. We use a cut off of the probability of being
in regime 1 greater than 70% to create this dummy variable. Quarters that are classified
as recession in this approach include: 1974-2 to 1975-1; 1980-2,3; 1981-2; 1981-4 to 1982-4;
1986-2; 1990-3 to 1991-4; 1993-2,3; 1995-2,3; 1998-2; 2000-3 to 2003-1; 2006-3 to 2007-1.

Mkt return (negative): We code a month that is the third consecutive month in which the
CRSP value-weighted market return with dividends is negative as a one and zero otherwise.
Months classified under this classification using our sample period include: 03/73 to 06/73;
05/74 to 09/74; 09/75; 03/77; 08/81 to 09/81; 02/82 - 03/82; 07/82; 02/84; 11/87; 08/90
to 10/90; 09/99; 11/00; 08/01 - 09/01; 06/02 - 07/02; 12/02; 02/03; 07/06; and 09/07 to
12/07.
42

SW index : “The Chicago Fed National Activity Index (CFNAI) is a monthly index
designed to better gauge overall economic activity and inflationary pressure. The CFNAI
is a weighted average of 85 existing monthly indicators of national economic activity. It is
constructed to have an average value of zero and a standard deviation of one. Since economic
activity tends toward trend growth rate over time, a positive index reading corresponds
to growth above trend and a negative index reading corresponds to growth below trend.
The CFNAI corresponds to the index of economic activity developed by James Stock of
Harvard University and Mark Watson of Princeton University in an article, “Forecasting
Inflation,” published in the Journal of Monetary Economics in 1999. The idea behind their
approach is that there is some factor common to all of the various inflation indicators, and
it is this common factor, or index, that is useful for predicting inflation. Research has
found that the CFNAI provides a useful gauge on current and future economic activity and
inflation in the United States.” (Reproduced from www.chicagofed.org.) An index similar
in spirit is also the business conditions index which is also used in the analysis. The (ADS)
business conditions index is based on the framework developed in Aruoba, Diebold, and
Scotti (2009). The average value of the index is zero. Progressively bigger positive values
indicate progressively better-than-average conditions, whereas progressively more negative
values indicate progressively worse-than-average conditions.

Appendix B. Estimation of recession periods using Hamilton’s (1989) Markov
switching model

This appendix reports the results of the following Markov switching model for the
quarterly growth rate in US GNP (yt ):
Regime 1 (st = 1): yt = α1 + ut , and
Regime 2 (st = 2): yt = α2 + ut , where
43

ut = ρ1 ut−1 + ρ2 ut−2 + ρ3 ut−3 + ρ4 ut−4 + et , et ∼ N (0, σ).
The Markov switching probability for state transition is given by:
P (st = 1 | st−1 = 1) = p, and
P (st = 2 | st−1 = 2) = q.
Following Stock and Watson’s (2002) observation of a structural break in the GNP series
in 1984, we estimate the model for two distinct time periods: 1952 (Quarter 2) to 1984
and from 1985 to 2008 (Quarter 3). We use these models to estimate the probability of
being in regime 1 interpreted by Hamilton (1989) as the recession regime which is used in
specifications of Table 4.

Period
Parameter

1952:2 to 1984:4

1985:1 to 2008:3

Value

Std.error

t-Value

Value

Std.error

t-Value

α1

-0.3403

0.2441

-1.39

0.8738

0.1880

4.65

α2

1.1727

0.1423

8.24

1.5922

0.2223

7.16

ρ1

0.0108

0.0895

0.12

-0.2506

0.0992

-2.53

ρ2

-0.0627

0.0811

-0.77

0.1994

0.0822

2.43

ρ3

-0.2462

0.0859

-2.87

-0.0532

0.0845

-0.63

ρ4

-0.2009

0.0867

-2.32

0.0391

0.0802

0.49

σ

0.7699

0.0608

12.66

0.3246

0.0321

10.12

p

0.9014

0.7502

q

0.7620

0.8578

Log L

-181.4

-56.44

131

95

Observations

44

References
Acharya, V., and Pedersen, L., 2005. Asset pricing with liquidity risk. Journal of Financial
Economics 77, 375–410.
Acharya, V., Viswanathan, S., 2011. Leverage, moral hazard and liquidity. Journal of
Finance 66, 99–138.
Adrian, T., Shin, H., 2010. Liquidity and Leverage. Journal of Financial Intermediation
19, 418–437.
Allen, F., Gale, D., 1994.

Liquidity preference, market participation and asset price

volatility. American Economic Review 84, 933–955.
Allen, F., Gale, D., 1998. Optimal financial crises. Journal of Finance 53, 1245–1284.
Amihud, Y., 2002. Illiquidity and stock returns: Cross–section and time series effects.
Journal of Financial Markets 5, 31–56.
Amihud, Y., and Mendelson, H., 1986. Asset pricing and the bid–ask spread. Journal of
Financial Economics 17, 223–249.
Amihud, Y., and Mendelson, H., 1991. Liquidity, maturity, and the yields on U.S. treasury
securities. Journal of Finance 46, 1411–1425.
Ang, A., and Bekaert, G., 2002a. International asset allocation with regime shifts. Review
of Financial Studies 15, 1137–1187.
Ang, A., and Bekaert, G., 2002b. Regime switches in interest rates. Journal of Business
and Economics Statistics 20, 163–182.
Ang, A., Hodrick, R., Xing, Y., Zhang, X., 2006. The cross–section of volatility and
expected returns. Journal of Finance 61, 259–299.

45

Ang, A., and Timmerman, A., 2011. Regime changes and financial markets. Unpublished
working paper, Columbia University and University of California at San Diego.
Aruoba, S., Diebold, F., Scotti, C., 2009. Real–time measurement of business conditions.
Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 27, 417–427.
Barro, R., 2006. Rare disasters and asset markets in the twentieth century. Quarterly
Journal of Economics 121, 823–866.
Bernanke, B., 1983. Nonmonetary effects of the financial crisis in propagation of the great
depression. American Economic Review 73, 257–276.
Bharath, S., and Shumway, T., 2008. Forecasting default with the Merton distance–to–default
model. Review of Financial Studies 21, 1339–1369.
Boudoukh, J., and Whitelaw, R., 1993. Liquidity as a choice variable: a lesson from the
Japanese government bond market. Review of Financial Studies 6, 265–292.
Brunnermeier, M., Pedersen, L., 2009. Market liquidity and funding liquidity. Review of
Financial Studies 22, 2201–2238.
Bushman, R., Le, A., Vasvari, F., 2009. Implied bond liquidity. Unpublished working
paper, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill and London Business School.
Campbell, J., Hentschel, L., 1992. No news is good news: An asymmetric model of changing
volatility in stock returns. Journal of Financial Economics 31, 281–318.
Campbell, J., Hilscher, J., Szilagyi, J., 2008. In search of distress risk. Journal of Finance
63, 2899–2939.
Chacko, G., 2005. Liquidity risk in the corporate bond markets. Unpublished working
paper, Harvard Business School.

46

Chen, N., Roll, R., Ross, S., 1986. Economic forces and the stock market. Journal of
Business 59, 383-403.
Chen, L., David, L., and Jason, W., 2007. Corporate yield spreads and bond liquidity.
Journal of Finance 62, 119–149.
Comerton–Forde, C., Hendershott, T., Jones, C., Moulton, P., Seasholes, M., 2010. Time
variation in liquidity: the role of market–maker inventories and revenues. Journal of
Finance 65, 295–331.
Cox, D.R., 1970. The analysis of binomial data. Methuen & Co., London.
de Jong, F., and Driessen, J., 2007. Liquidity risk premia in corporate bond markets.
Unpublished working paper, University of Amsterdam.
Dick–Nielsen, J., Feldhutter, P., and Lando, D., 2008. Corporate bond liquidity before
and after the onset of the subprime crisis. Unpublished working paper, Copenhagen
Business School.
Downing, C., Underwood, S., Xing, Y., 2009. Is liquidity risk priced in the corporate bond
market? Unpublished working paper, Rice University.
Edwards, A., Harris, L., Piwowar, M., 2007. Corporate bond market transaction costs and
transparency. Journal of Finance 62, 1421–1451.
Elton, E., Green, C., 1998. Tax and liquidity effects in pricing government bonds. Journal
of Finance 53, 1533–1562.
Elton, E., Gruber, M., Agrawal, D., Mann, C., 2001. Explaining the rate spread on
corporate bonds. Journal of Finance 56, 247–277.
Estrella, A., Mishkin, F., 1998. Predicting us recessions: financial variables as leading
indicators. The Review of Economics and Statistics 80, 45–61.
47

Estrella, A., Gikas, H., 1991. The term structure as a predictor of real economic activity.
Journal of Finance 46, 555–576.
Etula, E., 2009. Risk appetite and commodity returns. Unpublished working paper,
Harvard University.
Fama, E., French, K., 1989. Business conditions and expected returns on stocks and bonds.
Journal of Financial Economics 25, 23–49.
Fama, E., French, K., 1993. Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and bonds.
Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3–56.
Fama, E., French, K., 1995. Size and book–to–market factors in earnings and returns.
Journal of Finance 50, 131–155.
Fang, V., Noe, T., Tice, S., 2009. Stock market liquidity and firm value. Journal of
Financial Economics 94, 150–169.
Friewald, N., Jankowitsch, R., Subrahmanyam, M., 2009. Illiquidity or credit deterioration:
a study of liquidity in the U.S. corporate bond market during financial crises. Unpublished
working paper, NYU–Stern.
Garleanu, N., Pedersen, L., 2009. Margin–based asset pricing and deviations from the law
of one price. Review of Financial Studies 24, 1980–2022.
Gebhardt, W., Hvidkjaer, S., Swaminathan, B., 2005.

The cross–section of expected

corporate bond returns: betas or characteristics? Journal of Financial Economics
75, 85–114.
Goldstein, M., Hotchkiss, E., Sirri, E., 2007. Transparency and liquidity: a controlled
experiment on corporate bonds. Review of Financial Studies 20, 235–273.
Goyenko, R., 2006. Stock and bond pricing with liquidity risk. Unpublished working paper,
McGill University.
48

Hamilton, J., 1989. A new approach to the economic analysis of nonstationary time series
and the business cycle. Econometrica 57, 357–384.
Hamilton, J., 1994. Time series analysis. Princeton University Press, Princeton.
He, Z., Krishnamurthy, A., 2012a. Intermediary asset pricing, forthcoming. American
Economic Review.
He, Z., Krishnamurthy, A., 2012b. A model of capital and crises. Review of Economic
Studies 79, 735–777.
Hillegeist, S., Keating, E., Cram, D., Lundstedt, K., 2004. Assessing the probability of
bankruptcy. Review of Accounting Studies 9, 5–34.
Kamara, A., 1994. Liquidity, taxes, and short–term treasury yields. Journal of Financial
and Quantitative Analysis 29, 403–417.
Lin, H., Wang, J., Wu, C., 2011. Liquidity risk and the cross–section of expected corporate
bond returns. Journal of Financial Economics 99, 628–650.
Longstaff, F., 2004. The flight–to–liquidity premium in us treasury bond prices. Journal
of Business 77, 511–526.
Mahanti, S., Nashikkar, A., Subrahmanyam, M., Chacko, G., Mallik, G., 2008. Latent
liquidity: a new measure of liquidity, with an application to corporate bonds. Journal
of Financial Economics 88, 272–298.
Panyanukul, S., 2009. Liquidity risk and the pricing of sovereign bonds in emerging markets.
Unpublished working paper, Warwick Business School.
Pastor, L., Stambaugh, R., 2003. Liquidity risk and expected stock returns. Journal of
Political Economy 111, 642–685.

49

Rietz, T., 1988. The equity risk premium: a solution. Journal of Monetary Economics 22,
117–131.
Sadka, R., 2006. Momentum and post–earnings–announcement–drift anomalies: the role
of liquidity risk. Journal of Financial Economics 80, 309–349.
Schaefer, S., Strebulaev, I., 2008. Structural models of credit risk are useful: evidence from
hedge ratios on corporate bonds. Journal of Financial Economics 90, 1–19.
Shaman, P., and Stine, R., 1988. The bias of autoregressive coefficient estimators. Journal
of the American Statistical Association 83, 842–848.
Shleifer, A., Vishny, R., 1992. Liquidation values and debt capacity: a market equilibrium
approach. Journal of Finance 47, 1343–1366.
Stock, James H., Watson, M., 1989. New indexes of coincident and leading economic
indicators, NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 351–394.
Stock, James H., Watson, M., 1999. Forecasting inflation. Journal of Monetary Economics
44, 293–335.
Stock, James H., Watson, M., 2002. Has the business cycle changed and why? NBER
Macroeconomics Annual, 159–218.
Warga, A., 1998. Fixed income data base, University of Houston, Houston, Texas.
Watanabe, A., Watanabe, M, 2008. Time-varying liquidity risk and the cross section of
stock returns. Review of Financial Studies 21, 2449–2486.

50

Table 1
Summary statistics
Panel A provides summary statistics on bond returns by credit rating classes (in basis points) IG stands
for bonds rated BBB and above. Junk stands for bonds rated BB and below. We use the Lehman Brothers
Fixed Income Database for the period January 1973 to December 1996, supplemented with data from the
Merrill Lynch Corporate Bond Index Database for the period January 1994 to December 2007, giving us
a sample period of 1973 to 2007. Included bonds must be in the Lehman/Merrill index with at least one
year to maturity. The average return for each rating group is value-weighted by the amount outstanding
in that month. Returns are calculated using quoted prices or trades and matrix prices are discarded.
Returns for credit rating classes are not available for some months in the sample period, but returns by
IG and Junk rating class are available for all months in the sample period. Panel B provides summary
statistics on bond market factors and documents the return on the two factor portfolios DEF and TERM
in basis points, and summary statistics on the Silliq and the Billiq factors. The sample is from January
1973 through December 2007. The default factor (DEF) is the difference between the equally weighted
return on all corporate bonds in the database with at least one year to maturity and the average return on
one-year and 30-year government bonds from CRSP. The term factor (TERM) is the difference between
the 30-year government bond return and the one-month T-bill return from CRSP. Silliq is the innovation
in stock market illiquidity measure ILLIQ from Amihud (2002), modified by Acharya and Pedersen (2005),
calculated as the residuals of an AR(2) process. Billiq is the innovation in bond market illiquidity using
short maturity on-the-run Treasuries bid-ask spread as in Goyenko (2006), and calculated as the residuals
of an AR(2) process. Panel C presents pairwise spearman correlations of bond market factors. Number in
parentheses in Panel C are p-values for the test that the correlation coefficient equals zero.
Panel A:
Credit rating
AAA
AA
A
BBB
BB
B
CCC & below
IG
JUNK

N
415
409
415
413
405
405
369
420
420

Mean
67.2
72.6
72.1
73.5
89.2
99.4
160.3
67.6
97.6

Std.dev
134.5
146.0
152.5
152.0
167.7
221.7
332.0
127.3
177.9

Median
63.0
71.3
73.8
77.5
90.8
108.7
148.6
63.0
101.4

Min
-535.4
-414.7
-466.4
-500.2
-670.1
-804.0
-905.0
-428.3
-804.0

Max
736.8
772.3
667.5
745.7
850.0
1069.7
1069.7
735.1
1069.7

Panel B:

TERM
DEF
Silliq
Billiq

N
420
420
420
420

Mean
17.7
9.5
-0.02161
-0.05087

Std.dev
319.6
113.5
0.16112
0.43084

51

Median
19.6
10.6
-0.02248
-0.02648

Min
-1055.5
-625.1
-0.58342
-1.55171

Max
1162.5
616.9
0.65319
2.07333

Panel C :

TERM
DEF
Silliq
Billiq

TERM
1

DEF

-0.529
(0.00)
0.041
(0.40)
-0.057
(0.25)

1
-0.153
(0.00)
-0.057
(0.25)

52

Silliq

Billiq

1
0.086
(0.08)

1

Table 2
Regressions of bond portfolio return on bond market factors
Panel A presents regressions of bond portfolio return on bond market factors. Bond returns for each
rating group are in excess of the 30-day T-bill return. βT , βD , βSi , and βBi are, respectively, the regression
coefficients of TERM, DEF, Silliq, and Billiq, as defined in Table 1, Panel B. Bond returns are calculated
as defined in Table 1, Panel A. Panel B presents the ratio of the standard deviation of returns to standard
deviation of factors.
Panel A:

Rating
AAA
AA
A
BBB
BB
B
CCC & below

α
2.68
5.68
3.55
3.72
14.91
23.61
84.52

βT
0.42
0.47
0.50
0.47
0.38
0.35
0.21

Coefficients
βD
βSi
0.76
73.70
0.81
61.69
0.90
40.39
0.97
17.06
0.98 -90.15
0.99 -193.55
0.89 -328.70

βBi
13.58
1.81
-1.66
-11.41
-57.28
-70.07
-63.19

Adj-Rsq
0.76
0.79
0.82
0.75
0.51
0.30
0.11

α
0.83
1.68
1.12
0.97
2.47
2.49
5.04

βT
35.98
38.31
43.67
33.83
17.43
10.25
3.47

Panel B:
Rating
AAA
AA
A
BBB
BB
B
CCC & below

σD
99.48%
101.88%
104.88%
98.60%
72.03%
50.36%
19.86%

Ratio to σreturns of
σD
σSi
σBi
64.11% 8.83%
4.35%
67.96% 7.39%
0.58%
75.53% 4.84%
0.53%
81.45% 2.04%
3.65%
82.30% 10.80% 18.34%
83.31% 23.18% 22.44%
75.35% 39.36% 20.24%

53

t-Stat
βD
βSi
22.91 3.69
23.27 2.93
27.42 2.05
24.42 0.72
15.85 -2.38
10.18 -3.26
5.33 -3.16

βBi
1.83
0.23
-0.23
-1.29
-4.16
-3.23
-1.70

N
415
409
415
413
405
405
369

Table 3
Regime-switching model for bond returns
Panel A provides the estimates of the following model.
Investment-grade returns (in excess of the 30-day T-bill return):
1
1
1 + β1
Regime 1: rIG,t = αIG
IG,T T ERMt + βIG,D DEFt + βIG,Si Silliqt +
1
Billiqt + ǫ1IG,t
βIG,Bi
2 + β2
2
2
Regime 2: rIG,t = αIG
IG,T T ERMt + βIG,D DEFt + βIG,Si Silliqt +
2
Billiqt + ǫ2IG,t
βIG,Bi

Junk grade returns (in excess of the 30-day T-bill return):
1
1
1
1
+ βJunk,T
T ERMt + βJunk,D
DEFt + βJunk,Si
Silliqt +
Regime 1: rJunk,t = αJunk
1
1
βJunk,Bi Billiqt + ǫJunk,t
2
2
2
2
Regime 2: rJunk,t = αJunk
+ βJunk,T
T ERMt + βJunk,D
DEFt + βJunk,Si
Silliqt +
2
2
βJunk,Bi Billiqt + ǫJunk,t

Regime Dependent Variance-Covariance Matrix (st = 1,2):

Ωs t =



ρs t

2
σIG,s
t
σIG,st σJunk,st

ρst σIG,st σJunk,st
2
σJunk,s
t



Markov switching probability for state transition:
P (st = 1 | st−1 = 1) = p
P (st = 2 | st−1 = 2) = q
In Panels B and C, we test whether the conditional model, with the factor coefficients varying between
regimes, is significantly different from the unconditional model with constant coefficients. The null
hypothesis about the coefficients is H0 : Lβ = c where L is a matrix of coefficients for the hypotheses
and c is a vector of constants. The Wald chi-squared statistic for testing H0 is computed as χ2W =
(Lβ̂ − c)′ [LV̂ (β̂)L′ ]−1 (Lβ̂ − c). Under H0 , χ2W has an asymptotic chi-squared distribution with r degrees
of freedom where r is the rank of L and V the variance-covariance matrix of the coefficients. In Panel
D we assess the in sample accuracy of the regime-switching model. Panel D uses the regime-switching
model estimated in Panel A to obtain estimates of investment-grade (IG) and junk grade bond returns in
each regime and compares it against the actual realizations. We also estimate an unconditional model over
the entire sample (1973–2007) and obtain the predictions. Panels show the regression of the actual bond
returns against the predicted bond returns with a test of the slope coefficient = 1.0 and the intercept being
zero. ∗ ∗ ∗, ∗∗, ∗ Indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively. Numbers in parentheses
under the coefficients are standard errors.

54

Panel A: Estimation of a Markov regime-switching model
Regime 1
Investment grade
Junk grade
Coeff
t-Stat
Coeff
t-Stat
Constant
2.34
1.36
27.21
4.72
TERM
0.35
44.38
0.28
12.56
DEF
0.37
12.06
1.08
10.07
Silliq
13.95
1.21
-68.89
-2.08
Billiq
-2.40
-0.49
-14.11
-0.91
σi
24.31
82.96
Regime 2
Investment grade
Junk grade
Coeff
t-Stat
Coeff
t-Stat
Constant
7.21
1.59
22.07
1.44
TERM
0.52
29.92
0.46
7.56
DEF
0.97
26.76
1.06
8.78
Silliq
64.77
3.13
-195.19
-4.31
Billiq
20.69
2.37
-65.76
-2.37
σi
53.18
188.23

Parameters
p
q
ρst =1
ρst =2

Panel B: Wald tests for differences in coefficients between regime 1 and regime 2
Investment grade
Junk grade
Chi-sq
p-Value Chi-sq p-Value
TERM & DEF
177.18
0.00
11.61
0.00
Liquidity
10.20
0.01
8.46
0.01
Constant
0.99
0.99
0.10
0.76
TERM
89.50
0.00
7.37
0.01
DEF
167.72
0.00
0.01
0.92
Silliq
4.44
0.03
5.93
0.01
Billiq
5.58
0.02
2.53
0.10
Panel C: Wald tests for differences in coefficients between junk and IG
Regime 1
Regime 2
Chi-sq
p-Value Chi-sq p-Value
TERM & DEF
97.02
0.00
3.79
0.15
Liquidity
6.42
0.04
35.81
0.00
Constant
18.28
0.00
0.71
0.40
TERM
11.00
0.00
0.86
0.36
DEF
41.81
0.00
0.52
0.47
Silliq
5.87
0.01
28.22
0.00
Billiq
0.59
0.44
7.54
0.00
Log likelihood
-4676.81
Sample period 1973:01 – 2007:12

55

0.96
0.93
0.10
-0.40

Panel D: In-sample accuracy of the regime-switching model.

Constant.

Regime 1: Actual returns
IG
Junk
-0.81
-2.09
-0.47
7.66
(1.56)

Predicted - Regime 1 parameters

(1.89)

(5.79)

(5.73)

1.02

∗∗∗

(0.02)

Predicted - Unconditional parameters

0.87∗∗∗
(0.02)

Predicted - Regime 1 parameters

1.02∗∗∗
(0.06)

Predicted - Unconditional parameters

0.83∗∗∗
(0.05)

Obs.
Adj R2
F -test if
Slope = 1.0 (p-Value)

Constant.

276
276
276
276
0.94
0.91
0.52
0.49
1.05
66.51
0.13
10.81
(0.307) (0.000) (0.722) (0.001)
Regime 2: Actual returns
IG
Junk
1.06
5.16
-3.57
-8.21
(4.57)

Predicted - Regime 2 parameters

(4.56)

(17.04)

(17.48)

1.02

∗∗∗

(0.03)

Predicted - Unconditional parameters

1.25∗∗∗
(0.04)

Predicted - Regime 2 parameters

1.03∗∗∗
(0.10)

Predicted - Unconditional parameters

1.18∗∗∗
(0.12)

Obs.
AdjR2
F -test if
Slope = 1.0 (p-Value)

144
0.88
0.25
(0.620)

144
0.88
40.77
(0.000)

56

144
0.41
0.11
(0.742)

144
0.39
2.29
(0.132)

Table 4
Explaining the probability of regime 2 (stress regime) with macroeconomic, financial market, and
bank balance-sheet variables
This table presents OLS and logit estimates of the probability of being in regime 2 as a function of
macroeconomic and financial market variables. The OLS regression uses as dependent variable the
probability of being in regime 2 in any month, that is estimated along with the regime-switching model
in Table 3. The probability undergoes a logit transformation to map it into the real line, with a constant
correction term following Cox (1970, p. 33), to accommodate it being bounded between zero and one.
The dependent variable in the logit model is a dummy variable that equals one if the probability of
being in regime 2 is greater than 70%. Odd (even) numbered specifications are OLS (logit) estimations,
where the explanatory variables are lagged one period. N BER recession is a dummy variable that
equals one for NBER recession dates. SW index is the Stock and Watson (1989, 2002) recession index
with positive numbers indicating growth above trend. P rob(Recession) − Hamilton is the result of the
Markov switching model for the quarterly growth rate in U.S. GNP. We use these models to estimate
the probability of being in regime 1 interpreted by Hamilton (1989) as the recession regime greater than
70%. N egative market return is a dummy variable that equals one for three consecutive months of
negative market return (the CRSP value-weighted return with dividends). Business conditions index,
is based on the framework developed in Aruoba, Diebold, and Scotti (2009). The average value of the
index is zero, with bigger positive (negative) values indicating better- (worse)-than-average conditions.
P aper bill spread is the difference between the yield on the three-month nonfinancial commercial paper
rate and the three-month T-bill secondary market rate. T ED spread is the difference between the yield
on the three-month Euro $ deposit rate and the three-month T-bill secondary market rate, orthogonal to
the paper bill spread. Equity volatility is the square root of the monthly average squared daily returns
on the CRSP value-weighted index with dividends. EE measure is the growth in broker-dealer balance
sheet (relative to households) over the previous 12 months as calculated by Etula (2009). The sample
period is January 1973–December 2007. ∗ ∗ ∗, ∗∗, ∗ Indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels,
respectively. Numbers in parentheses under the coefficients are standard errors.
Constant.
NBER recessiont−1

(1)
-1.92∗∗∗

(2)
-1.03∗∗∗

(3)
-1.11∗∗∗

(4)
-0.70∗∗∗

(5)
-2.69∗∗∗

(6)
-1.40∗∗∗

(7)
-1.92∗∗∗

(8)
-1.06∗∗∗

(0.24)

(0.12)

(0.22)

(0.11)

(0.28)

(0.16)

(0.33)

(0.17)

5.88∗∗∗

2.62∗∗∗

(0.50)

(0.37)

-1.69∗∗∗

-0.76∗∗∗

(0.19)

(0.13)

4.71∗∗∗

2.01∗∗∗

(0.59)

(0.28)

3.12∗∗∗

1.78∗∗∗

(0.84)

(0.48)

-1.81∗∗∗

-0.93∗∗∗

(0.23)

(0.17)

0.01∗∗

0.004∗∗

(0.004)

(0.002)

0.03∗∗∗

0.01∗∗∗

(0.005)

(0.003)

419
23

419
16

SW indext−1
Prob(Recession)-Hamiltont−1
Negative market returnt−1
Business conditions indext−1
Paper bill spreadt−1
TED spreadt−1
Obs.
AdjR2 /P seudoR2 (%)

419
18

419
13

419
11

57

419
8

419
14

419
10

Const.

(9)
-4.57∗∗∗

(10)
-2.50∗∗∗

(11)
-4.69∗∗∗

(12)
-2.54∗∗∗

(13)
-4.75∗∗∗

(14)
-2.62∗∗∗

(1.02)

(0.40)

(0.79)

(0.40)

(0.79)

(0.41)

1.43∗

1.20∗

(0.84)

(0.61)

NBER recessiont−1
SW indext−1
Prob(Recession)-Hamiltont−1
Negative market returnt−1
Business conditions indext−1
Paper bill spreadt−1
TED spreadt−1
EE measurepreviousyear
Equity volatilityt−1
Equity volatilityt−1 *
EE measurepreviousyear
Obs.
AdjR2 /P seudoR2 (%)

0.12

0.06

0.006

-0.03

(0.33)

(0.23)

(0.32)

(0.23)

1.08

1.01∗∗

1.32∗∗

1.21∗∗

(0.67)

(0.48)

(0.65)

(0.47)

0.85

0.85

10.11

10.04∗

(0.93)

(0.59)

(0.90)

(0.60)

-0.99∗∗∗

-0.47∗

-10.13∗∗∗

-0.60∗∗

(0.35)

(0.28)

(0.35)

(0.28)

0.002

-0.005

0.004

-0.002

(0.005)

(0.004)

(0.005)

(0.003)

0.03∗∗∗

0.01∗∗∗

0.03∗∗∗

0.01∗∗∗

(0.005)

(0.004)

(0.005)

(0.004)

-229.49∗∗∗

-245.46∗∗∗

-200.11∗∗∗

-236.90∗∗∗

-206.00∗∗∗

-236.09∗∗∗

(76.29)

(56.70)

(58.32)

(46.42)

(57.80)

(46.97)

93.82∗∗∗

53.44∗∗∗

80.39∗∗∗

49.93∗∗∗

80.53∗∗∗

50.01∗∗∗

(26.44)

(10.45)

(20.91)

(9.69)

(20.73)

(9.89)

5099.01∗∗∗

5009.99∗∗∗

4248.32∗∗∗

4011.05∗∗∗

4364.55∗∗∗

4029.97∗∗∗

(1787.59)

(1336.16)

(1336.11)

(964.58)

(1314.77)

(996.73)

419
28

419
23

419
44

419
36

419
43

419
35

58

Table 5
Estimation of the likelihood of regime 2 (stress regime)-out-of-sample tests
This table tests the performance of the probability of regime 2, as predicted by the economic model in
Table 4, when compared to the probability of regime 2 obtained from the Markov regime-switching model
of Table 3. First, we estimate model (14) of Table 4 using only the data for January 1973 - December
1989. Using these estimates, we predict the probability of being in regime 2 for January 1990, then we roll
forward every month and repeat the process until we estimate the probability of regime 2 for all months
during January 1990 - December 2007. We present a logit estimation of the probability of being in regime
2 as a function of the predicted Prob(Regime 2) as the independent variable. The dependent variable is
a dummy variable that equals one if the probability of being in regime 2, obtained from the estimates in
Table 3, is greater than 70% following the cutoff level in Hamilton (1989). We also present a figure that
displays the ROC (Receiver Operating Characteristic) curve to assess the accuracy of this logit model to
predict regime 2. In the Y -axis we plot the true positive rate, the proportion of actual regime 2 months
correctly classified by the model. In the X -axis we plot the false positive rate, the proportion of non regime
2 months that are incorrectly classified as regime 2 months by the model. The diagonal represents random
guess. Points above the diagonal indicate good classification results, with the total area under the curve
relative to the area of the square measuring the accuracy of the model. ∗ ∗ ∗, ∗∗, ∗ Indicate significance at
the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively. Numbers in parentheses under the coefficients are standard errors.
Regime 2 (as per regime-switching model 1990 - 2007)
-1.78∗∗∗

Constant

(0.24)

5.77∗∗∗

Predicted Prob(Regime 2)

(0.94)

216
27
88.81





6HQVLWLYLW\






Obs.
P seudoR2 (%)
Area under the ROC curve (%)






6SHFLILFLW\

$UHDXQGHU52&FXUYH 

59





Table 6
Out-of-sample predictions during the financial crisis years, 2008 - 2009.
Panel A shows the estimated probability of regime 2, obtained from specification (14) in Table 4, using
the economic time-series for December 2007 - November 2009 (the predictive economic series are lagged
one month). Panel B presents the regression of the actual bond returns on the predicted bond returns (in
excess of the 30-day T-bill return) for the years 2008 - 2009 in basis points. We use the data on iShares
investment-grade and high-yield bond indices to compute the bond returns for these years. The table
presents the intercepts and slope coefficients for both investment-grade and junk grade bonds, with a test
of the slope coefficient = 1.0. To predict bond returns for 2008 and 2009, we proceed as follows: First, we
predict the probability as explained in Panel A. Next, we weight the prediction of bond returns itself for
2008 - 2009 from the regime-switching model of Table 3 by the respective regime probabilities to obtain
the predicted bond returns (in excess of the 30-day T-bill return). Numbers in parentheses under the
coefficients are standard errors. ∗∗∗, ∗∗, ∗ Indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
Panel A
Date
200801
200802
200803
200804
200805
200806
200807
200808
200809
200810
200811
200812

Predicted
Prob(Regime 2)
0.53
0.97
0.85
0.98
0.72
0.61
0.81
0.89
0.94
1.00
1.00
1.00

Date
200901
200902
200903
200904
200905
200906
200907
200908
200909
200910
200911
200912

Predicted
Prob(Regime 2)
0.97
0.91
0.66
0.002
0.40
0.66
0.89
0.42
0.70
0.82
0.25
0.65

Panel B

Constant
Predicted IG returns

Actual IG
returns
4.65

Actual junk
returns
51.15

(42.93)

(66.82)

0.839∗∗∗
(0.098)

0.862∗∗∗

Predicted junk returns

(0.102)

Obs.
R2 (%)
F -test if
Slope = 1.0 (p-value)

24
77
2.70
(0.12)

60

24
76
1.84
(0.189)

Table 7
Regime-switching model for stock returns
Panel A provides the estimates of the following model.
Low book-to-market stock returns (in excess of the risk-free rate):
1
1
1
1
1
+ βLow,Rmt
(Rm,t − Rf,t ) + βLow,T
T ERMt + βLow,D
DEFt + βLow,Sit
Silliqt +
Regime 1: rLow,t = αLow
1
1
βLow,Bit Billiqt + ǫLow,t
2
2
2
2
2
+ βLow,Rmt
(Rm,t − Rf,t ) + βLow,T
T ERMt + βLow,D
DEFt + βLow,Sit
Silliqt +
Regime 2: rLow,t = αLow
2
2
βLow,Bit Billiqt + ǫLow,t

High book-to-market stock returns (in excess of the risk-free rate):
1
1
1
1
1
+ βHigh,Rmt
(Rm,t − Rf,t ) + βHigh,T
T ERMt + βHigh,D
DEFt + βHigh,Sit
Silliqt +
Regime 1: rHigh,t = αHigh
1
1
βHigh,Bit Billiqt + ǫHigh,t
2
2
2
2
2
Regime 2: rHigh,t = αHigh
+ βHigh,Rmt
(Rm,t − Rf,t ) + βHigh,T
T ERMt + βHigh,D
DEFt + βHigh,Sit
Silliqt +
2
2
βHigh,Bit Billiqt + ǫHigh,t

Regime Dependent Variance-Covariance Matrix (st = 1,2):

Ωst =



ρst

2
σLow,s
t
σLow,st σHigh,st

ρst σLow,st σHigh,st
2
σHigh,s
t



Markov switching probability for state transition:
P (st = 1 | st−1 = 1) = p
P (st = 2 | st−1 = 2) = q
In Panels B and C we test whether the conditional model, with the factor coefficients varying between
regimes, is significantly different from the unconditional model with constant coefficients. The null
hypothesis about the coefficients is H0 : Lβ = c where L is a matrix of coefficients for the hypotheses
and c is a vector of constants. The Wald chi-squared statistic for testing H0 is computed as χ2W =
(Lβ̂ − c)′ [LV̂ (β̂)L′ ]−1 (Lβ̂ − c). Under H0 , χ2W has an asymptotic chi-squared distribution with r degrees of
freedom where r is the rank of L and V the variance-covariance matrix of the coefficients. Low and high
book-to-market stock returns is the return on the lowest and highest quintiles sorted by book-to-market
ratio, and data are obtained from Ken French’s data library.

61

Panel A: Estimation of a Markov regime-switching model for stocks
Regime 1
Low BM
High BM
Coeff
t-Stat
Coeff
t-Stat
Constant
-71.88
-7.95
-5.17
-0.43
113.44
50.65
86.20
26.69
(Rm − Rf )
TERM
-0.07
-2.11
0.05
1.28
DEF
-0.35
-2.89
0.36
2.04
Silliq
83.38
1.01
-54.92
-0.72
Billiq
55.15
3.11
-65.46
-2.63
σi
117.50
156.09
Regime 2
Low BM
High BM
Coeff
t-Stat
Coeff
t-Stat
Constant
-49.15
-1.42
-12.76
-0.31
(Rm − Rf )
107.66
33.70
82.79
12.83
TERM
-0.03
-0.38
0.16
1.17
DEF
-0.16
-1.18
0.50
1.77
Silliq
73.62
1.70
-242.21
-4.20
Billiq
6.30
0.18
-88.32
-1.48
σi
179.18
366.86

Parameters
p
q
ρst =1
ρst =2

Panel B: Wald tests for differences in coefficients between regime 1 and regime 2
Low BM
High BM
Chi-sq
p-Value Chi-sq p-Value
Constant
0.33
0.57
0.03
0.87
Rm − Rf
1.93
0.17
0.19
0.66
TERM
0.25
0.62
0.49
0.48
DEF
1.07
0.30
0.14
0.71
Silliq
0.01
0.92
5.35
0.02
Billiq
1.45
0.23
0.18
0.67
Panel C: Wald tests for differences in coefficients between high BM and low BM
Regime 1
Regime 2
Chi-sq
p-Value Chi-sq p-Value
Constant
11.69
0.00
0.26
0.61
Rm − Rf
30.26
0.00
8.82
0.00
TERM
3.42
0.06
1.18
0.28
DEF
6.46
0.01
3.26
0.07
Silliq
0.83
0.36
22.12
0.00
Billiq
9.92
0.00
1.24
0.27
Log likelihood
-5421.65
Sample period 1973:01 – 2007:12

62

0.957
0.897
-0.650
-0.496

Table 8
Explaining the probability of regime 2 (stress regime) from the stock returns model with
macroeconomic, financial market, and bank balance-sheet variables
This table presents OLS and logit estimates of the probability of being in regime 2 as a function of
macroeconomic and financial market variables. The OLS regression uses as dependent variable the
probability of being in regime 2 in any month, that is estimated along with the regime-switching model
in Table 7. The probability undergoes a logit transformation to map it into the real line, with a constant
correction term following Cox (1970, p. 33), to accommodate it being bounded between zero and one.
The dependent variable in the logit model is a dummy variable that equals one if the probability of
being in regime 2 is greater than 70%. Odd (even) numbered specifications are OLS (logit) estimations,
where the explanatory variables are lagged one period. N BER recession is a dummy variable that
equals one for NBER recession dates. SW index is the Stock and Watson (1989, 2002) recession index
with positive numbers indicating growth above trend. P rob(Recession) − Hamilton is the result of the
Markov switching model for the quarterly growth rate in U.S. GNP. We use these models to estimate
the probability of being in regime 1 interpreted by Hamilton (1989) as the recession regime greater than
70%. N egative market return is a dummy variable that equals one for three consecutive months of
negative market return (the CRSP value-weighted return with dividends). Business conditions index,
is based on the framework developed in Aruoba, Diebold, and Scotti (2009). The average value of the
index is zero, with bigger positive (negative) values indicating better- (worse)-than-average conditions.
P aper bill spread is the difference between the yield on the three-month nonfinancial commercial paper
rate and the three-month T-bill secondary market rate. T ED spread is the difference between the yield
on the three-month Euro $ deposit rate and the three-month T-bill secondary market rate, orthogonal to
the paper bill spread. Equity volatility is the square root of the monthly average squared daily returns
on the CRSP value-weighted index with dividends. EE measure is the growth in broker-dealer balance
sheet (relative to households) over the previous 12 months as calculated by Etula (2009). The sample
period is January 1973–December 2007. ∗ ∗ ∗, ∗∗, ∗ Indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels,
respectively. Numbers in parentheses under the coefficients are standard errors.

Constant
NBER recessiont−1

(1)
-2.00∗∗∗

(2)
-1.29∗∗∗

(3)
-1.62∗∗∗

(4)
-1.22∗∗∗

(5)
-2.80∗∗∗

(6)
-1.79∗∗∗

(7)
-1.86∗∗∗

(8)
-1.23∗∗∗

(0.19)

(0.13)

(0.17)

(0.12)

(0.21)

(0.18)

(0.25)

(0.17)

2.73∗∗∗

0.84∗∗∗

(0.49)

(0.30)

-1.09∗∗∗

-0.59∗∗∗

(0.17)

(0.12)

3.48∗∗∗

1.62∗∗∗

(0.47)

(0.30)

SW indext−1
Prob(Recession)-Hamiltont−1
Negative market returnt−1
Business conditions indext−1
Paper bill spreadt−1
TED spreadt−1
Obs.
Adj R2 /P seudoR2 (%)

419
7

419
0.1

419

63 8

419
2

419
13

419
7

1.50∗∗

0.31

(0.71)

(0.47)

-1.07∗∗∗

-0.61∗∗∗

(0.21)

(0.15)

0.002

-0.0006

(0.003)

(0.002)

0.009∗

0.0008

(0.005)

(0.004)

419
9

419
17

Constant

(9)
-4.15∗∗∗

(10)
-2.64∗∗∗

(11)
-4.20∗∗∗

(12)
-2.68∗∗∗

(13)
-4.18∗∗∗

(14)
-2.60∗∗∗

(0.69)

(0.37)

(0.59)

(0.38)

(0.59)

(0.38)

-0.42

-1.18∗

(0.68)

(0.61)

-0.41

-0.46∗∗

-0.38

-0.34∗

(0.26)

(0.21)

(0.25)

(0.20)

1.91∗∗∗

1.06∗∗

1.84∗∗∗

0.89∗

(0.59)

(0.47)

(0.58)

(0.49)

-0.15

-0.37

-0.23

-0.59

(0.60)

(0.51)

(0.59)

(0.51)

-0.01

-0.05

0.03

0.08

(0.30)

(0.27)

(0.29)

(0.25)

-0.001

-0.002

-0.002

-0.004

(0.003)

(0.003)

(0.003)

(0.003)

0.01∗∗∗

0.005

0.01∗∗∗

0.004

(0.004)

(0.004)

(0.004)

(0.004)

NBER recessiont−1
SW indext−1
Prob(Recession)-Hamiltont−1
Negative market returnt−1
Business conditions indext−1
Paper bill spreadt−1
TED spreadt−1
EE measurepreviousyear
Equity volatilityt−1
Equity volatilityt−1 *
EE measurepreviousyear
Obs.
Adj R2 /P seudoR2 (%)

-122.69∗∗

-109.82∗∗∗

-130.33∗∗∗

-120.31∗∗∗

-128.60∗∗∗

-116.42∗∗∗

(52.08)

(40.74)

(44.03)

(35.97)

(43.71)

(35.55)

62.53∗∗∗

36.41∗∗∗

55.85∗∗∗

36.99∗∗∗

55.81∗∗∗

36.21∗∗∗

(17.84)

(8.47)

(15.42)

(7.96)

(15.46)

(7.89)

3457.09∗∗∗

2575.38∗∗∗

3022.88∗∗∗

2346.98∗∗∗

2988.78∗∗∗

2256.96∗∗∗

(1184.75)

(859.99)

(960.79)

(715.35)

(956.78)

(697.49)

419
23

419
16

419
30

419
21

419
30

419
20

64

Table 9
Regime-switching model for high-minus-low book-to-market stock returns
Panel A provides the estimates of the following model.
High-minus-low book-to-market stock returns:
1
1
1
1
Regime 1: rHM LBM,t = α1 + βHM
LDEF HM LDEFt + βSit Silliqt + βBit Billiqt + ǫt
2
2
2
2
Regime 2: rHM LBM,t = α2 + βHM
LDEF HM LDEFt + βSit Silliqt + βBit Billiqt + ǫt

Markov switching probability for state transition:
P (st = 1 | st−1 = 1) = p
P (st = 2 | st−1 = 2) = q
In Panel B we test whether the conditional model, with the factor coefficients varying between regimes,
is significantly different from the unconditional model with constant coefficients. The null hypothesis
about the coefficients is H0 : Lβ = c where L is a matrix of coefficients for the hypotheses and
c is a vector of constants. The Wald chi-squared statistic for testing H0 is computed as χ2W =
(Lβ̂ − c)′ [LV̂ (β̂)L′ ]−1 (Lβ̂ − c). Under H0 , χ2W has an asymptotic chi-squared distribution with r degrees
of freedom where r is the rank of L and V the variance-covariance matrix of the coefficients. Low
and high book-to-market stock returns is the return on the lowest and highest quintiles sorted by
book-to-market ratio, and data are obtained from Ken French’s data library. The variable HMLDEF
is constructed as follows: Every month we classify stocks in the CRSP database in a 5 X 5 sort based on
its modified Z -score (measure of default risk) and monthly equity volatility. Modified Z -score is defined as
-4.34-0.08*wcta+0.04*reta-0.1*ebitta-0.22*mvliab+0.06*sata. wcta is the ratio of working capital to total
assets (Compustat item (actq-lctq)/atq). reta is the ratio of retained earnings to total assets (Compustat
item req/atq). ebitta is the ratio of earnings before interest and taxes to total assets (Compustat item
(piq+xintq)/atq). mvliab is the ratio of market value of equity to total liabilities (Compustat item (prccq
* cshoq)/ltq). sata is the ratio of sales to total assets (Compustat item saleq/atq). For each month, in
each volatility quintile, we compute a market capitalization-weighted stock return for each Z-score quintile.
Low default-risk stock returns then is the average of stock returns of the highest Z -score quintile in each
volatility quintile. High default-risk stock returns then is the average of stock returns of the lowest Z -score
quintile in each volatility quintile. HMLDEF is the difference between the High and Low default-risk stock
returns.

65

Panel A: Estimation of a Markov regime-switching model for HML BM (high-minus-low book-to-market)
HML BM
Regime 1
Regime 2
Parameters
Coeff
t-Stat
Coeff
t-Stat
Constant
-4.26
-0.25
64.70
1.67 p
0.969
HMLDEF
0.35
7.15
0.48
5.56 q
0.935
Silliq
9.38
0.05
-433.39
-4.89
Billiq
-68.73
-1.22
-123.81
-0.73
σi
204.53
345.87
Panel B: Wald tests for differences in coefficients between regime 1 and regime 2
HML BM
Chi-sq
p-Value
Constant
2.83
0.09
HMLDEF
1.00
0.32
Silliq
5.14
0.02
Billiq
0.07
0.79
Log likelihood
-2923.51
Sample period 1973:01 – 2007:12

66

Table 10
Flight to Liquidity Effects
Panel A presents OLS regressions of returns (or yields) of various bond (assets) portfolios on the probability
of being in regime 2 (stress), obtained from the estimation in Table 3, Prob(Regime 2)Bonds , or table 7,
Prob(Regime 2)Stocks , on the four bond market factors described in Table 2 and on the interaction these
factors and Prob(regime 2). Columns (3)-(5) are the yields on 90-day T-bill in excess of the overnight Fed
Funds effective rate (to remove policy effects). Panel B presents OLS regressions of returns (or yields)
of various bond (assets) portfolios on the probability of being in regime 2 (stress), obtained from the
estimation in Table 3, on the four bond market factors described in Table 2 and on the interaction of
these factors and Prob(Regime 2). The returns on Junk and IG (investment-grade) are value-weighted
averages of the bond portfolios in each group. The estimations in columns 3–5 use returns on junk and IG
bond portfolio groups by maturity: short-term is up to four years, medium term is between four and nine
years, and long term is longer than nine years. ∗ ∗ ∗, ∗∗, ∗ Indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10%
levels, respectively. Numbers in parentheses under the coefficients are standard errors.
Panel A: Flight to Liquidity Effects

Constant
Prob(Regime
Prob(Regime

2)Bonds

DEF
return
(1)
6.89

-(T-bill yld
- Fed funds)
(2)
-68.09∗∗∗

-(T-bill yld
- Fed funds)
(3)
48.57∗∗∗

-(T-bill yld
- Fed funds)
(4)
60.21∗∗∗

(4.34)

(4.15)

(2.82)

(4.17)

-0.10

50.71∗∗∗

(17.09)

(10.22)

2)Stocks

26.22∗∗
(10.91)

0.07∗∗

-0.11∗∗

-0.15∗∗∗

(0.03)

(0.05)

(0.05)

-75.38∗∗

-25.02

-10.08

7.82

(34.15)

(20.27)

(15.80)

(24.31)

-29.67∗∗

-21.37∗∗

-7.63

3.36

(12.11)

(10.33)

(7.01)

(10.40)

DEF
Silliq
Billiq
Prob(Regime 2)Bonds * DEF

0.05
(0.06)

Prob(Regime 2)Bonds * Silliq
Prob(Regime 2)Bonds * Billiq

-66.43

58.05

(119.28)

(43.43)

35.84

57.14∗∗∗

(30.64)

(19.89)

Prob(Regime 2)Stocks * DEF

0.14∗∗
(0.07)

Prob(Regime

2)Stocks

* Silliq

37.88
(38.81)

Prob(Regime 2)Stocks * Billiq

45.89∗∗
(20.60)

Obs.
AdjR2 (%)

420
3

420
3

67

420
12

420
6

Panel B: Flight to liquidity effects and bond maturity
Junk-IG Junk-IG
Short
Return
Return Junk-IG
(1)
(2)
(3)
∗∗∗
∗∗∗
Const.
26.46
26.02
24.24∗∗∗
Prob(Regime 2)
TERM

(10.23)

-2.80

-13.27

-3.50

-27.00

-13.40

(22.63)

(13.00)

(21.55)

(25.32)

-0.07

∗∗∗

0.84

∗∗∗

-0.08

-0.002

∗∗∗

(0.02)

-0.18

∗∗∗

(0.02)

0.77

∗∗∗

(0.03)

0.55

∗∗∗

(0.12)

(0.10)

-0.47∗∗∗
(0.04)

0.61

∗∗∗

0.62∗∗∗

(0.15)

(0.16)

-57.79

-64.59

-126.09∗

(38.71)

(31.87)

(52.50)

(66.66)

-2.00

-7.38

-5.81

-13.50

(12.09)

(9.51)

(15.82)

(19.20)

-64.66

Billiq

∗

∗

0.04

0.03

0.01

-0.06

0.15

(0.10)

(0.09)

(0.05)

(0.08)

(0.10)

-0.66∗∗∗

-0.67∗∗∗

-0.37∗∗∗

-0.71∗∗∗

-0.82∗∗∗

(0.22)

(0.20)

(0.14)

(0.22)

(0.24)

Prob(Regime 2) * Silliq

-210.23

-132.14

(111.17)

(76.90)

(118.45)

(137.87)

-90.79∗∗

-28.04

-76.95∗

-104.61∗∗

(35.79)

(24.93)

(44.93)

(49.71)

420
18

356
20

382
30

393
42

∗

Prob(Regime 2) * Billiq
Obs.
AdjR2 (%)

(7.68)

(22.58)

Silliq

Prob(Regime 2) * DEF

(5.03)

(5.99)

(0.12)

Prob(Regime 2) * TERM

Long
(Junk-IG)
(5)
24.13∗∗

(5.96)

(0.02)

DEF

Medium
Junk-IG
(4)
28.43∗∗∗

420
11

∗

68

-274.55

∗∗

-233.20∗

Fig. 1.
Time-series behavior of bond returns
The figure plots in basis points the returns on corporate bonds by credit rating classes IG and junk. See definitions in Table 1 for credit
rating classes. NBER recession dates are also shown as dotted lines.

ŽŶĚƌĞƚƵƌŶƐ;:ƵŶŬͿ

ŽŶĚƌĞƚƵƌŶƐ;/'Ϳ
ϭϱϬϬ

ϭ

ϴϬϬ
ϲϬϬ

ϭ

ϭϬϬϬ
ďĂƐŝƐƉŽŝŶƚƐ

ϮϬϬ
Ϭ

ϱϬϬ
Ϭ

ͲϮϬϬ
ͲϱϬϬ

ĂƚĞ

ĂƚĞ

69

ϮϬϬϳϭϭ

ϮϬϬϰϬϵ

ϮϬϬϭϬϳ

ϭϵϵϴϬϱ

ϭϵϵϱϬϯ

ϭϵϵϮϬϭ

ϭϵϴϴϭϭ

ϭϵϴϱϬϵ

ϭϵϴϮϬϳ

Ϭ
ϭϵϳϵϬϱ

ͲϭϬϬϬ
ϭϵϳϯϬϭ

ϮϬϬϳϭϭ

ϮϬϬϰϬϵ

ϮϬϬϭϬϳ

ϭϵϵϴϬϱ

ϭϵϵϱϬϯ

ϭϵϵϮϬϭ

ϭϵϴϴϭϭ

ϭϵϴϱϬϵ

ϭϵϴϮϬϳ

ϭϵϳϵϬϱ

Ϭ
ϭϵϳϲϬϯ

ͲϲϬϬ

ϭϵϳϲϬϯ

ͲϰϬϬ
ϭϵϳϯϬϭ

ďĂƐŝƐƉŽŝŶƚƐ

ϰϬϬ

Fig. 2.
Time-series behavior of TERM and DEF bond market factors
The figure plots in basis points the bond market factors that we use: TERM (term premium), DEF (default premium). See definitions
in Table 2. NBER recession dates are also shown as dotted lines.

&

dZD
ϲϬϬ

ϭ

ϰϬϬ

ϱϬϬ

ϮϬϬ

ďĂƐŝƐƉŽŝŶƚƐ

ϭϬϬϬ

Ϭ
ͲϱϬϬ

ϭ

Ϭ
ͲϮϬϬ
ͲϰϬϬ

ͲϭϬϬϬ

ĂƚĞ

ĂƚĞ

70

ϮϬϬϳϭϭ

ϮϬϬϰϬϵ

ϮϬϬϭϬϳ

ϭϵϵϴϬϱ

ϭϵϵϱϬϯ

ϭϵϵϮϬϭ

ϭϵϴϴϭϭ

ϭϵϴϱϬϵ

ϭϵϴϮϬϳ

ϭϵϳϵϬϱ

ϭϵϳϯϬϭ

ϮϬϬϳϭϭ

ϮϬϬϰϬϵ

ϮϬϬϭϬϳ

ϭϵϵϴϬϱ

ϭϵϵϱϬϯ

ϭϵϵϮϬϭ

ϭϵϴϴϭϭ

ϭϵϴϱϬϵ

ϭϵϴϮϬϳ

ϭϵϳϵϬϱ

Ϭ
ϭϵϳϲϬϯ

ͲϲϬϬ

Ϭ
ϭϵϳϲϬϯ

ͲϭϱϬϬ
ϭϵϳϯϬϭ

ďĂƐŝƐƉŽŝŶƚƐ

ϭϱϬϬ

Fig. 3.
Time Series behavior of Silliq and Billiq bond market factors
The figure plots in basis points the bond market factors that we use: Silliq (innovations on stock illiquidity), and Billiq (innovations on
bond illiquidity). See definitions in Table 2. NBER recession dates are also shown as dotted lines.

ŽŶĚŝůůŝƋƵŝĚŝƚǇŝŶŶŽǀĂƚŝŽŶƐ
ϭ

ϲ͘Ϭ

ϭ

ƐĐŽƌĞ

ϰ͘Ϭ
Ϯ͘Ϭ
Ϭ͘Ϭ
ͲϮ͘Ϭ

71

ϮϬϬϳϭϭ

ϮϬϬϰϬϵ

ϮϬϬϭϬϳ

ϭϵϵϴϬϱ

ϭϵϵϱϬϯ

ĂƚĞ

ϭϵϵϮϬϭ

ϭϵϴϴϭϭ

ϭϵϴϱϬϵ

ϭϵϴϮϬϳ

ϭϵϳϵϬϱ

ϭϵϳϯϬϭ

Ϭ
ϭϵϳϲϬϯ

Ͳϰ͘Ϭ

ϮϬϬϳϭϭ

ϮϬϬϰϬϵ

ϮϬϬϭϬϳ

ϭϵϵϴϬϱ

ĂƚĞ

ϭϵϵϱϬϯ

ϭϵϵϮϬϭ

ϭϵϴϴϭϭ

ϭϵϴϱϬϵ

ϭϵϴϮϬϳ

ϭϵϳϵϬϱ

ϭϵϳϲϬϯ

Ϭ
ϭϵϳϯϬϭ

ƐĐŽƌĞ

^ƚŽĐŬŝůůŝƋƵŝĚŝƚǇŝŶŶŽǀĂƚŝŽŶƐ
ϲ͘Ϭ
ϱ͘Ϭ
ϰ͘Ϭ
ϯ͘Ϭ
Ϯ͘Ϭ
ϭ͘Ϭ
Ϭ͘Ϭ
Ͳϭ͘Ϭ
ͲϮ͘Ϭ
Ͳϯ͘Ϭ
Ͳϰ͘Ϭ

Fig. 4.
Probability of high illiquidity stress regime estimated from a regime-switching model.
For details on the regime-switching model refer to Table 3. We use the model to estimate the probability of being in regime 2 interpreted
as the high illiquidity stress regime. NBER recession dates are shown.

WƌŽďĂďŝůŝƚǇŽĨŚŝŐŚŝůůŝƋƵŝĚŝƚǇƐƚƌĞƐƐƌĞŐŝŵĞ
ϭ

Ϭ͘ϲ

Ϭ͘ϰ

Ϭ͘Ϯ

Ϭ
ϭϵϳϯϬϭ
ϭϵϳϰϬϭ
ϭϵϳϱϬϭ
ϭϵϳϲϬϭ
ϭϵϳϳϬϭ
ϭϵϳϴϬϭ
ϭϵϳϵϬϭ
ϭϵϴϬϬϭ
ϭϵϴϭϬϭ
ϭϵϴϮϬϭ
ϭϵϴϯϬϭ
ϭϵϴϰϬϭ
ϭϵϴϱϬϭ
ϭϵϴϲϬϭ
ϭϵϴϳϬϭ
ϭϵϴϴϬϭ
ϭϵϴϵϬϭ
ϭϵϵϬϬϭ
ϭϵϵϭϬϭ
ϭϵϵϮϬϭ
ϭϵϵϯϬϭ
ϭϵϵϰϬϭ
ϭϵϵϱϬϭ
ϭϵϵϲϬϭ
ϭϵϵϳϬϭ
ϭϵϵϴϬϭ
ϭϵϵϵϬϭ
ϮϬϬϬϬϭ
ϮϬϬϭϬϭ
ϮϬϬϮϬϭ
ϮϬϬϯϬϭ
ϮϬϬϰϬϭ
ϮϬϬϱϬϭ
ϮϬϬϲϬϭ
ϮϬϬϳϬϭ

WƌŽďĂďŝůŝƚǇ

Ϭ͘ϴ

ĂƚĞ
Wƌ;,ŝŐŚŝůůŝƋͿ

EZƌĞĐĞƐƐŝŽŶ

72

Fig. 5.
Regime-switching model - Out-of-sample predictions during the financial crisis year 2008 and year
2009
This figure presents the regression of the actual bond returns against the predicted bond returns for the period 2008–2009. Actual
returns are obtained from data on iShares investment-grade and high-yield bond index. The returns used are in excess of the 30-day
T-bill return. To predict bond returns for 2008 and 2009, we proceed as follows: First, we predict the probability of regime 2 as explained
in Table 6, Panel A. Next, we weight the prediction of bond returns itself for 2008–2009 from the regime-switching model of Table 3 by
the respective regime probabilities to obtain the predicted bond returns (in excess of the 30-day T-bill return).

$FWXDOERQGUHWXUQVYVSUHGLFWHGERQGUHWXUQV


,QYHVWPHQWJUDGH\HDUV

$FWXDO%RQGUHWXUQV ESV


 



506( GHJUHHOLQH  
506( UHJUHVVLRQ  



 



  







$FWXDO 3UHGLFWHG
W6WDW   







5VTXDUHG 









5HJLPHVZLWFKLQJPRGHOSUHGLFWLRQ ESV



'DWDVRXUFH5HJLPHVZLWFKLQJPRGHO7DEOH

$FWXDOERQGUHWXUQV ESV
 

  

$FWXDOERQGUHWXUQVYVSUHGLFWHGERQGUHWXUQV
-XQNJUDGH\HDUV



506( GHJUHHOLQH  
506( UHJUHVVLRQ  








 




 











$FWXDO 3UHGLFWHG
W6WDW   
5VTXDUHG 
















5HJLPHVZLWFKLQJPRGHOSUHGLFWLRQ ESV

'DWDVRXUFH5HJLPHVZLWFKLQJPRGHO7DEOH

73

Fig. 6.
Probability of high illiquidity stress regime estimated from a regime-switching model of stock
returns
For details on the regime switching model, refer to Table 7. We use the model to estimate the probability of being in regime 2 interpreted
as the high illiquidity stress regime. NBER recession dates are shown.

WƌŽďĂďŝůŝƚǇŽĨŚŝŐŚŝůůŝƋƵŝĚŝƚǇƐƚƌĞƐƐƌĞŐŝŵĞ;ƵƐŝŶŐƐƚŽĐŬƌĞƚƵƌŶƐͿ
ϭ

Ϭ͘ϲ

Ϭ͘ϰ

Ϭ͘Ϯ

Ϭ
ϭϵϳϯϬϭ
ϭϵϳϰϬϭ
ϭϵϳϱϬϭ
ϭϵϳϲϬϭ
ϭϵϳϳϬϭ
ϭϵϳϴϬϭ
ϭϵϳϵϬϭ
ϭϵϴϬϬϭ
ϭϵϴϭϬϭ
ϭϵϴϮϬϭ
ϭϵϴϯϬϭ
ϭϵϴϰϬϭ
ϭϵϴϱϬϭ
ϭϵϴϲϬϭ
ϭϵϴϳϬϭ
ϭϵϴϴϬϭ
ϭϵϴϵϬϭ
ϭϵϵϬϬϭ
ϭϵϵϭϬϭ
ϭϵϵϮϬϭ
ϭϵϵϯϬϭ
ϭϵϵϰϬϭ
ϭϵϵϱϬϭ
ϭϵϵϲϬϭ
ϭϵϵϳϬϭ
ϭϵϵϴϬϭ
ϭϵϵϵϬϭ
ϮϬϬϬϬϭ
ϮϬϬϭϬϭ
ϮϬϬϮϬϭ
ϮϬϬϯϬϭ
ϮϬϬϰϬϭ
ϮϬϬϱϬϭ
ϮϬϬϲϬϭ
ϮϬϬϳϬϭ

WƌŽďĂďŝůŝƚǇ

Ϭ͘ϴ

ĂƚĞ

Wƌ;,ŝŐŚŝůůŝƋͿ

74

EZƌĞĐĞƐƐŝŽŶ

