                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      THE IMPACT OF STATE TAX SUBSIDIES FOR PRIVATE LONG-TERM CARE
           INSURANCE ON COVERAGE AND MEDICAID EXPENDITURES

                                          Gopi Shah Goda

                                        Working Paper 16406
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16406


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2010




I am extremely grateful to David Cutler and Amy Finkelstein for their guidance and support. I would
also like to thank Michael Boskin, Jeffrey Brown, Avi Ebenstein, Richard Frank, David Grabowski,
Damon Jones, Colleen Manchester, Kevin Mumford, Edward Norton, Anita Alves Pena, Jeffrey Rhoades,
John Shoven, David Stevenson, Kathy Swartz, seminar participants at Harvard University and Stanford
University, and participants at the Robert Wood Johnson Scholars in Health Policy Research Annual
Meeting for helpful comments and discussion. Comments from the editor and two anonymous referees
greatly improved the paper. All remaining errors are my own. Financial support from the Robert
Wood Johnson Foundation is gratefully acknowledged. This paper previously circulated with the
title "Do Tax Subsidies for Private Insurance Reduce Medicaid Costs? Evidence from the Market
for Long-Term Care Insurance" The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Gopi Shah Goda. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
The Impact of State Tax Subsidies for Private Long-Term Care Insurance on Coverage and
Medicaid Expenditures
Gopi Shah Goda
NBER Working Paper No. 16406
September 2010
JEL No. G22,H31,H51,H71,H75,I11,I18,I38,J14

                                               ABSTRACT

In spite of the large expected costs of needing long-term care, only 10-12 percent of the elderly population
has private insurance coverage. Medicaid, which provides means-tested public assistance and pays
for almost half of long-term care costs, spends more than $100 billion annually on long-term care.
,n this paper, I exploit variation in the adoption and generosity of state tax subsidies for private long-term
care insurance to determine whether tax subsidies increase private coverage and reduce Medicaid's
costs for long-term care. The results indicate that the average tax subsidy raises coverage rates by
2.7 percentage points, or 28 percent. However, the response is concentrated among high income and
asset-rich individuals, populations with low probabilities of relying on Medicaid. Simulations suggest
each dollar of state tax expenditure produces approximately $0.84 in Medicaid savings, over half of
which funnels to the federal government.


Gopi Shah Goda
Stanford University
SIEPR
366 Galvez St.
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
gopi@stanford.edu
1       Introduction

In 2007, the United States spent $2.2 trillion on health care, equivalent to a 16.2 percent and ever-

growing share of GDP. The publicly-financed portion of this spending includes not only amounts

spent by Medicare and Medicaid ($431.2 billion and $329.4 billion, respectively) but also the revenue

loss that stems from the exclusion of employer-sponsored health insurance from individual income.

This loss, currently the single largest tax expenditure, amounted to $145 billion in 2007.1

        Economists have studied several aspects of the costs and benefits of providing these tax

incentives, including their ability to reduce the number of uninsured, the elasticity of firms offering

health insurance to their workers, insurance-induced “job lock,” and distributional impacts, among

others. The results of these studies are important in assessing implications of removing or expanding

subsidies for health insurance. In this paper, I examine the effect of tax incentives for private long-

term care insurance on rates of insurance coverage and Medicaid expenditures for long-term care.

        The current financing of long-term care expenditures in the U.S. differs from the rest of health

care spending. Only 10-12 percent of the elderly population currently has private long-term care

insurance and Medicaid pays for almost half of long-term care costs. By contrast, private insurance

coverage is prevalent for acute health care and Medicaid pays only 15 percent of health care

expenditures as a whole (NHA, 2010). The low coverage rate of private long-term care insurance

is in spite of the substantial probability of needing assistance with activities of daily living and the

high costs of long-term care services if care is needed.

        Unlike private health insurance which has historically been heavily subsidized by the government

through tax subsidies, private long-term care insurance did not enjoy tax preferences prior to the

early 1990s. A limited federal subsidy was offered beginning in 1997, and in recent years, several

states passed tax subsidy initiatives: while only three states had tax incentives for private long-term

care insurance in 1996, by 2008, twenty-four states and the District of Columbia had adopted a tax

subsidy for long-term care insurance premiums (see Figure 2). Furthermore, there is continuing

interest at both the state and federal level to provide additional tax subsidies for private insurance.
    1
    Joint Committee on Taxation, Tax Expenditures for Health Care (JCX-66-08), July 30, 2008, available at
http://www.jct.gov. The figure cited does not include payroll tax revenue losses from the exclusion of employer-
sponsored health insurance.




                                                       1
   The push towards providing tax subsidies for private long-term care insurance arose from a desire

among policymakers to shift long-term care costs away from Medicaid. However, the efficiency

considerations of such policies depend not only on net government spending (which influences the

excess cost of raising government revenue through income taxation) but also on the effects of

tax subsidies on private insurance coverage. Higher levels of private insurance coverage implies a

large reduction in out-of-pocket expenditure risk, and may lead to greater access, higher quality,

lower reliance on informal caregiving, and a reduction in adverse selection. Even if government

expenditures for long-term care remain unchanged, financing long-term care through tax subsidies

rather than through Medicaid could still improve efficiency if Medicaid’s eligibility requirements

distort savings and work decisions or overall nursing home quality is lower because Medicaid pays

facilities less than market rates.

   This paper focuses on two specific questions related to the implementation of tax subsidies for

private long-term care insurance. The first is, how do tax subsidies affect rates of private long-term

care insurance coverage? The variation in the adoption and generosity of tax subsidy programs

across states and over time provides an ideal setting to examine this question. Figure 1 shows long-

term care insurance coverage rates in the nationally-representative Health and Retirement Study

(HRS) for individuals in states that never implemented a tax incentive (control states) and in states

that implemented a tax subsidy for long-term care insurance between 1998 and 2001 (accounting

for the majority of observations in treatment states). The figure shows that while coverage rates

in the control and treatment states were similar prior to implementation of the tax subsidies, long-

term care insurance coverage increased significantly in treatment states while remaining almost

flat in control states. The growth in coverage is highly correlated with the introduction of tax

incentive programs. Controlling for observable differences across states and time, I find that tax

incentives are effective in inducing purchase of private long-term care insurance: implementation

of the average tax subsidy increases purchase rates by 2.7 percentage points, or approximately 28

percent.

   The second question that this study addresses is whether tax subsidies for private long-term

care insurance are expected to reduce net government expenditures. I find that the highest response

to the tax incentives comes from individuals who are asset rich and have high income, groups who

are less likely to rely on Medicaid for their long-term care. Therefore, despite the relatively large

                                                  2
response to the tax subsidies, simulations that take into account that the subsidy-induced response

in insurance coverage varies with wealth suggest that tax incentives are unlikely to substantially

reduce government net expenditures. For each dollar of state tax expenditure, Medicaid saves

approximately $0.84 in long-term care expenses, more than half of which is funneled to the federal

government which jointly funds Medicaid. While the policy is net savings for the middle of the

wealth distribution, those savings are overwhelmed by substantial net costs at the high end. The

variability in the net cost across the wealth distribution highlights the fact that estimating the

response to tax subsidies differentially by factors that determine Medicaid eligibility can lead to

conclusions opposite from those drawn using estimates of average responsiveness, a key contribution

of this paper.

   The variation in the after-tax price caused by the implementation of tax subsidies also allows me

to estimate the responsiveness of private long-term care insurance purchase to the after-tax price, of

which there is little empirical evidence. I employ a simulated instrumental variables (IV) approach

where the instrument for the after-tax price is equal to the average after-tax price for a nationally

representative sample of 5,000 individuals in each state and year by educational attainment. This

approach isolates variation in the after-tax price arising from the tax subsidy and eliminates bias

stemming from potential correlation between one’s marginal tax rate and their demand for long-

term care insurance. The panel nature of the HRS also allows me to perform estimation using

individual fixed effects. My most-preferred estimate of the price elasticity with respect to the after-

tax price is -3.3, significantly more elastic than estimates in the literature for health insurance.

This estimate is identified solely by the variation in the after-tax price from changes in state tax

incentive programs.

   The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides additional background on the

market for long-term care insurance and tax preferences for private insurance. Section 3 describes

the data and the estimation strategy, and the results of the empirical analysis are presented in

Section 4. Section 5 describes the results of simulating the impact of tax subsidies on Medicaid

long-term care expenditures and Section 6 concludes.




                                                  3
2       Background and Related Literature

2.1       The market for private long-term care insurance

The cost of long-term care expenditures, providing services to those with mental or physical

impairments who cannot perform activities of daily living, amounted to $203 billion (or 8.7 percent

of total health care expenditures) for all ages in 2008 (NHA, 2010) and is expected to grow

substantially due to the aging of the population (CBO, 2004).2 Long-term care represents a large

financial risk for the elderly: 55 percent of individuals 85 and older experience some degree of

chronic physical impairment (CBO 2004). In addition, the costs of long-term care services can

be substantial. In 2009, the national average annual cost of nursing home care was $75,190 for a

semi-private room. Home health aides charge an average hourly rate of $19; four hours of home

health aide services daily would cost approximately $27,740 per year (Genworth, 2010).

        Medicaid, in addition to being the provider of health care for individuals with limited incomes

and assets, provides long-term care services to those who meet certain income and asset eligibility

criteria.3 Medicare, the federal program which provides health insurance to individuals over age

65, covers only limited stays in skilled nursing facilities following an acute health event, and some

home health care for these eligible individuals. The next largest source of long-term care financing

after government sources is out-of-pocket payments (21 percent in 2008). Private insurance pays

for a relatively small share of nursing home and home health care expenses, accounting for less

than 8 percent of expenditures in 2008 (NHA, 2010).

        Norton (2000) and Brown and Finkelstein (2009) provide excellent reviews of the possible

reasons for a thin insurance market. Demand-side reasons include difficulty in understanding long-

term catastrophic risks and misconceptions about who pays for long-term care. Eighty-three percent

of non-buyers cite cost as an important or very important reason they do not purchase private

long-term care insurance (AHIP, 2007). It has also been shown that the presence of Medicaid may

explain crowd out of private insurance purchase for at least two-thirds of the wealth distribution

(Brown and Finkelstein 2008, Brown, Coe and Finkelstein 2007).
    2
     These and earlier figures refer to the costs of formal paid care provided in nursing homes and by home health
care agencies provided in NHA (2010). The cost of providing informal care in terms of the market wage for these
services is roughly of the same order of magnitude (Arno et al., 1999).
   3
     The eligibility criteria for Medicaid long-term care services differ from state to state but the criteria are within
federally set guidelines.



                                                           4
       Supply-side reasons for the lack of private long-term care insurance coverage include high

administrative costs.       The majority of long-term care insurance policies are sold through the

individual market.4       Brown and Finkelstein (2007) show that only approximately 49 cents of

each dollar of premiums is paid out in benefits, lower than those estimated for other types of

insurance.5 These high loading factors provide evidence for market failures such as high transaction

costs, imperfect competition, asymmetric information, or long-term dynamic contracting problems

(Brown and Finkelstein, 2007).


2.2      Tax preferences for private long-term care insurance

Figure 2 shows the states which offered a tax subsidy for private long-term care insurance during

the sample period and their relative generosity as a percentage of annual premium costs.6 The

subsidies take the form of tax deductions or tax credits as described in more detail in Appendix

A. Appendix B describes the methods used to obtain the value of each subsidy as a percentage of

premium.

       Federal legislation in the 1996 Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA)

enacted a tax preference for long-term care insurance in the federal tax code by designating that

premiums for long-term care insurance could be counted toward the federal tax deduction for

unreimbursed medical expenses. Unreimbursed medical expenses, however, must be over 7.5 percent

of adjusted gross income (AGI) to be granted a tax deduction, and this deduction is only available

to households who itemize deductions on their federal tax return. These restrictions imply that a

relatively small set of individuals are eligible for this tax subsidy.

       Many prior analyses of tax subsidies for private long-term care insurance lack empirical evidence

(e.g. Wiener et al. (1994), Cohen et al. (1994), Cohen and Weinrobe (2000), Wiener et al. (2000)).

These studies and more recent empirical work (Courtemanche and He 2009, Johnson et al. 2007,

Stevenson et al. 2009) do not examine a key factor in determining the impact of higher rates of
   4
     Group policies are increasingly offered by employers and represent a growing segment of the market. According to
the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, 12 percent of workers in private industry had access to long-term care insurance
through their employer in 2006.
   5
     Mitchell et al. (1999) estimate loads of 15-25 cents per dollar for life annuities and Newhouse (2004) estimates
loads are 6-10 cents for group health insurance and 25-40 cents for individual health insurance.
   6
     States that implicitly offer the same subsidy at the state level because the tax base for the state return is the
same as the federal return described in the following paragraph are not coded as having a tax subsidy in Figure 2 or
subsequent analyses.



                                                          5
long-term care insurance on Medicaid expenditures: namely, that the impact on Medicaid depends

crucially on the likelihood of those who respond to the tax incentives to otherwise become eligible

for long-term care through Medicaid.


3       Data and Estimation Strategy

3.1       Data source and sample

The data used in this paper comes from the Health and Retirement Study (HRS), sponsored by

the National Institute on Aging. The HRS began as a biannual panel study on respondents age

51-61 in 1992 (born in 1931-1941) and their spouses. A separate sample, denoted as Asset and

Health Dynamics among the Oldest Old (AHEAD) and consisting of cohorts born before 1923, was

surveyed in alternate years until these samples were merged in 1998. At this time, two more samples

were added: the War Baby (WB) sample, made up of those born from 1942 through 1947, and the

Children of the Depression Age (CODA) sample, containing cohorts born from 1924 through 1930

(i.e. the missing birth cohorts between the HRS and AHEAD samples). All samples were merged

for the purposes of this study. The respondents and their spouses were interviewed every two years,

and the latest available survey responses comprising the eighth wave of the survey were taken in

2006. The survey contains a large amount of information regarding demographics, health status,

family structure, housing, work history and current employment, disability, retirement plans, net

worth, income, and insurance coverage.

        Similar to the approaches used in Brown, Coe and Finkelstein (2007) and Courtemanche and

He (2009), the analysis is limited to individuals aged 50-69, the prime buying age for long-term

care insurance.7 Only Waves 3-8 (sampled between 1996-2006) of the HRS are used in the analysis

due to ambiguous question wording in the first two waves of the survey.8 The sample also excludes

self-employed respondents whose treatment of health insurance premiums differ. Restricted access

was obtained to match the HRS with state identifiers that are not part of the publicly available

dataset. In addition, this dataset was augmented with data describing characteristics of state tax

incentives for long-term care insurance which were collected from historical state tax return forms
    7
     In a survey of buyers described in AHIP (2007), over 75 percent of buyers are in this age group. The average age
of buyers of long-term care insurance from this survey is 61.
   8
     See appendix in Finkelstein and McGarry (2006) for a complete discussion.



                                                         6
for all states from 1995 onwards. State level data on nursing facility occupancy rates, nursing

home beds per 1,000 people age 65 and over, percent of state population age 65 and over, average

nursing home private pay and Medicaid rates, and Medicaid eligibility data were merged from

various sources.9 The final sample includes 52,992 observations on 15,822 unique individuals. The

dependent variable in the regression analyses that follow is a binary variable indicating coverage

by private long-term care insurance.

       In each wave of the survey, approximately 10 percent of the respondents have private long-term

care insurance. Table 1 displays characteristics of the sample by long-term care insurance coverage

status. The table highlights the fact that long-term care insurance coverage is associated with more

assets, higher income, and higher levels of education. There is no large difference in age or gender

by coverage status. Approximately 30 percent of the observations were sampled in a state and year

where a tax incentive for long-term care insurance was available, with a higher percentage living

in a state with a deduction than a credit.

       The level of private long-term care insurance coverage varies significantly across different observ-

able characteristics. Table 2 summarizes coverage rates across subsamples before implementation

of any tax incentives, and the average subsidy levels available to these different groups. In general,

due to the fact that the likelihood of coverage is highly correlated with income and the subsidies

tend to be more valuable to high-income individuals, the highest subsidies are offered to populations

with relatively high pre-subsidy coverage rates.


3.2      Identification strategy

The first approach taken in this paper is to formalize the relationship highlighted in Figure 1 to

determine whether the presence of a tax incentive led to a higher probability of private long-term

care insurance coverage controlling for observable individual-level and state-level characteristics.

Specifically, I estimate the equation:
   9
    Nursing facility occupancy rates, beds data, and demographic data were obtained from AARP’s Across the States
reports, various years. Nursing home private pay rates were available from 2002-2007 from MetLife Nursing Home
Surveys, various years. A missing data binary variable for years prior to 2002 is also included. Medicaid rates for
1996-2004 and Medicaid eligibility data were generously provided by David Grabowski. Further discussion regarding
these data can be found in Grabowski et al. (2004) and Grabowski and Gruber (2007) and summary statistics of
these data are available upon request.




                                                        7
                           LT CIi = γSU BSIDYst + βXi + ωt + σs + µi + εist                                       (1)

       The dependent variable LT CIi is equal to one if individual i who lives in state s has private long-

term care insurance in year t. The variable SU BSIDYst is a binary variable that indicates whether

state s has a subsidy at time t. Xi is a vector of individual- and state-level characteristics, including

controls for education, gender, marital status, age, race, income, assets, number of children,

retirement status and health status, and the state-level characteristics mentioned previously. This

vector also includes a binary variable that indicates whether the individual is eligible to receive

a federal subsidy under HIPAA.10 Year fixed effects ωt control for general trends in private

long-term care insurance coverage. State fixed effects σs control for unobservable time-invariant

state characteristics such as state nursing home quality and costs of long-term care, presence of

Partnership insurance policies, and residents’ taste for insurance that may vary systematically. The

panel nature of the dataset also allows estimation using individual fixed effects to estimate within-

person effects of tax subsidies on insurance coverage. Specifications which include individual fixed

effects, denoted by µi , omit time-invariant individual controls such as race, gender, and education.

Standard errors are clustered at the state level to account for potential correlation of the error

terms within states.

       The estimate of γ in Equation 1 represents the effect the presence of a tax subsidy had

on long-term care insurance coverage. Estimation in specifications with state fixed effects only

utilizes variation within states over time in tax incentive programs. The identifying assumption

for these models is therefore the absence of state-specific time trends in coverage rates correlated

with SU BSIDY that would have caused trends in private long-term care insurance coverage to

differ without implementation of the tax subsidy. With the addition of individual fixed effects,

identification comes only from within-person changes in SU BSIDY .

       The second approach taken is to exploit differences in the value of the tax subsidy. The variable

T AXP RICE denotes the after-tax price of $1 of private long-term care insurance in terms of

foregone consumption.11 I estimate the equation:
  10
    This binary variable is equal to 1 for individuals who itemize their medical expenses in years 1997 onward.
  11
    Details regarding the calculation of the state marginal tax rate and the after-tax price of private long-term care
insurance can be found in Appendix B.



                                                          8
                      LT CIi = δT AXP RICEist + βXi + ωt + σs + µi + νist                        (2)

   This approach differs from the method used in Equation 1 because it treats tax incentives that

provide a larger value differently from tax incentives that do not heavily subsidize premiums. The

variable T AXP RICE varies by state and year with the implementation of the tax subsidy. It also

varies at the individual level, in many cases with the individual’s marginal tax rate. Running OLS

on Equation 2 implies that the estimate of δ is identified off of (1) changes in tax incentives for

long-term care insurance, and (2) non-linearities in the state’s tax schedule, after controlling for

the individual’s state of residence, income, and other covariates. The concern in the OLS estimate

is that the control variables may not completely account for potential correlation between marginal

tax rates and individual demand for insurance. The resulting bias could go in either direction. For

instance, there may be a negative correlation between T AXP RICE and unobservable individual

components of private long-term care insurance demand if insurance is a normal good and the effect

of income is not properly accounted for by X. A positive correlation could arise if individuals who

value insurance are also taking other actions to reduce their marginal tax rate.

   Therefore, I also instrument for T AXP RICE with a set of simulated instruments where

the instrument in each state and year is equal to the average after-tax price for a nationally

representative sample of 5,000 individuals, similar to the approach developed in Currie and Gruber

(1996). Because the after-tax price is calculated for the same set of individuals, the only variation

in the instrument comes from changes in tax subsidies for long-term care insurance. To allow the

value of the subsidy to change differentially for individuals in different socioeconomic groups, the

instrument is averaged separately for low education (high school or less) and high education (some

college or more) groups. The IV estimates of δ are therefore identified by changes in the after-tax

price arising from the tax subsidies and not contaminated by potential unobserved factors correlated

with the individual’s marginal tax rate and insurance purchase decisions. This methodology follows

several other studies in the health insurance literature that use an IV strategy to address potential

correlation between tax rates and insurance purchase (e.g. Royalty (2000), Finkelstein (2002),

Gruber and Lettau (2004)). The average simulated after-tax price is a valid instrument as it is




                                                 9
highly correlated with T AXP RICE, and has no direct bearing on an individual’s long-term care

insurance purchase decision.


4        Results and Interpretation

4.1        Main results: The effect of tax incentives on long-term care insurance coverage

Figure 1 provided suggestive evidence that tax incentives had a significant causal effect on the

purchase of private long-term care insurance, but did not control for other individual or state

characteristics that may have been changing over time. The results of the regression described by

Equation 1 are summarized in Table 3 and confirm that the tax incentives had a significant impact

on private long-term care insurance coverage rates after controlling for other factors. Column 1

includes only SU BSIDY . Column 2 adds in state and year fixed effects, and Column 3 adds all

control variables. Column 4 represents the fully-specified model, including all time-varying control

variables and individual fixed effects. The results in Column 4 indicate that the presence of a tax

incentive for long-term care insurance increased the probability that an individual will be covered

by 2.7 percentage points. This coefficient is precisely estimated and statistically significant at the 1

percent level. At the pre-subsidy coverage rate of 9.5 percent, the implementation of a tax subsidy

is associated with a 28 percent increase in the probability of coverage.

         Table 4 displays the OLS and IV estimates of δ, the coefficient on the after-tax price of private

long-term care insurance in Equation 2. As in Table 3, the first set of results in each row contains

no other controls; the second set adds state and year fixed effects; the third set adds control

variables; and the final set includes individual fixed effects. The IV estimates of the coefficient

of T AXP RICE are significantly different from zero and stable across specifications. First-stage

regression results confirm the power of the simulated after-tax price in predicting the actual after-

tax price an individual faces. The hypothesis that the instrument should be excluded from the first

stage can be strongly rejected with F-statistics in the thousands.12 The OLS estimates are largely

identified off of the non-linearities in the tax schedule which may produce bias if marginal tax rates

are correlated with long-term care insurance coverage after controlling for observable factors. The

IV estimates are more negative than the OLS estimates, suggesting that there are unobservable
    12
         The complete first-stage results are not reported but available upon request.



                                                             10
factors that are positively correlated with private long-term care insurance coverage that are also

positively correlated with the after-tax price after controlling for X, biasing the OLS estimate of δ

upward. There are several candidates for these unobservable factors. For example, bequest motives

are highly predictive of private long-term care insurance purchase because spending down one’s

wealth to qualify for Medicaid benefits eliminates the possibility of leaving an estate for one’s heirs.

A person with a large bequest motive may be taking advantage of tax-deferred or tax-free savings

vehicles, and consequently, after controlling for income, would have a lower marginal tax rate and

a higher after-tax price. Similarly, an individual who is financially savvy and familiar with the tax

code (or who has access to a paid tax preparer) may be more likely to respond to long-term care

insurance tax incentives and also more likely to take advantages of other tax incentives that reduce

her marginal tax rate.

    Because of the potential bias arising from identification off of non-linearities (or changes in

non-linearities) in the tax schedule and contamination from measurement error in T AXP RICE,

the estimate in Panel B, Column 4 of Table 4 represents my preferred estimate of the response

in coverage to changes in the after-tax price from tax incentives for long-term care insurance. An

estimated coefficient of -0.315 means that a 10 percent decrease in the after-tax price of long-term

care insurance increases the probability of coverage by 3.15 percentage points. The implied price

elasticity with respect to the after-tax price is simply -0.315/0.0949 = -3.32.

    It is important to note that the response that I estimate may be attributed to changes in the

after-tax price of long-term care insurance when the true response was at least partially due to

informational campaigns or media coverage correlated with implementation of the tax incentives,

increased salience of long-term care costs and risks, or the perception of government endorsement.

With the data available, it is difficult to definitively determine the extent to which information

drove the observed response or the precise mechanism through which this effect operated. Some

evidence suggests that the response to tax subsidies is nonlinear in the amount of the subsidy,

which may reflect informational effects.13 Therefore, caution should be taken when applying the

price elasticities estimated here more generally.
  13
     The evidence referred to includes results that show that states with credits or large subsidies have larger than
proportional responses to states with deductions or small subsidies. These results are not reported, but are available
upon request from the author.




                                                         11
4.2     Relationship to other estimates

Few studies have provided estimates of the price elasticity of long-term care insurance. Cramer

and Jensen (2006) estimate logit models of demand as a function of price and find elasticities in

the -0.23 to -0.87 range. However, their results are driven by the variation in premiums by age

rather than a source of exogenous variation. Johnson et al. (2007) estimate hazard models of time

to purchase long-term care insurance as a function of the net benefit that individuals expect to

derive from the policy and estimate a price elasticity of demand of -0.75. Neither estimate accounts

for the potential bias created by unobservable components of individual demand.

      Courtemanche and He (2009) study the change in the federal tax treatment of long-term care

insurance premiums and estimate an elasticity of -3.9, within the range of IV estimates produced

here. However, the approach taken in this study relies on fewer assumptions relating to the

exogeneity of treatment status. The validity of Courtemanche and He (2009)’s approach depends

on the persistence of itemizing status and medical expenses and the assumption that the decision

to file taxes and itemize medical expenses is exogenous to long-term care insurance purchase.

Moreover, many of the state initiatives are more broadly defined, applying to a larger segment

of the population than the federal incentive. Courtemanche and He (2009) find that 14 percent

of people in their sample itemized medical expenses and are likely to be affected by the federal

tax incentive. It is uncertain, therefore, whether their results can be generalized to the elderly

population.

      The estimated price elasticity is larger in magnitude than those generally found for health

insurance. Estimates of price elasticities for health insurance are between 0 and -3, with the bulk

between -0.5 and -1.14 However, each elasticity estimate is valid only for a local range of coverage

rates, and the much higher baseline ownership rates for health insurance (65-70 percent) make

these values difficult to compare. The high estimated price elasticity for long-term care insurance

is consistent with survey responses that indicate cost as a large factor in purchasing private coverage.
   14
      One strand of literature examines the elasticity of insurance coverage (Gruber and Poterba (1994), Marquis and
Long (1995), Chernew, Frick and McLaughlin (1997), Auerbach and Ohri (2006)). Because the primary channel
of health insurance coverage is through the employer, several studies also examine the price elasticity of firms
offering insurance (Feldman et al. (1997), Marquis and Long (2001), Chernew and Leibowitz (1992), Royalty (2000),
Finkelstein (2002), Gruber and Lettau (2004)).




                                                        12
4.3     Effects on the intensive margin

Because tax subsidies reduce the after-tax price of long-term care insurance, it is possible that

more generous policies were purchased as a result. To examine the effect on the intensive margin, I

estimate analogs of Equation 1 with indicators of two optional policy features on the left-hand side

for the whole sample of respondents: whether the policy contains a rider for inflation protection

that prevents benefits from eroding over time, and whether the policy covers both nursing home

care and home care, providing covered individuals with more flexibility to meet their long-term

care needs. The results are summarized in Table 5. The estimates indicate that tax incentives

increased the probability that individuals had inflation-protected coverage and coverage of both

nursing home and home care by 1.2 and 2.5 percentage points relative to a base of 3.9 and 7.1

percent respectively. Tax incentives therefore appear to have affected long-term care insurance

coverage decisions both at the extensive and intensive margin.

      The higher rates of coverage by both of these optional benefits represents an increase in the

comprehensiveness of coverage provided by private insurance contracts. In particular, the lack of

inflation protection provided by basic policies leave many exposed to considerable out-of-pocket

risk and at greater risk of relying on Medicaid. The associated increase in inflation-protected

policies therefore represents a meaningful increase in the insurance value of private long-term care

insurance.


4.4     Heterogeneity in response to tax subsidies and price elasticities

As was shown in Table 2, different subsamples of the population had varying degrees of pre-subsidy

coverage of private long-term care insurance, and were also treated with different levels of subsidy

because of the way the tax subsides were structured. Courtemanche and He (2009)’s identification

strategy in their study of the federal tax incentive for private long-term care insurance prevents them

from examining how responsiveness varies across observable characteristics due to lack of variation

among the treatment group. As will be shown in Section 5, this omission is important because

the variation in response across factors that determine Medicaid eligibility is a key driver of the

impact on Medicaid costs. By contrast, the numerous and varied state tax initiatives provide a rich

setting to examine how the response varies for different subpopulations. I therefore estimate fully-



                                                  13
interacted versions of Equations 1 and 2 to determine whether the response to tax incentives or the

price elasticity varies across observable characteristics such as income, wealth, education, retirement

status, marital status, gender, age, self-reported health status, and limitations in activities of daily

living (ADLs).

      There is substantial heterogeneity in the estimated effect of tax subsidies on the probability

of private long-term care insurance across many of these different observable characteristics, as

summarized in Table 6.15 The most striking fact is that the response to tax incentives is significantly

larger among individuals with high income and a large amount of assets. The estimated coefficients

change in sign and are not statistically significant for the low income and low asset subsamples.

Similar effects are present when the sample is cut by education status. Because of the strong

correlation between income, assets, and education, it is difficult to disentangle the effects of these

three characteristics separately. However, the evidence indicates that while state tax incentives do

induce coverage of private long-term care insurance, the effect is seen mainly among groups with

high income, a large amount of assets, and those who are more highly educated.

      The results in Table 6 show that the response varies for particular groups; however it is difficult

to determine whether this heterogeneity is simply because the value of the subsidy is greater for

these groups or whether the behavioral response to a given level of subsidy differs. This question is

addressed by estimating fully-interacted versions of Equation 2 where the after-tax price replaces

the binary subsidy variable and is instrumented with the simulated instruments described earlier.

      The results of these regressions are displayed in Table 7. In Table 7, the same groups that show a

strong response to tax subsidies (i.e., populations with high levels of education, income and wealth)

exhibit price elasticities that are significantly larger in magnitude. Furthermore, groups with no

detectable response have implied elasticities that are statistically insignificant and often of the wrong

sign. These results suggest that high income and wealth groups have a higher level of behavioral

response for a given level of subsidy and that raising the subsidy level among low income and wealth

groups is unlikely to have a significant impact on private long-term care insurance coverage. This

finding is consistent with Brown and Finkelstein (2008) who suggest that tax subsidies that are

possible given the range of marginal tax rates in the U.S. are not large enough to overcome large

implicit tax rates on private insurance premiums for low-wealth households.
 15
      The results shown in Table 6 are from specifications analogous to Columns (3) and (4) in Table 3


                                                         14
4.5      Characteristics of tax-induced insurance purchasers

In this section I explore the characteristics of the individuals induced to purchase private insurance

coverage (the marginal purchasers) relative to the general population or the total population of

long-term care insurance purchasers. In standard IV terminology, when the presence of a tax

subsidy is an exogenous determinant of insurance purchase, the tax-induced purchasers are known

as ‘compliers’ and estimates of the average characteristics of this population can be obtained

following the approach proposed by Abadie (2002) and illustrated by Autor and Houseman (2005).16

Specifically, the average of characteristic X for tax-induced purchasers of insurance is denoted by

κ(X) and calculated as follows:

             E[X|LT CI = 1, S = 1] · E[LT CI|S = 1] − E[X|LT CI = 1, S = 0] · E[LT CI|S = 0]
 κ(X) =                                                                                      (3)
                                     E[LT CI|S = 1] − E[LT CI|S = 0]

where S represents the presense of a tax subsidy and LT CI denotes long-term care insurance

coverage.

       The results of estimating the average value of selected characteristics for tax-induced insurance

purchasers using Equation 3 are given in Table 8. Table 8 also includes the averages of the same

selected characteristics for the general population, the population of long-term care insurance

purchasers, and differences between these groups and the marginal purchasers.17                     The results

indicate that those induced to purchase long-term care insurance by the tax subsidy have higher

income and assets, are more likely to be married, have higher levels of education, and are more

likely to be white than the general population as well as the population of long-term care insurance

purchasers as a whole. Tax-induced purchasers are less likely to report being in poor health status

than the general population, but are of similar health status as those who hold long-term care

insurance. The three groups do not vary significantly in age, gender, number of children, or

retirement status.

       While the average individual with long-term care insurance is already wealthier and more highly

educated than the general population, tax-induced purchasers are even more so. Therefore, the
  16
     Note that this method requires that the instrument (in this context, the presence of a tax subsidy) satisfies
standard LATE assumptions.
  17
     Standard errors of the differences are calculated using STATA’s bootstrap package with resampling performed
1,000 times.




                                                       15
results in Table 8 suggest that if the goal of tax subsidies was to increase insurance coverage among

those who may not have otherwise afforded insurance, it is unlikely that this goal was fulfilled.


4.6     Specification checks and falsification exercises

4.6.1    Specification checks

The results shown are robust to a variety of different specifications. The above specifications were

also estimated using the non-linear probit model and produce estimates that are extremely similar

in magnitude, with marginal effects of SU BSIDY between 2.1 and 2.7 percentage points. Because

the purchase of long-term care insurance is often a joint decision, the analysis was also done at

the couple level in contrast to the above specifications which treat husbands’ and wives’ decisions

separately. When modeling the coverage decision for couples, the analysis was done using two

dependent variables: the first a binary variable that indicated whether at least one member of the

couple was covered by private insurance, and the second a binary variable that indicated whether

both members of the couple were covered. The pre-subsidy coverage rate for the less restrictive

dependent variable was 12.7 percent, while only 3.7 percent of couples reported both having private

long-term care insurance. The presence of a tax incentive was estimated to have a 2.2 percentage

point (or 17 percent) increase using the first dependent variable, and a 1.3 percentage point (or

35 percent) increase using the second, broadly consistent with the reported results. The results

are robust to the inclusion of the variable denoting whether the individual is eligible to receive the

HIPAA deduction and constraining the instrument to be the same across education groups. Finally,

the specifications were run omitting the South, an area with fewer tax incentives and potentially

different regional trends. Under this sample selection, the estimated response of tax incentives was

to increase coverage rates by 2.4 percentage points, similar to the estimates shown in Table 3.


4.6.2    Falsification test: comparison to alternative insurance purchase

To increase our confidence that the response is not driven by shocks in insurance demand correlated

with the implementation of subsidies for private long-term care insurance, I estimate the above

specifications with dependent variables that denote either life insurance coverage or annuity




                                                 16
income.18 Because neither life insurance nor annuity income were tax-preferenced in the same

pattern as private long-term care insurance, an estimated effect of SU BSIDY on life insurance or

annuity demand would signify either unobservable shocks in demand for insurance that happened

in conjunction with tax incentive implementation or non-zero gross cross-price elasticities between

private long-term care insurance and these other insurance products. This exercise is in the spirit

of Royalty (2000) which uses both state variation in marginal tax rates and comparison to non

tax-preferenced fringe benefits as sources of identification of the price elasticity of health insurance.

      The estimates of SU BSIDY on the probability of coverage are shown in Table 9. The estimated

coefficients are generally small in magnitude relative to the mean of the dependent variable, often

flip in sign, and are statistically insignificant.19 The fact that the tax incentives increased long-term

care insurance coverage and did not have a strong detectable effect on other insurance purchase is

consistent with the claim that unobserved trends in insurance demand common to these different

types of insurance are not likely to be strongly biasing the estimates of γ and δ described earlier.


5     Simulating The Impact of Tax Incentives for Private Long-Term Care
      Insurance on Medicaid Costs

The stated objective of implementing tax incentives at the state level is to reduce Medicaid

expenditures for long-term care. Because the population purchasing insurance now will have most

of their long-term care claims one to two decades from now, it is not possible to get an accurate

assessment of the reduction in Medicaid long-term care expenditures from tax-induced purchase

using currently available data. Therefore, in this section I use the results from this paper along

with estimates from the literature to simulate the future fiscal impact of tax subsidies for private

insurance.


5.1     Simulation methods

I simulate the impact of providing a tax subsidy for a 65-year-old in each wealth decile i and gender

g. I define insurance coverage rates before and after the implementation of the subsidy as Pi (I)
  18
     The definition of life insurance used is a policy that does not provide a cash value upon surrender of a policy.
The HRS does not contain information on whether an individual has purchased an individual annuity, so the measure
of annuity income used is whether the respondent is currently receiving income from an annuity.
  19
     In results not reported, OLS and IV estimates of the coefficient on T AXP RICE provide very similar results.



                                                         17
and Pi′ (I) = Pi (I) + Ri , respectively, where Ri denotes the response to the tax incentive for wealth

decile i. Mi,g (I) and Mi,g (N ) represent the share of the expected present discounted value (EPDV)

of long-term care expenditures with and without private insurance for wealth decile i and gender

g. The Medicaid share prior to and following the tax subsidy is therefore equal to Mi,g (T ) and
 ′ (T ) respectively as defined below:
Mi,g


                            Mi,g (T ) = Pi (I) × Mi,g (I) + (1 − Pi (I)) × Mi,g (N )                               (4)


                             ′
                                                                        
                            Mi,g (T ) = Pi′ (I) × Mi,g (I) + 1 − Pi′ (I) × Mi,g (N )                               (5)

The expected Medicaid savings Ei,g (S) for wealth decile i and gender g follows:


                                                         ′
                                                                 
                                 Ei,g (S) = Mi,g (T ) − Mi,g (T ) × Eg (LT C)                                      (6)


where Eg (LT C) is the EPDV of long-term care costs for an individual of gender g.

    The expected cost of the tax expenditure for wealth decile i and gender g associated with the

Medicaid savings, Ei,g (C), is simply:

                                                                    TX
                                                                     −65
                                                                           pg,65+t
                                   Ei,g (C) = Si × Pi′ (I) × π ×                                                   (7)
                                                                           (1 + i)t
                                                                     t=0


where Si denotes the percentage subsidy offered to wealth decile i, π denotes the annual premium,

and pg,65+t denotes the probability the policyholder is alive and not on claim at age 65 + t.20
               PT −65 pg,65+t
The expression t=0     (1+i)t denotes the present value of an annual stream of $1 payments that

continue for the premium-paying duration valued with interest rate i.21
  20
     Note Equation 7 assumes that tax subsidies are available to both existing and tax-induced purchasers. However,
in three states (MD, OR, and VA), only new policies are eligible for tax credits; therefore, the tax expenditure for
these states would be significantly lower.
  21                                  d        c               d
     The probability pg,65+t = 1 − qg,65+t  − qg,65+t , where qg,65+t is the probability of a policyholder dying at age
             c
65 + t and qg,65+t is the probability a policyholder age 65 + t goes on claim. T is the maximum age of survival.




                                                          18
       Equations 6 and 7 together define the expected net government benefit of providing the tax

subsidy, Ei,g (N B), and the return per dollar of tax expenditure, Ei,g (R):


                                       Ei,g (N B) = Ei,g (S) − Ei,g (C)                                           (8)
                                                          Ei,g (S)
                                         Ei,g (R) =                                                               (9)
                                                          Ei,g (C)

       Medicaid is jointly funded by states and the federal government, and the federal share varies by

state but is at least 50 percent. This feature of Medicaid creates an externality in either entity’s

decision to implement a tax incentive. In the case of a state tax subsidy, at least half of the savings

are captured by the federal government while only the state bears the cost of the tax expenditure.

Assuming Medicaid costs are shared equally between the state and federal government, the total

expected net benefit can be broken down into the state’s net benefit and the federal government’s

net benefit as follows:
                                      state        1            state
                                     Ei,g   (N B) = Ei,g (S) − Ei,g   (C)                                        (10)
                                                   2
                                    f ederal        1            f ederal
                                   Ei,g      (N B) = Ei,g (S) − Ei,g      (C)                                    (11)
                                                    2
                  state (C) + E f ederal (C).22
where Ei,g (C) = Ei,g          i,g



5.2      Simulation assumptions

Implementation of the above procedure to estimate cost savings for the average long-term care

insurance subsidy requires assumptions regarding its effect on coverage rates, Medicaid’s long-term

care costs for individuals with and without insurance, and premiums. I first determine pre-subsidy

insurance coverage rates from the HRS by wealth decile. I assume the responses to the tax subsidy

by low, medium, and high wealth given in Table 6 correspond to the 20th , 50th , and 80th wealth

percentiles, respectively and linearly interpolate response rates for the remaining wealth percentiles.

       Table 10 partially reproduces Table 2 of Brown and Finkelstein (2008) which provides estimates

of Mi,g (I) and Mi,g (N ), Medicaid’s share of the EPDV of long-term care expenditures by gender and

wealth decile for 65-year-old individuals with and without private insurance. The private insurance
  22             f ederal
    The value Ei,g        (C) is negative because the federal government gains revenue from state tax subsidies due to
the deductibility of state and local taxes on federal tax returns for those who itemize. See Appendix B for more
details.



                                                         19
policy modeled provides a $100 daily benefit, and the wealth percentiles reflect the distribution at

age 65.23 This table shows that Medicaid shares of long-term care costs are declining in wealth and

having private insurance reduces Medicaid expenditures more as wealth declines.

       I use an annual premium of π = $2, 000, in line with premium estimates for a policy as modeled

in the simulation results in Brown and Finkelstein (2008). The premium is assumed to be the same

for both men and women, as premiums in the private long-term care insurance market are gender-

neutral. However, the EPDV of long-term care costs differ substantially by gender: Ef (LT C) =

$43, 750 for women and Em (LT C) = $17, 510 for men. Annuity values were calculated assuming

industry estimates of mortality and claim rates by gender for long-term care insurance policyholders

taken from Corliss et al. (2007) and a 3 percent discount rate. The sensitivity to these assumptions

is examined in Section 5.4


5.3      Simulation results

Figure 3(a) depicts the net benefit in dollars per 65-year-old at different points in the wealth

distribution. The relationship between dollars saved and wealth is non-monotonic: the net benefit

is negative for an individual at the 10th percentile, becomes positive for an individual at the 20th ,

and increases until the 50th percentile. At the high end of the wealth distribution, the net benefit

is negative. On average, the large losses at the high end of the wealth distribution overwhelm the

gains in the middle of the distribution and cost governments $27 per 65-year-old.

       The non-monotonic nature arises because of two countervailing forces. At low levels of wealth,

the potential Medicaid savings from higher private insurance coverage is large, but the response

to the tax subsidy is low. At high levels of wealth, there is a large degree of response to the

tax subsidy, but increased private insurance coverage does not substantially change the share of

long-term care expenses paid for by Medicaid for these groups. The cost of the tax subsidy, by

contrast, is monotonically increasing in wealth due to the higher subsidy rates available to high-

wealth individuals and higher rates of insurance coverage among these groups.
  23
     Medicaid eligibility is simulated using a utility-maximization framework and probabilities of long-term care
utilization from a transition model widely used in the industry. The model is solved using dynamic programming
techniques and a 3 percent discount rate. On average, the model predicts that 55 percent of long-term care
expenditures are paid for by Medicaid, broadly consistent with other estimates. The Medicaid income and asset
threshold used in the simulation are the modal thresholds, used by 35 states.




                                                       20
       Figure 3(b) divides the net benefits between the federal and state government assuming Medicaid

expenditures are shared equally. Because the tax expenditure is borne solely by the state, the state

loses more in foregone tax revenues than their portion of Medicaid savings across the entire wealth

distribution, spending on average $140 per 65-year-old. The federal government saves on average

$113 per 65-year-old without any associated outlay.24

       In total, the savings from Medicaid per $1 of tax expenditure is approximately $0.84. More

than half of these savings ($0.51) are conferred to the federal government, while the remainder

($0.33) is kept with the state. The return is greater than $1 for individuals between the 20th and

the 60th percentiles of the wealth distribution, and less for individuals with very high or very low

amounts of wealth. Because the EPDV of long-term care costs is much greater for women and the

cost of subsidizing their premiums is the same as for men, there is more to gain from Medicaid

paying a reduced share of long-term care expenses for women. The result is that returns are greater

for women than for men: $0.41 for men and $1.25 for women for each $1 of tax expenditure.

       Figure 3 highlights the importance of performing simulations using response rates that vary with

factors related to Medicaid eligibility relative to developing cost estimates from average response

rates, as in Courtemanche and He (2009). If the coefficients estimated in Table 3 were utilized along

with Medicaid shares for individuals with median wealth, the average tax subsidy would appear

to save $81 per 65-year-old and return $1.48 in Medicaid savings for each $1 of tax expenditure,

in stark contrast with the simulation results that take heterogeneous responses into consideration.

The error results from finding the net fiscal benefit at the average rather than the average of each

wealth decile’s net fiscal benefit.


5.4      Sensitivity analysis

The simulation results rely on the value of each input and the sensitivity to several factors is

summarized below. Reducing the premium to $1,800 (with no corresponding decrease in long-term

care costs) decreases the net cost per 65-year-old from $27 to $10 and increases the total Medicaid

savings per $1 of tax expenditure from $0.84 to $0.93. Increasing the premium to $2,200 increases

the net cost to $44 and decreases the savings to $0.76 per $1 of tax expenditure. Within this
  24
    This savings includes $70 in Medicaid savings and $43 in increased federal tax revenues due to the smaller
deduction of state taxes by itemizers. See Appendix B for more details regarding the interaction between state and
federal tax revenues.


                                                       21
wide range of premiums, however, the tax incentives are still expected to cost more than they save.

Similar results are obtained by adjusting Eg (LT C), the estimated EPDV of all long-term care costs,

by 10 percent in either direction. Changing the discount rate assumption affects the expected cost

savings because the Medicaid savings are further in the future relative to the premium subsidy,

and the cost-benefit analysis is sensitive to the 3 percent discount rate assumed in the simulations.

Adjusting the discount rate to 4.5 percent increases the net cost to $48 and reduces the Medicaid

savings to $0.66 per $1 of tax expenditure. Under the assumption that the discount rate is 1.5

percent, the policy becomes cost savings, saving $18 per 65-year-old and returning $1.09 for each

$1 spent in tax expenditure.


                     Sensitivity of Simulation Results to Parameter Estimates
                                                               E(N B) E(R)
                    Base Case Scenario                           -$27    $0.84
                                                        +10%     -$44    $0.76
                    Premiums
                                                        -10%     -$10    $0.93
                                                        +10%     -$13    $0.92
                    Expected Long-Term Care Costs
                                                        -10%     -$41    $0.75
                                                         1.5%   +$18     $1.09
                    Discount Rate
                                                         4.5%    -$48    $0.66

   By assuming that the EPDV of long-term care expenditures does not change after coverage

rates increase, the base simulation results implicitly assume no moral hazard. While Grabowski

and Gruber (2007) find no evidence of moral hazard in nursing home utilization, empirical evidence

suggests that home health care use is more subject to increased utilization through moral hazard

(Weissert et al., 2005). The effect of moral hazard would be to decrease the expected Medicaid

savings and therefore reduce the net benefit: smaller Medicaid shares through increased insurance

coverage would be offset by higher Medicaid expenditures overall. Assuming that, for example,

Eg (LT C) is 5 percent higher for individuals with private insurance relative to those without private

insurance increases the net cost per 65-year old to $42 and the Medicaid savings per $1 of tax

expenditure decreases to $0.75. If Eg (LT C) for the privately insured is 10 percent higher, the net

cost increases to $57 and the savings per $1 of tax expenditure falls to $0.66.

   There are several additional assumptions behind these estimates.          First, individuals who

purchased insurance after implementation of the tax subsidy are assumed to have similar Medicaid

shares as individuals who purchased insurance prior to the subsidy. This assumption is supported


                                                 22
by the fact that these two groups do not differ greatly in their health status, income, and assets, as

shown in the previous section. Second, as assumed in Brown and Finkelstein (2008), the EPDV of

long-term care expenditures is equal across the wealth distribution. Third, the tax expenditure is

assumed to stop only if a policyholder dies or goes on claim and therefore ceases paying premiums.

Changes in the subsidy level, perhaps due to changes in filing status or income, are ignored. Fourth,

the response among men and women to the tax subsidy was assumed to be the same, as supported

by the results in Table 7 which showed no statistical difference in the response by gender. The

simulations also assume that individuals do not move away from the state they received the subsidy

from and in turn save another state’s share of Medicaid expenditures rather than the state that

bore the tax expenditure or lapse their policy. If there is a positive probability of either, the

estimated net savings would be lower given the timing of the expenditure relative to the costs.

Finally, interactions with other programs, such as a potential reduction in Medicare costs from

having fewer Medicaid recipients, and other general equilibrium effects are ignored.


6   Discussion and Conclusion

This study builds on existing literature assessing the implications of expanding or contracting

tax incentives for insurance. In this study, I find that tax subsidies for private long-term care

insurance increased coverage by 2.7 percentage points, or 28 percent of pre-subsidy coverage rates.

The identification of this result comes from changes within states and individuals over time in

tax subsidy programs. The implied price elasticity is approximately -3.3, indicating that demand

response to private long-term care insurance is higher than for health insurance.

    While the tax incentives do seem to have induced insurance coverage, moving to the most

generous subsidy (a tax credit worth 20 percent of premiums) would be unlikely to substantially

reduce the proportion of the population that does not have adequate private insurance coverage

for long-term care. Moreover, the effects are concentrated among high income and wealthier

populations.   As a result, tax incentives are unlikely to substantially reduce net government

expenditures for long-term care. Simulations suggest that $1 in state tax expenditure produces

$0.84 in Medicaid savings, more than half of which is captured by the federal government. One

of the central contributions of the analysis is that it highlights the importance of estimating



                                                 23
insurance coverage responses separately by factors that determine Medicaid eligibility, ignored

in prior literature.

       To have a larger effect on the allocation of long-term care financing, tax incentives would need

to increase private insurance coverage for those who are at higher risk of spending down to Medicaid

eligibility. Structuring tax incentives such that they target low-wealth populations and increasing

awareness of long-term care risks among these groups may be influential, but it may be that without

more comprehensive Medicaid reform to reduce market distortions, these populations are unlikely

to respond to tax incentives by taking up private insurance.25

       It is important to note that while the tax subsidies as currently structured appear to be unlikely

to reduce Medicaid expenditures, they may be effective in counteracting myopia and the higher

rates of coverage they induce may have other desirable consequences not evaluated here. These

consequences may include a reduction in adverse selection and administrative loads, a reduction

in out-of-pocket expenditure risk among the elderly, greater access to higher quality care, lower

reliance on informal caregiving from spouses and children, and spillover effects to other potential

consumers. Evaluating these effects remains an important area for future research.




  25
     Brown and Finkelstein (2008) suggest a reform that would address both the means-tested nature of Medicaid
and its secondary payer status: the reform would involve giving refundable tax credits equal to the expected present
discounted value of the Medicaid benefits that are replaced by the private insurance. However, this policy would be
difficult to implement in practice.


                                                        24
References

Abadie, Alberto. 2002. “Bootstrap Tests for Distributional Treatment Effects in Instrumental

  Variable Models” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 97(457): 284–292.

AHIP. 2007. “Who Buys Long-Term Care Insurance? A 15-Year Study of Buyers and Non-Buyers,

  1990-2005”.

Arno, Peter S., Carol Levine, and Margaret M. Memmott. 1999. “The Economic Value of

  Informal Caregiving” Health Affairs, 18(2): 182–188.

Auerbach, David, and Sabina Ohri. 2006. “Price and the Demand for Nongroup Health

  Insurance” Inquiry, 43(2): 122–134.

Autor, David H., and Susan Houseman. 2005. “Do Temporary Help Jobs Improve Labor

  Market Outcomes for Low-Skilled Workers? Evidence from ‘Work First”’ National Bureau of

  Economic Research.

Brown, Jeffrey R., and Amy Finkelstein. 2007. “Why is the Market for Long-Term Care

  Insurance So Small?” Journal of Public Economics, 91(10): 1967–1991.

Brown, Jeffrey R., and Amy Finkelstein. 2008. “The Interaction of Public and Private

  Insurance: Medicaid and the Long-Term Care Insurance Market” American Economic Review,

  98(3): 1083–1102.

Brown, Jeffrey R., and Amy Finkelstein. 2009. “The Private Market for Long-Term Care

  Insurance in the United States: A Review of the Evidence” Journal of Risk and Insurance,

  76(1): 5–29.

Brown, Jeffrey R., Norma B. Coe, and Amy Finkelstein. 2007. “Medicaid Crowd-Out of

  Private Long-Term Care Insurance Demand: Evidence from the Health and Retirement Survey”

  Tax Policy and the Economy, 21, 1–34.

CBO. 2004. “Financing Long-Term Care for the Elderly”.

Chernew, Michael, and Arleen Leibowitz. 1992. “The Firm’s Demand for Health Insurance”

  In Health Benefits and the Workforce, ed. U.S. Dept. of Labor Washington D.C. pp. 77–83.

                                              25
Chernew, Michael, Kevin Frick, and Catherine G. McLaughlin. 1997. “The Demand

  for Health Insurance Coverage by Low-Income Workers: Can Reduced Premiums Achieve Full

  Coverage?” Health Services Research, 32(4): 453–470.

Cohen, Marc A., Nanda Kumar, and Stanley S. Wallack. 1994. “Long-Term Care Insurance

  and Medicaid” Health Affairs, 13(4): 127–139.

Cohen, Marc, and Maurice Weinrobe. 2000. “Tax Deductibility of Long-Term Care Insurance

  Premiums” HIAA.

Corliss, Gary, Roger Gagne, Barry Koklefsky, Ronald Lucas, Susan Oberman-Smith,

  and Marianne Purushotham. 2007. “Society of Actuaries Long-Term Care Experience

  Committee Intercompany Study, 1984-2004”.

Courtemanche, Charles, and Daifeng He. 2009. “Tax Incentives and the Decision to Purchase

  Long-Term Care Insurance” Journal of Public Economics.

Cramer, Anne T., and Gail A. Jensen. 2006. “Why Don’t People Buy Long-Term-Care

  Insurance?” Journals of Gerontology Series B: Psychological Sciences and Social Sciences, 61(4):

  S185–193.

Currie, Janet, and Jonathan Gruber. 1996. “Saving Babies: The Efficacy and Cost of Recent

  Changes in the Medicaid Eligibility of Pregnant Women” Journal of Political Economy, 104(6):

  1263–1296.

Feenberg, Daniel, and Elisabeth Coutts. 1993. “An Introduction to the TAXSIM Model”

  Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 12(1): 189–194.

Feldman, Roger, Bryan Dowd, Scott Leitz, and Lynn A. Blewett. 1997. “The Effect of

  Premiums on the Small Firm’s Decision to Offer Health Insurance” Journal of Human Resources,

  32(4): 635–658.

Finkelstein, Amy. 2002. “The Effect of Tax Subsidies to Employer-Provided Supplementary

  Health Insurance: Evidence from Canada” Journal of Public Economics, 84(3): 305–339.




                                               26
Finkelstein,   Amy,    and Kathleen McGarry. 2006. “Multiple Dimensions of Private

  Information: Evidence from the Long-Term Care Insurance Market” American Economic Review,

  96(4): 938–958.

Genworth. 2010. “Genworth Financial Cost of Care Survey”.

Grabowski, David C., and Jonathan Gruber. 2007. “Moral Hazard in Nursing Home Use”

  Journal of Health Economics, 26(3): 560–577.

Grabowski, David C., Zhanlian Feng, Orna Intrator, and Vincent Mor. 2004. “Recent

  Trends In State Nursing Home Payment Policies” Health Affairs.

Gruber, Jonathan, and James Poterba. 1994. “Tax Incentives and the Decision to Purchase

  Health Insurance: Evidence from the Self-Employed” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,

  109(3): 701–733.

Gruber, Jonathan, and Michael Lettau. 2004. “How Elastic is the Firm’s Demand for Health

  Insurance?” Journal of Public Economics, 88(7-8): 1273–1293.

Johnson, Richard W., Simone G. Schaner, Desmond Toohey, and Cori E. Uccello. 2007.

  “Modeling the Decision to Purchase Long-Term Care Insurance”.

Marquis, M. Susan, and Stephen H. Long. 1995. “Worker Demand for Health Insurance in

  the Non-Group Market” Journal of Health Economics, 14(1): 47–63.

Marquis, M. Susan, and Stephen H. Long. 2001. “To offer or not to offer: the role of price

  in employers’ health insurance decisions.” Health Services Research, 36(5): 935–958.

Mitchell, Olivia S., James M. Poterba, Mark J. Warshawsky, and Jeffrey R. Brown.

  1999. “New Evidence on the Money’s Worth of Individual Annuities” American Economic

  Review, 89(5): 1299–1318.

Newhouse, Joseph P. 2004. Pricing the Priceless: A Health Care Conundrum. MIT Press.

NHA. 2010. “National Health Expenditures by Type of Service and Source of Funds”.

Norton, Edward C. 2000. “Long-Term Care” In Handbook of Health Economics, ed. A. J. Culyer

  and J. P. Newhouse, vol. 1 Elsevier Science. chapter 17, pp. 956–988.

                                               27
Royalty, Anne B. 2000. “Tax Preferences for Fringe Benefits and Workers’ Eligibility for Employer

  Health Insurance” Journal of Public Economics, 75(2): 209–227.

Stevenson, David, Jocelyn Hsu, and Richard Frank. 2009. “Private Long-Term Care

  Insurance and State Tax Incentives” Inquiry, 46(3): 5–321.

Weissert, William G., Cynthia M. Cready, and James E. Pawelak. 2005. “The Past and

  Future of Home- and Community-Based Long-Term Care” The Milbank Quarterly.

Wiener, Joshua, Jane Tilly, and Susan Goldenson. 2000. “Federal and State Initiatives to

  Jump Start the Market for Private Long-term Care Insurance” Elder Law Journal, 8(1): 57–99.

Wiener, Joshua M., Lauren H. Illston, and Raymond J. Hanley. 1994. Sharing the Burden:

  Strategies For Public And Private Long-Term Care Insurance. Washington D.C.: Brookings

  Institution Press.




                                               28
                         Figure 1: Private Long-Term Care Insurance Coverage, Age 50-69
                 16

                 14
                             Subsidy Began 1998-1999
                 12
                                                                       Subsidy Began 2000-2001
                 10

                     8
           Percent




                                                  Never Implemented Subsidy
                     6

                     4

                     2

                     0
                      1996           1998         2000          2002           2004         2006
                                                         Year
Source: Health and Retirement Study (HRS), Waves 3-8, 1996-2006.




                              Figure 2: Tax Incentive Generosity Over Time, 1996-2006




Source: Tax subsidy characteristics obtained from state tax forms. Average subsidy value calculated using
sample from 1996-2006 waves of Health and Retirement Study (HRS) and NBER’s TAXSIM calculator. See
Appendix for more details.




                                                         29
      Figure 3: Estimated Net Benefit from Tax Subsidy for 65-Year-Olds by Wealth Decile

                                                       100

                                                        50

                                                         0


                            Dollars per 65-Year-Old
                                                             10          20           30   40        50    60       70   80   90   Average
                                                       -50
                                                                                                                                     -$27
                                                      -100

                                                      -150

                                                      -200

                                                      -250

                                                      -300

                                                      -350
                                                                                                Wealth Percentile



                                                                  (a) Estimated Total Net Government Benefit


                                                      200

                                                                                                                                   $113
                                                      100
                      Dollars per 65-Year-Old




                                                        0
                                                             10          20       30       40       50     60       70   80   90   Average

                                                      -100

                                                                                                                                   -$140
                                                      -200

                                                                  Net Federal Benefit
                                                      -300
                                                                  Net State Benefit


                                                      -400


                                                      -500
                                                                                                Wealth Percentile


                                                        (b) Estimated Federal vs. State Net Government Benefit

Source: Author’s calculations.

Notes: Calculations assume $2,000 annual premium, 3 percent annual discount rate, EPDV of long-
term care costs = $43,750 for women and $17,510 for men. Net benefits calculated as Medicaid savings
less tax expenditure assuming average subsidy levels and response vary by wealth decile. In (b), Medicaid
savings are assumed to be shared equally between federal and state governments and costs are borne by
states. See Section 5 for additional details.




                                                                                                    30
                 Table 1: Summary Statistics: Individual-Level Control Variables

                                             Do not have LTCI          Have LTCI
                                                 (N=47,700)            (N=5,292)
                                              Mean    Std Dev       Mean     Std Dev
               After-Tax Price                0.986     0.040       0.982     0.044
               Any Subsidy Available          0.280     0.449       0.334     0.472
               Credit Available               0.108     0.311       0.140     0.347
               Deduction Available            0.185     0.389       0.217      0.412
               HIPAA Subsidy Available        0.117     0.321       0.189     0.391
               Income                        39,973    102,651     54,745     60,030
               Assets                        266,642 1,563,712     446,441 931,397
               File Tax Return                0.826     0.379       0.916      0.278
               Age                            59.27      5.18       59.96       5.28
               Female                         0.556     0.497       0.565      0.496
               Married                        0.690     0.463       0.763      0.425
               Some High School               0.192     0.394       0.081      0.273
               High School                    0.374     0.484       0.318      0.466
               Some College                   0.231     0.422       0.244      0.429
               College Plus                   0.202     0.402       0.358      0.479
               Children                       3.103     2.023       2.824      1.871
               Hispanic                       0.084     0.277       0.029      0.169
               African-American               0.111     0.314       0.074      0.262
               Other Race                     0.051     0.220       0.023      0.150
               Retired                        0.350     0.477       0.406      0.491
               Fair/Poor Health Status        0.255     0.436       0.147      0.354

Source: Health and Retirement Study (HRS), Waves 3-8, 1996-2006. Observations at the person-year level
weighted using individual-level weights. Income and assets expressed in constant 2006 dollars. Sample
excludes individuals age 70 or older and those who report income from self-employment.




                                                 31
Table 2: Private Long Term Care Insurance Coverage and Average Reduction in After-Tax Price

                                                       Pre-Subsidy
                                                          LTCI         Average
                                                        Coverage       Subsidy      N
              All                                         9.5%          4.6%      52,992
              Gender
                    Male                                   9.5%          4.8%     21,448
                    Female                                 9.5%          4.5%     31,544
              Age
                    50-59                                  8.8%          5.4%     21,175
                    60-69                                  10.3%         3.5%     31,817
              Education
                    High School or Less                    7.0%          4.0%     31,919
                    Some College or More                   12.6%         5.3%     21,073
              Income
                    Low Income (<$15K)                     4.8%          2.7%     16,423
                    Medium Income ($15K-$40K)               8.7%         4.9%     19,808
                    High Income (>$40K)                    13.7%         5.7%     16,761
              Wealth
                    Low Wealth (<$20K)                     4.0%          3.3%     16,465
                    Medium Wealth ($20K-$150K)              8.4%         5.1%     17,639
                    High Wealth (>$150K)                   14.7%         5.1%     18,888
              Retirement Status
                    Working                                8.7%          5.2%     31,151
                    Retired                                11.0%         3.7%     21,841
              Marital Status
                    Unmarried                              8.1%          3.6%     18,408
                    Married                                10.2%         5.1%     34,584
              Self-Reported Health Status
                    Fair or Poor                           5.3%          3.4%     14,833
                    Good or Excellent                      11.0%         5.0%     38,159
              ADL Limitations
                    None                                   10.0%         4.8%     47,104
                    1+                                     5.2%          2.7%     5,888

Source: Health and Retirement Study (HRS), Waves 3-8, 1996-2006. Sample constructed as described in
Table 1. Average subsidy denotes average reduction in after-tax price for individuals in states with tax
subsidy.




                                                  32
Table 3: Linear Estimates of the Effect of Tax Subsidy Programs on Private Long-Term Care
Insurance Coverage

                                                   (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)
                Subsidy                          0.023**     0.028**    0.024**    0.027***
                                                 (0.009)     (0.011)    (0.011)     (0.009)

                State + Year Fixed Effects          No         Yes        Yes         Yes
                Control Variables                   No         No         Yes         Yes
                Individual Fixed Effects            No         No         No          Yes

* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
Robust standard errors, clustered by states. Individual-level weights used. N=52,992

Source: Health and Retirement Study (HRS), Waves 3-8, 1996-2006. Sample constructed as described in
Table 1.

Notes: Each coefficient represents OLS estimates of Equation 1. The dependent variable is a binary
variable denoting long-term care insurance coverage with an average value of 9.5 percent in states and
years with no tax subsidy. The right-hand side variable SU BSIDY is a binary indicator for whether
there is any tax subsidy in the state and year that the individual was sampled. The first column includes
no additional right-hand side variables. Column (2) adds state and year fixed effects. Column (3) adds
individual and state-level controls. Individual-level controls include education, gender, marital status, age,
race, income, assets, number of children, retirement status, health status, and eligibility for federal tax
subsidy through HIPAA. State-level controls include nursing facility occupancy rates, nursing home beds
per 1,000 pop age 65+, percent of state pop age 65+, average nursing home private pay and Medicaid pay
rate, Medicaid income/asset thresholds, spend down indicator. Column (4) adds individual fixed effects and
omits time-invariant characteristics.




                                                     33
Table 4: Linear Estimates of the Effect of the After-Tax Price on Private Long-Term Care Insurance
Coverage


                                                                 Panel A: Linear Probability Model
                                                                (1)         (2)        (3)        (4)
 After-Tax Price                                            -0.276*** -0.192**       -0.103     -0.037
                                                             (0.083)     (0.084)    (0.070)    (0.062)
 Implied Elasticity with respect to After-Tax Price           -2.909      -2.024     -1.086     -0.390
                                                             (0.875)     (0.885)    (0.738)    (0.654)

                                                                   Panel B: Instrumental Variables
                                                                (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)
 After-Tax Price                                            -0.446*** -0.591*** -0.374*** -0.315**
                                                             (0.098)      (0.140)    (0.142)    (0.158)
 Implied Elasticity with respect to After-Tax Price           -4.702      -6.230      -3.943     -3.321
                                                             (1.033)     (1.476)     (1.497)    (1.666)

 F-Statistic for Test of Excluded Instrument                 3,471.16     1,885.09      2,070.89     1,609.28

 State + Year Fixed Effects                                     No           Yes          Yes          Yes
 Control Variables                                              No           No           Yes          Yes
 Individual Fixed Effects                                       No           No           No           Yes

* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
Robust standard errors, clustered by individuals. Individual-level weights used. N=52,992

Source: Health and Retirement Study (HRS), Waves 3-8, 1996-2006. Sample constructed as described in
Table 1.

Notes: Each coefficient in Panel A represents OLS estimates of Equation 2. Each coefficient in
Panel B represents IV estimates of Equation 2. The dependent variable is a binary variable denoting
long-term care insurance coverage with an average value of 9.5 percent in states and years with no tax
subsidy. The right-hand side variable T AXP RICE denotes the after-tax price of $1 of private long-term
care insurance in terms of foregone consumption. The instrument in Panel B is the average after-tax price
for a nationally representative sample of 5,000 individuals within state X year X education cells. The first
column includes no additional right-hand side variables. Column (2) adds state and year fixed effects.
Column (3) adds individual and state-level controls. Individual-level controls include education, gender,
marital status, age, race, income, assets, number of children, retirement status, health status, and eligibility
for federal tax subsidy through HIPAA. State-level controls include nursing facility occupancy rates, nursing
home beds per 1,000 pop age 65+, percent of state pop age 65+, average nursing home private pay and
Medicaid pay rate, Medicaid income/asset thresholds, spend down indicator. Column (4) adds individual
fixed effects and omits time-invariant characteristics. Implied elasticities computed as ratio of estimated
coefficient to pre-subsidy insurance coverage rate.




                                                      34
    Table 5: Linear Estimates of the Effect of Tax Subsidy Programs on the Intensive Margin

                                                     Panel A: Inflation Protection
                                                   (1)       (2)        (3)       (4)
                Subsidy                          0.013** 0.014** 0.014** 0.012**
                                                 (0.006)   (0.007) (0.006) (0.006)

                                                Panel B: Nursing Home + Home Care
                                                   (1)      (2)      (3)     (4)
                Subsidy                         0.024*** 0.029** 0.025** 0.025**
                                                 (0.008)  (0.011) (0.011) (0.009)

                State + Year Fixed Effects          No         Yes        Yes        Yes
                Control Variables                   No         No         Yes        Yes
                Individual Fixed Effects            No         No         No         Yes

* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
Robust standard errors, clustered by states. Individual-level weights used. N=52,992

Source: Health and Retirement Study (HRS), Waves 3-8, 1996-2006. Sample constructed as described in
Table 1.

Notes: Each coefficient represents OLS estimates of Equation 1. The dependent variable is a binary
variable denoting long-term care insurance coverage with inflation protection (Panel A) with an average
value of 3.9 percent or a binary variable denoting long-term care insurance coverage for both nursing home
and home care (Panel B) with an average value of 7.1 percent. The right-hand side variable SU BSIDY
is a binary indicator for whether there is any tax subsidy in the state and year that the individual was
sampled. The first column includes no additional right-hand side variables. Column (2) adds state and
year fixed effects. Column (3) adds individual and state-level controls. Individual-level controls include
education, gender, marital status, age, race, income, assets, number of children, retirement status, health
status, and eligibility for federal tax subsidy through HIPAA. State-level controls include nursing facility
occupancy rates, nursing home beds per 1,000 pop age 65+, percent of state pop age 65+, average nursing
home private pay and Medicaid pay rate, Medicaid income/asset thresholds, spend down indicator. Column
(4) adds individual fixed effects and omits time-invariant characteristics.




                                                    35
           Table 6: Heterogeneity in Effect of Tax Subsidies Across Selected Subsamples

                                                   (1)                     (2)                    N
     All                                        0.024**                 0.027***                52,992
     Gender
           Male                                 0.034*                  0.031*                  21,448
           Female                               0.017*                  0.023***                31,544
     Age
           50-59                                0.025*                  0.031*                  21,175
           60-69                                0.032**                 0.025**                 31,817
     Education
           High School or Less                  0.006                   0.015*                  31,919
           Some College or More                 0.046***      ++        0.045***      +         21,073
     Income
           Low Income (<$15K)                   -0.002                  -0.010                  16,423
           Medium Income ($15K-$40K)            0.016                   0.018                   19,808
           High Income (>$40K)                  0.052***     +++        0.064***    +++         16,761
     Wealth
           Low Wealth (<$20K)                   -0.002                  0.006                   16,465
           Medium Wealth ($20K-$150K)           0.020*         +        0.025**                 17,639
           High Wealth (>$150K)                 0.047**       ++        0.042**                 18,888
     Retirement Status
           Working                              0.021                   0.029**                 31,151
           Retired                              0.030***                0.017**                 21,841
     Marital Status
           Unmarried                            0.000                   0.018*                  18,408
           Married                              0.037***       +        0.030**                 34,584
     Self-Reported Health Status
           Good or Excellent                    0.033**                 0.029**                 38,159
           Fair or Poor                         -0.002        ++        0.014*                  14,833
     ADL Limitations
           None                                 0.026**                 0.028***                47,104
           1+                                   0.003                   0.010                   5,888

* denotes significantly different from zero (* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at
1%); + denotes significantly different from top category (+ significant at 10%; ++ significant at 5%; +++
significant at 1%)

Source: Health and Retirement Study (HRS), Waves 3-8, 1996-2006. Sample constructed as described in
Table 1.

Notes: Each coefficient represents OLS estimates of Equation 1. The dependent variable is a binary
variable denoting long-term care insurance coverage. Average values by demographic group summarized in
Table 2. The right-hand side variable SU BSIDY is a binary indicator for whether there is any tax subsidy
in the state and year that the individual was sampled. Column (1) includes state and year fixed effects
and individual and state-level controls. Column (2) adds individual fixed effects and omits time-invariant
characteristics. Individual-level controls include education, gender, marital status, age, race, income,
assets, number of children, retirement status, health status, and eligibility for federal tax subsidy through
HIPAA. State-level controls include nursing facility occupancy rates, nursing home beds per 1,000 pop age
65+, percent of state pop age 65+, average nursing home private pay and Medicaid pay rate, Medicaid
income/asset thresholds, spend down indicator. Each category represents a separate regression including
                                                     36
interactions between subgroup indicators and all other right-hand side variables.
               Table 7: Heterogeneity in Price Elasticities Across Selected Subsamples

                                                     (1)                      (2)                    N
    All                                          -3.943**                 -3.321***                52,992
    Gender
          Male                                   -4.046*                  -1.753**                 21,448
          Female                                 -4.042**                 -4.705***                31,544
    Age
          50-59                                  -3.231                   -2.615                   21,175
          60-69                                  -6.244***                -4.166**                 31,817
    Education
          High School or Less                    -0.915                   -1.086                   31,919
          Some College or More                   -4.432***      +         -4.106**                 21,073
    Income
          Low Income (<$15K)                     6.845                    10.691                   16,423
          Medium Income ($15K-$40K)              -0.473                   1.397                    19,808
          High Income (>$40K)                    -6.036***    +++         -6.473***     +++        16,761
    Wealth
          Low Wealth (<$20K)                     6.286                    2.204                    16,465
          Medium Wealth ($20K-$150K)             -1.302                   -1.539                   17,639
          High Wealth (>$150K)                   -5.522***    +++         -4.220**       ++        18,888
    Retirement Status
          Working                                -4.701**                 -3.858*                  31,151
          Retired                                -2.547                   -1.469                   21,841
    Marital Status
          Unmarried                              -0.443                   -5.242                   18,408
          Married                                -5.070***                -2.535                   34,584
    Self-Reported Health Status
          Good or Excellent                      -9.889***                -7.131**                 38,159
          Fair or Poor                           3.389        +++         0.537                    14,833
    ADL Limitations
          None                                   -4.411***                -3.679**                 47,104
          1+                                     15.787**     +++         13.592         ++         5,888

* denotes significantly different from zero (* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at
1%); + denotes significantly different from top category (+ significant at 10%; ++ significant at 5%; +++
significant at 1%)

Source: Health and Retirement Study (HRS), Waves 3-8, 1996-2006. Sample constructed as described in
Table 1.

Notes: Each value represents implied elasticity computed using IV estimates of Equation 2 as described
in Table 4 estimated separately for each subgroup and coverage rates from Table 2. Column (1) includes
state and year fixed effects and individual and state-level controls. Column (2) adds individual fixed effects
and omits time-invariant characteristics. Individual-level controls include education, gender, marital status,
age, race, income, assets, number of children, retirement status, health status, and eligibility for federal tax
subsidy through HIPAA. State-level controls include nursing facility occupancy rates, nursing home beds
per 1,000 pop age 65+, percent of state pop age 65+, average nursing home private pay and Medicaid pay
rate, Medicaid income/asset thresholds, spend down indicator.


                                                      37
Table 8: Descriptive Statistics for Population, LTCI Purchasers, and Tax-Induced LTCI Purchasers

                                                            Tax-Induced
                               Population      LTCI            LTCI            Difference       Difference
 Characteristic                 Average      Purchasers      Purchasers
                                   (1)           (2)             (3)           (3) - (1)        (3) - (2)
 Age                             59.34         59.96            59.82           0.47            -0.14
 Income                          41,471        54,745          67,868         26,397 **        13,123
 Assets                         284,872       446,441         953,678        668,806 ***      507,237 ***
 Female                           0.557         0.565           0.672          0.115            0.107
 Married                         0.697         0.763            0.976          0.279 ***        0.213 ***
 Some High School                0.181         0.081            0.052         -0.129 ***       -0.028
 High School                     0.369         0.318            0.171         -0.198 **        -0.147 *
 Some College                    0.232         0.244            0.037         -0.195 **        -0.206 **
 College Plus                    0.218         0.358            0.740          0.521 ***        0.382 ***
 Children                        3.075         2.824            2.758         -0.316           -0.065
 Hispanic                        0.078         0.029           -0.089         -0.167 ***       -0.118 ***
 African-American                0.107         0.074           -0.035         -0.142 ***       -0.109 ***
 Other Race                      0.048         0.023           -0.032         -0.080 ***       -0.055 **
 Retired                         0.356         0.406            0.460          0.104            0.054
 Fair/Poor Health Status          0.244         0.147           0.071         -0.174 ***       -0.076

* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Individual-level weights used. N=52,992

Source: Health and Retirement Study (HRS), Waves 3-8, 1996-2006. Sample constructed as described in
Table 1.

Notes: The sample mean among tax-induced purchasers in Column (3) is calculated as described in
Equation 3. Standard errors of the differences are calculated using STATA’s bootstrap package with
resampling performed 1,000 times.




                                                    38
Table 9: Linear Estimates of the Effect of Tax Subsidy Programs on Alternative Insurance Coverage

                                                          Panel A: Life Insurance
                                                     (1)       (2)       (3)      (4)
                  Subsidy                           0.020    0.013      0.014   0.018*
                                                   (0.028) (0.015) (0.013) (0.011)

                                                   Panel B: Receiving Annuity Income
                                                     (1)      (2)       (3)      (4)
                  Subsidy                           0.000   -0.005    -0.005   -0.003
                                                   (0.002) (0.004) (0.004) (0.004)

                  State + Year Fixed Effects         No         Yes       Yes        Yes
                  Control Variables                  No         No        Yes        Yes
                  Individual Fixed Effects           No         No        No         Yes

* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
Robust standard errors, clustered by states. Individual-level weights used. N=52,992

Source: Health and Retirement Study (HRS), Waves 3-8, 1996-2006. Sample constructed as described in
Table 1.

Notes: Each coefficient represents OLS estimates of Equation 1 with alternative insurance coverage
on the left-hand side. The dependent variable is a binary variable denoting ownership of non-cash value life
insurance (Panel A) with an average value of 68.0 percent or a binary variable denoting receipt of income
from an annuity (Panel B) with an average value of 1.6 percent. The right-hand side variable SU BSIDY
is a binary indicator for whether there is any tax subsidy for private long-term care insurance in the
state and year that the individual was sampled. The first column includes no additional right-hand side
variables. Column (2) adds state and year fixed effects. Column (3) adds individual and state-level controls.
Individual-level controls include education, gender, marital status, age, race, income, assets, number of
children, retirement status, health status, and eligibility for federal tax subsidy through HIPAA. State-level
controls include nursing facility occupancy rates, nursing home beds per 1,000 pop age 65+, percent of state
pop age 65+, average nursing home private pay and Medicaid pay rate, Medicaid income/asset thresholds,
spend down indicator. Column (4) adds individual fixed effects and omits time-invariant characteristics.




                                                     39
Table 10: Medicaid Share of Expected Present Discounted Value of Total Long-Term Care
Expenditures for 65-Year-Old by Gender and Wealth
                                     Men                    Women
                Wealth    No Private With Private No Private With Private
              Percentile Insurance      Insurance Insurance    Insurance
                   i       Mi,m (N )     Mi,m (I)  Mi,f (N )    Mi,f (I)
                 10th        0.98          0.52      0.99         0.55
                 20th        0.89          0.44      0.93         0.50
                 30th        0.80          0.41      0.88         0.46
                 40th        0.71          0.37      0.80         0.43
                 50th        0.60          0.32      0.72         0.38
                 60th        0.46          0.26      0.60         0.33
                 70th        0.32          0.20      0.45         0.24
                 80th        0.17          0.12      0.24         0.15
                 90th        0.07          0.05      0.08         0.06

Source: Brown and Finkelstein (2008), Table 2.




                                                 40
Appendix A: State Tax Subsidies for Private Long-Term Care Insurance

In 2006, fifteen states allowed taxpayers to deduct premiums from their income, six states offered

tax credits, and two states offered both. The credits are not refundable, and therefore may only be

used to offset existing tax liabilities. Their values are generally capped at a specific dollar amount

or proportion of premium, and tend to be more generous than subsidies arising from premium

deductions. Tax incentives in the form of deductions are in most cases allowable in addition to the

standard deduction, not requiring taxpayers to itemize their deductions.


                     State                    Year Started    Credit    Deduction
                     Alabama                     1995                      X
                     Colorado                    2000            X
                     District of Columbia        2005                       X
                     Idaho                       2001                       X
                     Indiana                     2000                       X
                     Iowa                        1997                       X
                     Kansas                      2005                       X
                     Kentucky                    1998                       X
                     Maine                       1990                       X
                     Maryland                    2000            X
                     Minnesota                   1999            X
                     Missouri                    2000                       X
                     Montana                     1992                       X
                     Nebraska                    2006                       X
                     New Mexico                  2000                       X
                     New Yorka                   1996            X          X
                     North Carolinab             1999            X
                     North Dakota                1994            X          X
                     Ohio                        1999                       X
                     Oregon                      2000            X
                     Utah                        2000                       X
                     Virginia                    2000            X          X
                     West Virginia               2000                       X
                     Wisconsin                   1998                       X


a
  New York provided a tax deduction of long-term care insurance premiums from 1996 through 2001, and a
credit from 2002 onwards.
b
  North Carolina implemented a credit in 1999 available through 2003; a modified version was subsequently
reinstated in tax year 2007.




                                                   41
Appendix B: Calculation of After-Tax Price

Calculation of the after-tax price of $1 of long-term care insurance was performed using each state’s

description of the tax incentive and often required calculation of the individual’s marginal tax rate.

Marginal tax rate simulations were done using NBER’s TAXSIM program (Feenberg and Coutts,

1993).


Simulations of marginal tax rates

The RAND version of the HRS was used, merged with additional variables from the HRS. A

mapping of the financial variables in the HRS to TAXSIM input is provided below.


 TAXSIM input      Description                               HRS Variable(s) used
     pwages        Wage income of primary taxpayer           Individual earnings
     swages        Wage income of secondary taxpayer         Individual earnings of spouse
   dividends       Dividend income                           Included in household capital income
   otherprop       Interest and other property income        Other household income
    pensions       Taxable pension income                    Respondent’s and spouse’s pension
                                                                income
         gssi      Gross social security benefits            Respondent’s and spouse’s Social
                                                                Security retirement and disability
                                                                income
    transfers      Non-taxable transfer income               Respondent’s and spouse’s other
                                                                government transfers
     rentpaid      Rent paid                                 Rent paid
     proptax       Property tax paid                         Property tax paid
    otheritem      Other itemized deductions                 Charitable donations and itemizable
                                                                medical expenses
    childcare      Child care expenses                       Imputed as zero
        ui         Unemployment compensation benefits        Respondent’s and spouse’s unemployment
                                                                + workers compensation benefits
    mortgage       Mortgage interest paid                    Outstanding mortgage amount *
                                                                6 percent
         stcg      Short term capital gain/loss              Household capital income
         ltcg      Long term capital gain/loss               Imputed as zero

Imputation of after-tax price

The first step in the imputation of an individual’s after-tax price was to assign each person a

premium amount based on their state, year, and age. The premium amounts came from Table

5-4 in Johnson et al. (2007), which summarizes Weiss Ratings, Inc. premium data from 2002.


                                                    42
Premiums for ages that were not reported were interpolated from the available data and premiums

were assumed to grow by 3 percent each year.

   Next, a credit value and deduction value was calculated for each person. If a state had a tax

credit for long-term care insurance, the credit value was determined by the following formula:


                                C = max(min(min(cs × π, c̄s ), Ts ), 0)


where c is the fraction of the premium payable as a credit, π is the premium, and c̄s is the

maximum dollar amount of the credit. The value of the credit is constrained to be between zero

and the individual’s state tax liability, Ts , because the credits are nonrefundable. Similarly, the

value of a deduction in states with a deduction is given by:


                                 D = max(min(ds × π, d¯s ) × τs , 0)


where ds is the fraction of the premium deductible, τs is the individual’s state marginal tax rate,

and d¯s is the maximum amount deductible. Where the tax incentives differed by age or income,

appropriate adjustments were made. For individuals who itemize their expenses, the subsidy value

was reduced by their federal marginal tax rate to account for the deductibility of state income

taxes. For individuals who did not file a tax return, the after-tax price was set to 1. Therefore, the

after-tax price T AXP RICE is given by:
                                         
                                         
                                         
                                         
                                          1                   if non-tax filer
                                         
                                             π−(C+D)(1−τf )
                        T AXP RICE =              π            if itemizer
                                         
                                         
                                             π−(C+D)
                                         
                                                               otherwise
                                         
                                         
                                                π




                                                  43
