                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 LABOR-MARKET HETEROGENEITY, AGGREGATION, AND THE LUCAS CRITIQUE

                                        Yongsung Chang
                                          Sun-Bin Kim
                                        Frank Schorfheide

                                       Working Paper 16401
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w16401


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2010




We thank participants at various seminars for helpful comments. Schorfheide gratefully acknowledges
financial support from the National Science Foundation under Grant SES 0617803. Chang acknowledges
the support from WCU (WCU-R33-10005) Program through the Korean National Research Foundation.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Yongsung Chang, Sun-Bin Kim, and Frank Schorfheide. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Labor-Market Heterogeneity, Aggregation, and the Lucas Critique
Yongsung Chang, Sun-Bin Kim, and Frank Schorfheide
NBER Working Paper No. 16401
September 2010
JEL No. C11,C32,E32,E62

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper assesses biases in policy predictions due to the lack of invariance of "structural'' parameters
in representative-agent models. We simulate data under various fiscal policy regimes from a heterogeneous-
agents economy with incomplete asset markets and indivisible labor supply. Imperfect aggregation
manifests itself through preference shocks in the estimated representative-agent model. Preference
and technology parameter estimates are not invariant with respect to policy changes. As a result, the
bias in the representative-agent model's policy predictions is large compared to the length of predictive
intervals that reflect parameter uncertainty.


Yongsung Chang                                      Frank Schorfheide
Department of Economics                             University of Pennsylvania
University of Rochester                             Department of Economics
Rochester, NY 14627                                 3718 Locust Walk
ychang14@mail.rochester.edu                         McNeil 525
                                                    Philadelphia, PA 19104-6297
Sun-Bin Kim                                         and NBER
Department of Economics                             schorf@ssc.upenn.edu
Yonsei University
134 Shinchon-dong Seodaemoon-gu
Seoul Korea, 120-749
sunbin.kim@yonsei.ac.kr
                                                                                            1


1    Introduction

The Lucas (1976) critique of econometric policy evaluation argues that if econometric models
do not capture the primitive parameters of preferences and technology, their coefficients can
be expected to vary with changes in policy regimes. The quantitative work inspired by the
Lucas critique has proceeded by replacing econometric models that were parameterized
in terms of agents’ decision rules with dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE)
models in which parameters characterize the objective functions and constraints faced by
representative economic agents. With these “deep” parameters in hand, it is possible to re-
derive agents’ decision rules under alternative economic policies. In recent years, estimated
representative-agent DSGE models have been widely used to study the effects of monetary
policy (e.g., Smets and Wouters, 2003, 2007; Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans, 2005) and
fiscal policy (e.g., Forni, Monteforte, and Sessa, 2009; Leeper, Plante, and Traum, 2010)
changes.

    The tacit assumption underlying the DSGE model-based policy analysis has been that
the parameters that characterize the preferences of a representative agent and the produc-
tion technologies of a representative firm as well as the exogenous structural shocks are
policy invariant. However, to the extent that macroeconomic time series on variables such
as output, consumption, investment, and employment are constructed by aggregating across
heterogeneous households and firms, the assumption of policy invariance is not self-evident.
More than two decades ago, Geweke (1985, p. 206) pointed out that while the treatment of
expectations and dynamic optimization has been careful, potential problems due to aggre-
gation have usually been ignored: “Whenever econometric policy evaluation is undertaken
using models estimated with aggregated data, it is implicitly presumed that the aggregator
function is structural with respect to the policy intervention.”

    The goal of this paper is to assess the quantitative importance of biases in policy pre-
dictions due to the potential lack of invariance of preference and technology parameters
in representative-agent models. To do so, we simulate data under various fiscal policy
regimes from a heterogeneous-agents economy in which households have to insure them-
selves against idiosyncratic income risks (e.g., Bewley, 1983; Huggett, 1993; Aiyagari, 1994).
Following Chang and Kim (2006), our model economy extends Krusell and Smith’s (1998)
heterogeneous-agents model with incomplete capital markets (Aiyagari, 1994) to indivisible
                                                                                                       2


labor supply (Rogerson, 1988).1 The equilibrium outcomes depend on the cross-sectional
distributions of households’ wealth and earnings, which in turn depend on the policy regime.
Due to the indivisible nature of labor supply at the micro level, aggregate labor supply de-
pends on the shape of the cross-sectional reservation wage distribution rather than the
individual households’ willingness to substitute leisure across times.

      The heterogeneous-agents economy is calibrated to match the cross-sectional distribu-
tion of wealth and earnings in the U.S. We simulate this economy with an aggregate produc-
tivity shock that is comparable to the time series of measured aggregate TFP in post-war
U.S. data. Using aggregate times series on output, consumption, wages, and employment
generated from the heterogeneous-agents model, we estimate a representative-agent model
with state-of-the-art Bayesian methods (Schorfheide, 2000; An and Schorfheide, 2007) and
examine the potential lack of policy invariance of the representative-agent model parame-
ters. It turns out, using Geweke’s expression, that the aggregator function is not invariant
to policy changes.

      More specifically, the quantitative analysis generates the following findings. First, the ef-
fects of imperfect aggregation manifest themselves through the presence of preference shocks
in the representative-agent model. While it is common to include such preference shocks in
the specification of estimable representative agent models, their interpretation is subject to
controversy. Some researchers regard them as fundamental aggregate demand shocks that
contribute to business cycle fluctuations (e.g., Smets and Wouters, 2007). Other authors
view them as wedges in optimality conditions and thus as a sign of model misspecification
(e.g., Chari, Kehoe, and McGrattan, 2007). According to a variance decomposition com-
puted based on our estimated representative-agent model, the measured preference shocks
explain more than 50% of the fluctuations of hours worked. Second, using the standards
of the DSGE model estimation literature, the estimated representative-agent model fits the
aggregate time series data from the heterogeneous-agents economy well. A posterior odds
comparison with a more flexible vector autoregression (VAR) favors the structural model
by a substantial margin.2 Thus, as long as aggregate preference shocks are regarded as a
  1
      Both the theoretical and the empirical importance of incomplete asset markets and indivisible labor
supply are by now widely recognized. See, for instance, Krusell and Smith (1998), Chang and Kim (2006),
Ljungqvist and Sargent (2007), Nakajima (2007), Krusell, Mukoyama, Rogerson, and Sahin (2008), and
Rogerson and Wallenius (2009).
  2
    If a similar comparison were done based on actual U.S. data, for most DSGE models the posterior odds
                                                                                              3


priori plausible, the aggregate time series provide no evidence of model misspecification.

    Third, if the representative-agent model is estimated with data from the heterogeneous-
agents economy under different policy regimes, several important parameters vary con-
siderably. For instance, the aggregate labor supply elasticity, often recognized as a crucial
parameter for fiscal policy analysis (e.g., Auerbach and Kotlikoff, 1987; Judd, 1987; Prescott
2004), depends on the cross-sectional distribution of reservation wages, which in turn is a
function of the fiscal policy regime. The average level of total factor productivity is also
not policy invariant because fiscal policy affects labor-market participation and thereby the
cross-sectional distribution of productivities of the employed workforce.

    Finally, to assess the quantitative implications of the lack of policy invariance, we con-
struct predictive distributions for the effects of fiscal policy changes on output, consumption,
employment, and aggregate welfare based on the estimated representative-agent model un-
der the benchmark fiscal policy, assuming that the preference and technology parameters
are unaffected by the policy shifts. We find that the lack of policy invariance of the aggrega-
tor function is sufficiently strong enough to render predictions from the representative-agent
model inaccurate. In particular, the prediction bias due to imperfect aggregation is sub-
stantially larger than the prediction intervals that reflect parameter estimation uncertainty.

    While there exists a fairly extensive body of research on aggregation issues as well
as on the Lucas critique, we will only briefly discuss two strands of the literature that
are most closely related to this paper. First, calibrated heterogeneous-agents economies
similar to the one in this paper have been used to assess equilibrium conditions derived
from a representative-agent model in Chang and Kim (2006, 2007) and An, Chang, and
Kim (2009). However, none of the three papers considers the (fiscal) policy invariance of
the parameters in an estimated representative-agent model. Second, our analysis focuses
on the cross-sectional heterogeneity on the household side and fiscal policies that distort
households’ labor supply and savings decision. Much of the literature on policy analysis
with estimated DSGE models, however, focuses on monetary policy analysis in the context
of New Keynesian models. For the propagation of monetary policy shifts the heterogeneity
on the firm side, in particular with respect to pricing decisions, plays an important role.

    Until now the literature on New Keynesian DSGE model has mostly focused on the
question of whether the cost of changing nominal prices is invariant to, say, changes in the
comparison would favor the VAR, e.g., Del Negro, Schorfheide, Smets, and Wouters (2007).
                                                                                                              4


target inflation rate. Fernández-Villaverde and Rubio-Ramiréz (2007) estimate a model in
which both monetary policy rule parameters and nominal rigidity parameters are allowed to
vary over time. They find that during high inflation episodes, the estimated cost associated
with nominal price changes is lower3 and they interpret the negative correlation between
policy and price-adjustment parameters as evidence against policy invariance. Cogley and
Yagihashi (2009) conduct the following experiment. They simulate data under two monetary
policy regimes from an economy in which firms are heterogeneous with respect to their
price setting history and face some menu costs of nominal price adjustments. Based on the
simulated data, the authors then use Bayesian methods to estimate an approximating model
that assumes that firms are able to re-optimize their nominal prices with a fixed probability
in every period as in Calvo (1983). The attractive feature of the Calvo mechanism is that
a first-order approximation to the aggregate production function and the law of motion of
inflation can be derived analytically. As in our analysis, Cogley and Yagihashi (2009) find
that some of the preference and technology parameters of the approximating model are not
policy invariant. However, policy recommendations derived from the approximating model
still lead to good outcomes under the data-generating economy.

       The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 lays out the heterogeneous-
agents economy that features incomplete capital markets and indivisible labor. We cal-
ibrate the model economy to match salient features of the cross-sectional income and
wealth distribution in the U.S. as well as some key business cycle properties. Section 3
presents the representative-agent model that is estimated based on simulated data from the
heterogeneous-agents economy and used to predict the effect of policy changes. The quan-
titative results are presented in Section 4. In Section 5 we repeat the quantitative analysis
for model economies with divisible labor supply and complete asset markets, in order to
distinguish the separate roles played by the two frictions considered in Section 4. Finally,
Section 6 concludes. Detailed derivations for the representative-agent model as well data
sources can be found in the Appendices.
   3
       In a Calvo model of nominal rigidity this cost can be interpreted as the probability with which a firm is
unable to re-optimize its price.
                                                                                            5


2      Heterogeneous-Agents Economy

We provide a description of the heterogeneous-agents economy that serves as a data-
generating mechanism for the quantitative analysis. The model economy is based on Chang
and Kim (2007), which extends Krusell and Smith’s (1998) heterogeneous-agents model
with incomplete capital markets (Aiyagari, 1994) to indivisible labor supply (Rogerson,
1988). Due to the indivisible nature of labor supply the aggregate labor supply depends on
the shape of the cross-sectional reservation wage distribution, which in turn is affected by
the policy regime.


2.1     Economic Environment

Households: The model economy consists of a continuum (measure one) of worker-
households who have identical preferences but different productivities ex post. Household-
specific idiosyncratic productivity xt varies exogenously according to a stochastic process
with a transition probability distribution function πx (x0 |x) = Pr(xt+1 ≤ x0 |xt = x). A
household maximizes its utility by choosing consumption ct and hours worked ht :
                         "∞        (            1+1/γ
                                                      )#
                          X
                                 s             ht+s
             max      Et       β ln ct+s − B                                              (1)
                                              1 + 1/γ
                             s=0
                  s.t.   ct + at+1 = at + (1 − τH )Wt xt ht + (1 − τK )Rt at + T̄

                         at+1 ≥ a,    ht ∈ {0, h̄}.

Households trade assets at which yield the real rate of return Rt . These assets are either
claims to the physical capital stock or IOUs, which are in zero net supply. Both asset types
generate the same return Rt , which is subject to the capital tax τK .

      Households face a borrowing constraint, at+1 ≥ a, and supply their labor in an indivis-
ible manner, that is, ht either takes the value 0 or h̄. We normalize the endowment of time
to one and assume h̄ < 1. If a household supplies h̄ units of labor, labor income is Wt xt h̄,
where Wt is the aggregate wage rate for an efficiency unit of labor. Labor income is subject
to the tax τH and T̄ denotes lump-sum taxes or transfers. Ex post households differ with
respect to their productivity and asset holdings. The joint distribution of productivity, xt ,
and asset holdings, at , is characterized by the probability measure µt (at , xt ).
                                                                                                          6


Firms: A representative firm produces output Yt according to a constant-returns-to-scale
Cobb-Douglas technology in capital, Kt , and efficiency units of labor, Lt .4

                                    Yt = F (Lt , Kt , λt ) = λt Lαt Kt1−α ,                             (2)

where λt is the aggregate productivity shock with a transition probability distribution func-
tion πλ (λ0 |λ) = Pr(λt+1 ≤ λ0 |λt = λ). The representative firm’s profit function is:

                                     Πt = Yt − Wt Lt − (Rt + δ)Kt .                                     (3)

The first-order conditions for the profit maximization are

                            Wt = αYt /Lt     and (Rt + δ) = (1 − α)Yt /Kt .                             (4)

The return on capital (net of depreciation), Rt , is subject to capital tax. The physical
capital stock evolves according to

                                         Kt+1 = (1 − δ)Kt + It ,                                        (5)

where It is aggregate investment and δ is the depreciation rate. The total factor productivity
process λt is the only aggregate disturbance. While this feature of the model economy does
not necessarily reflect our views about the sources of business cycle fluctuations, it makes
the quantitative analysis more transparent. Since the aggregation error will show up as a
preference shift in the representative-agent model, we intentionally exclude shocks that shift
households’ preferences, e.g., labor supply shocks, from the heterogeneous-agents economy.

Fiscal Policy: Fiscal policy in the model economy are characterized by labor and capital
tax rates (τH and τK ) as well as the level of lump-sum transfers (T̄ ). We assume that
transfers are constant over time and the government maintains a balanced budget in each
period. The fiscal authority collects the revenue from income tax and spends it on fixed
lump-sum transfers to households T̄ or purchases of goods for its own consumption Gt :
                         Z                                              Z
         T̄ + Gt = τH Wt xt h(at , xt ; λt , µt ) dµt (at , xt ) + τK Rt at dµt (at , xt ). (6)

In order to obtain total tax revenues we have to integrate over the distribution of household
types over the measure µt (at , xt ). For simplicity, we assumed that government purchases
   4
       This implicitly assumes that workers are perfect substitutes for each other. While this assumption
abstracts from reality, it greatly simplifies the labor-market equilibrium because we only need to clear the
labor market through the total efficiency units of labor.
                                                                                               7


Gt do not affect the household’s marginal utility from private consumption or leisure nor
the production function of the representative firm. Due to the additional assumption that
the lump-sum transfers are a constant fraction χ of the steady state tax revenue, that is,
                           Z                                Z           
              T̄ = χ τH W̄ xh(a, x; λ̄, µ̄) dµ̄(a, x) + τK R̄ a dµ̄(a, x) ,             (7)

the time-varying level of government expenditures does not affect the decisions of households
and firms, which greatly simplifies the solution of the model.

Further Equilibrium Conditions and Model Solution: Since IOUs are in zero net
supply, the net supply of assets has to equal the capital stock. Moreover, in equilibrium the
labor hired by the firms has to equal the total supply of efficiency units by the households:
                      Z                       Z
                Kt = at dµt (at , xt ), Lt = xt h(at , xt ; λt , µt )dµt (at , xt ).      (8)

The aggregate resource constraint can be expressed as
                            Z
                       Yt = c(at , xt ; λt , µt )dµt (at , xt ) + It + Gt .                  (9)


    To solve for the competitive equilibrium fluctuation of the model economy, it is useful
to express the households’ optimization problem in recursive form. The state variables for
the households’ decision problem are its asset holdings at , its idiosyncratic productivity xt ,
aggregate productivity λt , as well as the joint distribution of asset holdings and idiosyncratic
productivities in the economy, µt (at , xt ). It is convenient to drop the time subscripts and
use variables with a prime (0) to denote the next period’s values. The value function for an
employed household, denoted by V E , is given by
                           1−σ
     E                     c    −1       h̄1+1/γ
   V (a, x; λ, µ) = max            −  B
                    a0 ∈A    1−σ         1 + 1/γ
                                h                                               i          (10)
                                        E 0 0 0 0       N 0 0 0 0
                           + βE max V (a , x ; λ , µ ), V (a , x ; λ , µ ) x, λ

subject to the constraints

                      c + a0 = a + (1 − τH )W xh̄ + (1 − τK )Ra,       a0 ≥ a,

                                           µ0 = T(λ, µ),

where T(·) denotes a transition operator that defines the law of motion for the distribution
of household types µ(a, x). The value function for a not-employed household, denoted by
                                                                                             8


V N (a, x; λ, µ), is defined similarly with h = 0. Then, the labor-supply decision is charac-
terized by:
                                                    V E (a, x; λ, µ), V N (a, x; λ, µ) .
                                                
                     V (a, x; λ, µ) = max
                                     h∈{0,h̄}

The households’ decision rules for consumption c(·), asset holdings a(·), and labor supply
h(·) are functions of the individual-specific state variables a and x and the aggregate states
λ and µ.

      To reduce the dimensionality of the state-space we use the “bounded rationality” method
developed by Krusell and Smith (1998). We replace the distribution µ(a, x) by a finite set
of moments, assuming that agents make use of a finite set of moments of µ in forecasting
aggregate prices. We also assume that agents forecast these moments T using a log linear
form law of motion. As in Krusell and Smith (1998), we achieve a fairly precise forecast when
we use the first moment of aggregate capital, K. A detailed description of the computational
procedure can be found in Chang and Kim (2007).


2.2     Calibration

In order to simulate data from the heterogeneous-agents economy we have to specify values
for the preference and technology parameters as well as the fiscal policy parameters. A
summary is provided in Table 1. The unit of time is a quarter.

Firm Parameters: On the production side of the economy, we let capital depreciate at the
rate δ = 0.025 and set the capital share parameter α = 0.64 to generate a labor share that
is consistent with post-war U.S. data. The aggregate productivity shock, λt , is a discrete
approximation of a continuous AR(1) process:

                          ln λt = ρλ ln λt−1 + σλ λ,t ,        λ,t ∼ N (0, 1).           (11)

We set ρλ = 0.95 and σλ = 0.007. These parameter values are obtained by fitting an AR(1)
process to a de-trended measured TFP (e.g., Kydland and Prescott, 1982).

Household Parameters: On the household side, we assume that the idiosyncratic pro-
ductivity xt follows an AR(1) process:

                          ln xt = ρx ln xt−1 + σx x,t ,        x,t ∼ N (0, 1).           (12)
                                                                                                            9


The values of ρx = 0.939 and σx = 0.287 reflect the persistence and standard deviation
of innovation to individual wages estimated from the PSID (see Chang and Kim, 2007).5
According to the Michigan Time-Use survey, a working individual spends one-third of his
discretionary time h̄ = 1/3. We set the intertemporal substitution elasticity of hours worked
equal to γ = 0.4. Given all other parameters, we set the preference parameter B such that
the steady-state employment rate is 60%, the average employment in our sample period.
The discount factor β is chosen so that the quarterly rate of return to capital is 1% in the
steady state. Finally, we let the borrowing constraint a = −2. In our model this corresponds
to half of the annual earnings of the household with average productivity, which is consistent
with the average unsecured credit-limit-to-income ratio of U.S. households – 28% in 1992
and 47.5% in 1998 – reported by Narajabad (2010) based on data from Survey of Consumer
Finances.

Fiscal Policies: Figure 1 depicts U.S. labor and capital tax rates, obtained from Chen,
Imrohoroglu, and Imrohoroglu (2007). The capital tax rate fell from 45% to roughly 32%
over the period from 1950 to 2003. Over the same time span the labor tax rate rose from
about 22% to 30%. The ratio of transfer in total government expenditure, χ = T /(T + G),
has shown a strong trend in the last half century. It rose from 22% in 1960 to 47% in 2010.6
For our benchmark economy we choose fiscal policy in 1984, the midpoint of our sample
(τH = 0.29, τK = 0.35, χ = 0.36).

       In addition to our benchmark fiscal policy, we consider 5 alternative fiscal policy regimes
in Section 4: (i) low labor income tax (τH = 0.22), (ii) high capital income tax (τK = 0.47),
(iii) higher ratio of lump-sum transfer in government expenditure (χ = 0.5), (iv) the 1960
fiscal policy (τH = 0.229, τK = 0.443, χ = 0.224), and (v) the 2004 fiscal policy (τH = 0.269,
τK = 0.327, χ = 0.417). These values, respectively, correspond to the lower or upper bound,
or the beginning or end point of U.S. fiscal policy during the sample period.

Implications: Since the goal of our analysis is to determine the magnitude of aggregation
   5
       Chang and Kim (2007) restrict the household sample to those with a household head between 35 and
55 years of age with a high school education to avoid the fixed effect in wages. With this restricted sample,
the estimates are ρx = 0.929 and σx = 0.227. Here, however, we use the whole sample of PSID, ages 18 to
65, to encompass the overall distribution of wages and obtain a larger shock for idiosyncratic productivity.
   6
     We compute this ratio based on the government consumption (NIPA3.1 Line 16) and net government
social benefits to persons (NIPA3.1 Line 19 - Line 13) with the caveat that in reality the government transfer
payments are not made in a lump-sum fashion and distributed equally to all households.
                                                                                                    10


biases in policy predictions, it is desirable for the model economy to possess a realistic
amount of heterogeneity, similar to that in the U.S. data. We compare the cross-sectional
distributions of earnings and wealth – two important observable dimensions of heterogeneity
in the labor market – found in the model and in the data. Table 2 summarizes both the
PSID (1984 survey) and the model’s detailed information on wealth and earnings. Family
wealth in the PSID reflects the net worth of houses, other real estate, vehicles, farms and
businesses owned, stocks, bonds, cash accounts, and other assets. For each quintile group of
the wealth distribution, we calculate the wealth share, ratio of group average to economy-
wide average, and the earnings share.

       In both the data and the model, the poorest 20% of families in terms of wealth dis-
tribution were found to own virtually nothing. In fact their share of wealth is negative,
indicating that they are net borrowers, potentially constrained in their consumption. The
PSID found that households in the 2nd, 3rd, 4th, and 5th quintiles own 0.50, 5.06, 18.74,
and 76.22% of total wealth, respectively, while, according to the model, they own 3.27,
11.38, 24.74, and 62.17%, respectively. The average wealth of those in the 2nd, 3rd, 4th,
and 5th quintiles is, respectively, 0.03, 0.25, 0.93, and 3.81 times larger than that of a typical
household, according to the PSID. These ratios are 0.16, 0.57, 1.24, and 3.11 according to
our model. Households in the 2nd, 3rd, 4th, and 5th quintiles of the wealth distribution
earn, respectively, 11.31, 18.72, 24.21, and 38.23% of total earnings, according to the PSID.
The corresponding groups earn 15.76, 19.97, 23.72, and 30.81%, respectively, in the model.
While the model economy cannot generate an extreme concentration of wealth observed in
the data,7 we deduce that it possesses a reasonable degree of heterogeneity, thus making it
possible to study the effects of aggregation in the labor market.

       Table 3 reports the second moments (standard deviation and correlation) of aggregate
output, consumption, and hours generated from the heterogeneous-agents economy and
post-war U.S. economy. Data definitions for the U.S. time series are provided in Appendix
B. Since the representative-agent model (presented in the next section) accommodates a
deterministic balanced-growth path, we remove a linear trend from log output and con-
sumption. Since the model economy allows for an aggregate productivity shock only, the
aggregate output of the model exhibits only about three-quarters of the volatility of actual
   7
       For example, in the PSID, the top 5% of households own 46% of total wealth, whereas in our model
that group owns 25.5% of total wealth.
                                                                                           11


output. Consumption is as volatile as that in the data. A striking difference is the standard
deviation of hours. It is three times more volatile in the actual data than it is in the simu-
lated data. This is in part due to the low-frequency movement in labor supply, not captured
in the model economy. In fact, the volatility of hours in the model-generated data is about
half as volatile as the standard deviation of actual Hodrick-Prescott-filtered hours, which
removes the low frequency variation. Output, consumption, and hours are all positively
correlated. The correlations between output and hours as well as between consumption and
hours are slightly stronger in the simulated data than they are in the U.S. data. While the
main purpose of our analysis is not to match the business cycle statistics of aggregate time
series, the heterogeneous-agents economy is successful in replicating some salient business
cycle features.



3     A Representative-Agent Model

In this section we describe a representative-agent model through which we will interpret the
equilibrium outcome of the heterogeneous-agents economy. We will estimate the fundamen-
tal preference and technology parameters of the representative-agent model using the aggre-
gate time series generated from the heterogeneous-agents economy. In other words, we look
for the parameters that best approximate the underlying heterogenous-agents economy. We
then use the estimated representative-agent model to predict the effects of alternative fiscal
policies and compare those with the actual equilibrium outcome from the heterogeneous-
agents economies under those policies.


3.1   Model Specification

The households in the model economy specified in Section 2 have identical preferences but
exhibit ex post heterogeneity with respect to idiosyncratic productivity and asset holdings.
We now replace the heterogeneous, borrowing-constrained households with a stand-in rep-
resentative household that solves the following problem:
                         "∞             (                             )#
                          X
                                t+s                (Ht+s /Bt+s )1+1/ν
              max     Et      β Zt+s ln Ct+s −                                           (13)
                                                         1 + 1/ν
                             s=0
                  s.t.   Ct + Kt+1 = Kt + (1 − τH )Wt Ht + (1 − τK )Rt Kt + T̄ .
                                                                                             12


Because of incomplete capital markets and the indivisible nature of the labor supply, house-
holds’ preferences in the heterogeneous-agents economy do not aggregate exactly to (13).
Chang and Kim (2007) document that the lack of exact aggregation leads to a wedge between
the marginal product of labor and the marginal rate of substitution. This labor-market
wedge is also well documented in the U.S. data, e.g., Hall (1997), and often interpreted as
an intratemporal aggregate labor supply shock, which we denote as Bt in (13). Scheinkman
and Weiss (1986), Krüger and Lustig (2007), and Liu, Waggoner, and Zha (2008) show
that capital market incompleteness can lead to a stochastic term in aggregate preferences
that affects the intertemporal first-order condition of the stand-in representative household.
Thus, we introduce a second preference “shock” Zt in (13).

    As is common in the literature on estimated DSGE models (e.g., Smets and Wouters
2003, 2007), we assume that both preference shifters follow independent autoregressive
processes:

                  ln(Bt /B̄) = ρB ln(Bt−1 /B̄) + σB B,t ,       B,t ∼ N (0, 1)           (14)

                       ln Zt = ρZ ln Zt−1 + σZ Z,t ,       Z,t ∼ N (0, 1).

It is important to note that the law of motion in (14) is not derived from the underlying
aggregation problem, but rather reflects a commonly made assumption in the empirical
literature. We also anticipate that the aggregate labor supply elasticity, denoted by ν, can
be different from the micro elasticity of household labor supply γ, that appears in (1). The
representative household owns the capital stock and its budget constraint resembles that of
the households at the micro-level. As in Section 2, the return Rt is defined in excess of the
depreciation rate δ and the evolution of the capital stock is given by (5).

    The production technology in the representative-agent model is of the Cobb-Douglas
form, identical to the one used in the heterogeneous-agents economy:

                                      Yt = At Htα Kt1−α ,                                  (15)

where technology evolves according to the AR(1) process

                   ln(At /Ā) = ρA ln(At−1 /Ā) + σA A,t ,    A,t ∼ N (0, 1).            (16)

The first-order conditions for the firm’s static profit maximization are identical to (4) except
that Lt needs to be replaced by Ht . The produced output is either consumed by the
                                                                                                          13


representative household, invested to accumulate capital, or consumed by the government.
Thus, the aggregate resource constraint takes the form

                                             Yt = Ct + It + Gt                                          (17)

and resembles (9). Finally, as in the heterogeneous-agents economy the government uses its
tax revenues for transfers T̄ and purchases Gt , maintaining a balanced budget:

                                      T̄ + Gt = τH Wt Ht + τK Rt Kt .                                   (18)

To construct an approximate solution to the representative-agent model, we log-linearize the
equilibrium conditions around the deterministic steady state and apply a standard solution
method for a linear rational expectations model.


3.2       Econometric Analysis

We will use Bayesian techniques developed in Schorfheide (2000) and surveyed in An and
Schorfheide (2007) in Section 4 to estimate the representative-agent model based on ag-
gregated data from the heterogeneous-agents economy. As observables we use log levels of
output Yt , consumption Ct , and employment Et , where
              Z                                             Z
       Ct = c(at , xt ; λt , µt )dµt (at , xt ), Et = (1/h̄) h(at , xt ; λt , µt )dµt (at , xt ).

Since α and δ, are easily identifiable based on long-run averages of the labor share, and the
investment-capital ratio, we fix these parameters in the estimation using the “true” values
reported in Table 1.8 Moreover, we assume that the econometrician knows the “true”
fiscal policy parameters (τH , τK , and χ). Finally, we also fix the autocorrelation of the
inter-temporal preference shock process (ρZ ) to 0.99.9

       Bayesian inference combines a prior distribution with a likelihood function to obtain
a posterior distribution of the model parameters. Marginal prior distributions for the re-
maining parameters of the representative-agent model are provided in Table 4. Our prior
   8
       We conducted the Bayesian inference based on non-dogmatic priors elicited from beliefs about steady-
state relationships as in Del Negro and Schorfheide (2008). The results were essentially the same as the ones
reported below.
   9
     A preliminary analysis generated estimates of this parameter that were always very close to one. Fixing
the parameter improved the numerical performance of the Bayesian computations.
                                                                                           14


is diffuse with respect to the coefficients determining the law of motion of the exogenous
shocks and assigns a high probability to the event that the annualized real interest rate lies
between 0 and 8% and the aggregate labor supply elasticity falls into the interval from 0 to
2. The joint prior distribution for all DSGE model parameters is obtained simply by taking
the product of the marginals.



4     Quantitative Results

We consider three main questions in our quantitative analysis. First, we estimate the
representative-agent model that best approximates the aggregate times series generated
from the calibrated heterogeneous-agents economy. As is explained above, we anticipate that
aggregation error manifests itself through preference shocks of a representative household.
We also compare the estimates based on simulated data to those from the U.S. economy.
Second, we study to what extent the parameters of the representative-agent model are
invariant to changes in fiscal policy. We do so by re-estimating the representative-agent
model using the data generated from the heterogeneous-agents model under different policy
regimes. Finally, we use the representative-agent model parameter estimates to predict the
effect of new policies assuming that taste and technology parameters are policy-invariant.
We assess the accuracy of these predictions by comparing them to the true equilibrium
outcomes from the heterogeneous-agents models.


4.1   Benchmark Estimates of the Representative-Agent Model

We begin by fitting the representative-agent model using the aggregate output, consump-
tion, and employment generated from the heterogeneous-agents economy under the bench-
mark fiscal policy. Posterior estimates based on 200 and 2,500 aggregate observations are
reported in Table 5. The sample size of 200 observations would correspond to 50 years of
quarterly observations. While the larger sample size of 2,500 is unrealistic, the consistency
property of Bayes estimators implies that the resulting parameter estimates are very close
to the pseudo-true representative-agent model parameters that minimize the information-
theoretic Kullback-Leibler distance between the approximating representative-agent model
and the data-generating heterogeneous-agents economy. In addition, we also report esti-
mates based on actual U.S. aggregate data from 1964:I to 2006:IV.
                                                                                                        15


       Our discussion of the estimation will highlight the following four findings: (i) the es-
timation of the representative-agent model detects sizeable preference shocks. (ii) With
these preference shocks the estimated representative-agent model fits the aggregate output,
consumption, and employment data well in comparison with a VAR. (iii) The estimated
aggregate labor supply elasticities are related to the slope of the reservation wage distri-
bution in the heterogeneous-agents economy. (iv) Due to a composition effect of the labor
force, measured total factor productivity At in the representative-agent model differs from
the underlying technology shock λt in the heterogeneous-agents economy. Findings (iii)
and (iv) will be very important for understanding the outcomes of the subsequent policy
experiments.

Preference Shocks: Although there are no aggregate preference shocks in the underly-
ing heterogeneous-agents economy, the representative-agent model estimation detects both
intratemporal (Bt ) and intertemporal (Zt ) preference shocks. For example, for the sample
of 2,500 observations the estimated ln Bt has an autocorrelation coefficient of 0.92 with
a standard deviation of innovation of 0.3%. The overall volatility (unconditional stan-
dard deviation) is 0.77%, about one-third of the volatility of aggregate consumption in the
heterogeneous-agents economy. The estimated overall volatility of ln Zt is 2.13%, similar to
that of aggregate consumption. A variance decomposition of the observables, based on the
a priori assumption of uncorrelated shocks, is provided in Table 6. Jointly, the two prefer-
ence shocks account for about 10% of the variation in output and consumption, and more
than 38% of the variation in hours worked. While we estimated the representative-agent
model subject to the assumption that all three shock processes are uncorrelated at all leads
and lags, it turns out that ex post the correlation between the technology process and the
intratemporal (intertemporal) preference shocks is 0.30 (0.2).10

       The variance decomposition based on actual U.S. data assigns even more importance
to the intratemporal preference shock, since it explains almost 50% of the fluctuations in
output and consumption and almost all of the variation in employment. To the extent that
U.S. business cycles are driven by other demand shocks, it is probably not surprising that the
preference shock plays a larger role in the actual data. The overall role of the intertemporal
  10
       Our estimates complement the findings in Chang and Kim (2007), who construct a time series for ln Bt
directly as the wedge between the marginal product of labor and the marginal rate of substitution and then
study its cyclical properties.
                                                                                            16


shock Zt , estimated based on simulated data, appears to be much smaller than those based
on U.S. data (or those in the literature). The intertemporal preference shock, Zt , captures
mis-specification of the consumption Euler equation. The fact that our estimation excludes
the use of asset returns might explain the muted role of this shock. While it is difficult to
make direct comparisons with the literature that estimates richer DSGE models or employs
alternative empirical methods, a substantial variation of preference shocks for employment
or hours worked seems broadly in line with recent studies by Hall (1997) and Chari, Kehoe,
McGrattan (2007), and Justiniano, Primiceri, and Tambalotti (2010). In sum, our results
indicate the need for caution in interpreting the measured preference shocks: the preference
shocks often measured from the aggregate time series analysis may reflect the specification
error (e.g., aggregate error) rather than a fundamental driving force behind business cycles.

Time Series Fit: For the subsequent policy experiments with the representative-agent
model to be plausible, it is desirable that it be able to track the simulated aggregate time
series. We therefore compute the posterior odds of the estimated representative-agent model
relative to a VAR(4) with Minnesota prior. Such comparisons are commonly used to assess
the overall time series fit of estimated DSGE models, as discussed in Del Negro, Schorfheide,
Smets, and Wouters (2007). We find that the posterior odds based on the sample of 200
observations favor the structural representative-agent model over the VAR by e23 . This
indicates that the cross-equation restrictions embodied in the representative-agent model
are well specified in view of the more flexible but less parsimonious VAR. If the same
calculation is repeated for actual U.S. data, the odds shift to e46 in favor of the VAR. More
generally, unlike most DSGE models that have been estimated in the literature based on
actual data, the representative-agent model fits the aggregate time series simulated from
the heterogeneous-agents model very well, at least if one regards aggregate preference as a
priori plausible.

Aggregate Labor Supply Elasticity: The 90% credible interval for the aggregate labor
supply elasticity of a representative household (ν) ranges from 1.57 to 1.86 for the sample of
200 observations and from 2.01 to 2.26 for the sample of 2,500 observations. Thus, it is quite
different from γ = 0.4 that we assumed for the individual households in (1). This point has
been stressed in Chang and Kim (2006). In our heterogeneous-agents model, which features
indivisible labor and incomplete markets, the aggregate elasticity is determined by the shape
of reservation wage distribution, which we describe later, instead of the willingness of inter-
                                                                                                          17


temporal substitution of leisure by individual households. It turns out that the estimated
aggregate labor supply elasticity (ν̂ = 0.34) based on U.S. data is much smaller than the
estimates obtained from the simulated data.11 Two salient features of the aggregate labor
market of the U.S. economy are a high volatility of quantities (hours) relative to prices
(productivity) and a lack of systematic correlation between hours and productivity. These
features lead to estimates that imply a low aggregate labor supply elasticity and fairly large
preference shocks. According to Table 6, the U.S. estimates imply that almost all of the
variation in hours worked is due to preference shocks.

Composition Effect: The point estimates of ρA and σA imply that the (unconditional)
standard deviation of the aggregate technology process in the representative-agent model
is about 1.2%. The standard deviation of the productivity process λt in the heterogeneous-
agents model, on the other hand, is about 2.2%. The discrepancy arises because of a
composition effect in the workforce. In the heterogeneous-agents economy, newly hired
workers during the expansion are, on average, less productive than existing workers, lowering
the average productivity of the workforce. Vice versa, it is the low-productivity workers who
leave the workforce during the recession. This composition effect of the workforce makes
the measured aggregate productivity less volatile than the true aggregate technology. It
also contributes to a larger estimate of aggregate labor supply because the measured hours
worked (e.g., employment) exhibit a larger volatility than the total labor input in efficiency
units. The composition effect is also well documented for actual U.S. data. For instance,
Bils (1985) estimates, based on PSID data, that the average wage of newly hired workers
is 19% lower than the average wage of existing workers.


4.2       Policy (In)variance of Model Parameters

We now investigate whether the parameters of the representative-agent model are invariant
with respect to policy changes. To do so, the heterogeneous-agents economy is simulated
under the alternative fiscal policies listed in Table 1. In these simulations the sequences
of aggregate and idiosyncratic shocks are kept identical to those used for the benchmark
analysis. Finally, the representative-agent model is re-estimated based on the new data sets.
  11
       A more detailed empirical analysis based on post-war U.S. data can be found in Rios-Rull, Schorfheide,
Fuentes-Albero, Kryshko, and Santaeulalia-Llopis (2009).
                                                                                                               18


If the representative-agent parameters were truly “structural,” the parameter estimates
should be the same (up to some estimation uncertainty), regardless of the policy regime.

       The resulting posterior mean parameter estimates and 90% credible intervals for samples
of 2,500 observations are reported in the top panel of Table 7. In order to understand
how policy changes affect the parameter estimates, two pieces of information are useful.
First, in the bottom panel of Table 7, we show how the steady states react to the policy
changes. Second, in Figure 2 we plot pseudo aggregate labor supply schedules based on the
steady-state reservation wage distribution, i.e., the inverse function of the cumulative wage
distribution, for the various fiscal policy regimes. Each curve represents the employment
rate (on the x-axis) at a given wage rate (y-axis). The vertical line denotes the steady-state
level of employment under each policy regime. The reservation-wage schedules shed light
on why changes in fiscal policy may affect aggregate labor supply estimates.

       A few observations stand out. First, while the estimate of the preference parameter ln B̄
is fairly stable across policy regimes, there is considerable variation – 90% credible intervals
do not overlap – in the estimates of average log productivity, ln Ā, the aggregate labor
supply elasticity ν, and the implicit steady-state interest rate rA , which determines the dis-
count factor β. Second, the estimated aggregate shock processes (not shown in the table)
are also sensitive to the policy regime. Third, the second panel of Table 7 documents that
the average labor productivity in the heterogeneous-agents economy falls – due to the com-
positional effect in the workforce discussed above – whenever total employment increases.
Fourth, Figure 2 indicates that the aggregate labor supply schedule in the heterogeneous-
agents economy becomes steeper toward the full employment level, as the economy moves
toward the right tail of the reservation wage distribution. This pattern is mirrored in the
labor-supply elasticity estimates generated with the representative-agent model.12 We now
consider the labor tax cut, the rise in the capital tax rate, and the increase in transfers in
more detail. The 1960 and the 2004 policy lead to a combination of the effects described
subsequently.

Labor Tax Cut: When the labor income tax rate is lowered (to τH = 0.22), the employ-
  12
       The representative-agent-based estimate of the labor supply elasticity is not identical to the slope of the
reservation wage distribution in the heterogeneous-agents economy. The calculation based on the slope of
the reservation wage distribution assumes that the entire wealth-earnings distribution remains unchanged,
whereas the aggregate productivity shock shifts the wealth-earnings distribution over time.
                                                                                            19


ment rate increases by almost 7% (from 60% to 63.8%). Because of the tax cut, the total
tax revenue decreases (not reported). Given the fixed proportion of lump-sum transfers
(χ = 0.36), each household receives fewer lump-sum transfers and increases the precau-
tionary savings motive. Higher labor input reinforces the accumulation of capital given
the complementarity between capital and labor. As a result, the aggregate capital stock
rises by 6% (from 15.17 to 16.07), lowering an equilibrium annual interest rate from 4%
to 3.68%. Aggregate output increases about 4% (from 1.48 to 1.53). The measured av-
erage labor productivity decreases by 3% (from 2.46 to 2.39) due to compositional effect.
Finally, the employment increase raises the slope of the reservation in the neighborhood of
the steady state and thereby lowers the implicit labor supply elasticity. In order for the
representative agent model to capture the composition effect and precautionary savings,
the estimates of the discount rate, rA , and average productivity ln Ā have to fall, as in the
second column of Table 7. As the average employment rate rises with the labor tax cut,
the economy moves toward a thinner part of the reservation wage distribution, requiring
the labor supply elasticity ν, of the representative agent model to decrease.

Rise in Capital Tax Rate: When we increase the capital income tax rate from τK = 0.35
to τK = 0.47, the equilibrium employment rate remains essentially unchanged. Thus, the
workforce composition effect is not operational. A high capital tax, however, decreases
savings and results in a decrease in the capital stock of 8% (from 15.2 to 14.0), raising
the equilibrium interest rate from 4% to 4.76%. Unlike in the case of the labor tax cut,
the estimates of the representative-agent parameters are more or less unaffected by the
policy change. The basic channels through which the capital tax increase operates are well
captured by the steady-state relationships in the representative-agent model.

More Transfers: The increase in the ratio of lump-sum transfers in government expendi-
tures from χ = 0.36 to 0.5 generates a negative income effect on the labor supply, decreasing
the employment rate to 57%. A larger transfer also discourages the precautionary motive
of savings, decreasing aggregate capital stock by 3% (from 15.2 to 14.76), and slightly raises
the equilibrium interest rate. Labor productivity, however, increases as the employment
rate decreases because less-productive workers retreat from the labor market. Finally, the
heterogeneous-agents economy moves to a point in the reservation wage distribution with
a flatter slope, implying a larger labor supply elasticity. Again, these changes (such as the
composition effect in the workforce and the change in the precautionary savings motive)
                                                                                                            20


are captured in the representative-agent model by bigger estimates of rA , ν, and ln Ā.


4.3       Accuracy of Policy Predictions

In order to assess the quantitative importance of the policy dependence of the parameters
of the representative-agent model, we now examine the accuracy of the policy predictions
that the representative-agent model delivers under the assumption that its parameters are
unaffected by policy interventions. To do so, we construct posterior predictive distributions
for the effects of the policy changes based on the model estimated under the benchmark
fiscal policy. We consider the percentage change in long-run aggregate output, consumption,
and employment as well as the overall welfare effect induced by the policy change. Before
discussing the quantitative results, some more details regarding our measure of welfare are
provided.

Welfare Measure: An important advantage of DSGE models over reduced-form models,
such as vector autoregressions, is the welfare analysis. Following Aiyagari and McGrattan
(1998), we define the social welfare as:13
                                         Z
                                  W = V (a, x)dµ(a, x),                                                   (19)

where µ(a, x) is the steady-state joint distribution of asset holdings and idiosyncratic pro-
ductivity and V (a, x) is the value function associated with the optimal decisions, i.e.,
                                         ∞
                                                                              h(at , xt )1+1/γ
                                         X                                                    
                                                   t
                         V (a, x) = E0         β           ln c(at , xt ) − B                    .        (20)
                                                                                 1 + 1/γ
                                         t=0

c(a, x) and h(a, x) are the optimal decision rules for an individual whose asset holdings
are a and idiosyncratic productivity is x. This is a utilitarian social welfare function that
measures the ex ante welfare in the steady state—i.e., the welfare of an individual before
the realization of initial assets and productivity, which is drawn from the steady-state
distribution µ(a, x). We measure the welfare gain or loss due to a policy change by the
constant percentage change in consumption each period for all individuals which is required
  13
       This measure of social welfare or its variants have been widely used in the literature. Examples include
Domeij and Heathcote (2004), Young (2004), Pijoan-Mas (2005), Heathcote, Storesletten and Violante (2008)
and Rogerson (2009). Detailed justifications for this welfare measure are provided in Aiyagari and McGrattan
(1998).
                                                                                                     21


to equate the social welfare before and after the policy change. Specifically, we compute ∆
that solves
   Z ( "X    ∞                                            1+1/γ
                                                                   #)
                                                h  (a ,
                                                  0 t t x )
                β t ln (1 + ∆)c0 (at , xt ) − B
                                           
        E0                                                               dµ0 (at , xt )
                                                    1 + 1/γ
            t=0
                     Z ( "X   ∞                                              #)                    (21)
                                                          h1 (at , xt )1+1/γ
                                     
                                   t
                   =     E0       β ln c1 (at , xt ) − B                           dµ1 (at , xt )
                                                              1 + 1/γ
                                  t=0

where c0 , h0 , and µ0 are consumption, labor supply, and steady-state distribution before the
policy change and c1 , h1 , and µ1 are those after the policy change. A positive ∆ implies that
average welfare improves upon a policy change. With the logarithmic utility, the welfare
gain ∆ can be expressed as
                                                         
                                ∆ = exp (W1 − W0 )(1 − β) − 1,                                      (22)

where W0 and W1 represent social welfare before and after the policy change, respectively.
In the representative-agent model the distribution µ(a, x) is degenerate and the computation
of the welfare effect simplifies considerably:
                                                                           !
                                                        1+1/γ      1+1/γ
                                                    H̄1      − H̄0
                       ∆ = exp ln C̄1 /C̄0 − B                                 − 1,                 (23)
                                                           1 + 1/γ

where C̄0 and H̄0 are the steady-state values of consumption and labor supply in the bench-
mark economy, while C̄1 and H̄1 are those in an economy with a different policy. One caveat
is needed before we discuss the welfare comparison across policies. Our welfare analysis does
not consider transition effects. We compare the welfare measures based on the steady-state
ergodic distributions. The equilibrium of the representative-agent model is approximated
with a first-order log-linearization, which is known to be fairly accurate for the stochastic
growth model considered in this paper. Under this approximation the mean levels of output,
consumption, and hours are identical to the steady-state levels. As described above, the
welfare effect is calculated directly from the steady-state levels of consumption and hours.

Quantitative Findings: The quantitative results for the policy predictions are summa-
rized in Table 8. The entries in the table refer to percentage changes relative to the bench-
mark values. The “true” policy effect is computed based on the new ergodic distribution
of the heterogeneous-agents economy. The “90% interval” entries correspond to 90% pre-
dictive intervals computed based on the posterior distribution of the parameters of the
                                                                                               22


representative-agent model obtained from 200 observations under the benchmark fiscal pol-
icy. These intervals reflect the uncertainty with respect to the “structural” parameters
of the representative-agent model. With the widespread adoption of Bayesian methods in
empirical macroeconomics, such predictive distributions are frequently used to conduct pol-
icy analysis under parameter (and model uncertainty) as, for instance, in Levin, Onatski,
Williams, and Williams (2006). Moreover, the use of the predictive distribution allows us
to relate the magnitude of the prediction biases due to lack of parameter invariance to the
overall level of uncertainty associated with the predictions. Finally, we report “p-values,”
which indicate how far in the tails of a Gaussian approximation of the predictive distribution
the realization of the policy effect lies.

       Across the entries in Table 8 we find that the “true” effects of the policies, both with
respect to the average level of output, consumption, and hours as well as with respect
to households’ welfare, lie almost always far outside the 90% intervals. Almost all of the
p-values are essentially zero. Among the three “single-instrument” policy changes, the
prediction of the effect of a capital tax increase is the most accurate. This is consistent
with our previous finding that the parameter estimates under the high-capital-tax regime
are very close to the ones under the benchmark fiscal regime. If the representative-agent
model is used to rank the five alternative policies, its welfare predictions imply that the
labor tax cut is the most beneficial and the capital tax increase is the worst policy. The
welfare ranking based on the actual effects in the heterogeneous-agents economy, however,
is quite different. The most favorable policy is the increase in transfers. The “1960 policy”
is the worst, leading to a larger welfare loss than the pure capital tax increase. Thus, using
Geweke’s terminology, the lack of invariance of the aggregator function is sufficiently strong
to render predictions from the representative-agent model inaccurate and the predicted
rankings of policies incorrect.14

       We now consider the prediction of the effects of an increase in government transfers
from 36% to 50% of government spending in more detail. Due to the income effect, to-
tal hours worked decrease by 5.25% in the heterogeneous-agents economy. However, the
representative-agent model predicts, under the assumption of policy-invariant preference
and technology parameters, a decrease of only 3.04%, to 3.22%, with 90% probability. The
representative-agent model under-predicts the employment effect because hours measured
  14
       This result is not affected by the estimates based on the large sample size (T=2500).
                                                                                          23


in efficiency units tend to move less than hours measured in physical units.

   While aggregate consumption increases by 3.09% in the heterogeneous-agents economy,
the representative-agent model only predicts a rise between 1.79% and 1.98%. The in-
creased transfer tends to have a stronger effect on consumption of households near the
borrowing constraint in the heterogeneous-agents model (less need for precautionary sav-
ings). Aggregate output decreases by 2.17% in the heterogeneous-agents economy, whereas,
according to the representative-agent model, it is predicted to fall by 3.04% to 3.22%. The
representative-agent model overpredicts the fall in output for two reasons. First, due to the
composition effect, labor productivity rises in the heterogeneous-agents economy. Second,
the aggregate capital stock decreases by more than the representative-agent model predicts,
due to less need for precautionary savings.

   Finally, the average welfare of households increases by 5.81% in the heterogeneous-
agents economy. The welfare effect predicted by the representative-agent model, on the
other hand, is much smaller. The 90% predictive interval ranges from 3.10% to 3.18%. The
representative-agent model under-predicts the welfare gains because the increased transfer
provides an additional insurance and reduces the need for precautionary savings in the
heterogeneous-agents economy.

Remedies: The first-best approach to addressing the prediction inaccuracy is to work with
a better model. In practice, of course, “true” models remain elusive and the best response
is to try to model and measure the policy-relevant mechanisms and trade-offs as well as
possible. For instance, while for the assessment of the capital tax change a careful modeling
of labor-market heterogeneity was not particularly important, its inability to capture the
effects of labor-market heterogeneity rendered the predictions of the representative-agent
model with regard to labor tax and transfer changes grossly misleading.

   From the perspective of a policy maker who has to make decisions based on imper-
fect models, our analysis indicates that the parameter uncertainty reflected in the formal
Bayesian estimation of the representative-agent model captures only a small aspect of the
policy maker’s “risk.” The results in Table 8 could be interpreted as the predictive in-
tervals being too small because the possibility that preference and technology parameters
may shift in response to a policy change is not being entertained. Let θ(np) denote the
non-policy-related preference and technology parameters of the representative-agent model.
Moreover, let ∆θ(np) denote an intervention-induced shift in the preference and technology
                                                                                               24


parameters. In order to account for the possibility of a parameter change, a policy maker
could specify a conditional distribution of ∆θ(np) given θ(np) .

      For concreteness, assume this distribution is independent normal and the standard devi-
ations for our parameters rA , ν, ln Ā, and ln B̄ are 0.09, 0.09, 0.002, and 0.003, respectively.
These numbers correspond to he posterior standard deviations of the four parameters asso-
ciated with the T = 200 estimates in Table 5. In Table 9 we compare the predictive intervals
obtained with and without accounting for the possibility of a parameter shift. While the
mean predictions do not change much, the predictive intervals become a lot wider in the
latter case and encompass the “true” effects on consumption and output. The p-values now
range from 0.06 to 0.32. To the extent that an econometrician has access to observations
from different policy regimes, statistical techniques, such as the estimation of time-varying
coefficients or regime-switching models, could be used to quantify the magnitude of poten-
tial parameter shifts. However, providing an operational procedure is beyond the scope of
this paper and we leave it as a future research topic.



5      Alternative Model Economies and Measurements

According to our heterogeneous-agents economy, the interaction of two frictions – indivisible
labor and incomplete capital markets – prevents the aggregation of individual households’
optimality conditions to the optimality condition that arises in our representative-agent
model. In order to examine the separate role of the two frictions, we repeat the analysis
in Section 4 for an economy with incomplete capital markets but divisible labor and for an
economy in which asset markets are complete but labor is indivisible. The third modifi-
cation of our benchmark empirical analysis consists of using efficiency-adjusted aggregate
hours instead of employment (or raw hours worked) as an observable when estimating the
representative-agent model based on data from the economy with indivisible labor and
incomplete asset markets.


5.1     Divisible Labor

The first alternative model economy we consider allows for divisible labor supply, but capital
markets remain incomplete. This is essentially the same specification as in Krusell and
                                                                                                               25


Smith (1998) with endogenous hours choice. The equilibrium of this economy can be defined
similarly to that of the benchmark model with the worker’s value function with divisible
labor, V D (a, x; λ, µ):

                                                            h1+1/γ
                                                                       h                              i   
             D
           V (a, x; λ, µ) =        max             ln c − B         + βE V D (a0 , x0 ; λ0 , µ0 ) x, λ
                               a0 ∈A,h∈(0,1)                1 + 1/γ

subject to

        c = (1 − τH )w(λ, µ)xh + (1 + (1 − τK )r(λ, µ))a + T̄ − a0 ,               a0 ≥ ā,   µ0 = T(λ, µ).


       We again estimate a representative-agent model that best approximates the aggregate
time series generated from the heterogeneous-agents model. As Table 10 shows, the aggre-
gate labor supply elasticity ν of a stand-in household is 0.37, very close to the elasticity
of individual households, γ = 0.4. Moreover, the estimated standard deviations for the
two preference shocks (not reported in the table) are very close to zero. This is consistent
with a “near perfect” aggregation result by Krusell and Smith (1998) – a representative-
agent model is a good approximation of the heterogeneous-agents economy with incomplete
markets. A comparison of the entries in Table 10 and Table 5 indicates that for the divisible-
labor economy the parameter estimates are much less sensitive to the tax policy than in
our benchmark economy.15 For instance, the estimate of ln Ā is not at all affected by the
policy regime, indicating that the divisibility of labor essentially eliminated the labor-force
composition effect.


5.2       Complete Asset Markets

Our second auxiliary model economy has complete capital markets but labor supply is indi-
visible. Due to perfect risk sharing, agents enjoy the same level of consumption regardless of
their employment status, productivity, or asset holdings.16 The equilibrium of this economy
is identical to the allocation made by a social planner who maximizes the equally weighted
  15
       Across model economies, the estimates of ln Ā and ln B̄ reported in Table 10 differ across models. This
is because we use different measures of labor input, namely, the number of actual hours worked for the
divisible labor economy, the employment rate for the economy with indivisible labor, and the efficiency units
of hours for the last economy.
  16
     The distribution of workers is no longer a state variable in the individual optimization problem. More-
over, because of the ergodicity of the stochastic process for idiosyncratic productivity, the cross-sectional
distribution of workers is always stationary.
                                                                                             26


utility of the population. The planner chooses the sequence of consumption {Ct }∞
                                                                                t=0 and

the cut-off productivity {x∗t }∞
                               t=0 for labor-market participation. To ensure an efficient allo-

cation, the planner assigns workers who have a comparative advantage in the market (more
productive workers) to work. If a worker’s productivity is above x∗t , he supplies h̄ hours of
labor.

    The planner’s value function in the complete market, denoted by V C (K, λ), and the
decision rules for consumption, C(K, λ), and cut-off productivity, x∗ (K, λ), satisfy the fol-
lowing Bellman equation:
                                                        ∞
                                          h̄1+1/γ
                                                   Z                  h               i
            C                                                              C   0   0
          V (K, λ) = max         ln C − B                   φ(x)dx + βE V (K , λ ) λ
                       ∗
                       C,x                1 + 1/γ   x∗t

subject to aggregate resource constraint and tax policy parameters. The aggregate effec-
                                                R∞
tive unit of labor is denoted by L where L = h̄ x∗ xφ(x)dx and φ(x) is the productivity
distribution of workers. The planner chooses the cut-off productivity x∗ so that:

                     1                                      h̄1+1/γ
                       (1 − τH )FL (K, L, λ)h̄x∗ φ(x∗ ) = B         φ(x∗ ).                 (24)
                     C                                      1 + 1/γ

The left-hand side is the (society’s) utility gain from assigning the marginal worker to
production. There are φ(x∗ ) number of workers with productivity x∗ in the economy. Each
of them supplies h̄x∗ units of effective labor, and the marginal product of labor is FL . The
right-hand side represents the disutility incurred by these workers. The key point here is
that, under complete markets, the first-order condition for the choice between hours and
consumption is exactly defined in terms of effective units of labor and wages at the aggregate
level.

    In theory, our estimation of a representative agent should reveal the preference of a
social planner. However, since we use the employment rate (instead of efficiency unit of
labor) in our estimation, the estimated parameters are still subject to a measurement error
(mostly due to composition effects of the heterogeneous workforce). According to Table 10
the aggregate labor supply elasticity (ν) is estimated to be 1.42. First, as (24) illustrates,
the aggregate elasticity of a social planner has nothing to do with individual households’
intertemporal substitution elasticity of leisure, γ. Second, we estimate the labor supply
elasticity in terms of employment, not in efficiency units of labor. Nevertheless, at the
estimated parameters the intratemporal and intertemporal first-order conditions of the rep-
resentative household hold almost exactly, and the estimated standard deviations of the
                                                                                                              27


preference shocks are very close to zero. In response to a policy change, the estimates of
ν and ln Ā change, but not as drastically as under the benchmark economy. The change
of the ln Ā estimate from -0.24 to -0.23 and -0.25, respectively, indicates the presence of
the labor-force composition effect. The labor tax cut and the increase in transfer induce a
change in the measure of total factor productivity of about 1%.


5.3         Efficiency Units of Hours

When we replace the employment rate by effective units of labor in the estimation of the
representative-agent model, yet retain the indivisibility of labor and the market incomplete-
ness in the underlying heterogeneous-agents economy, the estimates of ν, and ln Ā become
more stable across policies compared to the benchmark analysis. For example, with effi-
ciency units of labor, the estimate for the aggregate elasticity of labor supply (ν̂) ranges
between 0.4 and 0.62, implying a smaller aggregate labor supply elasticity.17 The average
level of aggregate productivity, ln Ā, remains close to zero across policies. We are now using
actual labor input in the estimation and therefore measure the average level of “true” total
factor productivity ln λt , which is zero. Given the approximate invariance of parameters,
the use of efficiency units might appear a promising alternative. However, in practice, it
is extremely difficult, if not impossible, to obtain the efficiency unit measures of quantity
(hours) and prices because it is almost impossible to capture all the heterogeneity using
observed characteristics – a typical cross-sectional wage regression barely reaches R2 of 0.4.



6         Conclusion

Representative-agent dynamic stochastic general equilibrium models are widely used for
economic policy analysis. A key assumption in policy experiments is that fundamental
parameters of the model such as taste and technology are invariant with respect to policy
changes. We demonstrate that this is not always the case. We construct a heterogeneous-
agents economy in which equilibrium outcomes depend on the distributions of wealth and
earnings, which in turn depend on the policy regime. We estimate a representative-agent
    17
         Hansen (1993) obtains a similar result. He finds that hours in efficiency units (measured by demographic
variables of the households from the CPS) move less than actual hours over the business cycle.
                                                                                           28


models that best approximates the aggregate times series generated from the heterogeneous-
agents model. We find that (i) the aggregation error manifests itself as a preference shift of
a representative household; (ii) taste and technology parameters in the representative-agent
model are not policy invariant; and (iii) fiscal policy predictions from the representative-
agent model are often inaccurate.

   We demonstrate that the representative agent model that abstracts from cross-sectional
heterogeneity can potentially mislead fiscal policy predictions. While it may not always be
feasible to model the various types of heterogeneity explicitly, it is important to account
for the possibility that preference and technology parameters of an estimated model may
shift in response to policy changes. To the extent that an econometrician has access to
observations from different policy regimes, statistical techniques, such as the estimation
of time-varying coefficients or regime-switching models, could be useful to quantify the
magnitude of potential parameter shifts.
                                                                                     29


References

Aiyagari, S. Rao (1994): “Uninsured Idiosyncratic Risk and Aggregate Saving,” Quarterly
    Journal of Economics, 109(3), 659-684.

Aiyagari, S. Rao, and Ellen McGrattan (1998): “The Optimum Quantity of Debt,” Journal
    of Monetary Economics, 42, 447-469.

An, Sungbae, Yongsung Chang, and Sun-Bin Kim (2009): “Can a Representative Agent
    Model Represent a Heterogeneous Agent Economy?” American Economic Journal -
    Macroeconomics, 1(2), 29-54.

An, Sungbae, and Frank Schorfheide (2007): “Bayesian Analysis of DSGE Models,” Econo-
    metric Reviews, 26(2-4), 113-172.

Auerbach, Alan, and Lawrence Kotlikoff (1987): Dynamic Fiscal Policy, Cambridge U.K.,
    Cambridge University Press.

Bewley, Truman (1983): “A Difficulty with the Optimum Quantity of Money,” Economet-
    rica, 51, 1485-1504.

Bils, Mark. (1985): “Real Wages over the Business Cycle: Evidence from Panel Data,”
    Journal of Political Economy, 93(4), 666-689.

Calvo, Guillermo (1983): “Staggered Prices in a Utility-Maximizing Framework,” Journal
    of Monetary Economics, 12(3), 383-398.

Chang, Yongsung, and Sun-Bin Kim (2006): “From Individual to Aggregate Labor Supply:
    A Quantitative Analysis Based on a Heterogeneous Agent Macroeconomy,” Interna-
    tional Economic Review, 47(1), 1-27.

Chang, Yongsung, and Sun-Bin Kim (2007): “Heterogeneity and Aggregation: Implica-
    tions for Labor-Market Fluctuations,” American Economic Review, 97(5), 1939-1956.

Chari, V.V., Patrick Kehoe, and Ellen McGrattan (2007): “Business Cycle Accounting,”
    Econometrica, 75(3), 781-836.

Chen, Kaiji, Ayse Imrohoroglu, and Selahattin Imrohoroglu (2007): “A Quantitative As-
    sessment of the Decline in the U.S. Saving Rate,” Manuscript, University of Southern
    California.
                                                                                     30


Cho, Jang-Ok (1995): “Ex-post Heterogeneity and the Business Cycle,” Journal of Eco-
    nomic Dynamics and Control, 19(3), 533-551.

Christiano, Lawrence, Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles Evans (2005): “Nominal Rigidities
    and the Dynamic Effect of a Shock to Monetary Policy,” Journal of Political Economy,
    113, 1-45.

Cogley, Timothy, and Takeshi Yagihashi (2009): “Are DSGE Approximating Models In-
    variant to Shifts in Policy?,” Manuscript, New York University.

Del Negro, Marco, and Frank Schorfheide (2008): “Forming Priors for DSGE Models
    (and How It Affects the Assessment of Nominal Rigidities),” Journal of Monetary
    Economics, 55(7), 1191-1208.

Del Negro, Marco, Frank Schorfheide, Frank Smets, and Rafael Wouters (2007): “On the
    Fit of New Keynesian Models,” Journal of Business & Economics Statistics, 25(2),
    123-162.

Domeij, David, and Jonathan Heathcote (2004): “On the Distributional Effects of Reduc-
    ing Capital Taxes,” International Economic Review, bf 45(2), 523-554.

Fernández-Villaverde, Jesús, and Juan F. Rubio-Ramiréz (2007): “How Structural Are
    Structural Parameters?,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, MIT Press, 83-138.

Forni, Lorenzo, Libero Monteforte, and Luca Sessa (2009): “The General Equilibrium
    Effects of Fiscal Policy: Estimates for the Euro Area,” Journal of Public Economics,
    93(3-4), 559-585.

Geweke, John (1985): “Macroeconomic Modelling and the Theory of the Representative
    Agent,” American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings, 75(2), 206-210.

Hall, Robert (1997): “Macroeconomic Fluctuations and the Allocation of Time,” Journal
    of Labor Economics, 15, S223-S250.

Hansen, Gary (1993): “The Cyclical and Secular Behaviour of the Labour Input: Com-
    paring Efficiency Units and Hours Worked,” Journal of Applied Econometrics, 8(1),
    71-80.
                                                                                     31


Huggett, Mark (1993): “The Risk-Free Rate in Heterogeneous-Agent Incomplete-Insurance
    Economies,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 17(5-6), 953-969.

Heathcote, Jonathan, Kjetil Storesletten, and Giovanni L. Violante (2008): “Insurance
    and Opportunities: A Welfare Analysis of Labor Market Risk,” Journal of Monetary
    Economics, 55, 501-525.

Judd Kenneth (1987): “Welfare Cost of Factor Taxation in a Perfect Foresight Model,”
    Journal of Political Economy, 95, 67-709.

Justiniano, Alejandro, Giorgio Primiceri, and Andrea Tambalotti (2010): “Investment
    Shocks and Business Cycles,” Journal of Monetary Economics, forthcoming.

King, Robert., Charles Plosser, and Sergio Rebelo (1988): “Production, Growth and Busi-
    ness Cycles: I. The Basic Neoclssical Model,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 21(2-
    3), 195-232.

Krüger, Dirk, and Hanno Lustig (2007): “When Is Market Incompleteness Irrelevant for
    the Price of Aggregate Risk?” Manuscript, University of Pennsylvania.

Krusell, Per, Toshihiko Mukoyama, Richard Rogerson, Aysegul Sahin (2008): “The Ag-
    gregate Implications of Indivisible Labor, Incomplete Markets and Search Frictions,”
    Journal of Monetary Economics, 55(5), 961-979.

Krusell, Per, and Anthony Smith (1998): “Income and Wealth Heterogeneity in the
    Macroeconomy,” Journal of Political Economy, 106(5), 867-896.

Kydland, Finn, and Edward Prescott (1982): “Time to Build and Aggregate Fluctuations,”
    Econometrica, 50(6), 1345-1370.

Leeper, Eric, Michael. Plante, and Nora Traum (2010): “Dynamics of Fiscal Financing in
    the United States,” Journal of Econometrics, 156(2), 304-321.

Levin, Andrew, Alexei Onatski, John Williams, and Noah Williams (2006): “Monetary
    Policy Under Uncertainty in Micro-Founded Macroeconometric Models,” in NBER
    Macroeconomics Annual 2005, ed. by Mark Gertler and Kenneth Rogoff, 20, 229-
    287. MIT Press, Cambridge.
                                                                                     32


Liu, Zheng, Daniel Waggoner, and Tao Zha (2008): “Asymmetric Expectation Effects of
    Regime Switches in Monetary Policy,” Manuscript, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta.

Ljungqvist, Lars, and Thomas Sargent (2007): ”Indivisible Labor, Human Capital, Lotter-
    ies, and Personal Savings: Do Taxes Explain European Employment?” 2006 NBER
    Macroeconomics Annual, MIT Press, 181-224.

Lucas, Robert (1976): “Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique,” Carnegie-Rochester
    Conference on Public Policy, 1, 19-46.

Nakajima, Makoto (2007) “Business Cycles in the Equilibrium Model of Labor Search and
    Self-Insurance,” Manuscript, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia.

Narajabad, Borghan (2010) “Information Technology and the Rise of Household Bankruptcy,”
    Manuscript, Rice University.

Pijoan-Mas, Josep (2005): “Precautionary Savings or Working Longer Hours?” Review of
    Economic Dynamics, 9, 326-352.

Prescott, Edward C., (2004) “Why do Americans Work So Much More Than Europeans?,”
    Quarterly Review, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, July, 2-13.

Rios-Rull, Jose-Victor, Frank Schorfheide, Cristina Fuentes-Albero, Maxym Kryshko, and
    Raul Santaeulalia-Llopis (2009): “Methods versus Substance: Measuring the Effects
    of Technology Shocks,” NBER Working Paper, 15375.

Rogerson, Richard (1988): “Indivisible Labor, Lotteries and Equilibrium,” Journal of
    Monetary Economics, 21(1), 3-16.

Rogerson, Richard (2009): “Taxes, Transfers and Employment in an Incomplete Markets
    Model,” Manuscript, Arizona State University.

Rogerson, Richard, and Johanna Wallenius (2009): “Micro and Macro Elasticities in a Life
    Cycle Model with Taxes,” Journal of Economic Theory, forthcoming.

Scheinkman, Jose, and Laurence Weiss (1986): “Borrowing Constraints and Aggregate
    Economic Activity,” Econometrica, 54, 23-45.

Schorfheide, Frank (2000): “Loss Function Based Evaluation of DSGE Models,” Journal
    of Applied Econometrics, 15(6), 645-670.
                                                                                    33


Smets, Frank, and Rafael Wouters (2003): “An Estimated Stochastic Dynamic General
    Equilibrium Model of the Euro Area,” Journal of the European Economic Association,
    1, 1123-1175.

Smets, Frank, and Rafael Wouters (2007): “Shocks and Frictions in U.S. Business Cycles:
    A Bayesian DSGE Approach,” American Economic Review, 97(3), 586-606.

Young, Eric (2004), “Unemployment Insurance and Capital Accumulation,” Journal of
    Monetary Economics, 51, 1683-1710.
                                                                                 34




Table 1: Parameterization of the Heterogeneous-Agents Economy




                      Preference and Technology Parameters



Parameter                                    Description


β = 0.98332     Discount factor
γ = 0.4         Intertemporal substitution elasticity of leisure
B = 101         Utility parameter
h = 1/3         Labor supply if working
a = −2.0        Borrowing constraint
ρx = 0.939      Persistence of idiosyncratic productivity shock
σx = 0.287      Standard deviation of innovation to idiosyncratic productivity
α = 0.64        Labor share in production function
δ = 0.025       Capital depreciation rate
ρλ = 0.95       Persistence of aggregate productivity shock
σλ = 0.007      Standard deviation of innovation to aggregate productivity



                            Fiscal Policy Parameters



             Bench-      Labor     Capital       More      1960     2004
             mark       Tax Cut   Tax Raise    Transfers   Policy   Policy
     τH       0.29        0.22                              .229     .269
     τK       0.35                  0.47                    .443     .327
     χ        0.36                               0.50       .224     .417
                                                                                           35




                Table 2: Characteristics of Wealth Distribution




                                                              Quintile
                                             1st    2nd     3rd     4th     5th    Total


    PSID
      Share of wealth                       -.52     .50    5.06   18.74   76.22    100
      Group average/population average      -.02     .03     .25     .93    3.81      1
      Share of earnings                     7.51   11.31   18.72   24.21   38.23    100


    Benchmark Model
      Share of wealth                      -1.56    3.27   11.38   24.74   62.17    100
      Group average/population average      -.08     .16     .57    1.24    3.11      1
      Share of earnings                     9.74   15.76   19.97   23.72   30.81    100




Notes: The PSID statistics reflect the family wealth and earnings levels published in the
1984 survey. Family wealth in the PSID reflects the net worth of houses, other real estate,
vehicles, farms and businesses owned, stocks, bonds, cash accounts, and other assets.
                                                                                          36




              Table 3: Second Moments of Simulated and U.S. Data




                                             Model      U.S. Data
                                            3000 obs.   1964-2006
                         σ(ln Y )             .033         .041
                         σ(ln C)              .020         .021
                         σ(ln H)              .013         .042
                         σ((ln H)HP )         .007         .018
                         corr(ln Y, ln C)     0.84         0.83
                         corr(ln Y, ln H)     0.80         0.56
                         corr(ln C, ln H)     0.37         0.51




Notes: σ(·) is sample standard deviation, corr(·) is sample correlation, and (ln H)HP denotes
HP-filtered (smoothing parameter 1,600) log hours. Unless noted otherwise, we extract a
linear trend from the U.S. data before computing the sample moments.
                                                                                      37




           Table 4: Prior Distributions for DSGE Model Estimation




                      Name    Domain    Density         Mean    S.D.
                      rA      R+        Gamma           4.00    2.00
                      ν       R+        Gamma           1.00    0.50
                      ln Ā   R         Normal          0.00    10.0
                      ln B̄   R         Normal          0.00    10.0
                      ρA      [0, 1)    Beta            0.50    0.25
                      ρB      [0, 1)    Beta            0.50    0.25
                      σA      R+        Inv. Gamma      .012    .007
                      σB      R+        Inv. Gamma      .012    .007
                      σZ      R+        Inv. Gamma      .012    .007




Notes: The means and standard deviations of priors. The following parameters are fixed:
α = 0.64, δ = 0.025, ρZ = 0.99. Moreover, we fix the policy parameters τH , τK , and χ at
their “true” values. rA is the annualized discount rate rA = 400 × (1/β − 1)
                                                                                                   38




                               Table 5: Parameter Estimates




                      Simulated Data / Benchmark                               U.S. Data
                     T = 200                     T = 2, 500                    T = 168
            Mean       90% Intv.        Mean          90% Intv        Mean         90% Intv
    rA      2.834     [2.682, 2.978]    2.774      [2.714, 2.833]     3.700      [3.253, 4.219]
    ν       1.723     [1.573, 1.856]    2.143      [2.008, 2.257]     0.343      [0.104, 0.601]
    ln Ā   -0.259   [-0.263, -0.256]   -0.257     [-0.259, -0.256]   -0.250    [-0.275, -0.225]
    ln B̄   -0.329   [-0.335, -0.324]   -0.316     [-0.319, -0.312]   -0.439    [-0.522, -0.367]
    ρA      0.898     [0.889, 0.908]    0.914      [0.913, 0.917]     0.975      [0.961, 0.989]
    ρB      0.762     [0.601, 0.925]    0.922      [0.915, 0.929]     0.983      [0.972, 0.998]
    σA      0.005     [0.005, 0.006]    0.005      [0.005, 0.006]     0.006      [0.006, 0.007]
    σB      0.003     [0.002, 0.003]    0.003      [0.003, 0.003]     0.007      [0.007, 0.008]
    σZ      0.003     [0.002, 0.003]    0.003      [0.003, 0.003]     0.012      [0.010, 0.013]




Notes: The following parameters are fixed during the estimation: τH , τK , χ as in Table 1,
δ = 0.025, ρZ = 0.99. rA is the annualized discount rate rA = 400 × (1/β − 1).
                                                                         39




              Table 6: Relative Importance of Preference Shocks




                                          B                 Z
                                 Mean    90% Intv.   Mean   90% Intv.
                             Benchmark Economy, T = 200
                 Output            5       [2, 8]     5         [4, 6]
                 Consumption       3       [0, 7]     6         [4, 7]
                 Hours            33      [18, 45]    5         [3, 7]
                            Benchmark Economy, T = 2, 500
                 Output            9       [8, 10]    5         [4, 5]
                 Consumption       9       [8, 10]    4         [4, 5]
                 Hours            43      [41, 46]    4         [4, 4]
                                        U.S. Data
                 Output           45      [21, 68]    5         [2, 9]
                 Consumption      47      [21, 75]    6      [1, 10]
                 Hours            98      [97, 99]    1         [0, 1]




Notes: The entries correspond to percentages.
                                                                                                     40




         Table 7: Steady States and Estimates under Alternative Policies




            Bench-            Labor           Capital            More             1960             2004
             mark            Tax Cut         Tax Raise        Transfers          Policy           Policy
                                      Parameter Estimates, T = 2, 500
 rA          2.77              2.56             2.74             2.84             2.53             2.75
          [2.71, 2.83]     [2.49, 2.62]     [2.66, 2.82]     [2.79, 2.91]     [2.46, 2.58]     [2.69, 2.81]
 ν           2.14              1.44             2.23             3.58             1.22             2.10
          [2.01, 2.26]     [1.38, 1.51]     [2.11, 2.36]     [3.28, 3.87]     [1.17, 1.26]     [2.00, 2.20]
 ln Ā       -0.26             -0.28            -0.25            -0.23            -0.30            -0.26
         [-0.26, -0.26]    [-0.29, -0.28]   [-0.26, -0.25]   [-0.23, -0.23]   [-0.30, -0.30]   [-0.26, -0.26]
 ln B̄       -0.32             -0.32            -0.31            -0.30            -0.31            -0.32
         [-0.32, -0.31]    [-0.32, -0.31]   [-0.32, -0.31]   [-0.31, -0.30]   [-0.31, -0.31]   [-0.32, -0.32]
                           Steady States in Heterogeneous-Agents Economy
 E           0.60              0.64             0.60             0.57             0.66             0.60
 K           15.2              16.1             14.0             14.8             15.4             15.5
 Y           1.48              1.53             1.43             1.44             1.51             1.49
 Y /E        2.46              2.39             2.39             2.54             2.29             2.48
 RA          4.00              3.68             4.76             4.04             4.16             3.80




Notes: The following parameters are fixed during the estimation of the representative-agent
model: τH , τK , χ as in Table 1, δ = 0.025, ρZ = 0.99. rA is the annualized discount rate
rA = 400 × (1/β − 1). As parameter estimates we report posterior means and 90% credible
intervals (in brackets).
                                                                                                     41




                      Table 8: Predictions of Policy Effects, T = 200




                         Labor          Capital            More            1960             2004
                        Tax Cut        Tax Raise        Transfers          Policy          Policy
 H        “True”          6.06            -0.23            -5.45            9.44            -0.21
          90% Intv.   [ 2.96, 3.15]   [-0.31, -0.28]   [-3.22, -3.04]   [ 5.18, 5.51]   [-0.21, -0.20]
          p-Value       2.2E-308        1.5E-013         2.2E-308        2.2E-308         3.3E-002
 C        “True”          7.33            -2.73            3.04             1.73            3.86
          90% Intv.   [ 7.84, 8.03]   [-3.63, -3.37]   [ 1.79, 1.98]    [ 2.25, 2.65]   [ 3.66, 3.71]
          p-Value       3.2E-025        2.5E-021         9.7E-089        8.1E-009         3.5E-035
 Y        “True”          3.44            -2.89            -2.19            2.57            0.81
          90% Intv.   [ 2.96, 3.15]   [-4.07, -3.84]   [-3.22, -3.04]   [ 2.28, 2.63]   [ 0.36, 0.41]
          p-Value       1.3E-011        5.9E-052         9.0E-066        1.7E-001         1.2E-178
 W        “True”          4.51            -2.61            5.80            -3.09            4.07
          90% Intv.   [ 6.60, 6.68]   [-3.52, -3.25]   [ 3.10, 3.18]    [ 0.16, 0.44]   [ 3.75, 3.79]
          p-Value       2.2E-308        3.8E-020         2.2E-308        2.2E-308         1.2E-120




Notes: The benchmark policy is τH = 0.29, τK = 0.35, χ = 0.36. The entries in the table
refer to percentage changes relative to the benchmark policy. The last two rows (W) contain
welfare gains (if positive) or costs (if negative) in percentage terms, measured by (22), due to
the policy change. “True” effects are computed from the means of the ergodic distributions
of the heterogeneous-agents economy. 90% Intv. are predictive intervals computed from
the posterior of the representative-agent model based on observations under the benchmark
policy.
                                                                                              42




      Table 9: Predictions of Policy Effects – More Transfers, T = 200




                                  Labor Tax Cut                   More Transfers
                            Estimation      Invariance      Estimation        Invariance
                            Uncertainty     Uncertainty     Uncertainty      Uncertainty
       H    “True”              6.06            6.06            -5.45            -5.45
            90% Intv.       [ 2.96, 3.15]   [ 2.26, 3.78]   [-3.22, -3.04]   [-4.12, -2.32]
            p-Value           2.2E-308       5.3E-011         2.2E-308         1.8E-005
       C    “True”              7.33            7.33            3.04             3.04
            90% Intv.       [ 7.84, 8.03]   [ 6.53, 8.78]   [ 1.79, 1.98]    [ 0.67, 3.10]
            p-Value           3.2E-025       3.2E-001         9.7E-089         5.5E-002
       Y    “True”              3.44            3.44            -2.19            -2.19
            90% Intv.       [ 2.96, 3.15]   [ 1.51, 4.47]   [-3.22, -3.04]   [-4.70, -1.56]
            p-Value           1.3E-011       3.2E-001         9.0E-066         1.5E-001
       W    “True”              4.51            4.51            5.80             5.80
            90% Intv.       [ 6.60, 6.68]   [ 5.70, 7.58]   [ 3.10, 3.18]    [ 2.18, 4.11]
            p-Value           2.2E-308       9.7E-005         2.2E-308         3.4E-006




Notes: The entries in the table refer to percentage changes relative to the benchmark policy.
          Table 10: Parameter Estimates for Alternative Model Economies and Measurements, T = 2, 500




                          Divisible Labor                                 Complete Markets                                       Efficiency Hours
             Bench-           Labor             More            Bench-           Labor             More            Bench-             Labor             More
             mark            Tax Cut         Transfers           mark           Tax Cut         Transfers           mark            Tax Cut          Transfers
 rA           2.72             2.45             2.81             2.50             2.50             2.48             2.75               2.54             2.82
         [ 2.68, 2.77]     [ 2.40, 2.50]    [ 2.76, 2.86]    [ 2.47, 2.54]    [ 2.46, 2.54]    [ 2.45, 2.52]    [ 2.70, 2.80]      [ 2.48, 2.60]    [ 2.74, 2.88]
 ν            0.37             0.37             0.38             1.42             1.33             1.53             0.64               0.54             0.80
         [ 0.37, 0.38]     [ 0.36, 0.37]    [ 0.37, 0.38]    [ 1.42, 1.43]    [ 1.33, 1.34]    [ 1.52, 1.53]    [ 0.62, 0.67]      [ 0.52, 0.56]    [ 0.77, 0.84]
 ln Ā        0.34             0.34             0.34             -0.24            -0.25            -0.23            0.01               0.00             0.01
         [ 0.34, 0.34]     [ 0.33, 0.34]    [ 0.34, 0.35]    [-0.24, -0.24]   [-0.26, -0.25]   [-0.23, -0.23]   [ 0.00, 0.01]      [ 0.00, 0.01]    [ 0.00, 0.01]
 ln B̄       -1.53             -1.53            -1.54            -0.35            -0.35            -0.34            -0.81             -0.82             -0.79
         [-1.53, -1.53]    [-1.53, -1.53]   [-1.54, -1.53]   [-0.35, -0.35]   [-0.35, -0.35]   [-0.34, -0.34]   [-0.81, -0.81]    [-0.82, -0.82]    [-0.79, -0.79]




Notes: The following parameters are fixed during the estimation τH , τK , χ as tabulated, δ = 0.025, ρZ = 0.99. rA reflects the
annualized discount rate rA = 400 × (1/β − 1). As parameter estimates we report posterior means and 90% credible intervals (in
brackets).
                                                                            44




                   Figure 1: U.S. Capital and Labor Tax Rates




                                   U.S. Tax Rates
       .50

       .45

       .40

       .35

       .30

       .25

       .20

       .15
              50    55   60    65 70 75         80    85 90 95         00
                              Capital Tax            Labor Tax
               Source: Chen, Imrohoroglu, and Imrohoroglu (2007)


Notes: The data are taken from Chen, Imrohoroglu, and Imrohoroglu (2007).
                                                                                                                        45




  Figure 2: Employment Rate Based on the Reservation Wage Distribution




                       Benchmark τH=0.29 τK=0.35 χ=0.36             Low τH = 0.22               High τK = 0.47

                       14                                 14                             14
                       12                                 12                             12
    Reservation Wage




                       10                                 10                             10
                        8                                  8                              8
                        6                                  6                              6
                                           1.2082                               1.1304                       1.1021
                        4                                  4                              4
                        2                                  2                              2

                              20 40 60 80                      20     40   60       80        20    40   60     80
                             Employment Rate (%)

                                   High χ=0.5              1960 τH=0.23 τK=0.44 χ=0.22    2004 τ =0.27 τ =0.33 χ=0.42
                                                                                                H        K


                       14                                 14                             14
                       12                                 12                             12
                       10                                 10                             10
                        8                                  8                              8
                        6                                  6                              6
                                           1.2312                           0.89847                          1.3067
                        4                                  4                              4
                        2                                  2                              2

                              20    40   60     80             20     40   60       80        20    40   60     80




Notes: Each curve represents the employment rate (on the x-axis) at a given wage rate (y-
axis). The vertical line denotes the steady-state level of employment under the benchmark
and the no-transfer policy regimes. The numbers in the plots indicate the elasticity of
employment with respect to wages around the steady-state employment rate.
                                                                                           A-1


A     Derivations for the Representative-Agent Model

In this appendix, we collect the first-order conditions (and their log-linear approximation
around the steady state) of the representative-agent model we use to fit the time series
generated from the heterogeneous-agents economy.

First-Order Conditions: The first-order conditions (FOCs) associated with the House-
hold Problem are:
                                        Zt
                               λt =
                                        Ct
                               λt     = βEt [λt+1 (1 + (1 − τK )Rt+1 )]
                             1/ν                  λt      1+1/ν
                          Ht          = (1 − τH ) Wt Bt
                                                  Zt
Notice that the preference shock Zt drops out of the labor supply function:
                                      1/ν                  1      1+1/ν
                                Ht          = (1 − τH )       Wt Bt     .
                                                           Ct
The FOCs of the firms problem are provided in (4).

Steady States: We subsequently denote the deterministic steady-state values by

                                    H̄, K̄, λ̄, C̄, Ȳ , Ā, B̄, W̄ , Ḡ, R̄.

The steady state value of Zt is equal to one. It is convenient to express the model in terms
of ratios relative to steady-state hours worked. The first-order conditions in the steady state
become
                                           ν1
                             1/β − 1        H̄              B̄
                        R̄ =          ,          = (1 − τH ) W̄ ,
                             1 − τK         B̄              C̄
                                         α1             1−α
                       K̄      Ā(1 − α)                  K̄
                           =                  , W̄ = αĀ          .
                       H̄        R̄ + δ                   H̄
Hence,
                                                   ν
                                H̄      (1 − τH )W̄ 1+ν
                                   =                    .
                                B̄         C̄/H̄
Moreover, the production function can be expressed as
                                             1−α
                                   Ȳ         K̄
                                       = Ā         .
                                   H̄         H̄
The government budget constraint leads to
                                                                     
             T̄                   K̄      Ḡ                         K̄
                = χ τH W̄ + τK R̄      ,     = (1 − χ) τH W̄ + τK R̄
             H̄                   H̄      H̄                         H̄
                                                                                                 A-2


and the market clearing condition can be written as

                                         Ȳ   C̄   K̄ Ḡ
                                            =    +δ + .
                                         H̄   H̄   H̄ H̄

We can now write the consumption-hours ratio as
                              1−α                                 
          C̄              K̄             K̄                       K̄
               = Ā                   − δ − (1 − χ) τH W̄ + τK R̄
          H̄              H̄             H̄                       H̄
                              1−α                                  1−α
                          K̄                     K̄                  K̄
               = Ā          − (δ + (1 − χ)τK R̄) − (1 − χ)τH αĀ
                          H̄                     H̄                  H̄
                                      1−α
                                      K̄                         K̄
               = [1 − (1 − χ)τH α]Ā         − (δ + (1 − χ)τK R̄) .
                                      H̄                         H̄

Hence, the steady state of hours worked is given by
                                                      1−α                               ν
                                                                                           1+ν
                                                        K̄
                               (1 − τH )αĀ             H̄
     H̄ = B̄ 
                                                                       
                                    1−α                               
                [1 − (1 − χ)τH α]Ā K̄H̄
                                              − (δ + (1 − χ)τ K  R̄) K̄
                                                                     H̄
                                                                     ν
                                                                        1+ν
                                   (1  − τ H )α
         = B̄                                              α 
                [1 − (1 − χ)τH α] − (δ + (1 − χ)τK R̄)Ā−1 K̄ H̄
                                                                                  ν
                                            (1 − τH )α                             1+ν
         = B̄
                [1 − (1 − χ)τH α] − [δ/(R̄ + δ) + (1 − χ)τK (R̄/(R̄ + δ))](1 − α)

Log-Linear Approximation: Denote the percentage gap from the steady-state value of
each variable by
                           H
                           bt, K
                               b t+1 , λ
                                       bt , C
                                            bt , Ybt , A
                                                       bt , B
                                                            bt , W
                                                                 ct , G
                                                                      bt , Z
                                                                           bt , R
                                                                                ct .
                                                                                     A-3


We obtain the following equations:

               [R̄/(R̄ + δ)]R
                            bt = A     b t − αK
                                 bt + αH      bt

                          W    bt + (α − 1)H
                          ct = A           b t + (1 − α)K
                                                        bt

                           bt = −C
                           λ     bt + Z
                                      bt

                           λ        bt+1 + (1 − β)R
                           bt = Et [λ             bt+1 ]

                       ν −1 H
                            b t = −C    ct + (1 + ν −1 )B
                                   bt + W               bt

                         Ȳ Ybt = C̄ C
                                     bt + K̄ Kb t+1 − (1 − δ)K̄ K
                                                                b t + ḠG
                                                                        bt

                            b t = τH α[Wt + Ht ] + τK (1 − α)[R̄/(R̄ + δ)]Yt
                                        c       b                          b
                   (1 − χ)G
                                         τH α + τK (1 − α)[R̄/(R̄ + δ)]
                            Yt = At + αH
                             b     b      b t + (1 − α)K bt

                           bt = ρA A
                           A       bt−1 + σA A,t

                           B
                           bt = ρB B
                                   bt−1 + σB B,t

                           bt = ρZ Z
                           Z       bt−1 + σZ Z,t .

If χ = 0 then Ḡ = 0 and we compute the level of government spending rather than percent-
age deviations from a steady state that is zero.
                                                                                       A-4


B    Aggregate Data Sources

Aggregate capital and labor tax rates are obtained from Chen, Imrohoroglu, and Imro-
horoglu (2007). As a measure of hours we use the Aggregate Hours Index (PRS85006033)
published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics. The remaining data series are obtained from
the FRED2 database maintained by the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. Consumption
is defined as real personal consumption expenditures on non-durables (PCNDGC96) and
services (PCESVC96). Output is defined as the sum of consumption, consumption expen-
ditures on durables (PCDGCC96), gross private domestic investment (GPDIC), and federal
consumption expenditures and gross investment (FGCEC96). Output, consumption, and
hours are converted into per capita terms by dividing by the civilian non-institutionalized
population (CNP16OV). The population series is provided at a monthly frequency and con-
verted to quarterly frequency by simple averaging. Finally we take the natural logarithm
of output, consumption, and hours. We restrict the sample to the period from 1965:I to
2006:IV, using observations from 1964 to initialize lags. We remove linear trends from the
log output and consumption series and demean the log hours series. To make the log levels
of the U.S. data comparable to the log levels of the data simulated from the heterogeneous-
agents economy, we adjust (i) detrended log output by the steady-state output level in the
heterogeneous-agents economy under the benchmark tax policy, (ii) detrended log consump-
tion by the steady state output level in the heterogenous agent economy plus the log of the
average consumption-output ratio in the U.S. data, and (iii) demeaned hours by the steady
state of log employment.
