NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EFFECTS OF THE FINANCIAL CRISIS AND GREAT RECESSION ON AMERICAN
HOUSEHOLDS
Michael D. Hurd
Susann Rohwedder
Working Paper 16407
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16407

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2010

We are grateful to the National Institute on Aging for research support and funding for data collection
under grants P01 AG008291, P01 AG022481, P30 AG012815, and R01 AG20717. We are grateful
to the Social Security Administration for funding of data collection. Many thanks to the ALP team
for their assistance with the data collection, to Joanna Carroll and Angela Miu for programming support,
and to students from the Pardee RAND Graduate School, Claudia Diaz, Alessandro Malchiodi and
Sarah Outcault, for able research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Michael D. Hurd and Susann Rohwedder. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Effects of the Financial Crisis and Great Recession on American Households
Michael D. Hurd and Susann Rohwedder
NBER Working Paper No. 16407
September 2010
JEL No. D12,D31,D84,D91,J64
ABSTRACT
In this paper we present evidence from high-frequency data collections dedicated to tracking the effects
of the financial crisis and great recession on American households. These data come from surveys
that we conducted in the American Life Panel – an Internet survey run by RAND Labor and Population.
The first survey was fielded at the beginning of November 2008, immediately following the large
declines in the stock market of September and October 2008. The next survey followed three months
later in February 2009. Since May 2009 we have collected monthly data on the same households.
This paper shows the levels and trends of many of these data which summarize the experience and
expectations of households during the recession.
We find that the effects of the recession are widespread: between November 2008 and April 2010
about 39 percent of households had either been unemployed, had negative equity in their house or
had been in arrears in their house payments. Reductions in spending were common especially following
unemployment. On average expectations about stock market prices and housing prices are pessimistic,
particularly long-run expectations. Among workers, expectations about becoming unemployed have
recovered somewhat from their low point in May 2009 but still remain high. Overall the data suggest
that households are not optimistic about their economic futures.

Michael D. Hurd
RAND Corporation
1776 Main Street
Santa Monica, CA 90407
and NBER
mhurd@rand.org
Susann Rohwedder
RAND
1776 Main Street
P.O. Box 2138
Santa Monica, CA 90407
susannr@rand.org

1. Introduction
According to the Case-Shiller 20-city average housing price index, housing prices reached a
maximum in May 2006. Problems in the housing market associated with the subsequent decline
in prices and with the relaxed lending standards during the run-up in prices spread to the
financial sector leading to the financial crisis. At the beginning of the crisis unemployment was
quite low: in December 2007 when the economy entered recession the rate was just 5%.
However, housing prices continued to decline and stock prices, which had been increasing as
measured by the S&P500, began to decline in October 2007. By October 31, 2008 the S&P500
was down 37% from a year earlier and it had dropped 17% in the month of October 2008 alone.
The Case-Shiller index was down 18% from a year earlier. The unemployment rate was 6.2% in
September 2008 up from 4.7% in September 2007 but the increase was modest relative to the
problems associated with the financial crisis. However, the unemployment rate increased to
6.6% in October, to 6.9% in November and to 7.4% in December 2008. The financial crisis had
become the Great Recession.
The effects of this recession are likely different from prior recessions because of
simultaneous shocks in the stock market, the housing market and the labor market. For example
in the recession of 1981-1982 the unemployment rate increased from 7.2% to 10.8% but housing
prices were approximately constant and the stock market rose. In the short recession of 2001
associated with the stock market crash, the unemployment rate increased from 4.3% to 5.5%, but
housing prices increased by about 4%. Besides the simultaneity of the shocks, circumstances
have changed. The transition from a DB pension world to a DC pension world meant that the
retirement assets of more older workers were affected by a stock market decline. Balloon loans
and small or no down payments for houses meant that many faced increasing mortgage payments
even as they had negative equity. Younger or lower paid workers were admitted into the housing
market during the boom years, but that same group was more likely to be subsequently
unemployed: not being able to make their house payments, many were foreclosed. The sharp
decline in the stock market reduced the buffer that might have ameliorated distress from the
housing or labor market.
In this paper we present results about the effects of the economic crisis and recession on
American households. They come from high-frequency surveys dedicated to tracking the effects
of the crisis and recession that we conducted in the American Life Panel – an Internet survey run
by RAND Labor and Population. The first survey was fielded at the beginning of November
2008, immediately following the large declines in the stock market of September and October.
The next survey followed three months later in February 2009. Since May 2009 we have
collected monthly data on the same households.
Our main measures are actual spending, unemployment, home equity, affect and mood,
and expectations about the stock market, the housing market and unemployment. While there is
some variation in the time path of these measures, mostly they declined from the beginning of
our surveys and continued to decline beyond June 2009, the official end of the recession,
reaching their low points in June-November 2009. Since then, they have shown little
improvement. If we define recession to be a period of negative change, from the point of view of
American households the recession has ended. If we define it in terms of levels, the recession is
not over and shows few signs of ending.
2. The American Life Panel

2

The American Life Panel (ALP) is an ongoing Internet panel survey of about 2500
persons operated and maintained by RAND Labor and Population. Panel members are recruited
from respondents to the University of Michigan Survey Research Center’s Monthly Survey
(MS). The MS incorporates the long-standing Survey of Consumer Attitudes and produces the
Index of Consumer Expectations. Each month, the MS interviews approximately 500
households, of which 300 are a random-digit-dialed sample and 200 are reinterviewed from the
RDD sample surveyed six months previously. The MS survey is considered to have good
population representation (Curtin, Presser, and Singer, 2005). At the end of an MS interview,
respondents are asked to participate in the ALP; about 80% of MS respondents asked have
agreed to participate. Those who do not have access to the Internet are provided with a Web TV
(www.webtv.com/pc/), including an Internet access subscription with an e-mail account.
Accordingly the sample does not suffer from selection due to a lack of Internet access.1 Poststratification weights are provided so that after weighting, the ALP approximates the
distributions of age, sex, ethnicity, education, and income in the Current Population Survey.
About once a month, respondents receive an email request to visit the ALP website to complete
questionnaires that typically take no more than 30 minutes to finish. Respondents are paid an
incentive of about $2 per three minutes of survey time. Response rates are typically between 80
and 95% of the enrolled panel members, depending on the topic, the time of year, and how long
a survey is kept in the field.
The ALP has conducted a large number of longitudinal surveys of its respondents, so that
over time it has collected data on a very wide range of covariates. For example, ALP
respondents have been asked about their financial knowledge, their retirement planning, and
hypothetical questions designed to reveal parameters such as risk aversion. They have been
given the Health and Retirement Study (HRS) survey instrument in modules one at a time over
an extended period, so that we have responses to the wide range of HRS health queries and to the
HRS cognitive battery. Most importantly, respondents were administered the HRS wealth
module in November 2008, shortly after our first survey.2
A strength of the ALP is that it takes advantage of Internet technology. There is a short
turn-around time between questionnaire design and the fielding of a survey, facilitating rapid
responses to new events or insights. Thus, surveys can be operated at high frequency, reducing
risk of missing events or the effects on households. This speed is in sharp contrast to the large
household surveys such as the HRS where the time from planning to fielding can be as much as a
year, and the time from fielding to data availability can exceed a year.
The Financial Crisis Surveys
The very large stock market declines in October 2008 prompted our first data collection.
We designed a survey that was administered to the ALP in November 2008. The survey covered
a broad range of topics, including various dimensions of life satisfaction, self-reported health
measures and indicators of affect, labor force status, retirement expectations, recent actual job
loss and chances of future job loss, housing, financial help (received and given and expectations
1

This approach has been used successfully in the Dutch CentER panel for many years.
As of this writing the ALP respondents have not yet been administered the HRS asset module a second time, so we
are lacking two longitudinal observations on wealth over a crucial period of the economic crisis. Funding is pending
for the second asset measurement planned for October 2010.
2

3

about these), stock ownership and value (including recent losses); recent stock transactions
(actual and expected over the next 6 months); expectations about future stock market returns
(one year ahead, 10 years ahead); spending changes; credit card balances and changes in the
amounts carried over; impact of the financial crisis on retirement savings; and expectations about
future asset accumulation. We followed up with a second longitudinal interview in late February
2009 covering approximately the same topics.
In our first survey (November 2008) 73 percent of households reported they had reduced
spending because of the economic crisis. These spending reductions are of substantial policy
and scientific interest, and so there is considerable value in a careful measurement of the
magnitude of the reductions. For example the welfare implications of the crisis depend partially
on the reduction in consumption. Furthermore, because of the lack of knowledge of how
spending responds to economic shocks at high frequency, it is important to establish the
empirical connection between the triggering events and the magnitude of consumption
reductions. The wide-spread spending reductions prompted us to re-orient the survey, expanding
the collection of information on the components of spending.
Beginning with the May 2009 interview we established a monthly interview schedule to
reduce the risk of recall error about spending and to collect data at high frequency on items such
as employment, satisfaction, mood, affect and expectations. An objective was to permit detailed
sequencing of events and their consequences.3
Each month we ask about spending in 25 categories during the previous month. These
categories comprise about 70% of total spending. Every third month beginning in July 2009 we
ask about spending during the previous three months on an additional 11 categories. Spending in
these categories tends to be less frequent such as durables. Taken together, the monthly and
quarterly surveys measure total spending over a three-month period. This three-month schedule
of two shorter monthly surveys and a longer quarterly survey has continued to the present.4
These surveys have several unique aspects. The first and most obvious is that they are
monthly panel surveys. This design permits the observation of the immediate effects of changes
in the economic environment that cannot be captured in low frequency surveys via retrospection.
A second unique aspect is our measurement of total spending on a monthly basis. This
measurement reduces recall bias for high frequency purchases, yet because the surveys cover an
entire year, this measurement also captures low frequency purchases. A third unique aspect is
the elicitation of subjective probabilities at a high frequency. In this design both the
determinants and the effects of subjective probabilities can be estimated. A fourth aspect is the
elicitation of measures of mood and affect that respond quickly to economic events.
A total of 2,693 respondents participated in at least one of the 14 interviews from
November 2008 through April 2010. The retention rate in the panel interviews has been high:
73.0 percent (N=1,966) responded to 10 or more interviews and 40.7 percent (N=1,096)
responded to all 14 waves. The high retention rate is partly due to respondents being invited to
continue to participate in the surveys even if they miss one or more of the interviews.

3

To further reduce recall error the survey is only available to respondents for the first 10 days of each month except
when the first day of the month falls on a weekend. Then the schedule is shifted by a day or two to accommodate
staff work schedules. Thus state variables such as unemployment refer to approximately the first 10 days of a
month, not the entire month.
4
Information about the surveys is given in Appendix Table 1, including survey length, fielding schedule and
response rates.

4

In this paper we use data from 14 surveys covering the period November 2008 through
April 2010. In the interest of maintaining an adequate sample size while at the same time basing
results on an approximate panel sample, we admit into the sample for panel analyses respondents
who missed at most four of the interviews.5

3. Indicator of financial distress
The main focus of the surveys is the effects of the financial crisis and the subsequent
recession on the economic well-being of households and on their reactions to the economic
shocks. As a summary measure of the immediate effects we say that a household is experiencing
financial distress if the respondent and/or spouse is unemployed, or if the household is more than
two months behind on mortgage payments (or in foreclosure), or if the value of the house is less
than the amount of the mortgage.6 Table 1 shows in each wave the percentage of households in a
panel sample that experienced financial distress. At the time of the initial survey 13.2% were in
financial distress, and in the last survey in April 2010 16.8% were in financial distress. We fit a
regression line to these percentages and find an increase of 0.15% per month from the regression
or 2.6% cumulative over 17 months. The second column of the table shows the cumulative
measure; that is, the percentage of households that since the first interview in November 2008
were in financial distress in at least one of the surveys. By April 2010, 39% of households had
experienced financial distress. Thus the effect of the recession as measured by the fraction of
households experiencing financial distress is not improving and it is widespread. This is to be
expected because unemployment has not declined by any important amount and housing prices
are approximately constant at levels much below their peaks in many cities.
Those with lower incomes are more likely to experience financial distress: the rate is
22% among households in the lowest income quartile but just 13% in the highest income quartile
(not shown). Younger people are more likely to be in households in financial distress: 23% of
those aged 18-34 are in households in distress versus 8% aged 60-69.7

4. Housing
Whether home owners have been affected by the large drops in home values, and how
seriously they have been affected, depends on where they live and when they bought their home.
Figure 1 shows Case-Shiller house price indices normalized to 100 in January 2003 for a 20-city
5

Results that use the spending data are based on the third through the 14th wave. A total of 2,623 respondents
answered at least one of these 12 interviews. Among these, 48.2 percent (N=1,264) participated in all 12 waves. In
the panel analysis of spending we include respondents who missed at most four of the 12 interviews. This
restriction is met by 77.8 percent or 2,041 respondents. Thus the sample used for spending analyses is slightly
different from the sample based on all 14 waves.
6
This measure of immediate financial distress does not account for households who have fallen behind with rent
payments because we did not initially collect this information. In later waves very few households report being
more than two months behind with rent payments, so the omission is not expected to affect the results in a material
manner. For longitudinal consistency of the measure of financial distress we excluded the event of “being behind
with rent payments” from all waves.
7
The statistics by age band and by income quartile are based on pooled observations from all waves. Income
quartiles are based on households’ average income computed over the entire survey period, stratified by marital
status (single vs. couple households).

5

average and for four representative cities, Phoenix, Los Angeles, Denver and Detroit. The 20city average peaked in May 2006 at about 50% above its level at the beginning of 2003. Since
reaching its peak it has fallen to about that initial 2003 level. The average conceals substantial
intercity variation. As is evident in the graph, in Denver there was a moderate increase in
housing prices, followed by a small decline, but this variation is not remarkable compared with
historical price changes. In Los Angeles or Phoenix, by contrast, there were dramatic swings in
home prices. However, the consequences of these price changes depend importantly on the date
of purchase. Consider a family who bought a house in 2003. Although the value of the home is
now below its 2006 peak of twice the purchase price, it is, nonetheless, at the 2003 level.
Provided the mortgage was reasonable in relation to family income, this family could have sound
finances, even having paid off some of the principal on the loan. However, if a family bought at
the top of the market with a small percentage down payment and a balloon loan, it would find
itself with substantial negative home equity and increased mortgage costs which might be
unaffordable.
It is noteworthy that substantial declines in housing prices are not limited to bubble
markets. A family buying a home in Detroit in late 2003 would now see a decline in value of
about 40%. The downturn in the auto industry and the departure of other large employers, such
as Pfizer, have taken their toll.
Our survey asks respondents about the value of their houses. These data have the virtue
of being reports on the same house over time and of being nationally representative. Other
commonly used data sources are based on recent actual property sales (possibly including
refinanced properties) or in the Case-Shiller index confined to 20 large cities. Table 2 shows
mean and median cross-section house values. We note that the ALP statistics are similar to those
reported in the Federal Housing Finance Agency "Monthly House Price Indexes for Census
Divisions and U.S. Purchase-Only Index” which is the only index available on a monthly basis.8
The reports from ALP respondents show a decline: Based on the regression of the log house
value on calendar time, both the mean and median value declined by about 0.4% per month for a
cumulative decline of about 7% over the 17 month period. This change does not account for
inflation. While it does represent a decline in the most important asset of many households, it is
not nearly as large as might be expected from the publicity about the crisis in the housing market.
However, most of the losses in housing value were prior to our initial survey. Additionally only
a subset of cities experienced very large declines in property values, but because of the
prominence of the Case-Shiller Index they tended to receive considerable publicity which may
have distorted expectations. This selective publicity may explain why respondents rate their
local housing market more favorably than the housing market in the U.S. as a whole.9
We ask respondents about the value of their mortgages which allows us to calculate the
percentage of owners with negative equity. These percentages of homeowners with negative
equity are more representative of the population than those obtained from sources such as lenders
or property records which are either incomplete or outdated. In Nov 2008, 5.6% of homeowners
owed more than their house was worth. By Feb 2009 this percentage had increased to 8.1%.
8

The “All Transactions Index,” which uses sales prices and appraisals but is only available quarterly, shows
somewhat higher appreciation than the purchases only index.
9
This finding is based on questions asking respondents to rate on a 5-point scale the “housing market in the U.S. as
a whole” and then the “housing market in [your] area.” The fraction rating the U.S. housing market as fair or poor
(85.9%) is persistently 20 percentage points higher than the fraction rating the local housing market as fair or poor
(65.8%).

6

After that there has been little trend in this percentage, hovering between 8 and 9 percent of
homeowners in each wave whether measured in cross-section or in panel.10 Younger
homeowners were much more likely to have negative home equity: 12.4% of homeowners under
age 50 had negative equity compared with 5.2% among those 50 or older. Although negative
home equity may not in itself lead to financial trouble, it makes the household vulnerable to
other economic shocks such as unemployment. Unemployment tends to be greater among
younger households.
A common measure of noncompliance with mortgage payments is being more than two
months behind on payments. Table 3 shows that in panel data the number of such households
reached a peak of 5% in October 2009 and has fallen since then to 3.8% in April 2010.
People with negative home equity do not keep up their mortgage payments as well as
those with positive equity. Those with negative home equity are over 6 times as likely to be
behind on their mortgage payments. Those falling behind are at great risk of losing their homes,
lacking equity for possible refinancing. The observed negative equity positions therefore suggest
further foreclosures in the future.
We asked respondents who were homeowners and had a mortgage whether they were
being foreclosed. The fraction in foreclosure reached its peak in October 2009 with 2.7% and
then declined. It was 1.3% in January 2010, and 1.2% in April 2010. Cumulating the
foreclosures over time starting with the first survey in November 2008 through April 2010 we
find that among those who had a mortgage at some time during this period, 4.8% had gone
through foreclosure by April 2010.11

House price expectations
Respondents are asked about expectations of price appreciation in the form of a
subjective probability as follows:
On a scale from 0 percent to 100 percent where 0 means that
you think there is no chance and 100 means that you think
the event is absolutely sure to happen, what do you think
are the chances that by next year at this time your home
will be worth more than it is today.
In addition the quarterly surveys ask the same question but with a time horizon of five years.
Table 4 shows the average subjective probabilities. The most notable feature of the
results is the very pessimistic expectations. The mean and median subjective probability of a
gain over the next 12 months was about 40% in May 2009 through July 2009, indicating that,
according to respondents’ beliefs, a decline in prices was more likely than a gain in prices.
Households holding that view are likely to be conservative in spending or in borrowing against
the value of their house. These expectations are very much at odds with historical frequencies.
Based on changes in the monthly house price index of the Federal Housing Finance Agency
"Monthly House Price Indexes for Census Divisions and U.S. Purchase-Only Index” the

10

Among homeowners with a mortgage about 12% had negative equity.
In cumulating the observations of experiencing foreclosure over time we include respondents who have missed
some waves.

11

7

estimated probability of a gain in house value over one year would be 88%.12 One explanation
for this discrepancy is that the past offers little guidance to the future due to the exceptional
nature of the recession. A second, more general explanation, is that expectations of future price
changes are dependent on recent price changes as has been found for stock market expectations
(Hurd, 2009).
One-year expectations increased between February 2009 and May 2009. Between May
2009 and January 2010 housing prices were approximately constant (Table 2) and one-year
average expectations were also approximately constant. But in April 2010 the median
probability of a one-year gain declined to just 30%, possibly reflecting recent declines in
reported housing values.
While five-year expectations are greater than 50% they still show considerable pessimism
and are at odds with historical price changes: the historical estimate based on the “Monthly
House Price Indexes” is 100%.13 That is, in every five-year interval since 1992 (taken monthby-month) house prices have increased. In distinction to one-year expectations, five-year
expectations were lower in April 2010 than in February 2009. Apparently people have become
somewhat more optimistic about the short-run as measured by the one-year expectations while at
the same time they have become more pessimistic about the long-run as measured by the fiveyear expectations.

5. Spending
Spending expectations
In normal times, most people should expect approximately stable spending over a six
month horizon. To the extent that they anticipate changes, most of the changes would be positive
because spending increases with age until old age. In addition nominal spending should increase
over time both because of inflation and because of increases in incomes. However, in November
2008 just 8% of respondents expected an increase in spending over the next six months whereas
about 20% expected a decrease (Table 5). The low point was reached in February 2009 where
22% expected a decrease. The expectations of a decrease likely resulted from pessimism about
the stock market and the housing market, heightened concerns about unemployment, and about
the vulnerability of income. By the metric of expected spending change, the low point of the
recession was reached in about February or March 2009 which coincided with the low point of
the stock market and a cessation in the decline in house prices.
Expectations are now stable with more expecting an increase than a decrease. This does
not necessarily mean that people have become more optimistic about the future course of the
economy: it could be that spending has been reduced to a level such that people do not expect
that further reductions are necessary.
There is a remarkable match between expectations of spending change and recollections
of actual change. Respondents were asked in July 2009 about whether they had reduced
spending over the preceding six months. Table 6 shows expectations of spending change
12

Calculated as the percentage of 12-month intervals over which the housing price index increased between January
1, 1991 to November 1, 2009.
13
Calculated as the percentage of five-year intervals over which the housing price index increased between January
1, 1991 to November 1, 2009.

8

collected in February 2009 with recollections of spending change collected in July 2009 in panel.
Although the temporal comparison is not completely exact, the expectations were very accurate
when they are compared with recollections.

Self-reported spending changes
In Wave 1, 73% of respondents said they reduced spending because of the financial
problems in the economy. In Wave 2, 30% said spending was lower compared to spending in
November 2008. We found little variation in reported spending reductions by age and income
except that fewer reduced spending among those aged 60+ and fewer reduced spending in the
highest income quartile. Many respondents reduced spending on health care such as doctor visits
and prescription drugs (self-reports): in wave 1, 22% said they had reduced such spending over
the last 6 months and in wave 2, 25% since the November 2008 interview. These reductions in
health care spending may lead, of course, to negative health consequences over the longer term.
In the climate of the recession it is natural to think that reductions in spending are due to
reduced economic resources or to pessimistic expectations about future economic resources such
as an increased likelihood of unemployment and the associated reduction in income. But
spending reductions could also reflect changes in “needs” such as changes in family
composition. Similarly spending could increase because of an unanticipated increase in
resources or because of increased requirements for spending due to, say, higher out-of-pocket
spending for health care. To separate changes in actual or anticipated resources from changes in
needs, we asked about the reasons for spending changes.
Among those who reported an increase in spending we find a combination of an increase
in economic resources and an increase in spending requirements. Of particular interest is that in
the 2009 interviews 24% of households reported an increase due to higher required mortgage
payments; this percentage declined to 19% in the 2010 interviews. However, there was a
substantial decline in the percentage reporting an increase in spending because of increases in
economic resources or better employment.
Reasons for Increase in Spending among those Reporting an Increase.
Percent indicating “very or moderately important”
Later quarterly
Earlier quarterly
interviews
interviews
(Feb09, Jul09, Oct09)
(Jan10, Apr10)
increase in income or wealth
47.1
34.7
better actual employment
32.9
20.7
higher required mortgage payments
24.1
18.6
other increased spending needs
86.1
80.3
Percent of respondents reporting increase in
spending since previous quarterly interview
11.7%
13.0%
N
648-654
517-522
Note: Respondents could check more than one reason.

Among those who reported a reduction in spending, about 80% cited a need to reduce debt and
68% cited a reduction in income. According to the self reports, the decline in stocks and in the

9

house value directly led to a reduction in spending. There was little change in these percentages
between the earlier and later waves. However, the overall percentage of households that reduced
spending was lower in the 2010 interviews than in the 2009 interviews. Possibly prior reductions
in spending were deemed sufficient by some households so that further reductions were not
necessary in the later waves. But the lower percentage of households is also consistent with the
improvement in expectations reported in Table 5, and with stabilized conditions.
Reasons for a Decrease in Spending among hose Reporting a Decrease.
Percent indicating “very or moderately important”
Earlier quarterly
Later quarterly
interviews
interviews
(Feb09, Jul09, Oct09)
(Jan10, Apr10)
need to reduce debt
81.1
78.6
reduction in income
68.5
67.7
change in employment status
46.2
45.6
decrease in value of stock holdings
35.0
39.7
decrease in housing value (homeowners only)
46.0
48.8
Percent of respondents reporting decrease in
spending since previous quarterly interview
26.1%
16.8%
N
1656-1660
656-658
Note: Respondents could check more than one reason.

Actual spending
Because of the large and wide-spread declines in spending reported in the first two
surveys we began in the May 2009 interview to ask detailed questions about amounts spent in the
preceding month. Our strategy was to ask about spending in 25 categories that are purchased at
high to middle frequency every month. Then, every three months we asked about the purchase
over the past three months of 11 more infrequently purchased categories. With possibly a few
minor exclusions the total of the three monthly surveys and the quarterly survey add to total
spending over the quarter.
The 25 categories queried in the monthly surveys are shown in Appendix Table 2
grouped as they would have been displayed. The grouping by broad types of spending or by
frequency of spending is meant to facilitate placement of reported amounts in the proper
category: Respondents are sometimes unsure about category placement and they are helped by
seeing other possibly relevant categories. The grouping should reduce the risk of either omission
or double counting. For example, the following categories were displayed at the same time
because they are associated with household operations.

Mortgage
Rent
Electricity
Water
Heating fuel for the home

10

Telephone, cable, Internet
Car payments: interest and principal
A major innovation was the development of a “reconciliation” screen. Outliers are a
problem in self-administered data collection such as Internet interviewing because there is no
interviewer to question extreme values. Therefore, we designed a new strategy for the ALP to
help with outliers: following the queries about spending last month on the 25 items we presented
the respondent with a summary table which listed the responses and added them to produce the
implied monthly spending total. The respondent was invited to correct any items. This produced
two very favorable results. Item nonresponse was reduced from an already low level to a trivial
level: in the initial survey of spending (May09) the maximum item nonresponse (rent) was
reduced from 2.6% to 0.7%, and in the following wave the maximum item nonresponse (again
rent) was reduced from 2.7% to 0.9%.14 The maximum rate of item nonresponse over all 25
items following the summary table was 0.8% in May09 and 0.9% in June09. This means that
almost no imputation for missing values is required. The second favorable result was a sharp
reduction in outliers. Combining both waves, the standard deviation of total spending (on the 25
items) was reduced from $14,045 to $5,624. The reduction was the result of a small number of
revisions, on average 2.5% of responses in each category of spending. However, eliminating
outliers in each category has an enormous impact on standard errors of the total that is
constructed as the sum of these 25 spending categories. The importance of a reduction of this
size can be seen directly in standard errors in models that explain spending: roughly speaking
the standard errors on estimated coefficients in regression models will be reduced by a factor of
about 2.5, making estimates that were formerly marginally significant, highly significant. See
Appendix Table 4 for more details.
Comparison with the Consumer Expenditure Survey
The CEX has the most authoritative survey measure of spending at the household level,
and so we would like to compare annual spending in the CEX with annual spending in our
survey. However, the latest published tables from the CEX cover the year 2008, which, even
after adjusting to 2009 prices, will make the comparison with ALP spending data for 2009
inexact: based on the trends in spending in our survey to be discussed below and in the decline
in spending in the National Income and Product Accounts, spending in 2009 was likely lower
than spending in 2008. We therefore expect that the price-adjusted level from the CEX for 2008
will be higher than our more recent spending measure.
In the ALP we calculate spending over a year by summing spending in the second, third
and fourth quarters of 2009 and in the first quarter of 2010. Spending in each quarter is the sum
of spending on the 25 items that are measured each month plus the 11 additional items that are
measured every quarter.
Average spending in 2008 as reported in the CEX was $44,721 (in 2009$); average
spending in the ALP was $41,723. Thus ALP spending is 93% of CEX spending. In our view
14

In the reconciliation screen, missing items were filled with zeros, and in a very few cases respondents corrected
these zeros to positive values. The item nonresponse rates are calculated under the assumption that the remaining
zeros were affirmed by the respondent. The remaining missing values are due to some respondents quitting the
survey before reaching the spending questions.

11

these levels are remarkably similar, particularly because the CEX levels for 2009 will likely be
lower than the 2008 levels.
Trends in spending
Table 7 has average and median spending in the 25 categories both in cross-section and
in panel. There is almost no difference between the cross-section medians and the panel medians
both with respect to levels and trends, and the only substantive difference between the crosssection and panel means is in the initial wave. All show a reduction in spending between April
2009 (as recorded in the May survey) and March 2010 as recorded in the April survey. The rates
of decline based on the regression of log spending on calendar time range from about 0.5 percent
per month to one percent per month for a cumulative decline of 5-10%. These, of course, are
substantial changes in spending over a short time period. Were income constant, the household
saving rate would have increased considerably. Except for the decrease in spending in the first
four months, the time pattern is unclear: a minimum was reached in January 2010 but the data
do not show a definite pattern of increase since then.
Certain components of spending are of interest as well as the total. Table 8 shows
spending on food, disaggregated into food purchased for consumption at home (food in) and
food purchased away from home such as in restaurants (food out). As measured at the mean,
spending for “food in” declined at about 0.5% per month for a total decline of 5.5% whereas
spending for “food out” declined at a somewhat higher rate. When measured at the median,
however, the differences are greater: median spending for “food in” did not decline at all
whereas the cumulative decline for “food out” was 33%. Apparently households substitute for
(cheaper) eating at home. It is noteworthy that the declines for total spending on food were close
to the declines on total spending on the 25 categories (Table 7). Although food is a necessity, the
substitution between spending on “food in” and “food out” led to approximately constant budget
shares on total spending for food.
Table 9 has spending on two categories of health care: prescription drugs and health care
services such as doctor visits. The decline in spending on the two components and on the total
was substantially greater than the decline in spending on the 25 categories, indicating that the
budget share declined. The decline is particularly sharp if spending in March 2010 (April 2010
survey) is excluded: for example, the median in February 2010 was just half of the level in April
2009. Because spending on health care is protective against future health declines, economizing
in this way has potentially long-term negative consequences.
Credit cards
Respondents were asked about ownership and use of credit cards. Table 10 shows that
the ownership of credit cards declined by about 0.2% of households per month for a cumulative
decline of 2.8 percent of households. At the same time the percentage of credit card holders that
paid the balance each month and escaped interest charges increased by about 3.8 percent of
households. However, credit card debt conditional on carrying debt over from one month to the
next increased by about $1,000 or 25%. Averaged over the entire population (not just those that
carried debt), by February 2010 credit card debt on which interest is assessed had increased by
$500. At an interest rate of 16% this is an increase in monthly interest payments of $80 per
month or $960 per year.
12

6. Stock Market
Over the past 20 years defined contribution plans have become an increasingly common
form of employer-provided pension plans. As a result the fraction in the population holding
stocks, even if indirectly in their pension plans, has increased over the years (Curcuru et al.
(2009)). The large declines in the stock market at the onset of the financial crisis likely
threatened retirement security, especially of those near retirement. We asked in the first two
waves whether the “recent financial problems in the economy reduced the value of [the
respondent’s (and/or spouse’s)] retirement savings,” by how much and whether respondents
actively changed how their retirement savings were invested. About 28% said that they did not
have any retirement savings, a response that is naturally most common among younger
households who have not had much opportunity to accumulate retirement savings.15 Among
those with retirement savings, 71 percent reported losses due to financial problems in the
economy. This percentage varies substantially by socioeconomic status as measured by
household income averaged over the entire survey period: in the lowest income quartile 47
percent reported losses, and in the highest income quartile 93 percent reported losses in their
retirement savings.
The self–reported magnitude of the losses was about 20% at the median in November
2008 and about 30% both at the mean and median by the time of our second interview in
February 2009. Since November 2008 the stock market continued to decline until its low point
in March 2009 when it was about 32% below its early November level.
Prior research suggests that households rarely rebalance their retirement savings
portfolios. See, for example, Agnew et al. (2003), Ameriks and Zeldes (2004) or Mitchell et al.
(2006). However, these findings are based on administrative data from retirement plan providers
which only record partial retirement asset holdings such as Vanguard proprietary data.
Furthermore, the findings come from “normal” times when there is no large event prompting
investors to rebalance their portfolios. We asked households about “active changes in how
[their] retirement savings are invested.” With this question wording we elicit changes in
households’ entire retirement assets (not just one part of their portfolio). 21% of those with
retirement savings reported in the February 2009 survey having made “active changes to how
retirement savings are invested” since the November interview. This seemed like a large fraction
over a short period of time—just three months—even though we do not know what this fraction
would be in normal times. Such investment moves may have a large impact on the long term
performance of portfolios – either through locking in losses by getting out of the stock market in
response to large declines, or through creating the potential for large gains by getting into the
stock market at that time. Beginning in the May 2009 survey we asked detailed questions about
asset allocation in retirement accounts with special emphasis on whether changes involved
increasing or decreasing stock market exposure. The objectives of these questions are twofold:
first, we wanted to find whether the large fraction of respondents reporting “active changes” to
their retirement investment allocations would be verified by quantitative measures of investment
activity. Second, we wanted to quantify the amount of asset reallocation.

15

Among those under the age of 35, half report not having any retirement savings, while just 5% of those age 70 and
older reported no retirement savings.

13

As of May 2009, 64.5 percent of households in our sample had an IRA, 401k, KEOGH
or similar retirement saving accounts. 28.6% of retirement account holders had made a change
in the investment of new funds and/or the allocation of old balances since the beginning of
October 2008, that is, since the beginning of the financial crisis. Among retirement account
holders who also responded to wave 1 or wave 2 of the survey the fraction reporting having
made “active changes” to their retirement savings was 28.0 percent.
About 10 percent of retirement account holders changed the investment allocation of new
contributions. The fraction of respondents that increased the amount of new funds allocated to
stocks is similar to the fraction that decreased the amount of new funds allocated to stocks (4.6
percent vs. 5.2 percent, respectively). However, with respect to reallocations of account balances
we find that a much larger fraction decreased their exposure to stocks (16.4 percent) than
increased (6.3 percent).16 Overall respondents decreased stock holdings in retirement accounts.
Under unchanging expectations finance theory would call for rebalancing, an increase in stock
holdings following the long period of losses. The most obvious explanation for this discrepancy
is that expectations were not determined by historical averages, but by more recent experience,
leading to considerable pessimism about the future course of the stock market.
Percent of households making changes to retirement accounts
(among holders),
October 2008 to May 2009, N=1,513
Allocation of new funds
increased amount to stocks
decreased amount to stocks

4.6
5.2

Allocation of balances
increased amount in stocks
decreased amount in stock

6.3
16.4

Sold all stocks in retirement accounts

3.0

Stock market expectations
We asked about expectations of gains in the stock market in the form of the subjective
probability that a broad measure of the stock market such as the Dow Jones Industrial Average
would be higher in one year than today.17 We also asked about a gain over a 10-year horizon.
The one-year subjective probabilities exhibit considerable pessimism: the average subjective
probability is just 40% (Table 11). The historical record for the Dow is that in 70% of the oneyear periods since January 1, 1970 the stock market had a gain, so that an average subjective
probability based on the historical record should be 70%. The median probability of a gain was
50% in most months which implies that the distribution had a fairly fat left tail; that is, a
16

Bilias et al. (2010) compare trends in stock market participation before and after the 2000 stock market downturn
and find that in the first years following the downturn nonparticipants were less likely to enter the stock market
while there was no sign of substantially higher exit rates. Their analysis of trading behavior is restricted to stock
holdings outside of retirement accounts.
17
The question has the same form as the question about housing price expectations.

14

considerable number of respondents assign a small probability of a gain. The average subjective
probability of a gain over a 10-year horizon began at a considerably higher level, almost 61%,
but then in distinction to the probability of a gain over one year, it has declined by about 10
percentage points. The historical probability calculated from all 10-year periods since Jan 1,
1970 is 93%.
While the subjective probability of a short-term gain has been approximately constant,
the subjective probability of a long-term gain has decreased substantially, and the average
probabilities are much below their historical averages. Thus the stock market subjective
probabilities are similar to the housing price subjective probabilities in that both show a
narrowing of the difference between the long horizon and short horizon probabilities. One
interpretation is that people are quite pessimistic about the long-run prospects of the economy.
Under this interpretation households are likely to be conservative in their spending decisions.

7. Health and Affect
A cost of the financial crisis in terms of well-being is its effect on the emotional and
physical health of the population. Respondents were asked to rate their satisfaction about several
aspects of their lives, about their health and about indicators of happiness or depression. Table
12 shows the percentage of respondents who affirmed the lowest two categories on a five point
scale about life satisfaction, and income and economic satisfaction; that is, it shows the
percentage who were “dissatisfied” or “very dissatisfied.” 18 For life satisfaction, just 7.1% of
respondents were dissatisfied or very dissatisfied in May 2009. Since then the percentage has
slowly increased reaching a maximum in March 2010. Dissatisfaction with income or with the
economic situation is considerably higher with about one-third of respondents expressing
dissatisfaction. Except for the initial drop in May 2009, there has been no noticeable trend.
Table 13 shows the percentage of respondents who affirmed the bottom categories of
self-rated health and of scales related to happiness and to depressive symptoms. There are five
categories of self-rated health and the table shows the percentage who rated their health as fair or
poor.19 That percentage initially declined from 16.0% in November 2008 to 13.8% in May 2009.
Since then the percentage has shown little trend. The next column of the table shows the
percentage that feel worn out (during past 30 days) all of the time, most of the time, or a good bit
of the time.20 There has been no trend in mood according to this measure. The results about
happiness (during the last 30 days) show the percentage who were happy none, a little or some of
the time. There was improvement between November 2008 and June 2009, but little change
until the last several interviews when the percentage increased. About one-third of respondents
reported moderate to extreme difficultly sleeping in November 2008.21 There has been a
substantial reduction in that percentage. Problems with depression have mostly been
unchanging.

18

The scale is very satisfied, satisfied, neither satisfied nor dissatisfied, dissatisfied, very dissatisfied.
The self-rated health scale is excellent, very good, good, fair and poor.
20
The scale for “worn out” and for “happiness” is all of the time, most of the time, a good bit of the time, some of
the time, a little of the time, none of the time
21
The scale for difficulty sleeping is none, some, moderate, severe, extreme.
19

15

Overall, the results for health and affect mainly indicate improvements from November
2008 to May 2009. In the subsequent months there has been much less improvement and in
some cases a worsening.

8. Retirement
Our survey has not been in the field long enough to observe any substantial number of
actual retirements. However, we ask respondents about their subjective probability of working
past age 62 (P62) and past age 65. These subjective probabilities have been asked in the HRS
for many years and they have been shown to be predictive of actual retirement (Hurd, Reti and
Rohwedder, 2009). They have an advantage over data on actual retirement because changes in
the subjective probability control for individual fixed effects such as unmeasured permanent taste
differences. Such fixed effects are difficult to control when using actual retirement data.
We expect that the financial crisis and subsequent recession could have two opposing
effects on retirement. In theory, the decline in stock values should have delayed retirement
because of the unexpected wealth loss. However, our survey had not yet been fielded during the
period of the greatest stock market losses when P62 would have increased the most. The second
effect on retirement is the worsening of the labor market, and particularly the difficulty of
finding a job following unemployment in the older population. The labor market effect would
likely lead to a reduction in expected retirement age. The net effect is an empirical matter.
Table 14 shows average values of P62 in cross-section for the population 45-61 and for
selected subpopulations. For the 45-61 year-olds, whether working or not, the average value of
P62 was approximately constant from February 2009 to January 2010, but then dropped by 3.3
percentage points in April 2010. To put that change in perspective, the labor force participation
rate of the older population has been increasing during the 1990s and particularly in the 2000s: in
2003 the rate among those 60-64 was 51%, and the rate was 54.1% in 2008. The increase over
five years was 3.1 percentage points about the same as the three-month decline in P62. If the
actual labor force participation of ALP respondents is well-predicted by P62, these data suggest
a sharp reversal of the trend toward higher participation.22
The level of P62 is higher among those 45-52 than among those 53-61 because some in
the older age group have already retired. Although the decline in P62 between January 2010 and
April 2010 occurred in both age groups, disaggregation by work status shows a remarkable
difference between the two groups. In the older age group the overall trend as measured between
February 2009 and April 2010 was moderately negative among those working and moderately
positive among those not working. In the younger age group the trend was also negative among
those working, but it was sharply negative among those not working. The contrast is greatest
between July 2009 and April 2010: P62 was approximately 13 percentage points lower among
the younger non-workers but two percentage points higher among the older non-workers. This
decline suggests in increase in pessimism about the future course of the labor market, which is
likely due to the persistence of high rates of unemployment.

22

Whether P62 will be a good prediction of labor force participation at age 62 will depend on the future course of
the economy. Should job prospects improve, P62 will likely increase and actual realized labor force participation be
higher than P62 measured currently

16

9. Unemployment
We ask respondents about their current labor force status. As shown in the following
table, they can check a number of options one of which is "unemployed."
What is your current employment situation? Please check all
that apply.
1. Work for pay
2. Unemployed, looking for work
3. Temporarily laid off
4. On sick or other leave
5. Disabled
6. Retired
7. Homemaker
8. Self-employed
9. Student
10. Other
Respondents are employed if they check 1, 4 or 8. They are unemployed if they check 2 or 3.
The unemployment rate is the number unemployed divided by the sum of the unemployed and
employed.
Because the status of being unemployed is subjective, rather than based on specific
objective activities related to job search as in the Current Population Survey (CPS), our measure
should include those who consider themselves to be unemployed but have not performed any of
those activities. Our measure generally tracks national statistics which come from the CPS but it
is higher because it includes some who are not actively looking for work.
We also ask about the labor force status of the spouse so that we are able to calculate a
household unemployment rate in the case of couples.
Coping with Unemployment
For most households, unemployment is associated with a substantial loss in income.
There are many different ways in which households might cope with this reduction in income.
Broadly speaking the household may alter its spending or it may seek replacements for the loss
of income. Which ones a household relies on depends on the household’s circumstances.
Beginning with the May 2009 survey (wave 3) we asked follow-up questions in case a household
(respondent and/or spouse) experienced unemployment over the last three months to find out
how affected households deal with the loss in income. Table 15 shows the distribution of
responses. “Reducing spending” is by far the most wide-spread response used by 85 percent of
households who experienced unemployment. 46% reduced the amount going into savings. Not
paying bills on time is also common.
Households may also undertake activities to replace the income lost from unemployment
such as the application for and receipt of unemployment benefits or the support from the
extended family. Table 16 shows the distribution of responses by those who experience
unemployment or by those whose spouses experience unemployment.
About one-third of households took money out of savings, and 27% received financial
help from family or friends. Forty percent received unemployment benefits. The low level of
17

benefit receipt is likely due to a combination of variation in how fast laid off workers decide to
claim benefits, lack of qualification for benefits, and failure to take up benefits.23
We distinguish two types of labor supply response to unemployment: efforts by the
respondent or by the spouse (as reported by the respondent) in reaction to own unemployment;
efforts by the respondent in reaction to the spouse’s unemployment and by the spouse in reaction
to the respondent’s unemployment. A labor supply response was far from universal: to own
unemployment about 13% of respondents took up a temporary job, and about 9% of spouses who
became unemployed took up a temporary job. In addition, about 5-8% of married persons began
to work or increased hours after their spouses became unemployed. A likely reason for these
rather small labor supply responses is that we do not distinguish between short-run and long-run
responses: many of the unemployed have been unemployed for just a few weeks and a
maximum of three months to be asked these follow-up questions. It is likely that as the
unemployment duration increases the labor supply response will increase.
Unemployment Expectations
Expectations about unemployment as well as actual unemployment should be an
important component in a household’s determination of spending. To track expectations about
unemployment we asked workers about their subjective probability of becoming unemployed in
the next 12 months. Table 17 shows the average probability in successive cross-sections. The
average probability began at about 20% and increased to almost 22% in May 2010. If each
person accurately assessed his or her probability the twelve-month actual fraction of workers
who would experience unemployment would be 22%. There has been some improvement since
then: based on a fitted regression line the average probability decreased by about 2.2 percentage
points over the 18 months of our surveys. The decline is likely due to improvements in the
housing and stock markets and to the stabilizing of the actual unemployment rate and the
subsequent modest reduction.
We can compare the expected percentage who will be unemployed over 12 months with
the realized percentage who actually became unemployed by tracing actual unemployment at the
individual level in the monthly surveys. The within-person comparison shows that 19.4%
experienced unemployment between November 2008 and October 2009 (Table 18). Their
average subjective probability reported in November 2008 was 20%. Thus workers predicted
quite accurately on average what their unemployment experience would be. In later waves
workers predicted more unemployment than what was experienced: for example, in May 2009
the average subjective probability of unemployment was 22% and the actual was 17%.
Unemployment and home ownership
Table 19 shows the relationships among home ownership, unemployment and mortgage
delinquency. In the entire population some 65.5% own a home, but the ownership rate is just
46.4% among the unemployed. Despite the lower ownership rate, about 3.5% of the unemployed
are in arrears on their mortgage payments versus 1.7% in the population. Conditional on owning
a home, the unemployed are more likely to have a mortgage (79% versus 75%), and, conditional

23

Questions about responses to unemployment are asked only of workers who lost a job some time over the
previous three months so that the unemployed who are slow to take up benefits are not recorded as receiving them.

18

on having a mortgage, they are more likely to be delinquent (more than two months behind on
payment) on their mortgage (10% versus 3%).
Households experiencing unemployment are much more likely to have negative home
equity than those who are not. Among homeowners with a mortgage about 12% have negative
equity compared with 17% of those unemployed. Although negative home equity does not
necessarily imply financial difficulties, the combination with unemployment does, as then the
household risks an inability to make its mortgage payments, and possible loss of the home.
Unemployment and spending
Prior research has found mixed results with respect to spending changes following
unemployment, but those studies were based on very different types of data.24 Our method is to
classify people according to whether they are initially employed or unemployed. Then we study
changes in spending associated with month-to-month transitions between those states. Table 20
shows those transitions over the May 2009 to April 2010 waves. Thus 14,053 respondents were
employed in adjacent waves. Among those respondents average spending in the initial wave
(wave t) was $2,551; spending was lower in the following wave (wave t+1) by 1.8% Median
spending was lower than mean spending, and it declined by about 0.7% between waves t and
t+1. The last column shows the median of the household changes and it shows a decline of
0.3%. 350 persons transited from employed to unemployed. Both mean and median spending by
their households was lower even when employed (wave t) than spending by households who
were employed in both waves. Mean spending in households that became unemployed declined
by 3.5%. Median spending increased by 2.4% but the median of household level changes was
negative 2.8%. At least according to two of the measures, the transition into unemployment was
accompanied by a greater decline in spending than the transition from employment to
employment. However, the transition from unemployment to employment was also associated
with a decline in spending whereas we would have expected an increase. Part of the reason for
this discrepancy is that spending is measured over the prior month during which the respondent
was unemployed for at least part of the time. Additionally the adjustment to the new economic
situation may require some time so that it would appear in later waves.
Table 21 presents some alternative evidence about the effects of job loss on spending.
We asked in the quarterly surveys (July 2009, October 2009, January 2010 and April 2010)
whether over the previous three months the respondent or spouse had lost a job that he or she
wanted to keep, and if so, whether any income was lost in association with the job loss. The
table shows spending in the month at the beginning of the recall period (wave t-3) and in the
current month (wave t): thus spending changes are over three months. This comparison is likely
more valid than Table 20 because most would have been unemployed during the month when
spending was measured.
Among those who did not report a job loss, spending declined at the mean by 1.7% over
the three month period or about 0.6 percent per month, and at the median by 1.2% or about 0.4%
per month. Particularly when measured at the median the decline in spending was substantially
higher among those who lost a job and lost income: the median decline was 10.7%.

24

Prominent studies using panel data include Gruber (1997), Gruber (2000), Stephens (2001), Bentolila and Ichino
(2008) and Sullivan (2008), which tend to find mixed evidence with regard to the size of the response of spending to
shocks to income and employment.

19

Unemployment and Health and Affect
Because of stresses associated with job loss we expect that those who became
unemployed would exhibit symptoms of stress such as sleeplessness. The unemployed would
also have a reduction in several domains of satisfaction about life. Figure 2 shows the change in
the percentage giving negative reports about these and other aspects of feelings and lives
according to their labor market transition between two adjacent waves.25 The upper left graph
shows that among those who were employed in two adjacent waves about eight percent were
dissatisfied or very dissatisfied with their lives and that in the follow-up wave the percent
dissatisfied declined slightly. Among those who became unemployed, the percentage expressing
dissatisfaction with life was higher even when employed, and it increased by about three
percentage points in the follow-up wave. Among those who transitioned from unemployment to
employment the percent expressing dissatisfaction with life declined by half, and among those
unemployed in two adjacent waves dissatisfaction with life was very high in both waves.
It is notable that in the graphs about economic and income satisfaction, the fractions
dissatisfied are much higher than with respect to life satisfaction: even among those employed in
two adjacent waves 30-35% expressed dissatisfaction. The changes accompanying employment
transitions have the same pattern as those with respect to life satisfaction.
In general the graphs for sleeplessness, depression, being worn out and feeling happy
show the same pattern. The exception is self-rated health: those employed in adjacent waves
have better health than those unemployed in any wave, but there is no systematic relationship
with employment transitions. Most likely changes in self-rated health take longer to materialize
following a transition.26
Unemployment and Health Insurance
A particular concern is that those who become unemployed may lose health insurance,
exacerbating the economic impact of unemployment. We ask respondents about health
insurance coverage which may come from own employment or a spouse’s employment. Table
22 shows how such coverage is related to employment transitions by showing coverage rates as a
function of the transition from one month to the next. For example, 3,231 single persons are
observed to transit from employed to employed. Of them, 82.8% had health care insurance in
the initial wave and 82.9% had such insurance in the succeeding wave.
Single persons who became unemployed were initially much less likely to have health
insurance even when employed, and the coverage rate declined by about 23 percentage points on
becoming unemployed. This decline is much sharper than for married persons where it was just
three percentage points. Part of the difference is, of course, due to spouse coverage. Part may
also be due to the greater economic resources of couples where they may be able to afford
COBRA coverage. In addition, the impacts in the table are immediate impacts: on average
newly unemployed respondents had only been unemployed for two weeks as of wave t+1, and
over longer periods the fraction lacking insurance may increase. For example, some employers
may provide temporary coverage as part of a separation package, but this coverage is not
permanent.
25

The explanation of the scales is given in connection with the discussion of Tables 12 and 13.
The longer-term dynamics of the measures of health, affect and mood undoubtedly show different quantitative
relationships than the one-month changes shown here.

26

20

9. Conclusions
The economic problems leading to the recession began with a housing price bubble in
many parts of the country and a coincident stock market bubble. These problems evolved into
the financial crisis. Following very large declines in the stock market in September and October,
2008, we fielded our first survey which we called the Financial Crisis survey because at that time
the news was dominated by the financial problems in the banking sector, the stock market bust,
and the housing market. Unemployment had been increasing but it was still at a relatively
modest 6.9%. Although we were not in the field to capture the immediate effects of the largest
part of the stock and housing declines, those prices did decline for a few more months following
our first survey, so we were able to observe at least some immediate effects. Even as prices in
the housing market stabilized and the stock market partially recovered, the unemployment rate
continued to increase, reaching 10.1% in October 2009. The financial crisis became the Great
Recession. With our monthly surveys we have observed the immediate effects of these large
changes.
According to our measures almost 40% of households have been affected either by
unemployment, negative home equity, arrears on their mortgage payments, or foreclosure.
Additionally economic preparation for retirement, which is hard to measure, has undoubtedly
been affected. Many people approaching retirement suffered substantial losses in their
retirement accounts: indeed in the November 2008 survey, 25% of respondents aged 50-59
reported they had lost more than 35% of their retirement savings, and some of them locked in
their losses prior to the partial recovery in the stock market by selling out. Some persons retired
unexpectedly early because of unemployment, leading to a reduction of economic resources in
retirement which will be felt throughout their retirement years. Some younger workers who have
suffered unemployment will not reach their expected level of lifetime earnings and will have
reduced resources in retirement as well as during their working years.
Spending has been approximately constant since it reached its minimum in about
November, 2009. Short-run expectations of stock market gains and housing prices gains have
recovered somewhat, yet are still rather pessimistic; and, possibly more telling, longer-term
expectations for those price increases have declined substantially and have shown no signs of
recovery. The implication is that long-run expectations have become pessimistic relative to
short-run expectations.
Expectations about unemployment have improved somewhat from their low point in May
2009 but they remain high: they predict that about 18% of workers will experience
unemployment over a 12 month period. Despite the public discussion of the necessity to work
longer, expectations about working to age 62 among those not currently working declined by 10
percentage points. In our view this decline reflects long-term pessimism about the likelihood of
a successful job search.
The recession officially ended in June 2009. A main component of that judgment is that
the economy is no longer declining. According to our data the economic situation of the typical
household is no longer worsening which is consistent with the end of the recession defined as
negative change. However, when defined in terms of levels rather than rates of change, from the
point of view of the typical household the Great Recession is not over.

21

References

Agnew, Julie, Pierluigi Balduzzi, and Annika Sunden. (2003) “Portfolio Choice and Returns in a
Large 401(k) Plan.” American Economic Review, 93, 193–205.
Ameriks, John, and Steven Zeldes. (2004) “How Do Household Portfolio Shares Vary with
Age?” Working Paper, Columbia University.
Bentolila, S. and A. Ichino. 2008. “Unemployment and consumption near and far away from the
Mediterranean.” Journal of Population Economics 21:255–280.
Curcuru, Stephanie, John Heaton, Deborah Lucas, and Damien Moore. (2009) “Heterogeneity
and Portfolio Choice: Theory and Evidence.” In the Handbook of Financial Econometrics.
Amsterdam: North Holland Publishing Company.
Curtin R, S. Presser, and E. Singer (2005), “Changes in Telephone Survey Nonresponse over the
Past Quarter Century.” Public Opinion Quarterly 69: 87-98.
Gruber, J. 1997. "The Consumption Smoothing Benefits Of Unemployment Insurance."
American Economic Review 87(1):192-206.
Gruber, J. 2000. "Cash Welfare As A Consumption Smoothing Mechanism For Divorced
Mothers." Journal of Public Economics 75(2):157-182.
Hurd, M. D. 2009. “Subjective Probabilities in Household Surveys,” in Annual Review of
Economics, Vol 1, 543-562
Hurd, M. D., M. Reti and S. Rohwedder. 2009. “The Effect of Large Capital Gains or Losses on
Retirement.” In Developments in the Economics of Aging, ed. David Wise. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Mitchell, Olivia S., Gary R. Mottola, Stephan P. Utkus, and Takeshi Yamaguchi. (2006) “The
Inattentive Participant: Portfolio Trading Behavior in 401(k) Plans.” Pension Research
Council Working Paper No. 2006–5.
Stephens Jr., M. 2001. “The Long-run Consumption Effects of Earnings Shocks.” Review of
Economics and Statistics 83(1):28–36.
Sullivan, J.X. 2008. “Borrowing During Unemployment: Unsecured Debt as a Safety Net.”
Journal of Human Resources 43(2):383-412.

22

Appendix
To track the effect of the financial crisis on American households, we began collecting
data in the American Life Panel in November 2008, shortly after the sharp decline in the stock
market in the preceding month. The second wave of the survey was administered to the same
households in late February/early March 2009. The next wave was conducted in May 2009
which is when we have adopted a monthly survey schedule: during the first 10 days of every
month respondents have been asked to complete one of our surveys. Basic monthly surveys are
shorter than the first two waves that we conducted, eliciting just a subset of variables. Every
three months we administer a long survey. Appendix Table 1 gives an overview table of the
survey schedule and response rates.

Appendix Table 1: Survey schedule, survey length and response rates
Wave

Survey

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14

Nov08
Feb09
May09
Jun09
Jul09
Aug09
Sep09
Oct09
Nov09
Dec09
Jan10
Feb10
Mar10
Apr10

Length of survey in
minutes
Mean* Median
19.3
24.6
15.0
14.1
26.2
12.2
12.3
27.3
13.9
13.7
27.5
14.9
13.8
26.7

16.6
21.2
11.2
11.3
21.8
9.3
9.3
22.8
10.8
11.0
23.3
11.4
10.4
22.4

Field period

Initially unrestricted**
02/24-03/16/09 = 21 days
05/01-05/10/09 = 10 days
06/01-06/10/09 = 10 days
07/01-07/10/09 = 10 days
08/03-08/12/09 = 10 days
09/01-09/10/09 = 10 days
10/01-10/11/09 = 11 days
11/02-11/11/09 = 10 days
12/01-12/10/09 = 10 days
01/01-01/10/10 = 10 days
02/01-02/10/10 = 10 days
03/01-03/10/10 = 10 days
04/01-04/11/10 = 11 days

*

Responses Response rate
[%]
2,056
2,124
2,086
2,117
2,139
2,123
2,157
2,053
2,082
2,112
2,129
2,123
2,084
2,077

76.4
79.0
77.5
78.6
79.4
78.8
80.1
76.2
77.3
78.4
79.1
78.8
77.4
77.1

Calculation of average time to complete survey excludes cases with times of 300 min or more who appear to have
interrupted their survey session.
**Over 90% of those who responded did so within the first 28 days.

23

Appendix Table 2: Items queried each month, grouped by actual screen display
Screen 1:
Mortgage
Rent
Electricity
Water
Heating fuel for the home
Telephone, cable, Internet
Car payments: interest and principal
Screen 2:
Food and beverages
Dining and/or drinking out
Gasoline
Screen 3:
Housekeeping supplies
Housekeeping, dry cleaning, and laundry services
Gardening and yard supplies
Gardening and yard services
Screen 4:
Clothing and apparel
Personal care products and services
Prescription and nonprescription medications
Health care services
Medical supplies
Screen 5:
Tickets to movies, sporting events, performing arts, etc.
Sports, including gym and exercise equipment such as bicycles, skis, and boats
Hobbies and leisure equipment
Screen 6:
Personal services, including cost of care for elderly and/or children, afterschool activities
Education, including tuition, room and board, books, and supplies
Other child-related spending, not yet reported, including toys, gear, and
equipment

24

Appendix Table 3
Additional 11 items queried quarterly beginning in the July survey about spending over previous
three months
Screen 1:
Big ticket items
• Automobile or truck
• Refrigerator
• Stove and/or oven
• Washing machine and/or dryer
• Dishwasher
• Television
• Computer
Follow-up questions on big ticket items queried amounts, and in the case of cars how
the purchase was financed.

Screen 2:
Homeowner’s or renter’s insurance
Property taxes
Vehicle insurance
Vehicle maintenance: parts, repairs, etc.
Health insurance
Screen 3:
Trips and vacations
Home repair and maintenance materials
Home repair and maintenance services
Contributions to religious, educational, charitable, or political organizations
Cash or gifts to family and friends outside the household

25

Appendix Table 4: Effect of reconciliation screen on outliers
Maxima and standard deviations in spending before and after revision, May 2009
max before max after std dev before std dev after
Food and beverages in
100,000
7,000
3,809
254
Food out
150,120
2,500
3,766
135
Gasoline
8,000
2,000
586
119
Clothing
3,000
2,000
263
120
Telecommunication
17,900
1,800
942
72
All

520,490

85,630

26

14,909

2,332

Table 1
Percent of households with indicator of financial distress, panel

Nov08
Feb09
May09
Jun09
Jul09
Aug09
Sep09
Oct09
Nov09
Dec09
Jan10
Feb10
Mar10
Apr10
Average monthly change (ppts)
Total change Nov08-Apr10 (ppts)

In month
13.2
15.0
16.1
16.9
16.6
17.4
16.8
17.2
16.8
16.2
16.1
16.4
17.3
16.8
0.15
2.6

Cumulative
13.2
19.3
24.6
27.7
28.6
30.9
33.4
34.9
35.2
36.1
37.1
38.4
39.4
39.0

Note: “Panel” consists of individuals who answered 10 or more of the 14 surveys. Financial
distress indicator is any of the following: unemployed, negative equity in house, behind more
than two months on mortgage, in foreclosure. Average monthly change based on regression of
percent of households on calendar time. Total change is compounded change over 17 months.
Average N = 1846

Note: Age < 50 had cumulative of 48%; Age > 64 had cumulative of 16%

27

Table 2
Self-reported housing values, thousands, cross-section
Mean
Median
Nov08
248,251
185,000
Feb09
235,631
175,000
May09
237,343
183,000
Jun09
227,694
175,000
Jul09
236,162
180,000
Aug09
238,827
180,000
Sep09
234,421
180,000
Oct09
228,059
180,000
Nov09
234,471
175,000
Dec09
229,619
179,000
Jan10
246,299
175,000
Feb10
226,421
175,000
Mar10
222,672
175,000
Apr10
222,011
167,000
-0.42
-0.33
Average monthly change (%)
-7.0
-5.5
Total change Nov08-Apr10 (%)
Notes: Average monthly change based on regression of log house value on calendar time.
Total change is compounded monthly change over 17 months. Observations in crosssection vary between 1509 and 1612.

Table 3
Percent of homeowners with mortgage who are currently more than two
months behind on their mortgage payments, panel
May09
3.2
Jun09
3.0
Jul09
4.4
Aug09
4.1
Sep09
3.7
Oct09
5.0
Nov09
4.4
Dec09
4.8
Jan10
3.9
Feb10
3.8
Mar10
3.1
Apr10
3.8
Average monthly change (ppts)
0.02
Total change May-April (ppts)
0.2
Notes: “Panel” consists of individuals who answered 10 or more of the 14 surveys.
Average monthly change based on regression of percent of homeowners on calendar time.
Total change is compounded monthly change over eleven months. Average N = 1018.

28

Table 4
Subjective probability of a housing price gain,
owners only, cross-section
one-year
five-year
Mean
Median
Mean
Median
Feb09
31.5
25.0
56.4
55.0
May09
38.5
40.0
June09
38.8
40.0
July09
38.4
40.0
55.0
50.0
Oct09
39.5
45.0
55.7
55.0
Jan10
39.3
50.0
53.6
50.0
Apr10
36.3
30.0
51.3
50.0
Note: Average N = 1570

Table 5
Anticipations of spending change over next six months,
percentage of respondents, cross-section
N Increase
Same Decrease
All
Nov08
2053
8.3
71.3
20.4
100.0
Feb09
2116
11.6
66.7
21.6
99.9
Jul09
2115
13.4
70.8
15.8
100.0
Oct09
2029
16.7
70.6
12.7
100.0
Jan10
2085
16.9
71.0
12.0
99.9
Apr10
2035
16.0
71.9
12.2
100.1

Table 6
Anticipations of spending change over next six months and
recollections of actual spending change over previous six months,
percent of respondents, weighted, panel.
Higher
Same Lower
All
Expectations, Feb/Mar 2009
9.4
67.0
23.5
99.9
Recollections, July 2009
10.1
65.9
24.1
100.1
N= 1093

29

Table 7
Monthly spending on 25 categories, seasonally adjusted
cross-section
Month of survey
Mean
Median
May09
2,639
2,069
Jun09
2,364
1,971
Jul09
2,465
1,955
Aug09
2,225
1,881
Sep09
2,374
1,884
Oct09
2,381
1,942
Nov09
2,140
1,808
Dec09
2,147
1,826
Jan10
2,256
1,796
Feb10
2,376
1,980
Mar10
2,313
1,979
Apr10
2,214
1,881
-1.0
-0.5
Average monthly change (%)
-9.9
-4.9
Total change (%)

panel
Mean
Median
2,585
2,020
2,364
1,963
2,403
1,943
2,224
1,875
2,386
1,866
2,394
1,897
2,125
1,802
2,125
1,815
2,210
1,762
2,345
1,933
2,284
1,965
2,189
1,868
-1.0
-0.5
-10.2
-5.0

Notes: “Panel” consists of individuals who answered 10 or more of the 14 surveys. Spending refers to the
month prior to the survey month. Average monthly change based on regression of log spending on calendar
time. Total change is compounded monthly change over 11 months. Observations in cross-section vary
between 2025 and 2130. Observations in panel average 1894.

30

Table 8
Monthly spending on food at home, food away from home (dining out), and total, panel
Mean
Median
Month of survey
Food in Food out Total
Food in Food out
Total
May09
352
140
492
300
100
440
Jun09
332
130
462
300
100
400
Jul09
330
123
453
300
100
400
Aug09
316
119
435
300
80
375
Sep09
312
117
429
300
80
390
Oct09
322
119
441
300
80
400
Nov09
314
114
427
300
70
375
Dec09
313
109
422
300
65
375
Jan10
337
121
458
300
75
400
Feb10
316
105
421
300
60
375
Mar10
317
108
424
300
70
379
Apr10
320
116
436
300
80
385
Average monthly change (%)
-0.5
-1.8
-0.9
0.0
-3.6
-0.8
Total change (%)
-5.5
-17.5
-9.0
0.0
-32.8
-8.3
Notes: “Panel” consists of individuals who answered 10 or more of the 14 surveys. Spending refers to the month
prior to the survey month. Average monthly change based on regression of log spending on calendar time. Total
change is compounded monthly change over eleven months. Observations average 1894.

31

Table 9
Monthly spending on prescription drugs, health care services, and total, panel
Mean
Median
Month of survey
Health care
Health care
Drugs
services Total
Drugs
services
May09
60
109
169
30
15
Jun09
62
88
150
26
0
Jul09
50
92
142
20
0
Aug09
51
88
139
20
0
Sep09
48
65
113
20
0
Oct09
50
72
123
22
0
Nov09
52
67
118
20
0
Dec09
50
60
110
20
0
Jan10
54
91
144
25
0
Feb10
50
71
122
20
0
Mar10
48
64
111
20
0
Apr10
50
91
141
20
0
Average monthly change (%)
-1.4
-2.4
-2.0
-2.0
Total change (%)
-13.8
-23.0 -19.7
-20.0

Total
70
57
50
45
40
45
40
35
46
35
35
45
-4.2
-37.3

Notes: “Panel” consists of individuals who answered 10 or more of the 14 surveys. Spending refers to the month prior
to the survey month. Average monthly change based on regression of log spending on calendar time. Total change is
compounded monthly change over eleven months. Average number of observations is 1894.

32

Table 10
Credit card holdings, payments and debt, cross-section
Percent
Percent of credit
Debt carried Debt carried over,
with credit card holders who
over,
conditional,
card
pay off balance
conditional,
median
mean
Nov08
78.2
41.8
8,540
4,000
Feb09
75.6
43.3
8,383
4,000
May09
77.3
43.2
9,339
5,000
Jun09
76.4
41.1
8,973
5,000
Jul09
75.6
42.2
9,985
5,000
Aug09
75.1
41.6
9,606
5,000
Sep09
76.1
42.8
9,608
5,000
Oct09
73.5
41.8
9,805
5,000
Nov09
75.8
43.4
10,348
5,000
Dec09
75.4
44.3
10,280
5,300
Jan10
74.8
42.7
10,122
5,000
Feb10
75.4
45.5
10,674
5,600
Mar10
74.6
45.2
10,398
5,000
Apr10
74.6
46.6
9,859
5,000
Average monthly change
-0.2
0.2
1.3
1.4
Total change
-2.8
3.8
24.6
27.5
Note: Average monthly change based on regression of percent or log debt on calendar time. Total change is
compounded monthly change over 17 months. First two columns show percentage point changes; last two show
percentage changes. Observations range between 2030 and 2143.

33

Table 11
Subjective probability of a stock market gain, cross-section
One-year
10-year
Mean
Median
Mean
Median
Nov08
40.3
50.0
60.8
65.0
Feb09
36.6
36.0
58.0
60.0
May09
41.0
50.0
59.4
60.0
Jun09
41.0
50.0
56.9
50.0
Jul09
39.2
45.0
52.8
50.0
Aug09
39.9
45.0
55.2
50.0
Sep09
40.3
50.0
53.6
50.0
Oct09
41.5
50.0
52.3
50.0
Nov09
43.1
50.0
55.3
50.0
Dec09
41.4
50.0
53.2
50.0
Jan10
41.7
50.0
50.8
50.0
Feb10
40.7
50.0
52.3
50.0
Mar10
40.8
50.0
52.0
50.0
Apr10
40.3
50.0
50.4
50.0
Observations range between 1996 and 2118.

34

Table 12
Percent of respondents expressing dissatisfaction, panel
Life satisfaction,
Household income
Economic situation,
dissatisfied or very
satisfaction, dissatisfied
dissatisfied or very
dissatisfied
or very dissatisfied
dissatisfied
Nov08
-33.8
44.9
Feb09
-33.9
42.4
May09
7.1
30.2
35.0
Jun09
7.3
30.7
34.3
Jul09
7.9
33.7
36.3
Aug09
9.6
32.9
38.6
Sep09
9.1
33.4
34.7
Oct09
9.5
33.4
35.9
Nov09
9.7
35.4
36.8
Dec09
10.7
33.2
35.6
Jan10
10.2
33.2
35.3
Feb10
11.3
33.2
35.7
Mar10
11.5
31.3
35.9
Apr10
10.3
32.0
33.7
Note: “Panel” consists of individuals who answered 10 or more of the 14 surveys. Average
observations are 1817. Life satisfaction measure in Nov08 and Feb09 not comparable with
later waves because of difference in scales.

35

Nov08
Feb09
May09
Jun09
Jul09
Aug09
Sep09
Oct09
Nov09
Dec09
Jan10
Feb10
Mar10
Apr10

Table 13
Percent of respondents expressing low levels of health and of affect, panel
Feeling worn
Feeling
Difficulty
Depression
Self-rated
out all to a
happy some
sleeping,
problems,
health, fair
good bit of
to none of
moderate to
moderate to
or poor
the time
the time
extreme
extreme
16.0
27.9
25.2
33.8
17.0
16.3
26.1
26.6
29.3
18.4
13.8
29.0
24.0
31.7
16.5
13.4
23.9
21.1
29.8
16.3
14.2
27.4
21.9
24.9
16.1
13.5
28.8
22.4
26.2
17.6
12.7
28.1
21.8
27.3
15.5
12.9
25.8
23.2
25.6
17.5
15.0
27.4
24.0
25.4
17.2
14.2
28.8
23.9
25.3
16.3
15.5
26.6
23.1
25.4
16.8
14.4
26.9
25.4
24.5
18.0
13.5
27.5
26.4
23.5
17.0
13.5
28.9
25.2
24.7
16.6

Note: “Panel” consists of individuals who answered 10 or more of the 14 surveys. Average N varies between
1701 and 1888 depending on item.

36

Table 14
Average subjective probability of working past age 62 (P62), ages 45-61, cross-section
Age 45 - 52
Age 53 – 61
All
P62
P62
Fraction
Fraction
working
working
Working for Pay
Working for Pay
for pay
for pay
Wave
Yes
No
All
Yes
No
All
N
P62
Nov08
71.3
--71.8
----Feb09
0.742
67.9 39.6 60.6
0.588
71.9 26.7 53.3
988 57.5
Jul09
0.733
68.1 42.0 61.1
0.567
70.2 29.0 52.4
980 57.5
Oct09
0.792
66.9 37.3 60.7
0.601
69.8 29.8 53.8
932 58.0
Jan10
0.758
69.1 34.6 60.8
0.559
68.7 33.2 53.0
948 57.6
Apr10
0.762
65.2 29.2 56.7
0.570
67.5 28.9 50.9
932 54.3
All
0.757
68.1 36.7 60.0
0.577
70.1 29.5 52.7
4,780 57.0
Note: N does not include Nov08 observations because in that wave P62 was only asked of workers.

37

Table 15
Actions taken in response to unemployment, percent
of households
Reduced spending
85.2
Reduced saving
46.4
Behind on mortgage
8.6
Behind on rent
16.9
Behind on other bills
36.1
Other
2.4
N = 699

Table 16
Replacement for income loss, % of households
Unemployment benefits
Took money out of savings
Financial help from family or friends
Borrowed money or increased credit card debt
Respondent took temporary job
Spouse/partner took temporary job
None of the above. Found a job soon
Respondent began working or increased working hours
Spouse/partner began working or increased working hours
N= 699

38

39.2
35.6
27.0
18.0
13.3
9.4
8.5
7.9
4.5

Table 17
Subjective probability of losing job over next twelve months, workers, cross-section
N
Probability
Nov08
1188
20.2
Feb09
1192
20.3
May09
1154
21.9
Jun09
1162
19.1
Jul09
1147
17.9
Aug09
1143
19.1
Sep09
1181
18.5
Oct09
1119
19.6
Nov09
1128
19.5
Dec09
1153
19.2
Jan10
1147
18.4
Feb10
1159
18.8
Mar10
1154
18.9
Apr10
1145
17.8
Average monthly change (percentage points)
-0.1
Total change (percentage points)
-2.2
Note: Average monthly change based on regression of percent probability on calendar time. Total change
is compounded monthly change over 17 months.

Table 18
Average subjective probability of unemployment over next 12 months and actual frequency (%)
among workers in initial wave, panel
Initial wave
N
Average probability
Actual frequency
Nov08
1188
20.2
19.4
May09
1153
21.9
16.9
Jun09
1161
19.1
13.5
Total
3502
20.4
16.6

39

Table 19
Distribution (%) of homeownership, mortgage ownership, and mortgage delinquency by
unemployment status
Home owner
Unemployed Not home
no mortgage
mortgage, not
mortgage,
All
owner
delinquent
delinquent
no
32.2
19.7
46.6
1.5
100.0
yes
53.6
11.5
31.4
3.5
100.0
Total
34.5
18.8
45.0
1.7
100.0
Note: N = 29,278. “Unemployed” is unemployed of either respondent or spouse.
Unemployment rate is 10.8%. Delinquency defined as more than two months behind on
mortgage payment.

40

Table 20
Spending before (wave t) and after (wave t+1) a household employment transition

Employment
transition

N

mean spending
Wave t Wave
%
t+1 change

median spending
Wave t
Wave
%
t+1 change

Median of
individual
changes (%)
E to E
14,053
2551
2505
-1.8
2135
2120
-0.7
-0.3
E to U
350
2208
2125
-3.7
1884
1930
2.4
-2.8
U to E
378
2303
2248
-2.4
1931
1853
-4.1
-2.7
U to U
1,587
1883
1850
-1.7
1535
1490
-2.9
-3.0
All
16,368
2460
2415
-1.8
2062
2042
-1.0
-0.6
Note: Employment transitions of respondent or spouse. E refers to employed and U refers to
unemployed.

No job loss
Job loss, no income loss
Job loss, income loss
All

Table 21
Spending prior to and following a job loss
Mean
N Wave t-3 Wave t percent Wave t
change
3,035
2,777
2,731
-1.7
2,270
40
2,145
1,983
-7.6
1,859
323
2,286
2,019
-11.7
1,925
3,398
2,711
2,638
-2.7
2,218

Median
Wave t+3
2,243
1,840
1,719
2,173

percent
change
-1.2
-1.0
-10.7
-2.0

Note: Respondents are categorized according to whether they lost a job they wanted to keep as reported in wave t. The
reference period is the last three months. Spending is recorded at wave t and at the wave three months earlier (t-3).

Table 22
Employment transitions and percent of persons with health insurance
Singles
Couples
All
Employment
N wave t wave t+1
N wave t wave t+1
N wave t wave t+1
transition
E to E
3231
82.8
82.9 7705
88.5
88.6 10936
86.5
86.6
E to U
85
55.0
32.4
94
72.7
69.4
179
62.3
47.7
U to E
88
47.2
46.6 121
66.6
69.3
209
56.5
57.5
U to U
532
28.3
29.8 487
60.6
60.4 1019
41.2
42.0
All
3936
72.7
72.3 8407
86.1
86.3 12343
80.9
80.8
Note: Employment transitions of respondent: E refers to employed and U refers to unemployed.

41

Ja
nM 03
ay
S 03
ep
-0
Ja 3
nM 04
ay
Se 04
pJa 04
nM 05
ay
Se 0 5
p0
Ja 5
nM 06
ay
S 06
ep
-0
Ja 6
nM 07
ay
Se 07
pJa 07
nM 08
ay
Se 0 8
p0
Ja 8
n09

Figure 1. Housing price indices for four cities and 20-city average

Case-Shiller Housing price index

250

200

150
PHX

100

50
LAX
DEN
DTW
AVG

0

42

Figure 2. Employment transitions, and health and affect
Life Satisfaction: % dissatisfied or very dissatisfied

HH Income Satisfaction: % dissatisfied or very dissatisfied

80%

80%

70%

70%

60%

60%

50%

50%

Initial Wave
Following Wave

40%

30%

30%

20%

20%

10%

10%

0%

Initial Wave
Following Wave

40%

0%

empl to empl

empl to unempl

unempl to empl

empl to empl

unempl to unempl

Satisfaction with Economic Situation: % dissatisfied or very dissatisfied

empl to unempl

unempl to empl

unempl to unempl

Self-Rated Health: % with fair or poor self-reported health

70%

80%

70%

60%

60%

50%
50%

40%
Initial Wave
Following Wave

Initial Wave
Following Wave

40%

30%
30%

20%
20%

10%

10%

0%

0%

empl to empl

empl to unempl

unempl to empl

empl to empl

unempl to unempl

Difficulty Sleeping: % with moderate to extreme difficulty sleeping

empl to unempl

unempl to empl

unempl to unempl

Feeling Depressed: % with moderate to extreme depressions problems

80%

80%

70%

70%

60%

60%

50%

50%

Initial Wave
Following Wave

40%

30%

30%

20%

20%

10%

10%

0%

Initial Wave
Following Wave

40%

0%

empl to empl

empl to unempl

unempl to empl

empl to empl

unempl to unempl

43

empl to unempl

unempl to empl

unempl to unempl

Figure 2 continued
Feeling happy: % feeling happy little to none of the time

Worn out: % feeling worn out all to a good bit of the time
80%

80%

70%

70%

60%

60%

50%

50%
Initial Wave
Following Wave

40%

Initial Wave
Following Wave

40%

30%

30%

20%

20%

10%

10%

0%

0%
empl to empl

empl to unempl

unempl to empl

empl to empl

unempl to unempl

Note: all figures are weighted averages

44

empl to unempl

unempl to empl

unempl to unempl

