NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SHOULD PUBLIC RETIREMENT PLANS BE FULLY FUNDED?
Henning Bohn
Working Paper 16409
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16409

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2010

The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Henning Bohn. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Should Public Retirement Plans be Fully Funded?
Henning Bohn
NBER Working Paper No. 16409
September 2010
JEL No. G23,H7,H72,H74,H83
ABSTRACT
Most state and local retirement plans strive for full funding, at least by actuarial standards. Funding
measured at market values fluctuates and often falls short. A common argument for full funding is
that pensions are a form of deferred compensation that does not justify a debt. The paper examines
public finance, political economy, and financial market issues that bear on optimal funding, broadly
and in a series of models.
In a model where most taxpayers hold debt and face intermediation costs, returns on pension assets
are less than taxpayers’ cost of borrowing. Pension funding is costly and hence zero funding is optimal.
The model also implies that unfunded pension promises are properly discounted at a rate strictly greater
than the government’s borrowing rate. If pension funds serve as collateral, funding can be warranted
despite the cost. This is shown in a model with legal ambiguity and default risk. Except in special
cases, the optimal funding ratio is less than full funding.
Henning Bohn
Department of Economics
University of California Santa Barbara
North Hall 2127
Santa Barbara, CA 93106
bohn@econ.ucsb.edu

“Neither a borrower nor a lender be”
(Shakespeare)

1. Introduction
Most state and local retirement plans strive for full funding as measured by actuarial
standards. Funds are commonly invested in risky assets. Hence actual funding ratios—the
ratios of assets to accrued benefit obligations—fluctuate and are often less than 100%. Press
reports about underfunding naturally cause taxpayer anxiety. Recent experience follows this
pattern. Though average funding ratios were over 80% before the recent financial crisis, many
state and local pension funds are now seriously underfunded (Munnell et al. 2008, 2010).
Concerns about funding are reinforced by controversies about actuarial standards. Some
economists have argued that officially reported funding ratios are inflated because pension
obligations are computed at excessively high discount rates (Novy-Marx and Rauh 2009).
These concerns raise questions about pension funding. What is full funding? Is it
optimal? Should it be required at all times or only in expectation? How should government
obligations be reported to the public? These questions have important ramifications for
financial markets and for state and local governments. Full funding all the time would require
overfunding on average and perhaps restrictions on investments. Giving politicians discretion
could undermine balanced budget restrictions and thus alter the political economy of state and
local governments.
Questions of optimal funding are complex because they are intrinsically linked to a
range of challenging economic, financial, and political-economy issues. This includes federal
tax laws as motivation for deferred compensation; the political economy of balanced budget
rules; the risk sharing implications of defined benefit plans (DB) as compared to defined
contributions (DC); the equity premium and its ramifications for investment strategies; and
labor issues relating to career employment.

1

This paper first reviews these issues broadly and then examines a series of models.
The main conclusion is that optimal funding depends on taxpayers’ cost of funds and on the
presence of legal ambiguities and default risks. The analysis is tailored to state and local
public finance; the paper is not about federal debt and pensions programs.
The main model implies that zero funding of public pensions is optimal. Because
empirically over 75% of U.S. families hold debt, the model assumes that most
taxpayers/voters are debtors. Intermediation costs on debt create a wedge between taxpayers’
discount rates and the rates of return on asset markets, which gives voters an incentive to
leave pensions unfunded. The voting equilibrium is nonetheless consistent with a balanced
budget rule that prohibits public debt.
In an extension with legal ambiguity and default risk, partial funding can be optimal
because it serves as collateral. Funding allows employers to reduce total compensation
because unfunded promises create an undiversifiable risk for employees. Optimal pension
funding balances intermediation cost against labor cost. This model yields funding ratios near
100% if employees are highly risk averse and if they rely on the pension for most of their
retirement income. However, optimal funding is always strictly less than full, except in a
behavioral scenario where employees have more “pessimistic” default expectations than their
employer.
The analysis has implications for pension accounting and for the tradeoff between DB
and DC plans. First, the appropriate discount rate for unfunded DB pensions is the taxpayers’
marginal cost of funds. If most taxpayers are borrowers, the appropriate discount rate is a
risk-adjusted borrowing rate—always a higher rate than the safe interest rate. Second, because
funding is costly and full funding is usually suboptimal, regulations that impose full funding
would undermine employer incentives to offer DB plans. Most private employers phased out
their DB plans after costly funding and insurance requirements were imposed in the 1970s. If
current anxieties about public retirement plans lead to excessive funding requirements, the
effects may prove similarly destructive.

2

The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews pension funding in general and
comments on funding policies, actuarial standards, and investment strategies of public
pension funds. Section 3 sets up a stochastic overlapping generations model with local
property taxes to study pension funding. Section 4 examines the impact of legal ambiguities
and default risk. Section 5 comments on incomplete financial markets. Section 6 concludes.
2. The Problem of Pension Funding
This section examines several conceptual issues that make pension funding problematic.
A key distinction is between Defined Benefit (DB) and Defined Contribution (DC)
plans. DB plans make specific promises about retirement income that are not necessarily
funded. Unfunded promises create obligations for the employer just like a bond. However,
DB pension obligations tend to be more complicated than bonds because promised payments
are often annuitized, contingent on earnings records, and inflation indexed. Default risk is
considered low due to strong legal protections (see Brown and Wilcox 2009; Peng 2009).
About 80% of state and local retirement plans are DB plans (Munnell et al 2008). In DC
plans, employer promises are limited to making contributions. Because DC plans are fully
funded by construction, they are not interesting for this paper except for comparison.
2.1. The Ambiguous Meaning of Full Funding
There are at least three conceptually different ways to interpret full funding. I will call them
the accounting view, the finance view, and the populist view.
The accounting view considers a pension fully funded if an actuarial measure of fund
assets at some date equals an actuarial measure of accrued liabilities. Accounting rules for
U.S. state and local governments are set by the Government Accounting Standards Board
(GASB). The key rule for pension accounting, GASB 25, gives plan sponsors a choice
between several different actuarial methods to compute pension obligations (see Peng 2009).
One measure, the accrued benefits obligation (ABO), seeks to determine the present value of
benefits earned by current plan participants at the valuation date, assuming no accrual of

3

obligations in the future. All others are projection methods, which involve (1) estimating the
lifetime benefits of current participants, including projected future earnings, (2) allocating the
cost to past and future service, and (3) treating the past-service component as accrued
liability. The most commonly used projection method is Entry-Age Normal (EAN), which
allocates cost over time in proportion to earnings (since entry).
Importantly, GASB gives plan sponsors wide discretion in discounting future benefits
and allows them to tie the discount rate to the expected return on assets. On the asset side,
smoothing methods are common that spread the recognition of a capital gain or loss over
several years. This means the actuarial value of assets is a moving average of market values.
Measures of funding are the unfunded actuarial accrued liability (UAAL), the gap between
actuarial liabilities and assets, and the funding ratio, which is the ratio of actuarial assets over
liabilities. If a plan sponsor makes contributions under GASB rules, the plan should be fully
funded on average, but the funding ratio will almost always differ from 100% due to capital
gains and losses. GASB rules specify that any positive or negative UAAL should be
amortized over time by raising or lowering new contributions relative to the “normal”
contribution.
The finance view considers a pension fully funded if the market values of assets
equals the present value of promised pensions (e.g., Novy-Marx and Rauh 2009). Distinctive
are the rejection of smoothing methods to value assets, the use of state-contingent claims
pricing to value future benefits, and the use of economic reasoning to ascertain the scope of
obligations (Bulow 1982). Expected asset returns are rejected as discount rates for liabilities.
Similar to accounting view, underfunding is measured at a point in time, and degrees of
funding are computed as ratios or differences of assets and liabilities.
By populist view, I mean the view reflected in newspaper stories that portray any
possible need for future taxpayer support of a public pension fund as scandalous (a “bail
out”). This view treats a pension as fully funded only if current pension assets cover all

4

obligations in all future states of nature, even under the most adverse conditions, so that there
is absolutely no risk of a shortfall that might require compensating employer contributions.
Zero risk of a shortfall is a much more demanding standard than the others, and
perhaps impossible to meet. Full funding in the finance or accounting sense does not rule out
underfunding in the future. Indeed, the odds should be about 50:50 with symmetric shocks
and fair accounting. There are only two ways to guarantee no future shortfall: a match of
current assets and liabilities combined with perfect hedging of all future risks, or an extreme
over-collateralization of expected obligations. Perfect hedging is difficult because a DB
pension is typically a complicated contingent claims. Collateral is costly, per se and because
excess funds are difficult to recover by the sponsor.
Uncertainty about future funding ratios can be reduced by a strategy of investing in
(relatively) safe assets. Then a modest over-collateralization would rule out future shortfalls
with near certainty. Thus the populist view in effect calls for substantial overfunding by
actuarial standards combined with a low risk investment strategy.
Fiscally conservative assumptions in the valuation may be a practical way to ensure a
funding buffer. This may explain why allegations of underfunding receive so much public
attention. If the public is mainly concerned about risk, any study that finds underfunding
under pessimistic assumptions is troubling, even if the plan is certified as fully funded by the
accountants and perhaps overfunded under a range of more reasonable assumptions.
The multiple meanings of full funding expand the question in the title. The question is
not only if pensions should be fully funded, but also in what sense and why.
2.2. Deferred Compensation and Balanced Budget Rules
Pension promises are a form of deferred employee compensation. In exchange for a future
pension, employees accept a reduced current salary.
Almost all states and local governments operate under balanced budget rules. The
operating budget (general fund) is supposed to be balanced every year. A separate capital
budget allows for bond financing, but usually subject to voter approval. Bonds are repaid out
5

of operating funds as the capital asset depreciates. Pension funds are organized as separate
entities, funded by contributions from the operating budget and dedicated to paying retirees. If
pensions are fully funded, the budget framework ensures that government net worth is always
positive.
Underfunded public pensions complicate this fiscal framework. A shortfall due to
unexpectedly low investment returns reduces government net worth. A shortfall because of
missed contributions means that the operating budget understates employee compensation.
Either way, a funding gap encumbers future operating funds just like a bonded debt. If the
budget can be balancing by reducing current wage payments in exchange for unfunded
pension promises, the balanced budget rule reduces to a prohibition against bond issues. Thus
pension funding is intrinsically linked to the political economy of balanced budgets.
This raises two questions. First, what motivates DB retirement plans in the public
sector? Tight funding restrictions might be defensible if DB plans had no apparent rationale
apart from evading balanced budget rules, but less so if there are efficiency arguments.
Second, what justifies balanced budget rules? Without such rules, special purpose pension
funds are meaningless. Though citizens might still be interested in measuring pension
obligations to estimate future taxes, retirement funds would be interchangeable with other
public funds.
2.3. What Motivates Employer Pensions?
The many arguments for employer pensions fall into three main groups—taxes, risk sharing,
and human capital/labor issues.
The tax argument is straightforward. Compensation paid in form of a pension is
taxable only when the pension is paid out. Hence deferred compensation means deferred
taxes. Assets in funded plans compound without being taxed repeatedly. Not surprisingly,
pensions—both private and public—became popular after WWII, at a time of high marginal
taxes on regular, non-sheltered savings. Note, however, that the tax argument applies to all

6

deferred compensation and does not provide a rationale for DB plans. A DC plan would
provide the same tax shelter with less employer entanglement.
Risk sharing provides a clear distinction between DC and DB plans. By construction,
the employer has no obligation to a DC plan beyond making the initial contribution. In a DB
plan, in contrast, the employer is responsible for specific benefits.
There are two microeconomic risk-sharing issues that favor DB pensions. One is
adverse selection in the market for life annuities. Annuities are less subject to adverse
selection when provided to employees as group than if employees tried to buy annuities
individually. Such risk pooling is automatic in a DB plan, but difficult to implement in a DC
plan. Second, DB investments can be more diversified as they may include “alternative” asset
classes not easily held in a DC plan. Both issues are microeconomic in the sense that risks is
shared among employees, so the benefit has essentially no cost to the employer.
There are also two sets of “aggregate” risks, one tied to funding strategy, the other tied
to the benefit design. The funding-related uncertainty is about real investment returns. In a
DB plan, the sponsor in effect owns the risk and returns of the investment portfolio—though
under some conditions, the risk is shared with working age plan members (see Bohn 2010).
Benefit-related uncertainty is caused by a variety to features that make the real cost of
pensions payments stochastic, e.g., an indexation of benefits to future wages, deviations from
one-for-one indexing to inflation, and uncertainty about beneficiaries’ collective longevity.
Human capital issues are complex and arguably job and firm specific, but relevant. DB
pensions are commonly tied to final salaries times years of service, which means they favor
long-reserving employees who earn raises throughout their career. They penalize employees
who quit early—with final nominal salary far below the expected end-of-career level—or are
unsuccessful. Hence a DB pension can serve as an incentive or retention mechanism.
The specifics depend on the labor market. One polar case is a competitive labor
market. Then total compensation at all times equals the marginal product of a worker’s wage.
Pension accruals that increase with age would be reflected in a flatter age-salary profile, and

7

restrictions on mobility due to pensions would be inefficient. A second polar case is a
unionized work place with seniority system, where young employees are paid less than their
marginal product in exchange for an entitlement to earn a premium later. A DB pension can
facilitate rewards for seniority. More generally, firm-specific human capital and frictions to
mobility may make labor relationships imperfectly competitive. A DB pension can help
facilitate implicit contracts that encourage efficient investment in human capital; but it might
become an obstacle to job mobility.
It is an open question why the public sector has not followed the private sector trend
towards DC plans. DB pensions were common in the private sector in the 1950s to 1980s.
Since then, many private firms have terminated their DB plans and shifted to DC or Cash
Balance (hybrid) pension schemes.
One line of explanation is that the demise of private sector DB pensions is inefficient
and regrettable—a result of bad regulation and credit risk. A mandatory pension guarantee
systems is in effect a tax on well-funded plans. ERISA gave creditworthy employers
incentives to convert to DC, causing adverse selection and triggering a death spiral of more
plan terminations and adverse selection. In this view, DB plans in the public sector are still
efficient because they are not subject to the same regulations. The ability to offer DB plans
may give public employers a comparative advantage in recruiting.
An opposing view holds that the move from DB to DC in the private sector was an
efficient response to increased job mobility, which may reflect a reduced importance of firmspecific human capital. In this view, the public sector’s failure to follow is signal of
inefficiency, perhaps due to inertia or resistance from unions. Career employment remains
prevalent in the public sector. One may argue that this is efficient, e.g., because of specialized
training or to avoid conflicts of interest (“revolving doors”); but the argument is not obvious
and it may not apply to all public sector jobs.
While these human capital and labor relations issues should be noted, they remain
unsettled and are not the focus of this paper. (See Friedberg 2010 for a review).

8

2.4. Balanced Budget Rules and Full Funding
Balanced budgets are extremely popular according to opinion polls, even at the federal level. 1
Full funding of pensions has a similar popular appeal to fiscal conservatism. A failure to make
pension contributions is easily understood as violation of the balanced budget principle.
The popularity of balanced budgets is a challenge to economic theory. Theories of
optimal dynamic taxation call for unbalanced budgets essentially all the time, because deficits
and surpluses help to stabilize tax rates when there are fluctuations in spending and in the tax
base. Hence a positive theory of balanced budget and other fiscal rules requires political
economy frictions or some other motive for restricting intertemporal optimization.
The political economy literature is somewhat unsatisfactory with regard to normative
analysis at the state and local level. The theoretical literature has focused on national debt and
identified a range of circumstances that favor excessive debt (see, e.g., Persson and Tabellini,
2000; Alesina and Perotti, 1995). A constitutional rule imposing balanced budgets is a natural
corrective mechanism for such distortions. But because rigid rules are costly, theory suggests
that rational voters should demand sophisticated balanced budget rules that are conditional or
cyclically adjusted. The empirical literature has focused practical questions about the effects
of different rules, taking their existence as given.
Political economy models of national debt are in principle applicable to state and local
governments. Notably, government authority is often divided among multiple agents. Hence
strategic interactions between them can create common pool problems, and responses to fiscal
shocks may be delayed. Uncertainty about reelection is also likely to shorten politicians’
planning horizons and invite the use of debt as tool to tie the hands of successor governments.
There may also be simple principal-agent explanations of why voters like balanced
budgets at the local level. Voters must monitor politicians who act as their agents. Credible
information about local budgets is often unavailable or costly, e.g., requiring time to attend
1 For example, according to a Nov.2009 CNN poll, 67% of U.S. voters agree that “the government should balance the budget
even when the country is in a recession and is at war,” suggesting support for balanced budgets even under extreme
conditions. This paper is concerned with state and local debt.

9

meetings. Each voter must monitor are multiple entities—the city, the county, the state. If
politicians have no authority incur debt, the potential damage from political favoritism,
corruption, or other monitoring failures is bounded by current revenue, whereas damages can
be huge if debt is allowed. 2 Simple rules also economize on information cost. A headline
saying the balanced budget rule was violated is much easier to understand than a complicated
budget document. A full funding requirement for pensions may appeal to voters for similar
reasons. Funding requirements are problematic, however, because the calculations require
numerous assumptions that can be manipulated and because the management of pension funds
poses new monitoring problems, as illustrated by recurrent scandals involving “pay to play”
schemes.
One key problem area for funding calculations is the discounting of future benefits.
The methods prescribed by accountants are economically unjustified, as noted above. Because
pensions are complex contingent claims, the correct discount rates are difficult to determine
and controversial even among economic experts. Such ambiguities are especially troubling if
reported funding gaps serve as summary statistic to information-constrained voters.
Voters who try to hold politicians accountable for pension funding will generally
encounter tradeoffs between type-I versus type-II errors. Pensions that are fully funded under
some (reasonable) assumptions can easily be portrayed as underfunded under more
unfavorable “conservative” assumptions. Fiscally conservative assumptions may be
appropriate if the damage from underfunding is greater than the cost of overfunding, but not
otherwise. While weak funding rules undermine the balanced budget rule as net worth

2 Such information problems do not imply “fiscal illusion”—the notion that voters underestimate the cost of deficit-financed

expenditures because they observe the benefits but not the long-run cost. Persistent one-sided errors are difficult to reconcile
with basic rationality and seem implausible in this age of cynicism about politicians. The issue here is risk reduction. An
appropriate analogy is the question how much signature authority to give to an accountant—control over current accounts or
also the power to borrow.
Note that state and local bond issues commonly require voter approval, and are widely considered politically
acceptable subject to such approval. If voters are concerned that public officials grant excessive pensions to public
employees without properly informing voters, one might consider requiring voter approval for new or significantly expanded
public pensions. If DB pensions are efficient, requiring voter approval would be preferable to populist proposals to abolish
public sector DB pensions.

10

constraint, overly restrictive rules might discourage the establishment of pensions plans even
when they are efficient.
Recent changes in accounting for retiree health benefits illustrate this tradeoff. GASB
43 treats the present value of projected future employer payments for retiree health as a
liability even if these payments are not vested—i.e., even if employee contributions could be
raised or benefits canceled at any time. This recent GASB rule has triggered a wave of benefit
cuts and premium increases by public employers. These responses suggest that voter
information is incomplete and accounting rules matter.
Regarding fund management, the key problem is how to monitor investment
managers. If public funds are invested in risky assets, performance evaluation is difficult.
Unexpected losses are not necessarily a sign of incompetence or fraud. Fund management
problems would be eliminated if pensions were left unfunded.
In summary, there are many information problems that might influence voters, but
there is no coherent model. The analysis below will motivate balances budgets differently—as
commitment device that avoids costly debt.
One should note that there is a literature on state and local pensions without balanced
budgets. D’Arcy et al. (1999) argue that under distortionary taxes, optimal pension funding
should be governed by tax smoothing arguments. They conclude that a range of funding levels
can be optimal, depending on the growth rates of taxes and expenditures. Lucas and Zeldes
(2009) note that pension funding and investment strategy would be irrelevant if Ricardian
neutrality applied. They also assume tax smoothing and find that optimally public pension
portfolios should hold (at least some) equity. Bader and Gold (2007) examine tax arbitrage
opportunities in public pensions and argue that bond investments would help local taxpayers
minimize federal taxes. I take a different approach in the analysis below because I consider
the popularity of balanced budget rules as a given—a stylized fact that economic theory
should explain or at least respect.

11

2.5. Investment Strategy and Interest Rates
Investment strategy matters for pension funding because return risk is a major source of
fluctuations in funding ratios. Even with “conservative” funding, the returns on assets and
liabilities invariably differ because DB plans liabilities are contingent on variables like wage
growth and survival rates, which are difficult to hedge on financial markets. Often the
mismatch between assets and liabilities is increased intentionally by strategies that strive for
high asset returns, e.g. via investments in the stock market or in “alternatives” such as hedge
funds or private equities.
Finance theory teaches that high returns usually involve risk. This suggests the use of
safe interest rates as measure of risk-adjusted returns on all financial assts. However,
explaining the equity premium is a challenge (Mehra and Prescott 1985). Managers of public
pension funds must necessarily take a stand on the explanation. If the premium is due to risk
aversion—say, a crash premium a la Barro and Ursua (2009)—the use of safe interest rates
may be correct. If the premium is instead due to liquidity effects, investor myopia, or other
non-fundamental reasons, an all-equity portfolio may promise abnormal returns. Problems of
performance measurement are a complicating factor. Lo (2008) notes that many hedge funds
have payoff profiles similar to short positions in far-out-of-the-money put options, i.e.
seemingly abnormally high returns most of the time (a high Sharpe ratio), but with a
possibility of severe losses in rare states of nature.
One apparent omission in the literature is a consideration of taxpayers’ access to
financial markets. This is critical for public retirement plans because the ultimate plan
sponsors are the state and local taxpayers. Many taxpayers hold debt and face borrowing
costs. The next section will examine the ramifications.
3. A Model of Local Government
This section examines a model of local public pensions. The model has quite a number of
necessary elements—a local population, a local government, a public work force, a national

12

or world economy that determines outside options, and a national tax system that motivates
tax-sheltered savings. Hence I start with an outline.
A main assumption is that all debt is subject to intermediation cost. This may be
motivated by costs of monitoring and screening that must be incurred to protect lenders
against moral hazard and adverse election; it is introduced as an exogenous wedge between
the cost of borrowing and the return to investing. To keep the model tractable, I reduce the
life cycle to three periods and abstract from demographic fluctuations. The local government
is financed by property taxes on homes. As in Epple and Schipper (1981), public debt and
pensions are capitalized in home prices. 3
To anticipate, intermediation costs will provide an argument against pension funding.
The intuition is that contributions to a public pension fund require taxes. Taxpayers who are
in debt must borrow to pay taxes. If the borrowing rate exceeds the return on fund assets,
taxpayers are better off if pensions are left unfunded and if taxes are deferred until the pension
payments are due. While this intuition is essentially deterministic, it is presented in a
contingent claims setting to show that intermediation cost and risk premiums have quite
different implications.
A model with taxpayers as borrowers faces some challenges. It must explain why most
individuals are borrowers, why individuals nonetheless desire pension savings, and why a
balanced budget rule has voter support despite taxpayers’ incentives to defer taxes. In the
model, the coexistence of debt and pension savings is motivated by a federal tax system that
imposes lower income taxes in retirement than in prime working age. Voters will support
balanced budgets because the cost of public debt would be capitalized in home prices.

3 Home ownership is a convenient device to make voters care about the community’s long run future without having to
model intergenerational altruism. An earlier version of this paper also explored optimal funding in a model with general
taxes. Then mobility becomes an important issue: selfish individuals would have stronger incentives to incur debt and to
underfund pensions, but debt would also be more dangerous for those who are relatively immobile.

13

3.1. Assumptions and Benchmark Allocation
The community is populated by overlapping generations of individuals who live for three
periods. The three cohorts are interpreted as young, middle, and old age. Time is indexed by t
and cohorts by age i (i=1,2,3). The community has an exogenous number of residents ( N i ) in
each cohort. Three periods is the minimum needed to model essential age-earnings and
pension vesting issues, while keeping model analytically tractable. The young supply one unit
of labor, the middle-aged supply e  1 units (capturing an age-earnings link), and the old are
retired. All individuals have preferences over consumption ( c it ), local public services ( gt ),

and housing services.
The outside world determines wages and returns to financial investments. Let w t be
the marginal product of a labor unit. Let financial assets be valued under a pricing kernel
mtn  m(st  n | st ) ; that is, payoffs at n  a(st  n ) in state of nature st n in period t+n are

valued in period t at conditional expectation E t [mtn at  n ]. Let mt 1  mt1 be the one-period
pricing kernel and let 1  rt  1/ E t 1mt define the safe interest rate. 4
The community has N identical houses that can be owned by residents or by
commercial owners. Owner-occupied houses provide a consumption value v(gt ) per period
for the young and middle-aged, which depends in part on public services; v(g) is increasing
and concave. Individual utility is
U t  u(c1t  h1t v(gt ))  u(c t21  ht21v(gt 1 ))   2 u(c t3 2 ),

(1)

where  (0,1) captures time preference and hti [0,1] indicates home ownership. (Ownership
greater than one would be treated as commercial.) Homeowners pay property taxes Tt .
Commercial owners earn the value v(gt ) as rental income but incur a management
cost of  H  0 , so net rental income is v(gt )   H  Tt . Commercial owners capitalize rental
income under the pricing kernel m, which yields a house value

4 Though the life-cycle arguments below employ essentially deterministic reasoning, a stochastic setting is important

because current disputes about pension accounting are centrally about discounting stochastic claims. Hence risk premiums
and intermediation cost should be clearly distinguished. For readers not used to pricing kernels: simply think of m as a
discount factor like 1/(1+r).

14

Ht 







E t mtn v(gt  n )   H  Tt n 

(2)

n 0

Assume N  N 1  N 2 , so not all houses can be owner-occupied. Then (2) defines the
equilibrium house price. Also assume (for simplicity)  H is high enough that all residents
prefer to own rather than rent, so h1t  ht2  1t . That is, the young in period t buy a house at
price H t , they pay taxes Tt and (later) Tt 1, and they sell the house at price H t  2 when old.
As simple benchmark, abstract from income taxes but allow for national old age
transfers TR (social security), and assume complete markets. (Section 5 considers incomplete
market.) Then individuals maximize utility subject to the budget constraint



 



w t  c1t  Tt  H t  E t mt1 (ew t 1  c t21  Tt 1 )  E t mt 2 (TRt  2  H t  2  c t3 2 )  0 (3)

The optimality conditions are
2
u'(c˜ t1
(st1 ))

u'(c˜ t1 (st ))

 m(st 1 | st )st 1 and

3
 2 u'(c t
2 (st 2 ))

u'(c˜ t1 (st ))

 m(st  2 | st )st 2 ,

(4)

where c˜  c  v(g) . Thus marginal utilities are aligned with the pricing kernel across periods
and states of nature. Because individuals can save on their own, there is no need for pension
funds. Under empirically plausible assumptions, net financial assets are negative from youth
to middle age and positive from middle to old age. 5 This is assumed in the following. Let U t

denote the maximized utility, which is a function of public services, home prices, and
property taxes.
The task of local government is to provide public services that maximize homeowner
utility U t . Assume
gt  Gt /N  G(L1t ,L2t ) /N

(5)

is produced by public employees, where G is increasing, concave, and linearly homogeneous,
and L1t and L2t are the number of young and middle-age employees. 6 Assuming the
5 That is, houses are costly, earnings peak in middle age, and social security and home sales are not enough to finance

retirement. As rough calibration, suppose w=1, e=1.5, a period of 20 years, 3% annual return on savings of 3%, house price
of 5 times annual wages, 1% annual property taxes; so H=0.25 and T=0.05 per 20 year period. Assume v=0.2, slightly above
the carrying cost of a house of 0.16, TR=0.2, and 3% time preference. Then c˜ 1 c˜ 2 c 3 1.05, savings are -0.15 in period 1,
+0.60 in period 2, and -0.60 in period 3. So individuals borrow when young and save in middle age.
6 An interesting extension would be to consider differential productivity of “experienced” employers who worked for the
same government in the previous period versus new middle age hires. This would provide a naturally motivation for career
employment and a way to address the human capital issues raised in Section 2.

15

government pays market wages, labor costs are W t  w t L1t  ew t L2t . To minimize cost,
relative productivity must match relative wages, so
G (l,1 l) / G (l,1 l)  e.
2
1
L

L

This defines the optimal share of young workers l*  L1 /(L1  L2 ) . Because public debt
would be neutral (capitalized in house prices), setting Tt  W t /N is without loss of
generality. Optimal public employment maximizes the value of services minus their cost, so

 (v(gt )  Tt ) /Lit  0. This implies

 l * e (1l * ) 
(l * e (1l * )) N
gt  g*t  (v') 1 w t
.
and Tt  Tt*  w t g*t
N


G (l * ,1l * )

Because (v') 1 is decreasing, optimal services are declining in the cost of labor. The implied
house price is

 

H t*   n0 E t mtn v(g*t )  Tt*   H

.

(6)

Assume v(g*t )  Tt*   H , so house prices are positive.
3.2. Income Taxes and Intermediation Cost
Individuals are in reality subject to national income taxes. As simple proxy for progressive
taxation, assume marginal tax rates  i are constant but age-specific. Because the age-earnings
profile peaks in middle age, assume  2   1 and  2   3 . Taxes apply to wage income minus
pension contributions, to returns on regular (taxable) investments, and to pension payouts.
Income taxes provide a strong motivation for pension plans. Because the setup cost of
a pension plan is negligible compared to the tax benefits, all employers will offer at least a
DC pension plan. 7 With competition between employers, all tax savings accrue to employees,
so the wage w t remains unchanged. Because employer contributions would reduce cash
wages one for one, assume (w.l.o.g.) that DC plans have zero employer contributions.
Regular investments, debt, and pensions now require separate accounting. Let x it  0
i
denote retirement contributions, let rxt
1 be the returns, and let

7 Individual IRA accounts or large tax exemptions for capital income would deliver similar tax benefits, but U.S. tax laws
allow greater contributions in employer plans. IRAs can be subsumed under DC plans. It is beyond the scope of this paper to
explain why Congress enacted laws that in effect subsidize pension savings; the focus here is on the implications.

16

1
2
2
X t  2  [x1t (1  rxt
1 )  x t 1 ](1  rxt  2 ).

(7)

be pension payouts. Payouts in middle age are prohibited. Individuals may also hold regular
i
i
taxable assets ait  0 with returns rat
1 and borrow amounts d t  0 .
For investments, assume the distribution of returns is chosen by investors subject to
i
i
the no-arbitrage conditions E t [mt 1 (1  rxt
1 )]  1  DC and E t [m t 1 (1  rat 1 )]  1, i=1,2.

where  DC  0 allows for a (small) cost of managing assets. That is, investments can be
interpreted as portfolios of Arrow securities that provide payoffs in specific states of nature.
This complete markets setting—apart from cost—provides a straightforward accounting for
uncertainty and for modeling risk premiums. 8
For individual debt, assume lenders incur intermediation costs that increase with the
level of debt (say, due to screening and monitoring expenses). Borrowers rank sources of debt
by borrowing costs, which are intermediation costs minus possible tax benefits (e.g. for
mortgages). To express this parsimoniously, let  d ( dˆ ) denote the net cost at debt level d̂ and
di
 (d i )  t  (dˆ )ddˆ the total cost of debt. For symmetry with assets, assume borrowers
d

0

t

d

choose the return distribution, which can be written as E t [m t 1(1  rdt 1 ( dˆ )]  1   d ( dˆ ) on
the margin and E t [mt 1(1  rdt 1(dti )]  1  d (dti ) for total debt. Net cost may be negative
for tax-deductible debt. To limit arbitrage, assume marginal costs approach infinity at some
(unspecified) maximum debt. To avoid corner solutions, assume  d (0)  0 .
Given these financing choices, individuals maximize utility subject to the budget
equations
c1t  h1t Tt  (w t  x1t )(1  1)  d1t  a1t  h1t H t
c t21  ht21Tt 1  (ew t 1  x t21 )(1  2 )  dt21  [1  rdt 1(d1t )]d1t
1
1
(h1t  ht21 )H t 1  at21  [1  (1  2 )rat
1 ]at

(8)
(9)

c t32  TRt 2  X t 2 (1  3 )  ht21H t 2  [1  rdt 1 (dt21 )]dt21  [1  (1  3 )rat2 2 ]at21 .(10)

8 Incomplete markets would be a distraction here and are deferred to Section 6. I abstract from management cost on regular

savings; they will be return-dominated even without cost.

17

Proceeding recursively, the first order conditions in middle age for pensions, taxable assets,
and debt are






2
3
3
2
2
U   u'(c˜ 2 )(1  2 )  E
t 1
t 1  u'(c t 2 )(1  rxt  2 ) (1  )   (x t 1 )  0, (11)
2
x t 1
2
3 2
3
2
U   u'(c˜ 2 )  E
(12)
t 1
t 1  u'(c t 2 )(1  (1  )rat 2 )   (at 1 )  0
2
a t
1
2
3
2
2
U  u'(c˜ 2 )  E
(13)
t 1
t 1  u'(c t 2 )(1  rdt 2 )   (dt 1 )  0
2
d t
1






where  (z)  0 denotes the Kuhn-Tucker multiplier for any constraint z  0 .
Consider first the case x t21  0. From (11) and the arbitrage condition for returns, one
obtains
3
u'(c t
2)
E t 1 
 x2  mt  2
2
˜
u'(
c

t1 )




2
1 3 (1 
(1  rxt 2 )  0 with  x2 
DC ).

1 2


(14)

Because this condition must hold for all investments, including Arrow securities, the marginal
rate of substitution in all states of nature must satisfy
3
u'(c t
2 (st 2 ))
2
(st1 ))
u'(c˜ t1

 1 m(st 2 | st 1 ) st 2

(15)

x2

This is similar to (4), but distorted by the tax factor  x2 . Recall that (1   3 ) /(1  2 )  1 and
assume  DC is small. Then  x2  1. This means federal taxes provide a “boost” to pension
returns and a strong incentive to contribution in middle age.
If (15) holds, (12) implies  (at21 )  0, so at21  0. Regular savings are inferior to
pensions. In addition, (15) combined with (13) imply

 d (dt21)   x 2  1  0.

(16)

This defines an optimal debt level dt2*
1  0. Intuitively, individuals borrow to fund pensions
up to the point where the pension tax incentives in  x2 are offset by intermediation cost.
Hence  x2 can also be interpreted as borrowing cost:  x2  1   d (dt21 ).
For completeness, consider the possibility that x t21  0. Then analogous arguments
imply

3
u'(c t
2 (st 2 ))
2
(st1 )
u'(c˜ t1

 m(st 2 | st 1 ) / x 2 ,

which

2
dt21  dt2*
1  0. Given dt 1  0, (13) implies

in

3
u'(c t
2 (st 2 ))

18

2
u'(c˜ t1
(st1 )

turn

implies

at21  0

and

 m(st 2 | st 1 ) /(dt21 ), where

(dt21 )  1/(1   (dt21 )   x 2 . Thus the marginal rate of substitution would be pushed down
even more than in the x t21  0 case.
To summarize: in all cases, income taxes imply a downward distortion in the marginal
rate of substitution between peak earnings years and retirement. In the following, to avoid
2
 0 applies.
distracting case distinctions, assume the case x t21  x DC

For the young, similar first order conditions as in middle age apply for regular assets
and debt (not shown). The condition for optimal pension contributions is different because
pensions must be held to retirement:
U  u'(c˜1 )(1  1 )  E  2 u'(c˜ 3 )(1  r1 )(1  r 2 ) (1  3 )   (x1 )  0.
t
t
t 2
xt 1
xt 2
t
1



x t



(17)

Using (15) to replace u'(c˜ t32 ) , this implies
2
u'(c˜ t1


)
 (x 1t )
1
E t 


m
)

(1

r

x1
t 1
xt 1 
1 0
1
1

 u'(c˜ t )
 u'(c˜ t )(1 )
where  x1  1 1 (1  DC ) 2  1 1  1.
2

2

1

1

(18)

In young age, the tax factor  x1  1 discourages retirement contributions.
Life-cycle arguments suggest that the young have strong incentives to borrow. To
avoid distracting case distinctions, assume d1t  0 and  d (d1t )  0 . Then the first-order
condition for debt has a zero Kuhn-Tucker multiplier and can be written as
2
u'(c˜ t1


)
E t 
(1   d (d1t ))  mt 1(1  rdt 1 ) 0 ,
1

 u'(c˜ t )

with implies

2
u'(c˜ t1
(st1 ))

u'(c˜ t1 (st ))



1
m(st 1
1  d (d t1 )

| st ) st 1 .

(19)
(20)

Optimal debt aligns the marginal rate of substitution with the pricing kernel, now distorted
downwards by intermediation cost. Combining (20) and (18),  (x1t )  0 follows from
 x1  1  1   d (d1t ), so x1t  x1DC  0. Similar reasoning implies a1t  0.
The model suggests that the young and middle-aged hold debt. For empirical support,
Table 1 shows data on the prevalence of borrowing and on the cost of borrowing. According
to the Survey of Consumer Finances 2007 (SCF), more than 80% of families with head of
household under 65 hold debt. Mortgages are held by majorities in the 35-64 age brackets,

19

installment debt by majorities in the under-54 age brackets, and credit card debt by majorities
in the 35-54 age brackets. Thus the vast majority of U.S. families are debtors, and for most of
them (all but prime mortgage debtors who itemize), debt is costly.
The model also implies that young borrowers should not contribute to pension plans.
Empirically, many young workers indeed contribute nothing or very little, which is sometimes
viewed as puzzling. Indeed, according to SCF, 58% of families under 35 have no retirement
accounts at all. Though retirement contributions by the young could be rationalized in model
extensions (see below), given the data, zero contributions are a useful benchmark.
In summary, the model yields a simply and empirically plausible life cycle. The young
work, buy a house, and borrow. The middle-aged save for retirement and hold debt only for
tax reasons. The old consume and liquidate their assets. 9
Marginal rates of substitution are given by (15) between middle and old age and by
(20) between young and middle age. Importantly, both marginal rates of substitution are less
than the pricing kernel. The relationship between  x2 in (15) and 1   d (d1t ) in (20) is an
empirical issue. As a rough calibration, a tax wedge between  2  30% and  3  15% over 20
years

would

imply

an

annual

tax

advantage

of

about

1%

(from

(1  2 ) /(1  3 )  0.85 /.70  (1  0.98%)20 ). A 25bp management cost (say, using index funds)
would leave a 75bp annualized gain in  x2 . Spreads between T-bills and credit card rates are
about 14% and spreads on car loans (the most common installment loan) about 5%; see Table
1. Because credit card and car loans have high default rates, the spreads reflect not only
intermediation costs but also risk premiums. Hence  d (d1t ) is difficult to calibrate. As
alternative, consider the spread between the Prime Rate and T-bills, which is about 3%.
Because Prime borrowers have low credit risk, this spread should largely reflect
intermediation cost; half the spread (1.5%) might be a conservative lower bound. Overall, the
data suggest that most young families face intermediation cost of several percentage points.

9 One could easily add a joy-of-giving bequest motive to the model (e.g. for giving the house to the kids), so liquidation
should not be taken literally.

20

This suggests 1   d (d1t )   x2  1. Because  x2  1   d (dt2 ) , the marginal rates of
substitution of both cohorts can be written as mt 1 /[1   d (d)] to express their generic
dependence on the pricing kernel and on intermediation cost.
Turning to local public finance, pension incentives and costly debt have a key
implication: Most taxpayers face a marginal cost of funds greater than the rate of return on
financial assets.
3.3. Public Pensions and Public Debt
Consider the local government’s financing choices with public debt and with DB pensions.
Let Dt denote end-of-period debt. With DB pensions, let w1t and w t2 denote period-t
“cash” wages paid to young and middle-aged public employees, and let Pt denote employer
contributions to the DB plan. Then W˜ t  w1t L1t  w t2 L2t is the current wage cost. The period-t
budget identity is
Dt  (1  rDt )Dt 1  W˜ t  Pt  N  Tt

(21)

The interest rDt may include an intermediation cost  D (constant for simplicity),
so E t 1mt (1  rDt ) 1   D  1 . Assuming investors impose the transversality/No Ponzi
condition E t mtn Dt n  0 as n   , one obtains the intertemporal budget constraint (IBC)
Dt*   E t mtn N  Tt  n  W˜ t n  Pt  n   D Dt n 
(22)





n 0

where Dt*  (1  rDt )Dt 1 is the start-of-period debt.
Let pension fund assets Ft earns returns rFt , where E t 1mt (1  rFt ) 1   F may be
subject to a management cost  F  0 . All pension benefits Bt are paid from the fund, either
from fund assets or pay-as-you go employer contributions. The budget identity is
Ft  (1  rFt ) Ft 1  Pt  Bt .

(23)

The limit condition E t mtn Ft n  0 as n   , implies the IBC
Ft*   E t mtn Bt n  Pt  n   F Ft n 





(24)

n 0

where Ft*  (1  rFt )Ft 1 is start-of-period funding position. Combining (22) and (24), the
present value of taxes is

21

N



E t mtn Tt  n  Dt*  Bt  Ft* 

n0





E t mtn W t n   F Ft n   D Dt  n 



(25)

n0

where W t  W˜ t  E t [mt 1Bt 1] measures total compensation (current wages and present
value of benefits). Thus taxes depend on debt, promised benefits minus funding, plus future
compensation and intermediation cost.
Voters care about taxes because they affect house prices. Combining (2) and (25),
Ht 



n 0
 1 Dt*
N



 

E t mtn v(gt  n )   H  1 W t n
N
 Bt  Ft*



1
N









E t mtn  F Ft n   D Dt  n 

(26)

n0

The first line in (26) reflects the value of public services and their real cost; the second line
reflects financing choices.
To attract employees, an employment package with DB plan must be competitive with
DC plans; and with complete markets, the optimal DB plan must essentially replicate DC
contributions and benefits. Instead of paying workers w t and ew t 1 in young and middle age,
the government pays w1t  w t  x1t and w t21  ew t 1  x t21 and it promises retired workers a
pension X t  2 , so Bt 2  X t  2 L2t 1 . If x1DC  0, as suggested in the previous section, the DB
plan simplifies: young employees receive an unreduced salary w1t  w t and no promise of
benefits. 10 Then from (7),
2
W t  W˜ t  E t [m t 1Bt 1 ]  w t L1t  ew t   DC x DC
L2t .





(27)

This means that to the extent that managing DC investments is costly, a DB plan reduces
employment cost. However, if DC costs are small (  DC  0 ), the optimal public services,
optimal taxes, and optimal public employment are the same as in Section 3.1. Notably,

10 In practice, legal restrictions may prevent DB plan sponsors from excluding the young. However, vesting requirements

could have a similar effect, suggesting an efficiency argument for long vesting periods. The optimality of zero contributions
in young age suggests caution in using accounting methods such as entry-age-normal that mechanically allocate projected
benefits over an entire career. The interpretation of Wt as total compensation implicitly exploits a single period of
contributions; with multi-period accrual, more elaborate notation would be needed.

22

gt  g*t , and line 1 in eq. (26) equals H t* in (6), so the “real” allocation is essentially
unchanged. 11
Line 2 of (26) shows that initial debt, pension promises, and pension fund assets are
fully capitalized. Because of intermediation cost, expected future debt reduces house values.
If DB fund management is costly (  F  0 ), future fund balances also reduce house values.
Recall that most voters—resident homeowners—are debtors. While real estate
investors capitalize houses at the pricing kernel m, voters discount the future at the marginal
rates of substitution (15) and (20), which are strictly greater. Assuming votes takes place
every period after homes are traded, middle-aged individuals vote to maximize

t2  v(gt )  Tt   E t [

m t 1
H ]
1  d (d t2 ) t 1

and the young vote to maximize
 m


m t 2
1t  v(gt )  Tt  E t  t1 1 v(gt 1 )  Tt 1 
H t  2 .
2
1  d (d t1 )

1  d (d t ) 

(28)

(29)

These relations yield several important results.
First, the payoff functions t2 and 1t are strictly decreasing in Ft :
i
 ti
T t
 mt 1 T t 1 
1  F   d (d t )  0 , for i=1,2.



E


t 1  (d i ) Ft 
Ft
Ft
N 1  d (d ti )
 d t


(30)

Thus, the middle-aged and young voters strictly prefer zero funding, Ft  0 . To see the
intuition, suppose funding were positive. Then if funding is reduced, taxes per house can be
reduced by 1/N in period t. Taxes must be increased by (1  rFt 1 ) /N units in period t+1,
which has a present value of (1  F ) /(1   d (dti )) /N at taxpayers’ marginal rate of
substitution. Because (1  F ) /(1   d (dti ))  1, taxpayers favor reduced funding.
Second, provided  D   d (d1t ) and  D   d (dt2 ), both generations would benefit
from a debt-financed tax cut in period t that is reversed in period t+1. This might suggest a
bias towards deficit spending. However, note that the  D Dt  n -terms in (26) enter negatively,

ew t   DC x t2 of middle-age employees would shift the optimal
1
1
2
*
*
employment mix ( Lt /(Lt  Lt )  l ) and increase the optimal scale of public services ( gt  gt ). These real effects

11 If DC have high cost, the reduced employment cost

would distract from funding issues and are not examined further.

23

so debt in future periods reduces house values. If voting over public debt is sequential,
rational investors must expect positive debt in the future and discount houses values
accordingly. This motivates a balanced budget rule—a constitutional provision to outlaw debt
once and for all. Voters will approve provided the impact of persistent debt on home prices
(the  D Dt  n -terms) outweighs the short-run cost difference  d (d)   D . 12 Hence the model
is consistent with popular support for balanced budgets. In the following, I assume a balanced
budget rule applies so Dt  0 .
Importantly, support for a balanced budget framework does not imply support for fully
funded pensions. For sequential voting over pension funding, this was shown above. For
voting on a once-and-for all rule about pension funding, note that  F Ft  n enters negatively
in (26). Hence voters would support zero funding as a fiscal rule. Future management costs
reinforce the optimality of zero funding. The general point is that homeowners strive to avoid
all intermediation cost—cost of debt and the cost of fund management. 13
Third, young voters may favor an even more extreme pension policy. If

 d (d1t )   d (dt2 ), young voters face higher borrowing cost than middle-aged public
employees. Hence they have an incentive to offer a benefits package with reduced wages and
2
2
higher benefits, so w t2  ew t  x DC
and x t2  x DC
. Compared to the private sector, such

benefits would appear “bloated.” However, bloated benefits would reduce house prices.
Hence middle-aged voters will be opposed; and young voters will approve only if the cost

12 The exact conditions are complicated but seem mild. For example, the middle aged to support a permanent debt reduction
2
provided  d (d t )   D   D / r where r is the interest rate on a consol. Say, if r =5%, the condition holds unless
2
 d (d t ) is 21-times greater than  D . Also, one could show that the model is consistent with borrowing for capital projects

that are eligible for tax-exempt financing, provided the tax subsidy covers the intermediation cost. The tax-exempt debt
would be capitalized as if  D  0 , which means property values would be increased. Note that for  d (d t )   d (d t ) ,
any proposal to defer taxes that is favored by the middle-aged is also supported by the young. The median voter in this model
is best interpreted as a median-age homeowner.
13 A main motive for introducing the variable  is to demonstrate the effects of borrowing cost versus investment cost.
F
1

2

Zero funding would be optimal even if  F  0 . Even if one abstracted from age-dependent tax rates (i.e., consider the
special case 

2

  and  F   DC 0 so  2x 1 and  d (d t2 )0 ), the young would favor zero pension funding.
3

Then middle-age voters would be indifferent, but trivial side payments (say log-rolling) would ensure unanimous support for
zero pension funding.

24

savings  d (d1t )   d (dt2 ) outweigh the negative house price effect. Thus the model can
rationalize bloated benefits as a possibility, but they are not a prediction.
Fourth, because funding is costly, mandatory funding—say, imposed by an outside
regulator—would reduce taxpayer incentives to offer a DB plan as compared to a DC plan. If
differences in management cost are negligible (say, if  F   DC  0 ), only underfunded DB
plans are preferable to DC. If full funding were required, only a cost advantage  F   DC
would justify a DB plan. (This abstracts from all other differences between DB and DC noted
in Section 2.)
In summary, one finds that pension funding is costly and therefore suboptimal. While
the model omits realistic complications that may warrant funding (see below), it provides a
useful baseline and it suggests caution in imposing funding regulations.
3.4. Accounting Implications of Intermediation Costs
Suppose the optimal public employment contract includes a DB plan. How should the
government account for the pension obligations?
Specifically, suppose middle-age government workers receive a wage w t2  ew t  x t2
in the current period and are promised X t 1  x t2 (1  rxt2 1 ) in retirements. Total benefits
Bt 1  X t 1L2t may be unfunded or (partially) backed by a fund Ft earning returns rFt 1 . To
simplify, assume young employees receive a wage w1t  w t and no pension entitlement.
Taxpayers and investors are not unanimous on how to value such pension obligations.
Outside investors apply the pricing kernel m and compute
2 2
2 2
AALm
t  E t m t 1Bt 1  E t m t 1 (1  rxt 1 )x t Lt  x t Lt .

Taxpayers use a marginal rate of substitution based on (15) or (20), generically denoted
m t 1 /[1   d (d)] . This implies

AALt  E t [ 1  td1(d ) Bt 1 ]  1 1d (d ) x t2 L2t  AALmt .
m

Thus discounting by the pricing kernel overstates the opportunity cost of pension promises for
taxpayers. Standard finance theory is correct that discounting must reflects the risk
characteristics of pension liabilities (not assets). However, the discount rates must include an
25

allowance for intermediation cost, i.e., they are properly derived from taxpayers' borrowing
rates, not from returns available to investors.
As simple adjustment for intermediation cost, one may add a spread to investmentbased discount rates. For example, “safe” pension benefits are commonly discounted at
duration-matched Treasury rates (Novy-Marx and Rauh 2009). Over the last 20 years, 10-year
Treasuries yields have averaged 2.8% in real terms (5.6% nominal, 2.8% inflation). If the
median voter faces an intermediation cost of 1.5-3%, one obtains real discount rates of 4%6%. For pension benefits subject to default risk, one would have to add a risk premium, e.g.,
the spread between taxable municipal bond and Treasuries (about 1-2%). This suggests real
discount rates in the 5-8% range, or nominal 8-11%. 14 Put differently, accountants are correct
when they discount pension obligations at rates much greater than Treasury rates—though not
for the right reasons. One may even argue that commonly used accounting rates of 7-8%
nominal are too low for most taxpayers.
One complication is that because funding is suboptimal, measures of “underfunding”
are difficult to interpret. Funding equal to AAL, Ft / AALt  100% , could be labeled “full”
funding. However, because fund returns are less than taxpayers’ borrowing cost, “full”
funding in this sense would lead to expected underfunding in the next period:
UAALt  E t



m t 1
1  d (d )

B

t 1



F
 Ft*1  AALt  1  d (d
) Ft  AALt  Ft  

1 

 F   d (d )
1  d (d )

Ft

(31)

which would be strictly positive at Ft  AALt . A forward looking measure of underfunding
must account for current underfunding, AALt  Ft , plus a term that reflects the inefficiency of
carrying funds into the next period.
One way to account for inefficient funding is to discount funded obligations by riskadjusted asset returns and unfunded obligations at a higher rate that reflects taxpayers’ cost of
funds. Interestingly, the GASB rule for retiree health plans prescribe exactly the opposite, a
higher discount rate on funded liabilities than on unfunded ones (GASB 43); this GASB rule
14 Because intermediation costs generally differ across individuals (as exemplified by age differences in the model), there is

no single “correct” discount rate for everyone. Hence I provide a range of rates; the choice of a particular value would be a
matter of setting accounting conventions.

26

seems unjustified. 15 This application further illustrates that the “intermediation-cost
approach” proposed here differs significantly from the finance and accounting approaches.
4. Legal Ambiguity and Default Risk

Legal ambiguity and default risks deserve attention here because they have first order effects
on optimal funding.
By legal ambiguity I mean the possibility that the plan sponsor can successfully
dispute the scope or existence of pension obligations. By default risk I mean the risk that the
plan sponsor will default outright on its liabilities—presumably on debt as well as pensions. A
key distinction is that default is usually observable and unambiguous. Hence default should be
insurable whereas legal ambiguities are not. Almost by construction, if a plan sponsor finds a
legal flaw or otherwise challenges a pension payment, an insurer could raise the same
objections. Employees must always worry how the courts might rule, and this uncertainty is
uninsurable. (Hence I prefer the term legal ambiguity instead of legal risk.)
For example, consider a plan that promises a fixed percentage of final salary, which is
then indexed to inflation, as is common in DB plans. Final salary is an ambiguous term when
the structure of compensation is evolving. A stingy definition—excluding all bonus-type
payments—would allow the employer to cut pensions by reducing base salaries and instead
paying repeated bonuses. (With inflation, freezing nominal salaries would work similarly.) A
generous definition would invite attempts to manipulate the timing of payments to show an
abnormally high final salary—a practice known as “pension spiking.” Indexing clauses may
also cause trouble, e.g., if simple formulas become so “unreasonable” over time that a court
may not enforce them.
With legal ambiguity, funding can serve as collateral and provide a floor on benefits.
A key question is to what extent pension assets are reserved for pension benefits, or if plan
sponsors can reclaim assets under some conditions. Funding is only effective as collateral if it
15 An additional problem with GASB 43 is that since health benefits are not vested, they are quite risky and must be

discounted accordingly.

27

cannot be diverted. Strong regal restrictions against “raids” by plan sponsors are indeed
widespread, even in cases when a plan seems vastly overfunded. Such restrictions are difficult
to rationalize without legal ambiguity. 16 Moreover, many retirement funds have a governance
structure designed to protect beneficiaries, e.g., through board representation.
To model legal ambiguity, assume each “macro” state of nature (st+1) has two possible
realizations ( st1, st1). With probability , the promised benefits X(st 1) are disputed and
the plan sponsor successfully refuses additional contributions. Then beneficiaries share the
X(st1)  min{X(st 1 ),F * (st 1 ) /L2t }. With

available funds and actual payments are

probability 1  , promised benefits are honored, so X(st1)  X(st 1 ). 17
As a behavioral extension, denote employees’ perception of legal ambiguity by e
and let it be distinct from the employer’s view. For simplicity, assume that  and e are
exogenous. Also assume the median voter is middle aged, so the public employer has a welldefined objective of maximizing t2 .
The economic implication of legal ambiguity is an uninsurable risk. Retirement
consumption is c t31 (s )  TRt 1  H t 1  X(st 1 ) if the employer pays as promised.
Retirement consumption is c t31 (s )  TRt 1  H t 1  F * (st 1 ) /L2t if employees share the
fund assets. Whenever the funding ratio f  F * (st 1 ) /(X(st 1 )L2t ) is less than 100%, default
implies a discrete downward “jump” in consumption and an upward jump in marginal
utility. 18 The latter is increasing in the ratio of promised pension to retirement income, in the
degree of underfunding, and in relative risk aversion (denoted ):
u'( f ) 

u'(c t32 (s  ))u'(c t32 (s  ))
u'(c t32 (s 

))



 1 (1 f ) c 3

X (st 1 )
t 2 (s



)

  1  0.


The ratio X(st 1) /c t31 (s  ) can be called pension dependence. It captures to what extent
employees rely on a promised pension for their retirement income.
16 Otherwise it would be economically efficient to give the plan sponsor (as residual claimant) the right to recover

overfunding. But with legal uncertainty, “overfunding” is not well defined because the scope of obligations is part of the
dispute. Hence a right to recover funds would undermine the collateral function.
17 The same pattern of payoffs would occur in case of default; hence the model applies analogously to default risk I focus on
legal ambiguity in part for brevity and in part because default raises the question why fund managers or beneficiaries are not
taking out insurance against a default of the plan sponsor (e.g. via credit default swaps).
18 Note that the relevant funding ratio f is the ratio of assets to obligations in the retirement period. This is consistent with
the definition of unfunded liabilities in Section 3.4 in the sense that f=1 implies UAAL=0.

28

Optimal pension design is then a choice of funded benefits, unfunded benefits, and a
wage w t2 that maximizes t2 subject to the constraint that the employment package gives
workers at least the same utility as a private job with DC pension. It is straightforward to
show that an interior solution ( 0  f  1) requires that
1

 F   d (d t2 )
1  F





 11e 1  e  u'( f ) .

(32)

Whenever the l.h.s. is greater, zero funding is optimal. If the r.h.s. were greater, full funding
would be optimal. The l.h.s. is greater than one and interpretable as the cost to taxpayers of a
funded as compared to an unfunded pension. 19 The r.h.s. has two parts. The ratio
(1 ) /(1 e ) is a misperceptions term that exceeds one if employees’ confidence in the

plan is less than the employer’s. The bracketed term 1  e u'( f ) exceeds one if employees
perceive a probability of default ( e >0) and if this risk is uninsured ( u'( f ) >0).
Specific numbers may help build an intuition. For example, consider a 50bp annual
funding cost and a 1.5% borrowing cost. Then for a period of 20 years,  F  10% ,

 d (dt2 )  35% , and

 F   d (d t2 )
1  F

 0.5 . Assume symmetric expectations (   e ) and   4 .

Suppose the employer pension is half of planned retirement income. Then an unfunded
pension would imply u'(c t3 2 (s  )) /u'(c t3 2 (s ))  0.5   16, so u'(0)  15 . Equality in (31)
would require a risk of   0.5 /15  3.4% . If   3.4% , zero funding is optimal. If   3.4%
partial

funding

u'( f ) 

 F   d (d t2 )
1  F

is

optimal.

For

example,

/  0.5 /0.25  2, which implies

if

  25% , (31) prescribes
 (1  u'( f )) 1/   0.76 . With
)

c t32 (s  )
c t32 (s 

50% pension dependence, one obtains an optimal funding ratio f  52% .
Table 2 shows results of similar calculations for a range of parameters. Generally, high
pension dependence, high risk aversion, and a high degree of legal ambiguity (or default risk)
favor funding, whereas intermediation costs discourage funding. Panel (a) shows cutoff
probabilities for zero funding. The cutoff probabilities are over 10% for all scenarios with

19 Because

1/(1 

 F   d (d t2 )
1  F

)  1

 F   d (d t2 )
1  d (d t2 )

, the cost term in (32) is a rescaled version of the terms in (30) and (31).

29

25% pensions dependence and for many of the 50%-dependence scenarios with low risk
aversion and/or high cost. Thus zero funding remains optimal unless legal risk is substantial.
Panel (b) shows optimal funding ratios. To focus on scenarios with positive funding,
all columns assume low intermediation cost and some rows assume very high risk-aversion
(up to 10). Many entries are nonetheless under 50%. Funding ratios greater than 80% are
optimal only with low cost and high risk aversion (=10) and relatively high pension
dependence (50%).
Because many state and local government employees are not participating in social
security, scenarios with high pension dependence are empirically relevant. They could
rationalize empirically observed funding ratios that are near 100%.
Three general results should be noted: First, full funding is never optimal under
symmetric beliefs. This is because u'( f )  0 as the funding ratio approaches 100%. The
optimal funding ratio is always bounded away from one, but not from zero. Specifically, zero
funding is optimal under symmetric beliefs whenever

u'

 F   d (d t2 )
.
1  F

(34)

Second, even with asymmetric beliefs, full funding is suboptimal unless employees are
much more pessimistic than the employer. Specifically, full funding is optimal if and only if
e    F   d (d t )
(35)
1  F
1e
   (d 2 )
For example, if F 1 d t  0.5 and the true default probability is zero, the perceived risk
F
2

must be at least 33%. Otherwise optimal funding is at most partial.
Third, legal ambiguity is always costly for the plan sponsor. Even if the actual or
perceived risks are low enough that zero funding remains optimal, doubtful promises are
discounted. An employer offering a DB plan must give workers the same utility as employers
offering DC plans. Because ambiguity about defined benefits imposes idiosyncratic risk on
employees, the employer must compensate with a higher wage. Funding can reduce these
concerns by serving as collateral, but it has a cost.

30

Finally, note that legal ambiguity raises some deeper questions about the meaning of
promises. If  were near one, a DB plan would provide an investment-backed retirement
income just like a DC plan, except with centralized asset management and with a slight upside
chance that the employer might (almost voluntarily) pay extra benefits. This case would raise
questions beyond the scope of this paper, e.g., about the meaning of “defined” plans when
legal ambiguity is so pervasive that legal definitions are virtually meaningless.
5. Incomplete Markets and Risk Sharing

The models above assumed complete markets. In reality most retirement savers invest in
standard financial instruments such as stocks and bonds. Many DC retirement plans restrict
investment options further, sometimes down a small menu of mutual funds. DB plans provide
a much more sophisticated set of benefits, which includes microeconomic insurance features
that savers would find costly or impossible to purchase on their own (e.g., annuities and
survivor benefits). Managers of DB plans may also have access to a wider range of
investment options, through at a cost. This raises questions about robustness of the previous
results. Three issues deserve comment.
(a) Most importantly, incomplete markets do not overturn the principal arguments
against funding. The intuition is simple. DC plans are constrained by missing contingent
claims markets because retirement incomes must be backed by publicly available financial
assets. DB plans are not constrained by missing markets because they are private contracts
between employer and employees. Market constraints apply only to the extent that funding is
mandatory or desirable, e.g., due to regulations or as collateral. Thus market incompleteness
tends to (i) magnify the advantages of DB over DC plans and (ii) increase the opportunity cost
of DB funding.
To model incomplete markets, assume only stocks or bonds are traded on liquid
financial markets. Stocks are claims on capital and pay a state-contingent return R k (st 1 ) .
Bonds are viewed as safe claims that pay Rb (st 1 | st )  R b (st )  1/ E t [mt 1 ] in all states st+1.

31

In addition, assume Arrow securities are available at an intermediation cost  z  0. Let
z  (st 1)  0 and z  (st 1)  0 denote long and short positions in Arrow securities on state
st 1, and assume the period-t prices are

  (st 1)   (st 1 )m(st 1 )(1   z ) , and

  (st 1)   (st 1 )m(st 1 ) /(1   z ). (Note that symbols +/- are used differently than in
Section 4.) The cost  z  0 can be interpreted as “markup” over the pricing kernel imposed
by insurance companies or investment banks. A setting without Arrow securities is included
as limiting case  z  . Assume m(st 1 ) is not spanned by stocks and bonds.
A retirement portfolio can then be written as
X(st 1)  R k (st 1 )x tk  Rb (st 1 )x bt  z  (st 1 )  z  (st 1 ) for all st+1

(35)

where x tk and x bt are holdings of “standard” stocks and bonds (purchased at unit price). The
period-t cost of a portfolio of such a portfolio is
x t  x tk  x bt   s   (st 1)z  (st 1)   s
t 1

t 1

  (st 1)z  (st 1)

(36)

The cost of a given portfolio is strictly increasing in  z unless the X(st 1 ) lies in the space
spanned by R k (st 1 ) and Rb (st 1 ) .
Let U DC (  z ,  DC ) denote the utility of an individual who invests optimally in a DC
pension plan constrained by (35) and (36); U DC is strictly decreasing in  z . Similarly, let
U DB (  z ,  F ;w1t ,w t21) denote an employee’s utility working under a DB plan that offers first
and second period wages (w1t ,w t21 ) and invests optimally. Provided  F   DC , a DB plan
can replicate the optimal DC plan and use the same funding and investment policy. Hence
U DB (  z ,  F ;w t  x1t ,ewt 1  x t21 )  U DC (  z ,  DC )

(37)

holds for any  z . However, the DB plan is superior in two ways. First, a DB plan has a
comparative advantage over DC because it can settle non-traded claims internally—across
employee groups or with taxpayer—without incurring transaction cost. The relevance of
internal settlement depends in part on risk sharing opportunities (discussed below) and
funding. Second, reduced funding raises taxpayer utility by the same reasoning as in Section
3, so zero funding is still optimal. Zero funding is even more advantageous because it avoids
the cost  z . If (37) holds with strict inequality, a plan that maximizes 1t or t2 subject to

32

U DB (  z ,  F ;w1t ,w t21)  U DC (  z ,  DC ) will have lower cost (i.e., w1t  w t  x1t and/or
w t21  ewt 1  x t21). Reduced cost would justify an expansion of public services and it
would increase property values.
(b) The optimality of zero contributions by the young should be flagged as a more
fragile result. It relies on several implicit assumptions: (i) Debt was assumed state contingent,
which allows the young to hedge risks without holding assets. If one assumed “inflexible”
debt instead, meaning a debt with exogenous return distribution, it is straightforward to show
that the young will make pension contributions—either in a DC plan or via their employer in
an optimal DB plan—provided debt returns differ sufficiently from the optimal return
distribution. 20 (ii) Pensions contributions in middle age were assumed unconstrained. If one
assumed a binding upper bound on x t21, contributions in young age would be a way to
increase pension assets that benefit from low taxes in retirement. 21 However, there is no
incentive to shift taxable income from young to old age unless (1   3 ) /(1   1 )  1; it is
questionable if condition holds empirically. (iii) The model abstracts from career employment
issue. Unless career employment promises productivity gains, pension benefits for the young
are difficult to justify.
(c) Restrictions on the space of financial contracts matter only to the extent that the
missing markets are needed to implement the unconstrained optimal allocation. Finance
theory implies that the aggregate pricing kernel is the marginal rate of substitution of an
investor who bears a representative share of aggregate risks. If output is produced with labor
and capital, the fundamental risks are shocks to wages, shocks to the return to capital
(including houses). This suggests that m t 1 is positively correlated with next period’s wage,
returns to capital, and house prices.
20 Note that inflexible debt has ramifications for optimal policy. Because inflexible debt breaks the alignment between
pricing kernel and marginal rates of substitution in (20), there is a potential for fiscal policy to improve risk sharing between
younger and older generations, as in Bohn (2009). A detailed examination is left for future research because tax instruments
are limited in the property tax model and because intergenerational risk sharing is more promising at the national level.
21 Formally, the shadow value of the upper bound on

2
would reduce the marginal rate of substitution between middle
x t1

1
and old age consumption and enter (17) in a way that reduces  (x t ) , potentially down to zero.

33

From budget equation (9), the income of the middle aged is naturally correlated with
w t 1. Optimal risk sharing calls for c˜ t21 to be perfectly correlated with m t 1 . Assuming

inflexible debt so the young contribute to pensions, optimal pension accruals from young to
middle age should provide equity exposure and hedging against wage risk. From (10), the risk
exposure of retirees is largely determined by pensions. Hence optimal pension payments to
retirees should provide positive equity exposure and positive exposure to wage risk. (Because
both cohorts own houses, optimal hedging against housing risk is unclear.)
These arguments suggest that missing markets for wage-indexed claims are a serious
constraint on DC plans. 22 DB plans, in contrast, can provide internal risk sharing because the
hedging needs younger and older cohorts go in opposite directions. This requires DB plans to
promise wage-linked pensions, i.e., pensions that cannot be matched by funding. Final salary
plans can be interpreted as practical implementation, because of all possible salary indexation
schemes, the final salary is closest to the retirement period. Thus the arguments in (a) above
apply to wage indexing and final salary plans.
Finally, one destructive scenario should be noted. Consider a DB plan that has made
promises—optimally—that are not fully funded and cannot be backed by traded assets; say, a
wage-linked pension. Suppose regulators suddenly demand that the plan be fully funded in all
states of nature. This mandate can be satisfied only by buying Arrow securities at marked-up
prices or by over-collateralizing the plan with stocks and bonds. Both options are expensive,
perhaps more costly than offering a DC plan. Hence uncertainty about funding rules gives
plan sponsors an incentive to shift from DB plans to DC (or hybrid) plans that are more easily
backed by standard financial assets—perhaps even preemptively. To conclude, the analysis of
incomplete markets suggests that taxpayer gains from underfunding are no less than in the
complete market model and arguably greater.

22 The seriousness of the problem and the ramifications for portfolio choice depend in part on the correlation between wages

are equity returns. Baxter-Jermann (1997) and Bohn (1999) estimate a high correlation. Constantinides et al. (2002) argue for
a low correlation.

34

6. Concluding comments

This paper examines state and local pension funding in an overlapping generations model
with intermediation cost. There are three main lessons.
First, funding is difficult to justify when taxpayers hold debt and face intermediation
cost. Then taxpayers’ cost of funding public pensions is greater than the (risk-adjusted) rate of
return available on fund investments. Put simply: Why should taxpayers vote to accumulate
assets in a public retirement plans that buys Treasury notes yielding, say, 2% when they are
paying 15% interest on their credit cards and 7% on car loans? Though part of the spread
between consumer loans and Treasury rates reflects default risk, another part reflects
intermediation cost. This cost could be avoided by underfunding public pensions and thereby
deferring taxes. Hence in the model, zero funding is optimal.
Similar arguments apply when pension funds hold equities and other risky assets. For
any asset class, if returns on pension assets and on taxpayer debt are adjusted for risk, there is
a gap that equals the cost of borrowing plus the cost of fund management. Hence
Shakespeare’s advice not to borrow and lend makes sense—unless taxpayers are gullible
enough to believe that pension managers can earn abnormal returns that justify the costs.
Second, legal ambiguity—the risk that unfunded pension promises may not be
enforceable—and default risk are plausible countervailing forces. Pension funds that are
irrevocably dedicated to the benefit of employees can serve as collateral. Collateral is valued
by employees and allows employers to reduce total compensation. Hence funding can be
optimal despite intermediation cost. However, collateral arguments justify at most partial
funding. Full funding remains suboptimal except in a scenario where employees are
irrationally pessimistic about unfunded pensions. Thus the model is broadly consistent with
the fact that most public retirement plans are funded, but assets usually fall short of full
funding (Munnell et al 2008).
Third, mandatory funding would increase the cost of DB plans, in absolute terms and
relative to DC plans. Regulations that require excessive funding are therefore costly and

35

damaging to DB plans. In the private sector, DB plans have largely vanished in the postERISA period of increasingly stringent funding rules. One must wonder if public sector DB
plans await the same fate. 23 The demise of DB pensions would be socially costly because DB
pensions have important efficiency advantages over defined contribution plans.

References

Alesina, Alberto, and Roberto Perotti, 1995, The Political Economy of Budget Deficits, IMF
Staff Papers 42, 1-31.
Bader, Lawrence N., and Jeremy Gold. 2007. The Case Against Stock in Public Pension
Funds. Financial Analysts Journal, 63(1): 55–62.
Baxter, Marianne, and Urban Jermann, 1997, The International Diversification Puzzle is
Worse Than You Think, American Economic Review 87, 170-180.
Barro, Robert and Jose Ursua, 2009, Stock-Market Crashes and Depressions, working paper,
Harvard University.
Bohn, Henning, 1999, Should the Social Security Trust Fund Hold Equities? An
Intergenerational Welfare Analysis, Review of Economic Dynamics 2, 666-697.
____, 2009, Intergenerational Risk Sharing and Fiscal Policy, Journal of Monetary Economics
56, 805–816.
____, 2010, Private versus public risk sharing: Should governments provide reinsurance?
UCSB, available at: http://econ.uscb.edu/~bohn.
Brown, Jeffrey, and David Wilcox, 2009, Discounting State and Local Pension Liabilities,
American Economic Review, 99:2, 538-542.
Bulow, Jeremy, 1982, What are Corporate Pension Liabilities? The Quarterly Journal of
Economics 97:3, 435-452.
Constantinides, George, John B. Donaldson, and Rajnish Mehra, 2002, Junior Can't Borrow:
A New Perspective on the Equity Premium Puzzle, The Quarterly Journal of Economics
117: 1, 269-296
D’Arcy, Stephen P., James H. Dulebohn, and Pyungsuk Oh. 1999. Optimal Funding of State
Employee Pension Systems. Journal of Risk and Insurance, 66(3): 345–80.
Epple, Dennis, and Katherine Schipper. 1981. Municipal Pension Funding: A Theory and
Some Evidence. Public Choice, 37(1): 179–87.
23 Recently, pension fund losses triggered by the financial crisis have led to political demands that public pensions be

operated so taxpayers face absolutely no risk of future shortfalls. The required funding would be far in excess of expected
obligations and could be prohibitively costly.

36

Friedberg, Leora, 2010, Labor Market Aspects of State and Local Retirement Plans: A
Review of Evidence and a Blueprint for Future Research, mimeo, University of Virginia.
Lo, Andrew, 2008, Hedge Funds, Princeton: Princeton Univ. Press.
Lucas, Deborah, and Stephen Zeldes, 2009. How should pension funds invest? American
Economic Review, 99:2, 527-532.
Mehra, Rajnish, and Edward Prescott, 1985, The Equity Premium: A Puzzle. Journal of
Monetary Economics 15: 2, 145-161.
Munnell, Alicia, Kelly Haverstick, Steven Sass, and Jean-Pierre Aubry, 2008. The Miracle of
Funding by State and Local Pension Plans, Center for Retirement Research, Boston
College.
_____, Jean-Pierre Aubry, and Laura Quinby, 2010. The Funding of State and Local Pension
Plan: 2009-2013, Center for Retirement Research, Boston College.
Novy-Marx, Robert and Joshua D. Rauh, 2009. The Liabilities and Risks of State-Sponsored
Pension Plans, Journal of Economic Perspectives 23: 4, 191–210.
Peng, Jun, 2009. State and Local Pension Fund Management, Boca Raton: Taylor&Francis.
Persson, Torsten, and Guido Tabellini, 2000, Political Economics, MIT Press.

37

Table 1: What Percentages of U.S. Families are Borrowers?

Percentage of Families who hold
Generation

Age

(in Model)

Bracket

Type of Debt:
Any Debt
Mortgage

Installment
Loan

Credit card

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

<35

83.5%

37.3%

65.2%

48.5%

35-44

86.2%

59.5%

56.2%

51.7%

45-54

86.8%

65.5%

51.9%

53.6%

55-64

81.8%

55.3%

44.6%

49.9%

65-74

65.5%

42.9%

26.1%

37.0%

≥75

31.4%

13.9%

7.0%

18.8%

Prime vs. TB

Fixed 30y vs

Car loan vs

Av. Card vs TB

3mo

Tr.10yr

Tr.3yr

3mo

Current (July 2010)

3.1%

1.7%

4.9%

14.2%

Average 1990-2009

3.2%

1.7%

NA

NA

Young

Middle

Old

Memo: Interest Rate Spreads over Treasuries

Legend: Bold = majority. Italics = minority.
Sources: Percentage of families’ data from Survey of Consumer Finances 2007. Mortgage refers to
mortgages secured by primary residence. Rate spread averages are own calculations based on FRB
release H.15. Current spreads from the Wall Street Journal for July 9, 2010. Prime vs. TB 3mo =
Prime rate minus 3-month Treasury bill rate. Fixed 30y vs Tr.10yr = 30-year fixed rate mortgage rate
minus 10-year Treasury rate. Car loan vs Tr.3yr = Average rate on 36 month car loans minus 3-year
Treasury rate (Per SCF, car loans are the most common installment loans). Av. Card vs TB 3mo =
Average rate on credit cards minus 3-month Treasury bill rate.

38

Table 2: Funding as collateral against legal ambiguity or default
(a) Maximum probability of enforcement problems so ZERO funding is optimal
Funding cost
Borrowing cost
Cost factor
Pension
Risk
Dependence aversion
25%
2
25%
3
25%
4
50%
2
50%
3
50%
4
75%
2
75%
3
75%
4

Annual
Annual
20-year
Risk
factor u'
0.8
1.4
2.2
3.0
7.0
15.0
15.0
63.0
255.0

0.25%
0.75%
0.224
(1)

0.5%
1.5%
0.505
(2)

1.0%
3.0%
1.316
(3)

28.8%
16.3%
10.4%
7.5%
3.2%
1.5%
1.5%
0.4%
0.1%

64.9%
36.8%
23.4%
16.8%
7.2%
3.4%
3.4%
0.8%
0.2%

(never)
96.0%
60.9%
43.9%
18.8%
8.8%
8.8%
2.1%
0.5%

(b) Optimal funding ratios for given probabilities of enforcement problems
Default Probability:
Funding cost
Borrowing cost
Optimal u' = Cost/Default
Pension
Risk
Dependence
aversion
25%
2
25%
4
25%
10
50%
2
50%
4
50%
10
75%
2
75%
4
75%
10

5%
0.25%
0.75%
4.477
(1)

10%
0.25%
0.75%
2.239
(2)

25%
0.25%
0.75%
0.895
(3)

0
0
37%
0
31%
69%
24%
54%
79%

0
0
56%
11%
49%
78%
41%
66%
85%

0
41%
75%
45%
70%
88%
64%
80%
92%

39

