                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    WAGES IN THE FEDERAL AND
                       PRIVATE SECTORS



                        Steven F. Venti



                     Working Paper No. i61i




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                      Cambridge, MA 02138
                            June 1985




Prepared for the NBER Conference on Public Sector Payrolls, held
November 15—17, 1984 in Williamsburg, Virginia. Useful comments were
provided by Tom Barthold, Alan Gustman, Jane Mather, Sharon Smith, and
conference participants. Partial  support from the Faculty Committee on
Research at Dartmouth College is gratefully acknowledged. The research
reported here is part of the NBER'S research program in Labor Studies
and project in Government Budget. Any opinions expressed are those of
the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                           NBER Working Paper #1641
                                           June 1985




                       Wages in the Federal and
                            Private Sectors



                                ABSTRACT




     This study addresses the legal principle of "comparability" that ties

federal sector wages to wages in the private sector. We first examine

comparability by determining if workers with similar observed and unobserved

characteristics receive the same wages in each sector. Estimates based on data

from the 1982 CPS indicate males may have a slight wage advantage in the federal

sector. Female workers earn substantially more in the federal sector than in

the private sector. We then develop a choice—theoretic approach to the issue of

comparability by applying a simple supply argument: a cost-minimizing federal

employer would pay wages no higher than necessary to attract employees and

eliminate queues for federal jobs. If the market pays equalizing differences

for unique attributes of each sector, then this approach is not consistent with

wage equality between the sectors. A model jointly determining sectoral

attachment and wage offers is estimated by maximum likelihood. Results suggest

the elimination of queues will require substantial wage reductions for both male

and female federal employees.



                                           Steven F. Venti
                                           Department of Economics
                                           Dartmouth College
                                           Hanover, NH 03755
                                       —2—


 I.   Introduction and Overview

      Pay comparability between the public and private sectors is supported by

both equity and efficiency arguments. Equity considerations dictate a worker do

no better or worse in the public sector than in the private sector. Efficiency

considerations imply the federal sector pay no more than is necessary to attract

an adequate supply of employees. Equal pay, it is presumed, will lead to "fair"

competition for workers between the public and private sectors.

      Several previous studies have attempted to determine if equal pay in the

public sector has been attained. They have employed wage regressions to adjust

observed differentials for observed quality and productivity differences among

workers. Inability to "explain" pay differences by measured characteristics is

taken to be evidence that equal pay is not the rule. Unexplained or residual

differences in pay are interpreted as quasi-rents to employment in the higher

paying sector.

      The present analysis addresses two alternative interpretations of the

"unexplained" difference between public and private wages. The first is

unobserved differences in the productivity of workers in each sector. Despite

the availability of large samples and detailed information in recent microdata

files, we can never fully capture all worker specific differences. If workers

are sorted between sectors on the basis of these unobserved factors the

unexplained component of wage regressions may be more properly interpreted as

individual differences rather than quasi-rents. One goal of the present

analysis is to extend the wage regression approach to adjust for the effects of

observed and unobserved productivity related personal characteristics.

      The second alternative interpretation of the unexplained difference between

public and private sector wages is equalizing (or compensating) wage differences

for nonpecuniary job attributes. Workers may perceive fundamental differences

between the public and private sectors. Distinguishing features of each sector,
                     Wages in the Federal and Private Sectors



     The legal principle of "comparability" has formally guided federal

white-collar wage policy for the last 20 years. The legislation requires

"federal pay rates be comparable with private enterprise pay rates for the same

levels of work."' The principle has been interpreted and enforced to equalize

wages between the federal and private sectors. Recent evidence suggests this

objective has not been attained. Seminal work by Smith (1976, 1977, 1981) and

Quinn (1979) indicates federal workers may be "overpaid" relative to their

private sector counterparts by as much as 15 to 20 percent.

     This paper makes two additional contributions to the comparability debate.

The first is another attempt to determine if federal and private sector wages

are "equal" as mandated by current federal wage guidelines. Since individual

productivity differences are valid reasons for pay differences between sectors,

we extend the approach of Smith and Quinn to control for the effects of both

observed and unobserved worker quality in order to isolate residual wage

inequality between sectors.

     The second contribution is an attempt to motivate a more choice-theoretic

treatment of public-private wage differences. This approach is based on a

simple supply interpretation of wage "comparability": as a cost-minimizing

employer the public sector would set wages just high enough to attract the

required work force. This interpretation appears to be the original motivation

for comparability legislation. The approach suggests that if there exist

equalizing differences in pay for nonpecuniary job attributes of each sector, a

policy of equal wages is inappropriate. To resolve the issue of a "comparable"

wage we develop and estimate a model of sectoral job attachment to identify the

wage differential consistent with this interpretation of comparability.
                                      —4—


determine whether the worker will be employed in the government sector. More

important, identification of the separate decisions permits a test for the

existence of queues for federal jobs by revealing excess desired demand for

government jobs at a given relative public-private wage.   A related advantage of

directly specifying the sectoral attachment mechanism is that it can be

incorporated into the wage regression method to adjust observed differentials

for both observed and unobserved productivity characteristics.

     Before preceeding one shortcoming of the model deserves mention. This

study focuses only on the wage component of pecuniary compensation. The

principle of comparability has only recently been applied to nonwage

compensation (Carow (1981)). Although the model does deal with nonwage job

attributes, the analysis is geared to those attributes, unlike fringe benefits,

that cannot be manipulated by employers. Of course the existence of positive

public—private wage differentials would be of less consequence if offset by

other forms of pecuniary compensation such as fringe benefits. However, there is

ample evidence this is not the case (Quinn (1979, 1982a, 1982b), Bellante and

Long (1981)). These studies suggest federal-private wage differentials may

understate total compensation differentials.

     The results suggest wage equality between similar workers in the federal

and private sectors was not achieved in 1982. After adjusting for both observed

and unobserved productivity characteristics we find the federal wage structure

exceeds the private sector wage structure by about 4 percent for males and 22

percent for females. We also attempt to estimate the wage differential that

eliminates implicit queues for federal sector jobs. For the marginal worker this

is the wage differential that equalizes the attractiveness of total compensation

(wage and nonwage) packages offered by each sector. The estimates suggest

elimination of queues would be achieved by reducing federal wages for males

about 16 percent and federal wages for females by about 42 percent.
                                      -3-


which may be viewed either favorably or unfavorably by workers, include

stability of employment, opportunity for internal promotion, unique nature of

public service, pace of work, the bureaucratic work environment, etc.     If the

"return" to a job is viewed as a package containing both wage and nonwage

components, then part of any public-private wage difference may be an equalizing

difference for the nonwage job attributes. If workers trade off wages for these

job attributes a policy of "equal wages" between sectors may lead to a federal

wage scale that neither equalizes overall "returns" to workers in each sector

nor elicits the appropriate supply response.

     If wage differences between sectors are, in part, equalizing differences,

then how can one determine if the federal sector "overpays"? Unlike the problem

of unobserved productivity, the effects of equalizing differences cannot easily

be dealt with in a wage regression framework. In particular, the conventional

approach of standardizing wages for the effects of noriwage job attributes cannot

be applied because some of the fundamental differences between the federal and

private sectors (e.g. serving the public) cannot be easily measured.2 The

alternative approach adopted here is to judge whether the government "overpays"

based on implicit queues for public sector jobs. If the difference between

public and private wage offers exceeds the equalizing difference in pay

necessary to offset the difference between noriwage job aspects, then more

individuals will desire government employment than there are public sector jobs.

The wage differential that "just" eliminates the queue is, in a simply supply

sense, the "comparable" wage differential.

     The present analysis formulates and estimates a model of sectoral

attachment at the individual level that permits rough calculation of the length

of implicit queues for federal sector jobs. We identify determinants of worker

preferences for federal sector employment and determinants of federal sector

hiring choices. The separate decisions of employee and employer together
                                          —5—


      Section 2 briefly outlines the objectives of comparability legislation and

the pay setting mechanism in the federal government. The following section

briefly reviews the wage regression approach and provides the motivation for the

empirical work that follows. Section 4 lays out the employer-employee matching

model that is central to our approach, and Section 5 discusses econometric

issues. The description of data sources and presentation of results are

contained in Sections 6 and 7 respectively. The findings are summarized in the

final section.




2.    Setting Pay in the Federal Sector

      The federal government employs several different systems to determine pay.

Slightly under one half of all federal civilian employees (mostly white collar)

are classified under the General Service (GS) pay schedule. Another fifth

(mostly blue collar) fall under the Federal Wage System (FWS). Remaining

workers are covered by the Postal Service Schedule or one of several smaller pay

plans for other agencies.

      Each    of the major federal pay systems is linked to private sector rates of
pay. Reasons for doing so are set forth in the Federal Salary Reform Act of
1962 which established the comparability principle for workers covered by the

GS:


              "Adoption of the principle of comparability will insure
             equity for the federal employee with his equals
             throughout the national economy - enable the government
             to compete fairly with private firms for qualified
             personnel — and provide at last a logical and factual
             standard for setting Federal Salaries." (reprinted in
             President's Panel (1976), p. 8)

      Having set this objective, an elaborate mechanism was established to

annually     adjust federal pay to private pay rates. In March of each year the
Bureau of Labor Statistics undertakes a national white collar salary survey.
                                      —6-


This information is used to assign rates of pay to jobs in the public sector

such that federal pay rates are comparable to "private enterprise pay rates for

the same levels of work."3 A number of factors interfere with pursuit of this

objective. First, it is often difficult to compare jobs in the public sector

with jobs in the private sector (air traffic controllers, judges, etc.). Second,

there are a number of technical problems with the BLS survey that may make the

private sector comparison group a biased sample of all private sector workers.4

Finally, in nine of the past 13 years, and not since 1976, have the pay raises

suggested by the technical analyses been fully accepted by the executive and

legislative branches. As a consequence there is good reason to suspect the

comparability process may have strayed from its objective.

     Although in principle federal wage schedules assign rates of pay to jobs

not individuals, application of the system provides some flexibility to tailor

compensation to fit individuals. To attract or retain workers, while remaining

within the confines of the GS or FWS, federal employers can reclassify jobs

upward (grade creep), speed up promotions, lower credentials for jobs, or give

unduely large credit to previous work experience. In addition, upper level

managers are eligible for merit pay bonuses. Borjas (1980) present some

evidence on wage variation within the federal sector.




3.   The Wage Regression Approach

     The wage regression approach used by both Smith and Quinn, has previously

been applied to race and sex differentials. An important distinction between

these applications and the present application is that sectoral attachment,

unlike race and sex, is a "choice" variable. The method compares earnings or

wages between similar workers in each sector. It poses the hypothetical

question: "What would a person with some given set of observed characteristics
                                      —7-



(education, sex, race, etc.) earn in each sector?" Unexplained or residual

differences in pay between sectors are interpreted as quasi-rents to employment

in the higher paying sector.

     A serious empirical problem arises because choices not taken are not

observed. Associated with each worker is a public sector wage or a private

sector wage, but never both. The wage a private sector worker would earn if he

were to obtain a public sector job is not observed, nor is the wage a government

worker would earn in a private sector job. Direct wage comparisons are

impossible. The best one can do is somehow impute an alternative wage for each

worker. Inevitably this requires basing the analysis on workers employed in one

sector or the other.

     Smith and Quinn perform these imputations using the results of OLS wage

equations fitted to each sector. Parameter estimates based on employed private

sector workers are used to predict what "public sector workers would earn in the

private sector."5 The portion of the wage differential that cannot be explained

by differences in measured characteristics between workers in each sector is

interpreted as the extent of overpayment: a quasi-rent to employment in the

higher paying sector.

     Such an interpretation, however, hinges on two crucial assumptions. First,

the disturbances in each wage equation are classically behaved. This assumption

implies that given observed personal characteristics, workers are randomly

distributed across sectors. Yet this restriction may be inconsistent with even

the simplest models of employee and employer behavior which suggest sectoral

attachment is a choice variable. Each employment match is the end result of a

search process in which employees attempt to choose the job offering the

greatest net advantage and employers try to obtain labor at the lowest cost.

Many, if not most, of the factors involved in these choices (worker and employer

preferences, job attributes, worker quality, etc.) are measured only
                                       -8-



imperfectly. If the matching process is effective we expect, say, a worker with

unobserved skills valued most in one sector to be observed working in that

sector. Thus self (or firm) selected samples, which imply different unobserved

productivity characteristics of workers in each sector, may provide an

alternative explanation of residual wage differences predicted by the wage

regression technique.

     The second assumption crucial to the Smith-Quinn interpretation is that pay

oifferentials do not represent equalizing differences for nonpecuniary job

attributes of each sector. If workers view the federal and private sectors as

offering fundamentally different quantities of important nonwage job attributes,

then workers will, in general, not face the same wage offers from each sector.

The worker side of an employer-employee match suggests workers desire employment

in the sector offering the most advantageous package of job attributes and

wages.   For some workers higher public sector wages may not be enough to offset

dissatisfaction with nonwage aspects of public sector jobs. Other workers may

view public sector jobs more favorably.

     In a competitive labor market distributions of preferences across workers

and nonwage attributes across jobs together determine the market tradeoff

between coniponentsof the total (pecuniary and nonpecuniary) compensation

package.6 The presumption of "equilibrium" that permits interpretation of

market tradeoffs as equalizing differences in pay is open to question in the

public sector. Thus without the "equilibrum" assumption it is difficult to

distinguish equalizing differences from noncompetitive quasi—rents.

     The above arguments suggest wage differences between the public and private

sectors can be decomposed into four "sources": a) observed productivity or skill

differences, b) unobserved productivity or skill differences, c) equalizing

differences in pay for nonpecuniary job attributes, and d) quasi—rents or
                                                -9-



overpayment by government employers. The Smith-Quinn application of the wage

regression approach is directed towards the distinction between a) and d), but

their framework can be modified to also consider b) and c). Let the (log) wage

offer to the th individual by the jth sector (federal or private) be given by:



(1)          W =         + If?   +   a3   +
                                                      j=f,p

where Z is a vector of individual productivity characteristics, and              and

are vectors of sector specific weights. The           represent   the value of

unobserved (to the analyst) productivity in each sector. Without loss of

generality they are scaled to have zero mean in the population. The

represent the market evaluation of nonwage job attributes in each sector and the

      are white noise.

        The two assumptions required to interpret the unexplained residual as a

quasi—rent can be more formally stated. Let S1 be a binary variable that takes

on a value of unity if the th individual is observed to be employed in the

federal sector and a value of zero otherwise. The assumption of no worker

sorting implies unobserved productivity characteristics are distributed randomly

across sectors:


             E(/S1=1) = E(uIS1=O)             = 0
(2)                                                     j=f,p



The assumption of no equalizing differences in pay implies:


(3)          E(a) = E(a)


        If both of these assumptions are satisfied then separate wage regressions

estimated on subsamples of public and private sector workers will yield
                                           —10—


consistent estimates of            and &.         These parameter estimates can be used to

decompose the observed wage differential into "explained" and "unexplained"

components. This decomposition is generally evaluated at the sample means

(indicated by bars):7


(4)       w =         - wP   =             - )'   +
                                                      5f - p'7.
The first term of the decomposition measures the part of the gross differential

attributable to sectoral differences in the productivity characteristics of

workers. The second term measures the quasi-rent to sectoral attachment.

      We consider next the effect of relaxing assumptions (2) and (3) on the

interpretation of the decomposition in (4). First, if workers are sorted

between sectors on the basis of unobserved productivity characteristics,

assumption (2) will be violated. Empirical disturbances for the wage functions

of observed workers in each sector (the estimation subsamples) will include

nonrandomly selected samples from the population distributions of 1.i and             31P.


For workers employed in the public sector expected wages are:



              f                        f          f
           E(wis.=1)
              1   1
                     =           Z6
                                 —1—
                                            ÷   E(ji/S=1),
                                                  1   1




and for workers in the private sector:


          E(wIs=O) = ZI6IJ         +       E(i.x?/S.=0)




      Wage regressions based on samples of observed workers may be misspecified

due to an omitted variable measuring the expected effect of unobserved

productivity characteristics given sectoral choice.8 Estimated ,5J may be

biased. In the context of the wage decomposition discussed above the effects

of omitted productivity will be captured by the unexplained component
                                         —11—



        -
            P).       Unobserved productivity differences between workers in

each sector may account for what previously appeared to be quasi-rents. Thus if

assumption (2) does not hold consistent estimates of J can only be obtained

by jointly considering the wage and sector choice (S1=O,1) functions.

       A more difficult problem to deal with is the presence of unmeasured job

 attributes. The aJ in equation (1) represent market tradeoffs between wage

offers and nonpecuniary job attributes in each sector.9 Ignoring complications

due to unobserved productivity, violation of the "no equalizing differences"

assumption (3) yields a wage decomposition:



            =     -      = (f    -           ÷ (         -         +   (a ar).
                                                                         -




       The part of the gross differential not explained by differences in

productive characteristics is comprised of "overpayment" of (1 -                               'Z   and

the market value of nonwage job attributes (a - aP).                         The coefficients on

the intercepts in the wage regression model will capture                           -
                                                                                       ar),   but because

the difference in intercepts depends on the scaling and measurement of the Z

variables, one cannot retrieve                  -
                                                    a)       (see Jones (1983)). Thus equalizing

differences may also account for what previously appeared to be quasi—rents to

sectoral attachment.

      The troublesome effects of unobserved productivity characteristics (ii) and

equalizing differences (aJ) both arise from the sorting of workers between

sectors. In the unobserved productivity case, workers end up in the sector

yielding the greatest return to unobserved skills, all else constant. In the

equalizing differences case workers choose the sector where, say, they "spend"

the least for desirable job attributes. However the two effects are quite

different because payment to the                    is worker—specific, but payment of a
                              -12-


determined at the market level, is not worker-specific. As a result, the a3

will be independent of sectoral choice at the individual level. Unlike the

troublesome effects of unobserved productivity, joint consideration of

individual sectoral choice and wage offers will not resolve the problem. In the

context of the wage regression approach to differentials, there is no easy way

to separate the effects of equalizing differences from quasi-rents.




4.   Queues and the Determination of Federal Employment

     The preceeding section suggests the method of wage decomposition often

employed to analyze wage differentials may fail to disentangle quasi-rents to

employment in the government sector from the effects of either unobserved

productivity characteristics or equalizing differences in pay. We consider an

alternative approach to this problem. The approach is motivated by the simple

supply argument that appears to be the original objective of comparability

legislation: a cost—minimizing federal employer would set wages no higher than

necessary to attract the required work force. If wages are above this level the

government "overpays". Workers seeking quasi-rents to government employment

will queue up for federal jobs.

     Evidence of queues is our indicator of overpayment. As a practical matter

the length and composition of these queues will rarely be observed. It is

likely that many workers who desire federal jobs at current relative wages are

employed in the private sector and never formally seek employment. To determine

whether the federal government overpays, we need to identify these workers.

     In the absence of direct observation of worker preferences for federal

sector employment we develop below a simple model of the "matching" or sorting

process between workers and employers. The model is used to determine the

length and composition of queues. An additional advantage in that the selection
                                        -13-



mechanism central to this model enables us to adjust wage regressions for the

biasing effects of unobserved productivity characteristics.

     The model contains two sectors (public and private) and many workers. To

focus attention on the fundamental differences between sectors (job security,

unique nature of public service, bureaucratic work environment, etc.) we assume

all employers within each sector are homogeneous. According to our

characterization, certain nonwage job attributes are intrinsic to the government

in its capacity as employer. These attributes are thus considered fixed —

neither   sector can provide the unique attributes of the other sector at any

cost. It follows that employers in each sector are primarily concerned with

wage offers (given the market value of job attributes) rather than manipulating

packages of wages and job attributes.

     Unlike employers, who are of only two types, workers have heterogeneous

tastes and preferences. Associated with each sector is a wage structure that

relates the wage offered each worker to the worker1s bundle of productivity

characteristics. We assume all workers are aware of the best wage offers they

could obtain in each sector. We focus on two choices; one by employees and one

by employers.

     First, at the prevailing public-private relative wage workers decide

whether they prefer public or private sector employment. At the same time

federal employers, perhaps anticipating queues for jobs, decide how they will

select workers from the pool of potential employees demanding jobs. Given

exogenous (legislated) levels of both employment and the federal wage scale,

employers adopt a set of hiring standards to ration workers from the queue.'°

     A worker will be employed in a particular sector if the worker both desires

employment in that sector and the sector chooses to hire the worker. In

addition, some workers may be either unemployed or out of the labor force.      In


the present analysis we deal only with employed persons. Moreover, we assume
                                            —14—


all workers can obtain a job in the private sector if needed, although many of

these workers may prefer employment in the public sector. This assumption is

consistent with the presumption of implicit queues for government jobs, that is,

many private sector workers may prefer federal sector jobs at current relative

wages between the sectors.

     We call the sector preference decision of workers the "job acceptance"

decision because it implicitly answers the hypothetical question: "Would the

individual accept a federal sector job if offered (at some specified relative

wage)?" We denote the employer decision to ration employment the "job offer"

decision because it implicitly answers the hypothetical question: "Would the

federal sector offer this individual a job if the individual applied?" The job

acceptance decision is based on a utility comparison between packages of wages

and nonwage job attributes offered by each sector. The job offer decision

follows from cost minimizing behavior by employers. In particular, the federal

sector attempts to select those workers from the queue (identified by

productivity characteristics) that are most productive given the wage the

federal sector must offer.

     It is also important to recognize the hiring standards employed by the

federal sector at a point in time are derived from a single point on the public

sector demand curve for labor. At this point the wage is above the

"competitive" level and queues result. The job offer decision summarizes how

workers are chosen from the queues. At other points on the public sector demand

curve -   representing    say, alternative budgets specifying different wage and

employment levels -      different   hiring standards will be in effect.

     This rather narrow formulation of the job offer decision is the consequence

of not modelling the general equilibrium determination of public and private

sector wages at the macro level. Thus one must bear in mind the hiring

standards we specify may be useful predictions of the likelihood of choosing a
                                                   —15-



marginal worker from the queue, but the same hiring standards would be

inappropriate for nonmarginal changes in any of the factors that affect the

length of the queue."

      More formally we consider first the worker, or job acceptance side of the

employment match. For each individual the decision to seek work in a particular

sector will depend on the worker's evaluation of nonwage job attributes offered

hnd on the potential wage that could be earned in each sector. The federal

sector is fundamentally different from the private sector due to certain nonwage

aspects of the job. Workers with different characteristics may vary in their

evaluation of the nonwage aspects of each sector. These heterogeneous

preferences may, in part, be represented by worker characteristics X. Worker

choice between sectors also depends on relative wages. We denote the log wage

differential between sectors as                        where    and w are the log wage offers

individual i would receive should the individual obtain employment in the

federal (f) or private (p) sectors. We represent worker preference or desire

for employment in each sector by h1! and h where:'2



           hf =   X
                      If
                      $    +f (wf   - wp
                                         )    + ef

(5)

           hP = X'8P +     a(w      -
                                         w)   +   e.
The Bi indicate the relationship between measured characteristics and tastes for

work in each sector. The                measure the sensitivity of worker sectoral choice

to the relative wage differential. Thus the s and a's together characterize

each individual's evaluation of job packages offered by each sector. The e3

represent unobserved worker heterogeneity.

      From equation (5) it follows that an individual will desire to work in the

federal sector if h -       h >0.        Let P1 =      h-h     be:
                                 —16—




           p1 =       - P)   +
                                 (a a)(w - w)
                                    -             +   e e)
                                                       -



(6)
              =      + c1(wf — w)       ÷
                                            e1.



If sectoral attachment was purely a supply decision then this equation would

determine sectoral choice. However the proportion of workers desiring federal

employment may exceed the number of jobs available in the government sector.

For example, a private sector worker may be qualified for and desire a Post

Office job at some favorable (to the worker) w-wP, yet the worker can do no

more than queue up for the job.

      To determine observed sectoral attachment we need to bring in the employer

or job offer side of each match. At issue are the standards used by the federal

sector to ration the queue of potential employees. We assume the objective of

the federal sector is to maximize worker productivity per dollar spent on labor

input. Towards this end we define a job offer function that evaluates each

potential employee by productivity characteristics (X2) and the absolute cost

      Let P2 be an index of the desirability of a worker to the federal

government:


(7)        P2 =XB
               -2-2
                    ÷w
                     2
                       +e,
                         2


      The matching process that generates observed sectoral attachment can now be

made more explicit. Since neither P1 nor P2 are directly observed we can


arbitrarily scale each such that P>O indicates a worker will accept a public

sector job (j=1) or the government will hire the worker (j=2) and PO indicates

the workers does not desire a public sector job (j=1) or will not be hired

(j=2). Then, a worker is employed in the federal sector with probability:
                                 —17—




(8)        P* =
                  Prob[P1>O, P2>O].


      We emphasize that the functions P1(') and P2(.) are pppulation

relationships in the above model. All workers have relative preferences for

federal versus private sector work and the public sector can potentially

evaluate all workers. P1 tells us which workers implicitly enter the queue and

P2 indicates which individuals will be chosen.13 Some workers that would be

acceptable to the federal government do not desire federal employment and thus

remain in the private sector. Similarly, many private sector workers may desire

employment in the federal sector but are never hired.   It is in this spirit that

we refer to P1(.) as the "job acceptance" decision (would the individual accept

a federal sector job if offered?) and P2(.) as the "job offer" decision (would

the federal sector hire an individual if that individual were to appear in the

queue?).




5.    Estimation Issues

      Equation (8) indicates an individual will be observed to be employed in the

federal sector with bivariate probability       The probability of observing an

individual to be employed in the private sector is 1-P. If both w and w are

known for each worker and e1 and e2 are distributed joint normal the parameters

of P1 and P2 can be estimated directly.14

      Poirier (1980) has shown that identification can be achieved through a

single exclusion restriction. The problem is one of choosing variables that

determine either the job acceptance or job offer decisions, but not both. As a

practical matter we feel there are several defensible restrictions we can

impose. However, rather than relying solely on exclusion restriction we also
                                     -18—


tap an additional source of identification by using information on prior

employment status of individuals.

        Let S1 and St indicate employment status in periods t-1 and t

respectively, where S=0 indicates private sector attachment and S=l indicates

federal sector attachment. Further identification is provided by assuming all

workers with federal sector jobs in period t-1 may, if they choose, remain

employed in the federal sector in period t, that is, all federal sector

separations are voluntary. Evidence for 1982, the year of our data, provides

support for this assumption. For example, Executive branch employment dropped

by over 113,000 in the first two years of the Reagan Administration. Over 90

percent of this reduction was achieved through normal processes of attrition

(and early retirement) rather than by reduction-in-force procedures

(separations, downgrades, or lateral reassignments).15

      Let ir1 be the probability of observing an individual with employment

pattern St_l=m and S=n. The above assumption implies the likelihood an

individual will be observed to make the {Sti=1, S=O} transition is the joint

probability of being offered a federal job in period t (P2>0), but not accepting

it (P1IJ):16


             10   =
(9)
                      Prob[P10,   P2>0]


For the individual known to make this transition other combinations of job

acceptance and offer decisions resulting in private employment ((P1>0, P20) and

(P10,             are assumed to occur with zero probability.

      The likelihoods of observing remaining transition patterns of employment

are unaffected by the assumption. We have:
                                                    —19—




               00 =
                         Prob[P10, P2>0] +                                   Prob[P1>0,
                                            P
                                       1        2


               01 =
                         Prob[P1>0, P2>0]


                       = Prob[P1>0, P2>0].


For workers in the federal sector in period t we cannot distinguish between

transitions (S_1=0, S=1} and {St_1=1, St=i}, so 0111 Wowever for

workers in the private sector in period t we can distinguish between those

employed in the government sector in the prior period (1110) and those not

employed in the private sector in the prior period (ir00).

       Both wage offers               and w enter each of the ir.                Up to this point we have

considered them known. Although individual workers may be aware of wage offers

in each sector, the observed data contain one or the other. We deal with this

problem by explicitly incorporating these wage offers in the model. To do so, a

slight reparameterization is useful. Let                       =           and     = Z'5P. Then

equations (1), (6), and (7) can be rewritten (omitting individual subscripts)

as:



           P1 =               +   a( -              E= p +         E



           i       =X'8
               2       -2-2       2        c2              2           2
(11)

                   =          +


           wp      = _'1 +


where.
                                                        -20-



                =                - £4)        +
                                                  e1



                =                +
           £2


                     f       +n
                                  f




           E4=Up                 +flP

The unidentified a are captured by coefficients on the intercept contained in

Z. To maintain full generality the reduced form disturbances are jointly

distributed with density f(E1, E2,

     We   are now able to derive the likelihood function of the sample. Using our

earlier classification scheme we can partition sample observations into, three

categories. These categories and the contribution of each to the likelihood

function of the sample are:


1)   All federal sector workers:


            o1 = 11               =
                                      Prob[P1>0, Pf 0,
                                                                   -
                                                                       f]
2)      Private sector workers with prior federal sector status:


                    =
                         Pr[P10,          P2>0, wP -   P]
3)      Private sector workers with no prior federal sector status:


            0O =         1   -
                                  Pr[P >0, P >0, wP -         P].
Since      and wP are never both observed for the same individual each of these

expressions is based on trivatiate density derived from f() by "integrating

out" either s3or .                      For   example, rr1°   is       based on the density:
                                                      -21-



                g(E1, 2' E4) = ff(•)dE3,
which enables us to calculate:
                          _r,*
                            1
                     10                          P - "P
                11
                          =f fg(E1,    s2,
                                             w       w



Remaining probabilities are based on similar expressions.

       Let n1, n2, n3 refer to the subsarnples of observations from the appropriate

categories. The natural log of the likelihood function of the sample is:



      L =      Z      log(ir1) +   E   log(ir10) +        Z    log(w00)
                                                          n3


where 1=0111 The model described by this likelihood function may be

considered an endogenous switching model with a bivariate regime classification

function.

      The joint density f(-) is assumed joint normal with mean vector zero and

covariance matrix with typical element                           Following the conventional probit

normalization we set 011=022=1. Because                         and       are never jointly observed,

034   is   not identified in this model. The parameter vector is thus:

           =
               {81,82,1,2,,6P,012,013,01402302403301
The likelihood function is maximized with respect to c                        using a modified scoring
algorithm proposed by Berndt, Hall, Hall, and Hausman (1974).




6.    Data

      The primary data source used for estimation is the Current Population

Survey (CPS) for the second quarter (April, May, June) of 1982. This source has

several advantages over other surveys. Sampling procedures based on rotation
                                     —22-


groups make it possible to match respondents in adjacent years. This permits

creation of the large longitudinal file we need to classify observations by

previous period employment status.17 Another advantage over other longitudinal

data files ( NLS, PSID) is the CPS provides detailed information on the level

(federal, state, or local) of government.18

     The data used include all respondents who worked in either the federal or

private sectors in 1981 and also worked in either the federal or private sectors

in 1982. Any individual that did not work in either year, or worked in state or

local government in either year is excluded. Although we recognize these

exclusion restrictions are not exogenous, the costs of taking explicit account

of them are prohibitive.

     The sample contains 6064 men and 4561 women. Summary statistics for these

data are contained in Table 1. Definitions of most variables are obvious. The

dependent variable is the natural log of the hourly wage rate calculated by

dividing usual weekly earnings by usual hours worked per week. Region variables

are based on census definitions and unemployment rates are at the state level.

The variable "Percent Federal Employment" is an index of the federal presence in

each state obtained by dividing federal civilian employment by total employment

in each state. Finally, the variable "Years of Potential Experience" is

calculated as age minus schooling minus five.

     One potentially important variable not included in our analysis is union

status. This exclusion may be defended on grounds that it is preferable to let

union effects implicitly enter the model in reduced form rather than deal

directly with the endogeneity of union status. In any event, the absence of

information on collective bargaining prohibited the analysis of union status.'9
                                  -23-


 7.     Results

        7.A Parameter Estimates

        Equation (6) suggests an individual's desire for employment in the public

 sector will depend on relative wage offers (wt- w). According to this

 formulation a percentage increase in w will have the same effect as a

percentage decrease of the same percentage magnitude in w. However, an

empirical problem arises because of the omission of relevant information on

pensions and other nonwage forms of pecuniary compensation. Theory suggests an

inverse relationship between wages and fringes in the compensation package.

This prediction has received little empirical support (see Smith an Ehrenberg

(1983)). Instead, evidence indicates the public sector (or high wage employers

in general) may offer workers both high wages and attractive fringes.20

Moreover, the pension component of the compensation package is often an

actuarial (frequently linear) function of wage payments. This suggests workers

will not be indifferent between changes in relative wages due to changes in

federal sector (high fringe) wages on the one hand and private sector wages (low

fringe) on the other. To allow for this possibility we generalize our empirical

formulation of the job acceptance decision to permit asymmetric responses to

public and private sectorwages:


(6')



       Parameter estimates for this version of the model are presented in Table 2

for males and Table 3 for females. The first two columns of each table present

results for the job acceptance (P1) and job offer (P2) equations. Remaining

columns contain estimated wage functions for the federal sector (wv) and private

sector (wP). Estimates of the        are presented at the bottom of each table.

       We first consider estimates for the job offer and acceptance decisions for

males. Since most of the individual parameters are not of primary interest we
                                                  —24—


will be brief. Higher federal sector wage offers increase the probability a

worker will desire to work in the public sector but decrease the likelihood the

worker will be hired. Worker preference for the public sector decreases with

the private sector wage offer. Comparison of 4 and                      suggests worker choice

is more sensitive to federal wages than to private sector wages. This

difference may, as the discussion above indicated, reflect more generous fringe

benefits in the federal sector.

      Other estimates reveal married or previously married individuals are more

likely to desire employment in the federal sector than never married

individuals. Nonwhites are less likely to desire government employment but more

likely to receive a public sector job offer. Workers in the South are both less

likely to want and less likely to be offered federal jobs. The coefficient on

the federal employment variable indicates federal presence in a state strongly

increases the likelihood of a federal job offer.

      We present the estimated wage functions for males in columns 3 and 4 of

Table 2. Most, parameters of the wage functions are precisely measured. The

estimated covariance parameters indicate wages and the matching process are not

independent. This suggests OLS estimates of sectoral wage functions may be

biased.      We make some comparisons with OLS to investigate the extent of this

bias in subsection 7.C.

      The parameter estimates indicate wage functions in the federal and private

sectors are slightly different in several respects. Nonwhites have a

(insignificant) wage advantage in the federal sector but a wage disadvantage in

the private sector. Federal wages appear to be lower outside of the South

(which includes Washington, D.C.) but private sector wages are higher in all

regions other than the South. The estimates indicate an additional year of

education adds 3.7 percent to wages in the federal sector and 4.5 percent in the

private sector (evaluated at means). An additional year of potential experience
                                —25—


adds about 1.1 percent to wages in each sector.

     For females the estimated ce's again have the expected signs. Most of the

other coefficients in the job offer, acceptance, and wage equations are of the

same sign and approximate magnitude as the coefficients for males. A notable

exception is the curious effect of education on the probability an individual

will be offered a public sector job. For both males and females an additional

year of education has the same effect on the job offer probability evaluated of

mean (12.6) years of schooling. However additional years of schooling beyond

the sample mean have much larger positive effects on the job offer probability

for men than for women. Indeed, for women the effect of an additional year of

schooling turns negative at slightly under 15 years of schooling.



     7.8 Direct Wage Comparisons

     The advantage of joint estimation of wage offer functions and the sectoral

choice mechanism in that the biasing effect of unobserved worker quality is

eliminated. As Section 3 argued, the resulting "unexplained" wage differences

may represent the combined effects of government payment of quasi-rents and

equalizing differences. Direct wage comparisons cannot distinguish between

these effects. However, "equal" wage structures is itself a current policy goal

so these wage comparisons indicate how this goal has been met.

     Before considering the estimates it is useful to clarify a problem of

interpretation of direct wage comparisons. "Equal" wage structures is taken to

mean a randomly chosen individual will face identical wage offers from each

sector =Q?).     This   definition of "equalt' wages implicitly takes a wage

function based on all private sector workers as the standard of comparison.

Whether this should be so is a policy issue we do not address here. Previous

analyses (Smith, Quinn) have used the average wage of all private sector workers

as the standard and, to compare our findings with theirs, we continue this
                                    —26—




tradition. However, one may argue the "correct" comparison group should include

state and local employees, or be limited to the unionized private sector, be

restricted to large private employers, or contain only white males. Indeed, the

puzzling question of why survey evidence used in federal wage policy (the PATC

Survey) suggests federal workers are "underpaid", yet estimates based on the CPS

samples indicate federal workers are "overpaid" may be the result of different

comparison groups (see Freeman (1984)).        In any event, the standard used in this

section is the wage function of a random sample of all private sector workers.

Our primary concern is the effect of observed and unobserved productivity

characteristics on sectoral wage differences.

     Predicted percentage wage differences between the federal and private

sectors are presented in Table 421 The first row gives mean differences for

each sex. In our sample males in the federal sector average 32.8 percent more

and females 38.7 percent more than their counterparts in the private sector.

The second row of Table 4 presents estimated federal—private differentials

"adjusted" for differences in observed productivity related characteristics of

workers in each sector. These estimates, based on the wage regression approach,

indicate almost two—thirds of the male gross differential can be attributed to

observed individual differences. The analogous figure for females is about 40

percent. Finally, parameter estimates from the model jointly estimating wage

functions and the sectoral choice mechanism (row 4) suggest the "unexplained"

wage difference is 4.2 percent for males and 22.1 percent for females.22

     It is interesting to compare these findings to the most recent published

results (using 1978 data )     of   Smith (1981). Employing the wage regression

technique she finds a wage advantage of 10 to 11 percent for males and 20 to 21

percent   for females. These figures are remarkably close to our reported OLS
results in row 2   of   Table 4.    However, an important   difference between these
                                —27—


findings and those of Smith is she specified her wage equations with 12

variables (mostly quadratic and product terms involving experience, education,

and marital status) not included in our specification. Row 3 of Table 4

presents the results of adding most of these same variables to our OLS wage

functions. The wage advantage increases slightly to 12.1 percent for males and

drops to 20.3 percent for females.

       The comparison between rows 2 and 3 suggests wage regression estimates of

the wage advantage may not be very sensitive to omitted variables. (many of the

variables included in row 3 but not in row 2 are highly significant.) Therefore

it is a bit surprising that the maximum likelihood (ML) correction for

unobservables further reduces the wage advantage for males. Although

computation costs prohibited inclusion of a variable list as exhaustive as

Smith's in our ML model, the OLS results suggest the addition of these variables

would probably have little effect. Thus observed wage differences appear to be

attributable to unobserved as well as observed productivity differences for

males, but for females the effect of unobserved characteristics is apparently

nil.




       7.C Simulated Probabilities and Queues

       If employers pay no equalizing differences for sectoral differences in

nonwage job attributes the above figures represent our best estimates of the

federal—private wage advantage. If this is not the case, we need an alternative

indicator of the "comparability" of wages. One such indicator is the length of

queues for federal sector jobs.

       Recall that neither the job acceptance nor the job offer decisions are

directly observed. We can use the parameter estimates of the model to simulate

these events. In Table 5 we present predicted marginal probabilities of job

acceptance and job offer. These predictions are obtained by calculating
                               -28-




 probabilities for each member of the sample and then averaging.

      The first entry in this table indicates the average predicted probability

of job acceptance of males in the sample was 0.18.23 Our interpretation is

that 18 percent of all sample men would accept a federal sector job if offered.

The analogous figure for females is a bit higher, about 29 percent. This

suggests that federal-private wage differentials are more attractive to women in

this sample.

     The job offer probabilities presented in the second row indicate 83 percent

of all males would be acceptable to federal employers, but only 67 percent of

females would be hired. This reflects the expected "reverse" sorting in the

matching process, that is, most measured personal characteristics have opposite

effects in the acceptance and offer decisions. In addition, the estimated

correlations between unobserved factors entering each decision are also negative

(-0.87 for males and -0.92 for females). Thus those individuals most likely to

desire a federal sector job are also least likely to be offered a federal

sector job. This pattern is most striking when the joint probability of being

offered a job and accepting a job (the probability of being employed in the

federal sector) is considered. If joining the queue (job acceptance) and being

chosen from the queue (job offer) were independent, the probability of observing

a worker in the federal sector would simply be the product of marginal

probabilities: 0.134 for males and 0.160 for females.24 However neither the

acceptance nor offer decisions are pure random behavior, so the predicted joint

probability based on the negative estimated correlation is 0.064 for males and

0.047 for females (row 3).

     These simulated probabilities provide useful new information about the

matching process. Yet they do not say much about whether wages are "comparable"

between sectors. We can attempt to answer this more difficult question by
                              -29-



noting that if the public-private wage differential observed in the sample

exceeds the equalizing difference that must be paid to attract workers to the

federal sector, then queues for federal sector jobs will result. If we ignore

worker quality and concentrate on numbers of workers we are able to obtain an

informal measure of the length of the queue by comparing the fraction of the

workforce desiring government employment (at sample wages) to the fraction that

is employed in the federal sector.

     This indicator of the length of the queue, calculated as

Pr(P1>O)/Pr(P1>O,P9>O) is presented in the last row of Table 5. This expression

is the inverse of the probability that a worker desiring a federal sector job

will be chosen from the implicit queue. Roughly three times as many men would

be willing to work at the sample wage differential as will be hired at that

differential. The analogous figure for women is double that of men.


     7.D. An Alternative Indicator of Comparability

     An alternative approach to comparability can be based on a simple supply

argument: a cost-minimizing federal employer would pay wages no higher than

necessary to attract the required workforce and eliminate the queues

described above. This approach has considerable theoretical appeal.    In


particular, the inability of the wage regression approach to distinguish between

payment of rents and payment of equalizing differences for job attributes is no

longer a problem because each individual's choice of sector is based on an

implicit valuation of both the wage and ronwage aspects of jobs.

    This supply principle can be made operational by using the parameter

estimates obtained in section 6 to simulate the employment effects of changes in

federal wages. To simplify matters we consider only policies that alter federal

wages by the same percentage amount for all individuals. Other policies that

alter the return to individual attributes or otherwise result in different
                                                    -30-


percentage changes across individuals are not considered. In the notation of

the wage offer functions discussed earlier, all changes in federal wages are

obtained by altering the intercept.

       Let be the proportion of male (or female) workers employed in the federal

sector. The probability of job acceptance can be rewritten (using equation

(6')) as:




(12)
              11
                   =   FIX   8   + afAf
                                     (w+k   '
                                                +   app
                                                      w1
                        —1i•—1     1' 1                 1 i•



where F[.] denotes the normal distribution function and the new term, k,

approximates a constant (across individuals) percentage change in the federal

wage offer.

       Given the parameter estimates we can use (12) to simulate the number of

persons desiring employment in the government sector for any change in federal

wage offers. In particular, the federal wage reduction that eliminates queues

given ty the k that satisfies 1/N                   P          =   Z. This   procedure yields values of
                                            i=1 ii
k of about minus 16 percent for males and minus 42 percent for females. This

suggests the federal government could continue to attract a workforce of current

size with substantially lower wages.

       Several important issues are raised by these figures. First, since the

simulation procedure fixes the level of employment but not labor "quality," one

consequence of lower federal wages may be deterioration of the quality of the

federal workforce. The severity of this problem depends on the relative

importance of the federal wage structure (wi) and hiring standards (P1) in

determining who enters and is chosen from queues. As an empirical matter the

"quality" effect has been minimized by considering only constant percentage

changes in wages. Apparently the number of individuals desiring employment in
                                     -31-



the federal sector is primarily a function of the wage level, and the 'quality"

(attributes) of individuals desiring federal employment is more strongly related

to the wage structure (the relative valuation of individual attributes by each

sector). A comparison of simulated workforces before and after the wage

reduction indicates the quality problem is not severe. For example, the 16

percent wage reduction for males will reduce the average level of education of

the male federal workforce from 13.9 years to 13.8 years. Comparable figures

based on the 42 percent wage reduction for women are 13.1 and 12.8. Levels of

work experience were slightly higher for the lOW wage federal workforce than for

the high wage workforce.

     Another issue is the particularly large response for women. Perhaps the

most likely explanation is our choice of a private sector comparison group (see

the discussion in Section 7.B). If the private sector is imperfect (unions,

discrimination, monopoly, etc.) the wage the government must offer to attract

workers will be affected. For instance, if there exists sex or race

discrimination in the private sector, the price the federal sector must pay for

its work force will be lower. Although payment of these lower wages may be cost

effective given the imperfections in the private sector, it may be legally or

politically inappropriate for the federal government to simply match (or

slightly exceed) discriminatory wages. Thus perhaps some of the apparent

government wage advantage, particularly for females, can be attribute to

imperfections in the private sector labor market. Our results may indicate the

private sector "underpays" certain groups of workers.

     Finally, two additional limitations of the model may also be relevant.

First, some of the assumptions required to calculate k are not likely to be

satisfied. In particular, we have implicitly assumed the demand curve for

public employees is perfectly inelastic: as relative wages change the "target"

employment level   remains fixed. Finally, we note once again that the role of
                                       -32-



pensions in the public sector may complicate our interpretation of relative wage

differences.




8.   Summary

     Our empirical effort is directed towards two goals. First, we seek to

determine if wage structures in the federal and private sectors have been

"equal ized by the federal comparability process. Our second goal is to develop

a more choice-theoretic approach to the issue of wage comparability. A

difficulty with previous work is that when markets do not clear, as is likely to

be the case for the public sector, the conventional wage regression approach to

comparability is unable to distinguish equalizing differences from quasi-rents.

Explicit modelling of worker and employer choices appears to be an appealing

alternative.

     With respect to the first goal, a comparison of 1982 wages for federal

workers and all private sector workers suggests wages were not equal. Although

much of the gross differential in average wages can be explained by differences

in observed and unobserved attributes of workers in each sector, federal sector

wage advantages of about 4 percent for males and 22 percent for females remained

unexplained.

     With respect to the second goal we formulate and estimate a model

permitting prediction of the wage differential that eliminates implicit queues

for federal sector jobs. The estimates suggest the elimination of queues will

require substantial reductions in federal wages for both sexes. Subject to

limitations detailed in 7, the simulations suggest the federal sector is able to

attract a workforce of current size and roughly current "quality0 by offering

average wages 16   percent lower for men and   42 percent lower for women.
                                 -33—



                                        Footnotes
     1
         Federal Salary Reform Act of 1962.

     2lhis is the standard method of estimating equalizing differences in the

private sector where observed wage differentials can be assumed to be

"equilibrium" differences. See Smith (1979), Brown (1980), and Duncan and

Holmiund (1983) for examples. Quinn (1979) makes some adjustments for

public-private differences in nonwage job attributes. See also Bellante and

Link (1981)

     3See President's Panel (1976), ch. 2. This is a brief description of GS

pay determination. FWS pay rates are set to be "in line with prevailing levels

for comparable work within a local wage area." Postal Service rates are set by

collective bargaining, although "On a standard of comparability to the

compensation and benefits paid for comparable levels of work in the private

sector of the economy."

     4See Smith (1977, 1982) and President's Panel (1976), Ch. 5. The most

important is the minimum establishment size which leads to oversampling of high

pay employers. Another problem is the lack of information on fringe benefits.

     5Alternatively, wage functions can be estimated for public sector employees

and the estimated coefficients can be used to predict what private sector

workers would earn in the public sector. See Smith (1977), p. 49-52.

     6See Smith (1979) or Rosen (1983).

     7We ignore the index number problem of choosing a base.

     8See, for example, Heckman (1979).

     9The aJ say nothing about individual preferences for wages versus job

attributes unless preferences are homogenous in the population or the particular

individual is at the margin between sectors.

     101n the short run we assume federal employers cannot use the wage

mechanism to shorten the queue. This seems to be an accurate description of pay
                                -34-


procedures for lower and middle level jobs, but it may be less valid for upper

level jobs.

     11A more elaborate and complete model specifying the mechanisms governing

wage adjustments at the macro level is beyond the scope of this paper.

     12We omit the individual subscript where no ambiguity will result.

          also indicates whether workers who do not enter the queue (P1O) would

be chosen were they to enter the queue. Thus P2 should not be interpreted as

conditional on being in the queue.

     14Empirical investigations of similar models in which wages enter in

reduced form are Abowd and Farber (1981) and Farber (1983).

     15See U.S. Office of Personnel Management (1983). The assumption is

similar to the "job rights" assumption of Abowd and Farber (1981).

     16Although period t-1 employment status is used to classify observations,

we do not condition on prior employment status. Thus all arguments in the

following probability expressions pertain to period t.

     17Only about 15 percent of the respondents can be matched across one year

(rotation groups four and eight). To obtain a large enough file we combined

three monthly surveys.

     18lnformation   on level of government has always been collected as part of
the CPS, but until 1979 this information was not available only   sproadically.

Availability of this information gives us a distinct advantage over some

previous efforts using the CPS to analyse federal-private differentials in which

only half of all public sector workers could be identified by industrial

classification.

     190ne third of our sample does have recorded union status. These are not

enough observations for a meaningful analysis. Both the rate of unionization

and the nature of unionization differ between the public and private sectors.
                                        -35—


Thus unions may offer an "explanation" for noncomparability of wages. See

Ehrenberg and Schwarz (forthcoming).

             particular, federal pension contributions measured as a proportion of

wages are several times greater than private sector contributions. See Leonard

(1983) and Smeeding (1983).

        21Percentage changes are calculated as (em_i) where m is the difference in

logs.

        22The last row of Table 4 is calculated as       =
                                                             1(1_P)   To obtain

the standard error of this estimate we first calculate var(-) =       E    from the

covariance matrix of parameters. The reported standard error is the square root

of X'ZX.

        23This probabilitiy is not conditional on a job offer. Also, all

probabilities are evaluated at the appropriate adjusted sample wage differences.

        24The joint probability is calculated for each member of the sample and

then averaged. In a heterogeneous population this joint probability will not

equal the product of the two average marginal probabilities.
                                    -36-


                                           References

 Abowd, 3. and H. Farber. 1982. Job Queues and the Union Status of Workers."

      Industrial and Labor Relations Review. 35: 354-367.

 Bellante, D. and A. Link. 1981. "Are Public Sector Workers More Risk Averse

      than Private Sector Workers". Industrial and Labor Relations Review.

      34: 408-412.

Bellante, D. and 3. Long. 1981. "The Political Economy of the Rent-Seeking

      Economy: The Case of PublicEmployees and Their Unions." Journal of

      Labor Research. 2: 1-14.

Berndt, E., B. Hall, R. Hall, and J. Hausman. 1974. "Estimation and Inference

      in Nonlinear Models." Annals of Social and Economic Measurement 4:

      653—665.

Borjas, G. 1980. Wage Policy in the Federal Bureaucracy. Washington D.C.:

     American Enterprise Institute.

Brown, C.    1980. "Equalizing Differences in the Labor Market." Quarterly

     Journal of Economics.         :113—134.

Carow, R. 1981. "Total Compensation Comparability in the Evolution of Federal

     Compensation Policy," in P. Mieszkowski and G. Peterson, ed., Public Sector

     Labor Markets. Washington, D.C.: Urban Institute.

Duncan, G. and B. Holmlund. 1983. "Was Adam Smith Right After All? Another

     Test of the Theory of Compensating Wage Differentials." Journal of Labor

     Economics.      1: 366—379.

Ehrenberg, R. and J. Schwarz. forthcoming. "Public Sector Labor Markets", in

     0. Ashenfelter and R. Layard, ed., Handbook of Labor Economics.

     North-Holland.

Farber, H.   1983. "The Determination of the Union Status of Workers".

     Economety-ica.    51: 1417—1437.
                                   —37—



Freeman, R. 1984. "How Do Public Sector Wages arid Employment Respond to

     Economic Conditions." presented at the NBER conference on Public Sector

     Payrolls, Williamsburg, VA, Nov. 15-17.

Heckman, J. 1979. "Sample Selection Bias as a Specification Error."

     Econometrica. 47: 153-161.

Jones, F. 1983. "On Decomposing the Wage Gap: A Critical Comment on Blinder's

     Method." Journal of Human Resources. 18: 126-130.

Leonard, H. 1983. "The Federal Civil Service Retirement System: An Analysis

     of its Financial Condition and Current Reform Proposals," presented at the

     NBER Conference on Pensions, Labor, and Individual Choice, Peurto Rico,

     March 23-26.

Poirier, 0.     1980. "Partial Observability in Bivariate Probit Models." Journal

     of Econometrics. 14: 209-217.

President's Panel on Federal Compensation. 1976. Staff Report. Washington

     D.C.: GPO.

Quinn, J. 1979. "Wage Differentials Among Older Workers in the Public Sector."

     Journal of Human Resources. 14: 41-62.

_________     1982a.    "Compensation in the Public Sector: The Importance of

     Pensions," in R. Haveman, ed., Public Finance and Public Employment. Wayne

     State University Press: Detroit.

_________      1982b.   "Pension Wealth of Government and Private Sector Workers."

     American Economic Review. 72: 283-287.

Rosen, S.     1983. "The Equilibrium Approach to Labor Markets." NBER working

     paper No. 1165.

Smeeding, T.     1983. "The Size Distribution of Wage and Nonwage Compensation:

     Employer Cost versus Employee Value," in J. Triplet, ed., The Measurement

     of Labor Cost. Chicago, Ill.: University of Chicago Press.

Smith, R.     1979. "Compensating Wage Differentials and Public Policy: A
                               -38-




     Review." Industrial and Labor Relations Review. 32: 339-352.
Smith, R. and R. Ehrenberg. 1983. "Estimating Wage-Fringe Trade-Offs: Some

     Data Problems," in 0. Triplett, ed., The Measurement of Labor Cost.

     Chicago, Ill.: University of Chicago Press.

Smith, S.   1976. "Pay Differentials Between Federal Government and Private

     Sector Workers." Industrial and Labor Relations Review. 29: 179-197.

_________   1977.   Equal Pay in the Public Sector: Fact or Fantasy. Princeton

     University: Industrial Relations Section.

_________   1981.   "Public/Private Wage Differentials in Metropolitan Areas," in

     P. Mieszkowskj and G. Peterson, ed., Public Sector Labor Markets.

     Washington, D.C.: Urban Institute.

_________   1982.   "Prospects for Reforming Federal Pay." American Economic

     Review. 72:273—277.

U.S. Office of Personnel Management. 1983. OPM: The Year in Review, 1982.

    Washngton, D.C.: GPO.
                                              —39—


                                Table 1: Summary Statistics




                                                      Males                 Females
 Variable
                                                 Mean         S.D.      Mean       S.D.

 Log Wage: Federal Sector                        2.41             .39   2.05           .40


 Log Wage:     Private Sector                    2.13             .50    1.72          .43



 Nonwhite                                            .10          .30     .12          .33

Veteran                                              .42          .49

Married                                              .73          .44     .58          .49

Widowed, Divorced or Separated                       .08          .26     .21          .41



Central City                                         .21          .41     .24          .43

SMSA but not Central City                            .37          .48     .34          .47

Northeast                                            .24          .43     .24          .43

North Central                                        .27          .44     .27          .44

West                                                 .21          .40     .20          .40


Percent Federal nployinent                           .03          .06     .03          .07


Unemployment Rate                                    .09          .21     .09          .21



Years of Education                              12.64         2.77      12.48      2.30

Years of Potential Experience                   21.66        13.94      21.20      14.18


Professional                                         .15          .36     .13          .34

Managerial                                           .14          .34     .08          .26


Clerical                                             .09          .28     .42          .49


Craft                                                .27          .44     .03          .17


Operative                                            .21          .41     .14          .35

Laborer                                              .07          .25     .01          .11

Number   of   observations                                 6064                 4561

crnitted Categories are      "South"   for the regional dummies and "Service" for the
occupational dummies.
                                                   —40—



                           Table 2: Parameter Estimates for Malesa



                                             (1)              (2)         (3)        (4)
                                   Job Acceptance          Job Offer    Federal    Private
Variable                             Probability          Probability     Wage       Wage
                                                                          ()         (wv)

Nonwhite                                —.283                 .330        .047      —.077
                                        (.134)               (.184)      (.043).     (.021)

Veteran                                  .501                —.286      —.009         .023
                                        (.144)               (.156)      (.036)      (.014)

Married                                     .179               -           -           -
                                        (   fl7)
Widowed, Div. or Sep.                       .141
                                        (.128)



Central City                             .320                —.393
                                        (.114)               (.195)

SMSA but not C. City                     .526                -.836
                                        (.176)               (.227)

Northeast                                   .036              .271       —.048        .055
                                        (.099)               (.169)      (.034)      (.017)

North Central                               .375              .187       -.135        .074
                                        (.200)               (.179)      (.044)      (.014)

West                                        .307              .143       —.073        .151
                                        (.155)               (.132)      (.046)      (.017)

Percent Fed. nployment                       -             26.023          -          —

                                                            (5. 782)


Unemployment Rate                      -1.383                  -          .961        .585
                                        (.535)                           (.277)      (.221)



Years of Education                                            .061       -.007        .007
                                                             (.035)      (.015)      (.008)
                       b
(Yrs. of Education)2                                         —.017        .175        .151
                                                             (.066)      (.049)      (.033)

Yrs. of Pot. Experience                                         -         .037        .039
                                                                         (.004)      (.001)

(Yrs. of Pot. Experience)2                                               —.059       —.063
                                                                         (.007)      (.003)
                                               —41--




                        Table 2: Parameter Estimates for Males (cont'd)


                                         (1)               (2)             (3)         (4)
                                 Job Acceptance         Job Offer    Federal      Private
Variable                           Probability         Probability     Wage         Wage
                                                                           ()          (wv)


Professional                                                            .440        .448
                                                                       (.046)      (.027)

Managerial                                                              .381           .496
                                                                       (.046)      (.027)

Clerical                                                                   .329        .243
                                                                       I           I

Craft                                                                   .272        .430
                                                                       (.041)      (.025)

operative                                                               .103       .304
                                                                       (.038)     (.025)

Laborer                                                                    .059    .186
                                                                       (.044)     (.029)

Ln W                                   3.683            —1.202
                                       (.229)            (.345)

In                                    -2.275
                                       (.323)

Intercept                             —4.873             2.668        1.291            .897
                                       (.733)            (.823)        (.183)     (.060)


Covar iance Matrix
Job   Acceptance (P1)                  1.000


Job Offer (P2)                        —.868              1.000
                                       (.066)
Federal   Wage ()                       .053             -.056             .121
                                       (.042)            (.037)       (.008)

Private   Wage (wv)                     .081             —.266                     .164
                                       (.046)            (.048)
                                               —42—




                        Table 2: parameter Estimates for Males (cont'd)



         Log—Likelihood Function:        -3964.08

         Number of observations:        6064

                             5626
                 N00:
                               25
                 N01:

                               32
                 N10:
                              381
                 N11:




            standard errors in parentheses


bScaled by 100
                                                 -.43—




                          Table 3: Parameter Estimates for Femalesa


                                          (1)                (2)         (3)       (4)
Variable                           Job Acceptance         Job Offer    Federal   Private
                                     Probability         Probability     Wage      Wage
                                          (P1)
                                                                           f
                                                             (p2)        (w        (wv)

Nonwhite                                 .177                .100        .021       .018
                                        (.179)              (.176)      (.056)     (.020)

Married                                 —.035                 —
                                        (.064)
Widowed, Div. or Sep.                   —.006
                                        (.071)


Central City                             .644              —.693
                                        (.220)             (.295)

SMSA but not C City                      .995             —1.073
                                        (.364)             (.401)

Northeast                                .930              —.585       -.129       .069
                                        (.389)             (.353)      (.072)      (.017)

North Central                            .080              -.022       — .036      .029
                                        (.141)             (.126)      (.047)     (.016)

West                                     .297               .075       —.071       .119
                                        (.166)             (.144)      (.050)     (.016)

Percent of Fed. i yment                                   16.098
                                                          (4. 500)

Unemployment Rate                     —4.427                           1.238        106
                                       (1.823)                         (.566)     (.253)


Yrs. of Education                                            425       —.077       .002
                                                           (.103)      (.024)     (.011)
                      b
(Yrs. of Education)2                                      —1.427        .383       .128
                                                           (.386)      (.092)     (.046)

Yrs. of Pot. Experience                                                 .026       .019
                                                                       (.005)     (.001)

(Yrs. of Pot. Experience)                                              —.043      —.034
                                                                       (.010)     (.003)
                                              —44—



                    Table 3: Parameter Estimates for Females (cont'd)


                                      (1)                 (2)              (3)      (4)
                                  Job Acceptance       Job Offer        Federal   Private
Variable
                                    Probability       Probability        Wage       Wage
                                      (P)                 (P)                f
                                        1                  2               (w)      (wv)


Professional                                                              .555       .516
                                                                         (.091)     (.022)

Managerial                                                                .422       .465
                                                                         (.077)     (.023)

Clerical                                                                  .380       .302
                                                                         (.063)     (.016)

Craft                                                                     .281       .389
                                                                         (.102)     (.036)

Operative or Laborer                                                      .138       .245
                                                                         (.072)     (.021)



                                     2.902              —•757
                                     (.178)             (.324)

In w                                -1.697
                                     (.430)

Intercept                           —3.795              —.736            1.647       .955
                                     (.992)             (.390)           (.246)     (.080)



Covariance 4atrix

Job Acceptance (P1)                  1.000


Job Offer (P2)                       -.920              1.000
                                     (.051)

Federal Wage ()                      —.073                .081            .116
                                     (.048)              (.043)          (.013)

Private Wage (wv)                     .004              —.146                       .135
                                     (.058)              (.066)                     (.055)
                                              —45—



                      Table 3: Parameter Estimates for Females (cont'd)



     Log—Likelihood Function:         -2727.74

     Number   of   Observations:      4561

          N0:        4339
                        14
          N01:
                        16
          N10:
                      192
          N11:


a)   Asymptotic standard errors in parentheses

b)   Scaled by 100
                                —46—




Table   4: Predicted Percentage Federal-Private Wage Differencesa



   Method of Estimation                Males         Females


   Sample Meanb                         32.8           38.7


   OLSc                                 11.7           22.6
                                        (2.1)           (2.6)

   OLSd                                 12.1           20.3
                                        (2.0)           (2.5)

   MLEe                                  4.2           22.1
                                        (6.5)           (7.9)




aStandard errors in parentheses.




CAdjusted for observed productivity characteristics listed in
 column 3 of Tables 2 and 3.


dAdjusted for observed productivity characteristics listed in
 column 3 of Tables 2 and 3 and indicators of part—time work,
widowed, divorced, or separated, married, two urbanization
dummies, and five additional product terms between the included
variables.
eAdjusted for observed productivity characteristics listed in column
 3 of Tables 2 and 3 and unobserved productivity differences.
                                           —47—




                   Table 5: Simulated Probabilities



                                                  Males   Females

   (1) Probability of
       Job Acceptance (P1)                        0.180   0.286


   (2)   Probability of
         Job Offer (P2)                           0.829   0.676


  (3) Joint Probability of
      Enp1oyment Match                            0.064   0.047


  (4) Length of Queue                             2.811   6.107




Source: (1): —
                 ln
                 n.i=lPr(P 1>0)
                      n
          (2):
                 n.   E   Pr(P2 >0)

                      n
          (3):      E Pr(P >0,        p >0)
                 n.i=1    1            2



          (4): (1)/(3)
