NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DOES HEALTH INSURANCE COVERAGE LEAD TO BETTER HEALTH AND
EDUCATIONAL OUTCOMES? EVIDENCE FROM RURAL CHINA
Yuyu Chen
Ginger Zhe Jin
Working Paper 16417
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16417
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2010

This project is a collaborative effort with a local government of China. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Yuyu Chen and Ginger Zhe Jin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Does Health Insurance Coverage Lead to Better Health and Educational Outcomes? Evidence
from Rural China
Yuyu Chen and Ginger Zhe Jin
NBER Working Paper No. 16417
September 2010, Revised March 2012
JEL No. I18,I21,I38
ABSTRACT
Using 2006 China Agricultural Census (CAC), we examine whether the introduction of the New Cooperative
Medical System (NCMS) has affected child mortality, maternal mortality, and school enrollment of
the 6-16 years olds. Our data cover 5.9 million people living in eight low-income rural counties, of
which four adopted the NCMS by 2006 and four did not adopt it until 2007.
Raw data suggest that enrolling in NCMS is associated with better school enrollment and lower mortality
of young children and pregnant women. However, using a difference-in-difference propensity score
method, we find most of these differences are driven by the endogenous introduction and take-up of
NCMS, and out method overcomes classical propensity score matching's failure to address the selection
bias. While the NCMS does not affect child mortality and maternal mortality, it does help improve
the school enrollment of six-year-olds.
Yuyu Chen
Applied Economics Department
Guanghua School of Management
Peking University
Beijing, 100871
Chenyuyu@gsm.pku.edu.cn
Ginger Zhe Jin
University of Maryland
Department of Economics
3105 Tydings Hall
College Park, MD 20742-7211
and NBER
jin@econ.umd.edu

1. Introduction
Many governments advocate nationwide health insurance in order to improve individual
welfare. In this paper, we use the recent expansion of health insurance coverage in rural China to
quantify the impact of health insurance on child mortality, maternal mortality, and school enrollment.
Although the Chinese economy has continued to grow during the past 20 years, many rural residents
remain poor and have difficulty obtaining access to health care when they are sick.2 To address the
problems associated with the lack of health insurance in rural areas3, China initiated the National
Cooperative Medical System (NCMS) in 2003, targeting rural residents with large subsidies from
central and local governments. Unlike mandatory insurance proposed elsewhere, the NCMS is
implemented county-by-county, allowing local governments to decide when to introduce the NCMS,
how much premium to charge, and how many benefits to offer. If the county offers the NCMS, a
rural household can choose to enroll in the NCMS for either every household member or none of
them. Diffusion of the NCMS has been fast: in 2004, 14% of counties offered NCMS coverage
(MOH 2005); by June 30, 2008, all counties offered the NCMS, covering 91.54% of the rural
population.4 A more detailed description of the NCMS can be found in Wagstaff et al. (2009).
2

China shows an uneven progress against poverty (Ravallion and Chen 2007). In 2005, China still has 208 million

people living below the World Bank’s $1.25-per-day poverty line (Chen and Ravallion 2008), most of them being rural.
According to the 2007 National Statistical Yearbook, rural residents on average spend 5.34% of income on health care
and the ratio increases to 10% for the poorest twenty percent. These numbers tend to underestimate the financial burden
of health care cost because poor households are often under-treated. There is also a sizable health-expenditure disparity
between urban and rural areas, largely due to the increasing gaps in income, health care utilization and local government
budget deficit (Liu et al. 1999; Chou and Wang 2009).
3

The old community-based health insurance system broke down when the rural economy shifted away from the

collective system in 1978 (Hsiao 1984). As a result, patients face increased financial burden, reduced access to health
care services, and compromised service quality (MOH 1999).
4

News release from Guang Ming Daily, written by Ying Zhang, October 22, 2008, accessed at
http://www.hyey.com/Article/zhengcezhuanti/xinnonghe/now/xiyue/200810/141630.html on June 5, 2010. This
article cites data source from the Ministry of Health.
2

In theory, health insurance can affect a household in many ways, ranging from increased
health care utilization, better health, and higher productivity, to greater financial resources freed up
from medical costs. Our data do not include direct measures of health care utilization, but they allow
us to study the effect of the NCMS on mortality of pregnant women and young children at the village
level and school enrollment at the individual level.
Mortality and educational outcomes have long been studied as potential consequences of
health insurance. For example, the expansion of Medicaid coverage in the US has been shown to
improve the mother’s prenatal care, reduce infant mortality, and reduce the incidence of low birth
weight (Currie and Gruber 1996a, 1996b); the introduction of the State Children’s Health Insurance
Program (SCHIP) has been linked to better child health and better school performance (Joyce and
Racine 2003; Levine and Schanzenbach 2009); and the adoption of nationwide health insurance has
reduced the mortality rate of young children in Taiwan (Chou 2011) . There is also evidence that
health insurance can relieve financial burdens on individual households (Miller et al. 2010), and an
increase in financial resources available can boost children’s school performance (Morris, Duncan &
Rodrigues 2004; Dahl and Lochner 2005). Several survey articles have reviewed research on the
impact of health insurance on health (Levy and Meltzer 2008) and the impact of child health on
educational outcomes in both developed and developing countries (Currie 2009; Glewwe and Miguel
2008).
Turning to the effects of the NCMS in particular, the existing evidence is mixed. On the
positive side, some studies show that the NCMS reduced illness-related poverty, increased
inpatient/outpatient utilization of health services and reduced the rate of non-hospitalization after two
3

weeks of diagnosis (Chen et al. 2005; Yuan et al. 2006; Wagstaff et al. 2009; Wang 2007; Zhu et al.
2007; Fang et al. 2006; Zhang et al. 2007). Because deliveries constitute a significant fraction of
hospitalizations, many studies compare the percent of hospitalized deliveries before and after the
NCMS. Cheng et al. (2008) report an increase in the hospitalized delivery rate from 85% to 96.9% in
14 counties of Hubei (2002-2006), from 77.5% to 92.5% in 3 counties of Chongqing (2003-2007),
and from 32.43% to 83.24% in the rural area of Qinghai (2002-2007).5 Similar increases have been
shown in Guangxi (Liao 2009) and Yunnan (Lu and Li 2010). These studies find that the NCMS
increased the health of women and infants because mortality risk is much lower for hospital delivery
than for home delivery.6 Two of them also report a significant decline in maternal and birth deaths
after the NCMS (Liao 2009; Lu and Li 2010). On the negative side, some researchers have expressed
concerns that the low reimbursement rate in the NCMS will limit its effectiveness (Zhang et al. 2006,
Yi et al. 2009), and that the China Health and Nutrition Survey lacks evidence of better health care
utilization and improved health condition after the adoption of the NCMS (Lei and Lin 2009).
This paper aims to provide additional evidence regarding the impact of the NCMS, using a
large cross-sectional data set from the 2006 China Agriculture Census. Unlike Wagstaff et al. (2009),
we do not track individuals before and after the introduction of the NCMS. But our data cover
neighboring areas within a poor inland province including four counties that introduced the NCMS at
the time of the survey (end of 2006) and four counties that did not introduce the NCMS until 2007.

5

Focusing on one county of Qinghai, Shi (2008) shows that the rate of hospitalized delivery increased from 90.16% in
2004 to 98.67% in 2006.

6

According to WHO (2005), most maternal deaths take place in developing countries and the leading causes are
haemorrhage (severe bleeding, 25%), infections (15%), and eclampsia (12%). Skilled professional care is essential to
save lives at and after birth.
4

The eight counties are geographically adjacent to each other, belong to the same administrative
district, and are similar in demographics, access to health care services, and access to public
education. Because the data were collected as a part of the census, our sample includes 5.9 million
individuals, 1.4 million households, and 1.4 million school age children across 3,977 villages.7 The
advantage of such a large sample is that it helps capture severe health risks that are small probability
events and could have a catastrophic impact on a rural household without health insurance.
Furthermore, the high poverty in this area makes it attractive for identifying the impact of the NCMS
on a financially vulnerable population.
It is difficult to establish a causal relationship between health insurance and measurable
outcomes in observational data because they both may be influenced by unobservable factors. There
are two sets of endogenous unobservables that may contaminate the estimation. One is
heterogeneous county-level characteristics. For instance, if the NCMS counties are richer and in
better fiscal condition, then the population in the NCMS counties could have better health and
educational outcomes compared with the population in the non-NCMS counties even without the
NCMS. The other set is heterogeneous household-level characteristics. For example, comparing two
households residing in the same NCMS county, richer and more health-conscious households may be
more likely to take up the insurance.
The classical cross-sectional propensity score matching method focuses on estimating the
effect of a treatment program (i.e. the NCMS counties in our context) by comparing the treated
individual with an untreated one. The validity of the method relies on the assumption that treated and
7

There are actually 3,986 villages in the data but 9 did not provide any village-level information. We deleted them from
analysis.
5

untreated individuals are similar in unobservables if they are matched on observables (Rosenbaum
and Rubin, 1983). To correct the two kinds of selection bias mentioned above, instead of directly
estimating the treatment effect of enrolling in the NCMS, we estimate the treatment effect of the
NCMS being offered in a county. This is an intent-to-treat analysis.
Specifically, we propose a difference-in-difference (DID) propensity score method using both
NCMS and non-NCMS county data, with which we can explore within-county heterogeneity and
cross-county difference. The key assumption in classical cross section matching, that individuals
matched in observables are similar in the unobservables, can be relaxed when we construct the
propensity score to use households in the non-NCMS counties as a control for similar households in
the NCMS counties, regardless of the participation status of the households. The heterogeneity
within a county allows us to control for the unobservable county specific attributes and thus account
for the endogenous introduction of the NCMS county by county. Our method is similar to the DID
matching strategy proposed by Heckman, Ichimura and Todd (1997) and Heckman, Ichimura, Smith
and Todd (1998). The main difference is that they use longitudinal (or repeated cross-section) data to
difference out the time-invariant factors before and after a treatment program8, whereas we use all
households within each county with unequal propensity to enroll in the NCMS to difference out the
county-specific unobservables and use households in non-NCMS counties as a control group.

8

Using longitudinal data that track program participants and non-participants before and after a treatment program,

Smith and Todd (2005) show that DID matching estimators perform much better than classical cross-sectional matching
when participants and non-participants are drawn from different regional labor markets and/or were given different
survey questionnaires.
6

Wagstaff et al. (2009) also use DID together with the propensity score method to evaluate the
impact of the NCMS (on health care utilization), but there is an important difference between their
methodology and ours: they compare the NCMS-insured individuals with observationally similar
individuals in non-NCMS counties, while we compare both the NCMS insured and uninsured
individuals in the NCMS counties with individuals in the non-NCMS counties. As detailed below,
the two types of comparisons lead to different results and we argue that our method can better
address the endogenous take-up of NCMS due to non-observables.
Results from our DID propensity score method suggest that most of the seemingly beneficial
effects of NCMS are driven by selection. By applying the DID propensity score method to
populations of different socioeconomic status, we find that the NCMS may have moderate effects in
improving the school enrollment of six-year-olds.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the data and the background
of NCMS in the studied area. Section 3 presents a data summary and classical analysis (OLS and
propensity score matching) of key outcomes. Section 4 specifies our DID propensity score
methodology. Section 5 reports the main results. Section 6 offers a brief discussion and conclusion.

2. Background and Data
The National Bureau of Statistics of China organized local governments to conduct two
rounds of the China Agricultural Census (CAC) in 1996 and 2006. Drawing from the 2006 CAC, our
data cover all the residents residing or having a registered residence in a continuous area as of
December 31, 2006. Due to data confidentiality, we are not allowed to reveal the geographic
7

location, but we can say that the studied counties are mostly rural, belong to the same inland
province, and have a per-capita income below the national average. In total, we observe 5.9 million
individuals in 1.4 million households in 3,977 villages. The villages spread across 250 townships in 8
counties, among which one county adopted the NCMS in 2004 (referred to as county A), three
counties adopted it in 2006 (B, C, D), and the other four did not adopt the NCMS until 2007 (E, F, G,
H). The size of the whole census area is roughly 16,000 km2 in total, with an average area of 4 km2
per village. More details of this data set are available in Chen, Jin and Yue (2010).
In 2006, each NCMS participating individual cost on average 50 RMB9 in the NCMS
system, of which 10 RMB was paid by the individual, 20 RMB was subsidized by the central
government and the other 20 RMB were contributed by the county government. This structure
remained unchanged in 2007 and 200810, but both the central and local government subsidies
increased from 20 to 40 RMB per person in 2009. To ensure the appropriate use of the NCMS
funds, the central government required local governments to devote the funds to reimbursement and
fund management. Local governments were also required to post a list of existing claims and
reimbursements within each village, so that both participating and non-participating villagers had a
good idea of how much reimbursement they could obtain from the NCMS if they participated.
In the study area, the NCMS paid the insured amount directly if the treatment was delivered
at a county- or town-level hospital. If health services were delivered at an above-county hospital, the

9

The exchange rate between the Chinese currency (RMB) and US dollar at the study period was roughly seven RMB for
one dollar.

10

One exception is that that the individual premium of county E was 12 instead of 10 RMB in 2007. County E reduced

this number to 10 RMB in 2008.
8

NCMS required the patient to pay the full amount out of pocket and then seek reimbursement. For
simplicity, we refer to both types of NCMS payment as reimbursement. In our sample period, the
reimbursement rate was 60-70% for township healthcare providers, 45-55% for county level
providers, and 35-40% for out-of-county providers. These rates have increased 5-15% over time
because the total subsidy from the central and local governments doubled in 2009. Benefits cover
both inpatient and outpatient care performed by designated providers for designated procedures, so
the actual reimbursement rate for all diseases could be significantly lower than the percentages
mentioned above. Moreover, the reimbursement is capped at 200-300 RMB per individual per year
for outpatient care and 10k-25k RMB for inpatient care. As documented in the existing literature, the
potential benefit of the NCMS in relieving a household's financial burden mostly depends on the
extent to which NCMS covers inpatient cost.
Since take-up of the NCMS is voluntary, not every household participates. In 2006, among
the four counties that offered the NCMS, 80% of the households had at least one person enrolled in
the program. Although the NCMS in principle does not allow partial participation, we observe that
13% of the households had partial participation because some household members migrated out of
the area for work and therefore were unlikely to enjoy the benefits of NCMS, or some members had
a non-rural or non-local residential permit (hukou), hence were likely to have insurance coverage
somewhere else.
The NCMS was offered to the whole area in 2007, with an average take-up rate of 86.74% in
2007, 92.64% in 2008 and 93.37% in 2009. In 2007, 39.59% of the participating individuals received

9

NCMS reimbursement.11 Conditional on receiving reimbursement, the average reimbursement was
76 RMB per person, and over 250 (0.013%) individuals received more than 10,000 RMB from the
NCMS. With more government subsidies in 2009, 66.56% of participating individuals received some
form of NCMS reimbursement from January to November 2009, with an average reimbursement of
100.65 RMB per person, and over 700 (0.019%) individuals received more than 10,000 RMB.
Given the fact that the 2005 per-capita income in the studied area was between 1500 and
2000 RMB, these numbers suggest that the NCMS is unlikely to offer much financial help for a
healthy enrollee who only needs outpatient care for minor diseases. However, the NCMS could be a
significant help if the enrollee needed hospitalization (e.g. for birth delivery), had a severe chronic
disease (e.g. dialysis due to kidney failure) or had encountered a major acute health problem during
the year. The 35-70% reimbursement rate and the restriction to designated providers and designated
procedures imply that individual households still need to pay a large proportion of health care costs if
they have severe diseases, and the out-of-pocket health care expenditure could be even higher if the
NCMS motivates the insured to seek more treatment.
Due to the low probability of severe health events, we need a large sample to capture the
events and their potential impact on a household's health- and non-health outcomes. In addition to
the large sample size, our sample area is much poorer than the average in rural China, where the cost
of health care is not proportional to household income. If the NCMS has any effects on health- and
non-health outcomes, they should be likely to show up in our sample. These reasons lead us to
believe that our data could provide better insights into the effects of the NCMS as compared to much
11

Reimbursement data are only available in county aggregate (from the local government reports). This is why we
cannot examine whether NCMS has increased health care utilization at the household or individual level.
10

smaller and probably more national representative samples used in Yi et al. (2009), Lei and Lin
(2009) and Wagstaff et al. (2009).
The main part of the data was collected at the household level.12 By this design, we observe
detailed household information including how many individuals reside in the household, their
relationship to the household head, their age and gender composition, the amount of contract land,
the amount of land in use, ownership of housing, the self-estimated value of house(s), ownership of
durable goods, the availability of electricity, water and other amenities, whether the household has
enrolled in the NCMS (for counties A to D), the number of household members that receive
government subsidies, and the household engagement in various agricultural activities. The CAC
does not collect data on household or personal income.
Individual-level data are limited to age, sex, education, employment, occupation, and the
number of months away from home for out-of-township employment in 2006. Since a child in the
studied area may get married as early as 17 and daughters often leave their own home after marriage,
we restrict our definition of children to age 0-16.
School age children are defined as anyone between 6 and 16 inclusive. According to the Law
of Compulsory Education of China, the parent or legal guardian of a six-year-old (by September 1) is
mandated to enroll the child in school; for the areas short of educational resources (like our study
area), the compulsory education age may be delayed until seven. In other words, a seven year old in
our sample area is required to enroll in school but the enrollment of a six year old can be voluntary.
12

The household head was asked to enter information for every family member. If a resident was away from home at the

time of the interview, his/her information was still collected from the household. If the whole household had a registered
residence in the studied area but was away from home at the time of interview, the village head would fill in the form for
the household. Please see a more detailed description of this data set in Chen, Jin and Yue (2010).
11

Given the lack of day care services in rural China, a six year old is most likely to stay at home if he
or she is not enrolled in school. Compulsory education is free of tuition but parents need to pay fees
for books and in-school activities, which in total might exceed 200 RMB per child per year. Children
from far away families also need to pay for in-school boarding and meals, which could bring the total
cost of schooling to as high as 500 RMB per year. Many children from extremely poor families
cannot afford boarding and have to walk hours a day to school carrying lunch prepared from home. If
the NCMS eases the financial burden on a household, it could make more resources available to
support child schooling. It could also allow poor children to access health care services when they
are sick and reduce the potential interruption of schooling due to illness. Note that the question that
the CAC asked on school enrollment refers to whether a child is currently enrolled in primary or
secondary school, not whether a child has attended school on a particular day. Because of this, we
can capture lack of school enrollment due to major health problems but not school absence due to
minor diseases.
Supplemental data were collected at the village level, including the size of the village in both
arable land and registered population, whether the village is a place for minority gathering, the
number of health care providers serving within the village, the distance to the nearest bus station13,
elementary school, secondary school, and hospital, access to water, electricity and other amenities,
whether the village has a national poverty status (as designated by the Central government), and how
many young children (age 0-5) and pregnant women died during 2006.14 The data also include
13

The exact question is to the nearest bus/rail/dock station, but there is no railway station or major river in the studied
area.

14

Due to potential measurement errors in the registered population, we calculate the number of adults per village from
our study sample and use it to proxy for village population.
12

several township level variables, namely the number and nature of township-village-enterprises, the
distance between the township and county center, whether there is a highway exit within the
boundary of the township, and the registered population of the township.

3. Data summary and simple analysis
Throughout the sample, 48.64% of the 5.9 million population was offered the NCMS in 2006.
Conditional on the four counties that offered the NCMS, 80% of households had at least one member
enrolled in the NCMS. Breaking down this number by county, the household take-up rate was 75.7%
for county A, 83.7% for county B, 78% for county C and 83.9% for county D. Figure 1 plots the
histogram of household NCMS take-up rate at the village level, which ranges between 0 and 1 but is
mostly concentrated between 0.7 and 1.
Table 1 summarizes the village-level mortality of young children and pregnant women in
NCMS and non-NCMS counties. As shown in the first two columns, NCMS counties have lower
mortality than non-NCMS counties for both young children and pregnant women. Within the four
NCMS counties, the median NCMS take-up rate at the village level is 84.1%. And villages with an
above-median NCMS take-up rate tend to have slightly lower mortality in both absolute count and
mortality rate.15 These comparisons could reflect the beneficial effects of the NCMS or a selection
bias if richer and healthier counties are more likely to adopt the NCMS early or if richer and
healthier households are more likely to take-up the NCMS. We will address the selection issue in the
15

Child mortality rate is computed as the total number of 0-5 year old deaths divided by the sum of the death count and
the total number of living 0-5 year olds in our sample. Maternal mortality rate is computed as the total number of
pregnancy deaths divided by the sum of the death count and the total number of living 18-30 year old women in our
sample.
13

next Section.
Table 2 summarizes the enrollment rate of school-age children by NCMS status. The
enrollment rate is almost 4 percentage points higher in NCMS counties than in non-NCMS counties
(88.09% vs. 84.13%). Within the four NCMS counties, households enrolled in the NCMS are 2.3
percentage points more likely to have their children enrolled in school (88.55% vs. 86.27%). Again,
these raw differences could be driven by the NCMS or by selection. If we compare school
enrollment rates by age the same pattern holds for every age level, but the differences are most
obvious for ages 6, 7 and 16. One possible explanation is that financially constrained households are
more likely to delay the start of child schooling or to stop child schooling immediately after the 9years of compulsory education. To the extent that the NCMS improves health and relieves a
household’s financial burden, it could increase child schooling, especially at the two ends of the
school age range.
For a closer look at county-level selection, Table 3 lists the relevant fiscal condition, percapita income, demographics, percentage of migrating households, house value, and contract land for
the eight counties in our sample. Fiscal condition and per-capita income are derived from the area’s
statistical year book and the rest come directly from the CAC data. On average, NCMS counties have
relatively higher per-capita income and higher local fiscal income per capita. County D is the richest
of the eight, while County A is almost the poorest of the four NCMS counties although it adopted the
NCMS first (in 2004). Note that this comparison is relative within the study area. Overall, the study
area is quite poor, with 50% of the population living in villages with national poverty status and with

14

a percentage of school enrollment much lower than the national average (>95%).16
Table 4 compares the average household and village characteristics of (1) households
participating in the NCMS, (2) households not participating in the NCMS but living in NCMS
counties, and (3) households living in non-NCMS counties. Overall the three groups are similar, but
households in NCMS counties are slightly more educated, have a slightly smaller household size,
have slightly higher house value, and are slightly less likely to live in villages with national poverty
status. Similar differences exist between NCMS participating and non-participating households
within NCMS counties.
Our first attempt to address the selection bias is controlling for observables. Denoting cty
for county,

for village,

for household,

and

for individual, we regress the three main

outcomes – village-level young child mortality (
mortality (

), village-level pregnant women

), and individual-level schooling (

residing county offered the NCMS in 2006 (

) and the extent to which the residents

take up the NCMS (village take-up rate
dummy

) – on whether the

) or an individual take-up

), controlling for a number of village, household and individual attributes. In

particular,
(1)
(2)

16

In a news conference held by the Ministry of Education on February 28, 2006, Minister ZHOU Ji reported that the
nationwide average enrollment rate for 9-year compulsory education is over 95%. In particular, the nationwide
enrollment rate is 99.15% for elementary school (grade 1-6) and 95% for middle school (grade 7-9). Source: Ministry
of Education ( http://www.moe.gov.cn/edoas/website18/11/info18511.htm), accessed at June 5, 2010.
15

(3)
As shown in Table 1, the distribution of village-level mortality is concentrated at zero or one
death. So we define
and

as a dummy of having any young child mortality in village ,
as a dummy of having any maternal mortality in village

. In an

unreported table, we use the mortality rate instead and the results are similar.
The village attributes (

) include village population, distance to the nearest bus station,

distance to the nearest elementary school, distance to the nearest secondary school, distance to the
nearest hospital as well as the village’s poverty status and minority gathering status. The household
attributes (

include house value (self-reported), contract land, whether any household member has

migrated for a job out of the study area, number of 0-5 year olds, number of 6-16 year olds, number
of 17-23 year olds, number of 24-44 year olds, number 45-59 year olds, number of 60+ year olds,
and an indicator of the main source of income. The individual attributes ( ) include child age,
gender, and birth order. If the NCMS is effective in improving health and reducing the financial
burden of health care, we expect {

} to be negative and {

} to be positive,

although all of them can be overestimated due to selection bias.
Table 5 reports the linear-probability OLS results for the two village-level dummies of
whether there is any mortality in 0-5 year old children and pregnant women. Table 6 reports the
linear-probability OLS results for the individual dummy of school enrollment.17 In both tables, we
report one version without county dummies and one version with county dummies. The version
without county dummies identifies the coefficient of

17

. The other version

We have tried negative binomial for the death count and probit for in school enrollment. Results are similar.
16

absorbs

in the county dummies and controls for the endogeneity of NCMS

introduction. For school enrollment, we also report results for the full sample of 6-16 year olds and
the sub-sample of 7-15 year olds separately.
Both tables confirm the impression from the raw data: NCMS counties have lower mortality
and higher school enrollment, though the difference on the village-level mortality is not statistically
significant. Conditional on residing in NCMS counties, households enrolled in the NCMS are 1.3-1.7
percentage points more likely to send their children to school compared with those not enrolled, but
villages with higher NCMS take-up rates do not show significantly lower mortality.
To estimate the effect of the NCMS on school enrollment rate, a typical way to address the
endogenous take-up of the NCMS is to find an instrumental variable that is correlated with an
individual household’s take-up decision but uncorrelated with the household’s decision for children’s
school enrollment. Since the household is likely the unit of decision for both, such an instrument is
difficult to find. One candidate we have considered is the percentage of elderly (age 60+) in other
households of the same village. Age is likely to affect a household’s take-up decision because the
elderly are vulnerable to health risks and the existing claims and reimbursements are supposedly
posted in the village. This positive correlation is confirmed in the data (with a first-stage t-statistics
on the instrument equal to 2.35). When we use it as an instrument in equation (3), the coefficient
of

is positive and insignificant with a magnitude roughly 30 times higher than the

OLS coefficient.18 This leads us to conclude that the IV approach is not useful, either because the
instrument is weak or is invalid.
18

The 2SLS coefficient of NCMS take-up is 0.593 for 6-16 year olds and 0.346 for 7-15 year olds, using a sample of
only NCMS counties.
17

Another method to deal with the selection bias of NCMS take-up is propensity score
matching. Conditional on the four NCMS counties, the classical propensity score matching will
match one NCMS participating household with one non-participating household based on the
predicted propensity of take-up and then compare the school enrollment outcome of the two
households. Similar matching can be applied to village-level mortality, while the dependent variable
of the propensity score prediction is the village-level NCMS take-up rate, not the individual decision
of whether or not to enroll in the NCMS.
Table 7 shows the results of the classical cross-sectional propensity score matching, using a
sample of the four NCMS counties only. In particular, we first use data from the NCMS counties to
estimate the propensity of a household having at least one member participating in the NCMS. This
prediction is not by individual because the CAC reports how many household members enroll in the
NCMS but not who has enrolled. Among the 80% of households that participate in the NCMS, 13%
participate partially because some household members have non-rural and non-local hukou or have
migrated out of the area for work. These factors are controlled for in the propensity score prediction
in addition to household size, number of children, number of the elderly, contract land, house value
and village-level variables such as national poverty status, minority gathering status, whether the
village is the center of a town, and the village’s nearest distance to elementary school, secondary
school and hospital.19 Many of these explanatory variables have statistically significant coefficients
(p<0.01) in the probit estimation of the propensity score, but the overall pseudo R-square is not high
(0.016 at the household level and 0.168 at the village level). The low household-level R-square is
19

We have also tried to include household head education in the propensity score regression, but it is never statistically
significant.
18

comparable to what is reported in Wagstaff et al. (2009) Table 5 (0.010-0.044) and does not have a
natural interpretation econometrically (Greene 2008). Even if the low pseudo R-square indicates an
imperfect fit of the model, it highlights the presence of unobservables and therefore the importance
of relaxing assumptions behind the classical cross-sectional propensity score matching estimators.
Once we identify the propensity score function, every participating household is matched
with one non-participating household within the four NCMS counties, by both nearest neighbor
matching and stratification matching. Since the two matching methods yield similar results, we
report the result from nearest neighbor matching. The average treatment effect of NCMS take-up on
school enrollment is presented in Panel A of Table 7. The result (0.016) is close to that of Table 5
(0.017), suggesting that either there is little selection bias in the OLS results or the classical
propensity score matching does not address the selection bias either.
Panel B of Table 7 extends the propensity score prediction to the full sample, and allows an
NCMS participating household to be matched with a similar household in a non-NCMS county. As
shown in Figure 2, the propensity score distribution is similar across the two types of counties,
except that the propensity score of non-NCMS counties has more density in the first (lower) mode
and less density in the second (higher) mode. This is consistent with the poorer status of non-NCMS
counties as shown in Table 3. Compared to the within-NCMS county matching, the propensity score
matching across the two types of counties finds a larger effect of NCMS take-up on school
enrollment (0.026 versus 0.016), partly because the across-county comparison includes the
fundamental difference between NCMS and non-NCMS counties.
We also use the NCMS counties to predict the average take-up rate per village as a function
19

of village attributes and extend the prediction to the villages in non-NCMS counties. Since almost all
the villages have a positive NCMS take-up rate, it is impossible to conduct village-level propensity
score matching within the NCMS counties. Panel C of Table 7 presents the propensity score
matching results when we match each village in the four NCMS counties with a village in a nonNCMS county. We find a negative effect of NCMS take-up rate on both types of mortality.
Compared to OLS results, the effect on whether there is any 0-5 year old deaths is marginally
significant.
Overall, raw data comparison across NCMS and non-NCMS counties, as well as OLS and
propensity matching results suggest that the NCMS may have a significant effect on school
enrollment. The effect of the NCMS on village-level mortality is negative as we expect, but
statistically significant in raw data comparison, marginally significant in propensity score matching,
and not significant in OLS.

4. Our methodology: DID in propensity score matching
In this section, we propose a new propensity score matching methodology to better utilize
variations in our data. We observe outcomes for three sets of households: participants in the NCMS
(

, non-participants in the NCMS (

), and people not exposed to the NCMS (

outcome of an NCMS-participating household
(

). The

depends on the household’s observable attributes

), unobservables that are specific to NCMS-exposed counties, such as county investment in

health care and education infrastructure (

and individual-specific unobservable attributes (

Ideally, the average treatment effect (ATE) of enrolling in NCMS would be estimated as:
20

).

[

(4)

)]

(

(

).
(

However, the non-treatment outcome of the treated

) is not observed. Classical

propensity score matching finds a non-participating household

) and rewrites the average treatment effect estimator as:

same observable attributes (
[

(5)

in the same county that has the

(

)]

If the two households differ in

(

).

(i.e.

and

affects the NCMS take-up decision,

is a biased estimator of
Another option is comparing household
counties so that

in the non-NCMS

, which leads the average treatment effect to be estimated as:
[

(6)

with a matched household

(

)]

However, since we do not observe whether
NCMS be offered, it is likely that

(

).

would actually take up the NCMS should the
due to the endogenous take-up of the NCMS in

NCMS counties. County specific unobservables may differ as well due to the endogenous offer of
NCMS (

. Both suggest

is a biased estimator of

To alleviate the selection bias, consider two groups of households in all counties: the first
group has high take-up propensity based on their observable attributes ( X h ) and the second group
has low take-up propensity because of their different observables ( X l ). Because
groups are likely to differ in unobservables as well (

, the two

. Each group may contain NCMS-

participating, NCMS-non-participating, and NCMS-non-exposed households. If we compare highpropensity households between NCMS-exposed (E) and non-NCMS-exposed (NE) counties and
assume the probability of taking up NCMS condition on
21

is

, we get:

[

(7)
[

)]

(

[

)]

(

[

{

)]

(

)]

(

}

[

)]

(

{

}

under the assumption that household-specific unobservables follow the same statistical distribution
conditional on

in NCMS and non-NCMS counties

. Note that this

assumption is weaker than what is assumed in classical propensity matching (
or

is for any high propensity household i in

because

NCMS exposed counties that does not depend on the NCMS actual take-up status but
do. The assumption of

and

is more likely to be satisfied in our data because

the two types of counties are similar in the distribution of population, although their county specific
unobservables can differ (

. Similarly, under the assumption of

,

we have for the low propensity group:
[

(8)
[
{

(

(

)]

[

(

)]

[

)]
(

}

)]

[

(

{

)]
}.

If we further assume that the influence of X and W on Y is separable (i.e.
), the average treatment effect (ATE) of the NCMS is the same for high and low
propensity groups, and the treatment effect does not arise until the NCMS is in effect, we can write
the difference between (7) and (8) as a DID propensity score estimator:
(9)
{

}

{
22

}

{

}

{

}

{

}

{

}

{

}

{

}

{

}

{

}

.

In other words, we can difference out the county specific unobservables between NCMS and nonNCMS counties, hence circumventing the endogenous offering of NCMS by county. This way we
identify the true ATE as a proportion of

. Alternatively,

average treatment effect of randomly increasing NCMS enrollment from

can be interpreted as the
to

.

Note that our DID estimator utilizes three groups: (1) those who take up NCMS in the NCMS
counties, (2) those who do not take up NCMS in the NCMS counties, and (3) those living in the nonNCMS counties. The endogenous individual take-up is controlled for by comparing observationally
similar households between NCMS and non-NCMS counties, while the endogenous introduction of
NCMS at the county level is controlled for by comparing high propensity households and low
propensity households within the same type of county.
The effectiveness of

hinges on three assumptions: first, county-specific

unobservables (W) apply to everyone in the same county so that W can be differenced out. Second,
conditional on X, the unobservable individual attributes (Z) follow the same distribution between
NCMS and non-NCMS counties. Note that this does not require Z to be distributed the same for all
values of X. For example, if Z represents the attitude for child schooling and X represents education
level of the household head, we assume that households with the same household head education
have the same distribution of schooling attitude in NCMS and non-NCMS counties, but high- and
23

low-education households could have different schooling attitudes. The third assumption is that the
average treatment effect (which by definition does not occur until the household is enrolled in the
NCMS) is the same for all NCMS-participating households.
We argue that
(

or

is better than classical propensity score matching estimates
), because we do not directly compare NCMS participants versus those that

do not participate or are not exposed to NCMS. More specifically, Wang et al. (2009) and Wagstaff
.20 This is still biased because insurance

et al. (2009) propose estimators similar to

participants are a selected group and the distribution of

could be systematically different from

even if the two sets of counties are overall comparable. In contrast, we compare the population
of NCMS and non-NCMS counties regardless of the household’s actual NCMS take-up decision.
Therefore, we get around the unobserved selection of NCMS take-up and weaken the assumption
from similarity between

and

to similarity between

and

(conditional on X).

Moreover, our DID design differences out county-specific unobservables, which enables comparison
between NCMS and non-NCMS counties even if the offering of NCMS is endogenous.

5. Results
To calculate our DID estimator, we pool the eight counties and divide the overall householdlevel propensity score distribution equally into 10 bins by the percentile of the distribution.21 For
example, bin 1 refers to the lowest 10 percent of the propensity score distribution, bin 2 refers to the
20

Both Wang et al. (2009) and Wagstaff et al. (2009) have data before and after the insurance offer, so their estimate, if
translated in our framework, is equivalent to

for Y that represents the before-after change of outcomes

within a household.
21

We have tried 20 bins with 5% of data in each bin. Results are very similar.
24

lowest 10-20%, and bin 10 refers to the highest 10%. Using k as the index of bin, we estimate:
∑

∑

(10)

∑

where {  cty } are the eight county dummies, in an attempt to capture county-by-county difference in
school enrollment, and { k } is the DID estimator for bin k as compared to bin 1. Since bin 1 has
the lowest propensity score, a positive effect of the NCMS would be reflected as k  0 for all
k  2,3,...10. and the magnitude of k would increase with k .

Following the same logic, we can conduct the DID estimator at the village level for both
types of mortality. Since we have significantly fewer counts of villages (3977) than individuals (1.4
million), we use 5 instead of 10 bins for the village-level estimation:
(11)

∑

∑

∑

(12)

∑

∑

∑

.

In Table 8 we first summarize the distribution of the predicted village-level NCMS take-up
rate in the two types of counties. The two distributions are similar in mean, standard deviation,
minimum and maximum. Panel B of Table 8 reports the DID estimators for village-level mortality.
Using the lowest 20% of villages (in terms of predicted take-up rate) as the benchmark, we find that
all of the interactions between the bin dummies and NCMSoffered are negative but statistically
insignificant. These estimates suggest that the NCMS has no obvious effect in reducing the incidence
of child or maternal mortality at the village level, a result consistent with the OLS regression
reported in Table 3.
Before we present the DID estimators on individual-level school enrollment, Figure 3 plots
the average of InSchooli for bins 1-10 in NCMS and non-NCMS counties separately. Within the
25

non-NCMS counties, the average of InSchooli is 85.6% for the 9th bin (top 10-20% of the
propensity score) and 83.7% for the 1st bin (lowest 0-10% of the propensity score). The 1.9%
difference filters out the county-level unobservables (W) and therefore reflects the fundamental
difference between the two bins when there is no NCMS. Similarly, the difference between the 1st
and 9th bins is 89.4%-87%=2.4% in NCMS counties. According to Section 4, the DID estimator can
be computed by 2.4%-1.9%=0.5%, which we interpret as the average treatment effect of an
increasing NCMS take-up rate from the propensity of the 1st bin (0.71) to the propensity of the 9th bin
(0.872).22
Following this logic, equation (10) identifies the DID estimator ( k ) for every bin
k  2,3,...10. Compared to Figure 3, equation (10) allows unobservable county attributes to differ

among each county and lets InSchooli vary by individual attributes such as age, gender, and birth
order. These individual attributes do not enter into the propensity score prediction because the
prediction is done at the household level.
Table 9 reports the DID estimators for bins k  2,3,...10. Unlike the OLS and classical
propensity score matching results, these DID estimators are all statistically zero, suggesting that the
NCMS has no significant effect on school enrollment once we control for the endogeneous
introduction and take-up of the NCMS.
To make a more straightforward comparison between our DID estimate and the classical

22

Similar comparison can be conducted between bin 1 and bin 10. We do not have a compelling explanation as to why
the average school enrollment of bin 10 is lower than that of bin 9. One possibility is that families of bin 10 are more
likely to have a family member that migrates or holds a non-rural hukou out of the study area, both of which could
lead to more measurement errors in school enrollment. In our DID estimate, we explicitly control for the systematic
differences across bins.
26

propensity score estimate, we add the dummy of NCMStakeup to equation (10):
∑

∑

(13)

∑

∑

To avoid confusion, we use a different Greek letter for the coefficient of NCMSoffered (  k ) because
the interpretation of this coefficient will be different from that of k . Following the notation of
Section 4, k compares households exposed to the NCMS with households not exposed to the
NCMS thus representing the average treatment effect of the NCMS (proportional to the propensity of
enrolling in the NCMS relative to the lowest propensity group). In comparison,  k captures the
difference between NCMS participants and non-participants (both exposed to NCMS), which
corresponds to

;  k captures the difference between the non-exposed and the exposed-

but-not-participating; and k  k captures the difference between participants and the non-exposed
(

. The DID estimator k should be somewhere between  k and k  k .
Table 10 reports the estimates of  k and  k for k  2,3,...10. Consistent with the

classical propensity score matching results (as reported in Table 7), we find 8 out of the 9  k s are
statistically significant. Interestingly, none of the  k s are significant. Comparing Tables 9 and 10,
we conclude that most of the observed school enrollment differences between NCMS participating
and non-NCMS participating households are due to selection. In other words, the classical propensity
score matching estimate (in Table 7) has failed to control the selection bias due to unobservable
individual attributes. The propensity score matching between NCMS and non-NCMS counties
(

) is even worse because it does not control for the across-county difference either.
Is it possible that the NCMS was introduced too soon to have any real effect on school
27

enrollment by 2006? The second column of Table 9 compares county A (the one that introduced the
NCMS in 2004) versus the other four non-NCMS counties. This column shows no positive effect of
the NCMS either: two of the eight DID estimators are even negative, with 95% confidence.
So far, we conclude that the NCMS has no positive effect on mortality and school enrollment
for the average population. One possible explanation for the zero average treatment effect is that the
NCMS is only effective on a small fraction of the population that is most vulnerable to health risk
(Levy and Meltzer 2008). To examine this explanation, we try to identify vulnerable populations in
six ways: (1) age 6,7,8, 9-14 and 15-16; (2) boys versus girls; (3) households with and without
elderly; (4) households with a low and high house value; (5) households with a low and high
percentage of household members being adult laborers; and (6) household heads with lower- or
higher-than median education.
Arguably, younger age children are more vulnerable either because they are more likely to be
sick or because the enforcement of compulsory schooling is weaker at a younger age (especially six
years old, given the law’s permission to delay the school start age until seven year old if the area is
short of educational resources); girls are more vulnerable because households tend to give priority to
boys’ education; households with elderly are more subject to health risks of the elderly; and
households with a lower house value and/or lower education of the household head are more
vulnerable because they are likely to be poorer. These arguments predict that the NCMS may have
more beneficial effects on six year olds, girls, households with elderly members, and households
with a lower house value or lower education level for the household head. The difference between
households with relatively more or less adult laborers is less clear: those with less adult laborers are
28

more vulnerable to health risk, but those with more adult laborers could enjoy a greater gain of total
labor productivity due to health improvements associated with more labor.
Table 11 reports the DID estimators for children aged 6, 7, 8, 9-14, and 15-16 separately. We
examine the lower end of the age range in more detail because Table 2 shows that ages 6 and 7 have
the lowest enrollment rates and the highest variation between NCMS and non-NCMS counties. This
leads us to suspect that uninsured households may delay the school starting age of their children due
to lack of financial resources for education, lack of access to health care, or both. As we expect,
Table 11 shows that the NCMS only has significant effects on school enrollment at age 6, and close
to zero effect on older children. Even for age 6, only 3 of the 9 interactions of the propensity score
bin and NCMSoffered are statistically significant, suggesting that the effects of the NCMS on
reducing the delay of elementary school enrollment are moderate and only present for the households
with relatively high propensity scores.23
One may argue that parents want to delay child schooling not due to a lack of financial
resources but out of concern that a child younger than the average in his/her class may not have good
opportunities to develop leadership and other social skills. We have two reasons to argue against this
interpretation. First, if the delay is due to the concern about social skills, the introduction and take-up
of the NCMS does not affect this concern and therefore should not have any effect on school starting
age. Second, Chinese families that have more financial resources tend to push for early enrollment
instead of for delayed schooling. For example, in the China Health and Nutrition Survey (CHNS), a
longitudinal sample of Chinese households in nine provinces, the six-year-old enrollment rate is
23

In an unreported table, we repeat the exercise for 16-year-olds alone but do not find any significant effect of NCMS on
school enrollment.
29

significantly higher in urban households (65.1%) than in rural households (56.6%). The comparison
is similar if we divide the CHNS sample by whether a household’s per-capita income is above or
below the sample median: the six-year-old enrollment rate is 63.37% in above-median households
and 58.36% in below-median households.
In addition, Guo et al. (2007) show that urban China has an alarmingly high rate of caesarean
section (c-section) deliveries in hospital-based births (between 26% and 63% during the late 1990s),
as compared to the World Health Organization recommended level of 15%. At least anecdotally, part
of this is attributable to a rush of c-section deliveries in urban China towards the end of August
because the requirement for compulsory school enrollment is being six years old by September 1.24
To address the parental cry for early enrollment, the Ministry of Education is considering a proposal
that allows five year olds to enroll in elementary school if the child has received kindergarten
education and the local area has enough educational resources to admit them.25 Based on these facts
and our DID estimates, it is plausible that the introduction of the NCMS has led to less delay of
schooling, either because NCMS relieves the financial burden of health care or because better access
to health care makes more six-year-olds healthy enough for school. Unfortunately, we do not have
individual-level health utilization data to distinguish these two explanations.
Table 12 reports the DID estimators by the percentage of household members that are adult
laborers (age 17-60). In particular, we divide the households into four quartiles and obtain a separate
set of parameters for each quartile. The DID estimates are mostly insignificant, except for 4

24

See http://dailynews.sina.com/bg/chn/chnnews/chinanews/su/20100914/04411830677.html, accessed on September
14, 2010.

25

See http://edu.ce.cn/young/campus/200912/07/t20091207_20566049.shtml, accessed on September 11, 2010.
30

coefficients for households in the third quartile, 1 coefficient for the first quartile and 1 coefficient
for the fourth quartile. This suggests that, even if the NCMS has improved the health of adult
laborers, increased their labor income, and made more financial resources available for child
schooling, the effect is sparse and non-linear.
For other sub-groups (not reported), we find no more than one statistically significant DID
estimate by child gender, by whether a household has elderly members, by house value, and by
household head education. These results, combined with the above results by child age and adult
laborers, imply that the NCMS is not effective in improving school enrollment among the most
vulnerable households, though there is some evidence that the NCMS has reduced the delay of
elementary education for six-year-olds.

6. Discussion and Conclusion
Overall, the raw data of a large cross-section from the 2006 China Agricultural Census
suggests that NCMS-insured households on average have better outcomes in child school enrollment,
young child mortality, and maternal mortality than do non-insured households. However, most of
these differences are driven by the endogenous introduction and take-up of the NCMS. Once we
control for the selection bias using a difference-in-difference propensity score method, the NCMS
has close to zero effect on the average population, although there is moderate evidence that it has
reduced the delay of elementary education for some six-year-olds.
This finding of zero average treatment effect is consistent with the existing literature (Yi et al.
2009; Lei and Lin 2009), who attribute the lack of effect (on health care utilization and health
31

improvement) to the low reimbursement rate and to selection. Wang et al. (2009) do find some
positive effects of health insurance coverage on self-reported health status, but the insurance program
they studied is different from the NCMS and arguably more comprehensive in outpatient care and
could offer more help to deal with non-catastrophic health risk.
Since our studied area is much poorer than most areas of China, we suspect that the NCMS
does not improve the three studied outcomes in other areas either. In addition to the low
reimbursement rate, as noted above, the lack of average effect may be explained by the fact that
mortality is an extreme event and the effect of the NCMS on school enrollment may take more than
three years to show up in the data. Another possibility is that the NCMS may encourage more health
care utilization but the ease of financial burden has not appeared yet, as households need to pay even
more money out of pocket when they seek more treatment. Wagstaff et al. (2009) confirm this
suspicion: they find that the NCMS is related to more health care utilization but that it does not
decrease out-of-pocket spending on health care except for infant deliveries. Thanks to increased
government subsidies in 2009, the reimbursement rate has increased over time. Whether this
improvement portends better health and educational outcomes is a topic worth studying in the future.

7. References
Chen, Shaohua and Martin Ravallion (2008) “The developing world is poorer than we thought, but
no less successful in the fight against poverty,” Policy Research Working Paper #4703, World Bank.
Chen Y, Xu X, Wang R, Zhang H, Wu N, Wang L, Luo W, Wang Z. (2005) ”Evaluation of the effect
of NCMS on poverty reduction due to illness.” Chinese Health Economics 24(8): 26–28 (in Chinese)
Chen, Yuyu; Ginger Zhe Jin and Yang Yue (2010) “Peer Migration in China”, NBER working paper
#15671.
32

Cheng Bin; Wang Zaoli; and Yang Zhiyong (2008) “The Influence of the New-Type Rural
Cooperative Medical System on Promoting Hospital Delivery of Pregnant Women in Rural Areas”
Maternal and Child Health Care of China, 2008 23(10): 1323-1324 (in Chinese).
Chou, Win Lin and Zijun Wang (2009) “Regional Inequality in China’s Health Care Expenditures”
Health Economics 18: S137–S146.
Chou, Shin-Yi; Jin-Tan Liu and James K. Hammit (2006), "Households' Precautionary Behaviors The Effects of the Introduction of National Health Insurance in Taiwan," Review of Economics of the
Household, 4(4), 395-421, 2006.
Chou, Shin-Yi; Michael Grossman and Jin-Tan Liu (2011) “The Impact of national Health Insurance
on Birth Outcomes: A Natural Experiment in Taiwan” NBER working paper #16811.
Currie, Janet and Jonathan Gruber (1996a) “Health Insurance Eligibility, Utilization of Medical
Care, and Child Health.” Quarterly Journal of Economics. 111: 431-66.
Currie, Janet and Jonathan Gruber (1996b) “Saving Babies: The Efficacy and Cost of Recent
Expansions of Medicaid Eligibility for Pregnant Women.” Journal of Political Economy. 104:126396.
Currie, Janet (2009) “Healthy, Wealthy, and Wise: Socioeconomic Status, Poor Health in Childhood,
and Human Capital Development” Journal of Economic Literature, 47(1): 87-122.
Dafny, Leemore and Jonathan Gruber. 2005. “Public Insurance and Child Hospitalizations: Access
and Efficiency Effects,” Journal of Public Economics 89(1): 109-129.
Dahl, Gordon and Lance Lochner (2005) “The Impact of Family Income on Child Achievement”
NBER working paper #11279.
Fang Lilin; Yuan Zhaokang; Xiao Yunchang; Hong Ying; Cheng Hongliang; and Wang Jinfu (2006)
“A Comparative Analysis of the Equitability of Health Service before and after the Implementation
of the New Rural Cooperative Medical System” Chinese Rural Health Service Administration, 2006
26(5): 6-8 (in Chinese).
Glewwe, Paul and Edward A. Miguel (2008) “The Impact of Child Health and Nutrition on
Education in Less Developed Countries” Handbook of Development Economics, Volume 4, Chapter
56, Elsevier.
Greene, William H. (2008) Econometric Analysis, 6th Edition, Prentice Hall.
Guo, Sufang; Sabu S. Padmadas; Zhao Fengmin; James J Brown; and R William Stones (2007)
“Delivery settings and caesarean section rates in China” Bulletin of the World Health Organization
33

85(10): October 2007, 733-820. Accessed at http://www.who.int/bulletin/volumes/85/10/06035808/en/index.html.
Heckman, James, Hidehiko Ichimura and Petra Todd (1997): “Matching As An Econometric
Evaluation Estimator: Evidence from Evaluating a Job Training Program,” Review of Economic
Studies, 64(4), 605-654.
Heckman, James, Hidehiko Ichimura, Jeffrey Smith and Petra Todd (1998): “Characterizing
Selection Bias Using Experimental Data,” Econometrica , 66(5), 1017-1098.
Imbens Guido (2004) “Nonparametric estimation of average treatment effects under exogeneity: a
review” The Review of Economics and Statistics 86(1): 4–29.
Joyce, Ted and Andrew Racine (2005) “Chip Shots: Association Between the State Children’s
Health Insurance Programs and Immunization Coverage and Delivery.” Pediatrics 115(5): e526e534.
Lei, Xiaoyan and Wanchuan Lin (2009) “The New Cooperative Medical Scheme in Rural China:
Does More Coverage Mean More Service and Better Health?” Health Economics 18(S2), 2009,
S25-S46.
Levine, Phillip and Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach (2009) “The Impact of Children’s Public Health
Insurance Expansions on Educational Outcomes” Forum for Health Economics & Policy, Berkeley
Electronic Press 12(1).
Levy, Helen and David Meltzer. 2008. “The Impact of Health Insurance on Health” Annual Review
of Public Health 29:399-409.
Liao Xiaoning (2009) “The Effects of Jiangxiao Project and the New Rural Cooperative Medical
System on Improving Hospital Delivery Ratio of Pregnant Women in Poor Rural Areas” Chinese
Primary Health Care, 2009 23(2):43 (in Chinese).
Liu Y, Hsiao WC, Eggleston K. 1999. Equity in health and health care: the Chinese experience.
Social Science and Medicine 49: 1349–1356.
LoSasso, Anthony and Thomas Buchmueller. 2004. “The Effect of the State Children’s Health
Insurance Program on Health Insurance Coverage.” Journal of Health Economics. 23:1059-82.
Lu Liping and Li Xueqing (2010) “The Effects of the New-Type Rural Cooperative Medical System
on Reducing the Mortality of the Pregnant and Lying-in Women in China” Medical Information,
2010 5(10):2985-2986 (in Chinese).

34

Miller, Grant; Diana M. Pinto and Marcos Vera-Hernández (2009): “High-Powered Incentives in
Developing Country Health Insurance: Evidence from Colombia’s Régimen Subsidiado” NBER
working paper #15456.
Ministry of Health PRC (1999) Research on National Health Services: An Analysis Report of the
Second National Health Services Survey in 1998 (I), Beijing.
Ministry of Health, PRC (2005) Handbook of Statistics on New Cooperative Medical System 2003–
2004. Department of Rural Health Management and Center for China Cooperative Medical Scheme
of MOH: Beijing.
Ministry of Health, PRC (2007) Guideline on the Management of New Cooperative Medical System
(2007 version). Department of Rural Health Management and Center for China Cooperative Medical
Scheme of MOH: Beijing.
Morris, Pamela; Greg Duncan and Christopher Rodrigues (2004) “Does Money Really Matter?
Estimating Impacts of Family Income on Children’s Achievement with data from Random
Assignment Experiments” Northwestern University working paper.
Nyman J and Barleen N. (2005) “The Effect of Supplemental Private Health Insurance on Health
Care Purchases, Health, and Welfare in Brazil” University of Minnesota: Minneapolis, MN.
Rosenbaum, Paul and Donald Rubin (1983) “The Central Role of the Propensity Score in
Observational Studies for Causal Effects,” Biometrika, 70,41-55.
Russel M. (2005) “Applying DALY to assessing national health insurance performance: the
relationship between the national health insurance expenditures and the burden of disease measures
in Iran” International Journal of Health Planning & Management 20(2): 89–98.
Shi Qingling (2008) “The Promoting Effects of New-Type Rural Cooperative Medical System on
Hospital Delivery of Rural Areas Pregnant Women” Maternal and Child Health Care of China, 2008
(18):2492-2492 (in Chinese).
Smith, Jeffrey and Petra Todd (2005): "Does Matching Overcome Lalonde’s Critique of
Nonexperimental Estimators?" Journal of Econometrics, 125 (1-2), p. 305-353.
Trivedi, P. (2003) “Patterns of health care use in Vietnam: analysis of 1998 Vietnam Living
Standards Survey data” in Glewee, P., Agrawal, N., and Dollar, D. edited Economic Growth, Poverty
and Household Welfare: Policy Lessons from Vietnam. World Bank, Washington DC.
Wagstaff, A. and M. Pradhan (2005) “Health Insurance Impacts on Health and Nonmedical
Consumption in a Developing Country” The World Bank: Washington, DC.
35

Wagstaff, A and S. Yu (2007) “Do health sector reforms have their intended impacts? The World
Bank’s Health VIII project in Gansu province, China” Journal of Health Economics 26: 505–535.
Wagstaff, A. and M. Lindelow (2008) “Can insurance increase financial risk? The curious case of
health insurance in China” Journal of Health Economics 27(4): 990-1005.
Wagstaff, A.; M. Lindelow; Gao Jun; Xu Ling; and Qian Juncheng (2009) “Extending health
insurance to the rural population: An impact evaluation of China’s new cooperative medical scheme”
Journal of Health Economics 28: 1-19.
Wang, Hong; Winnie Yip; Licheng Zhang; and William C. Hsiao (2009) “The Impact of Rural
Mutual Health Care on Health Status: Evaluation of a Social Experiment in Rural China” Health
Economics 18: S65–S82 (2009).
Wang Weizhong (2007) “Analysis on the in-Patient Services Utilization Before and After Enforcing
the New-Type Rural Cooperative Medical System in County-level City of Tong Xiang” Chinese
Primary Health Care, 2007, 21(9):12-14 (in Chinese).
The World Health Report 2005, accessed at www.who.int/whr/2005/en/index.html on August 15,
2011.
Yuan Z; Fang L.; Zhou X.; Xian Y.; Hong Y.; Cheng H.; and Wang J. (2006) “Impact of NCMS on
farmers’ demand and utilization for medical care: a follow-up survey” Chinese Rural Health Service
Administration 26(10): 14–17 (in Chinese).
Yi, Hongmei; Linxiu Zhang; Kim Singer; Scott Rozelle; and Scott Atlas (2009) “Health Insurance
and Catestrophic Illness: a Report on the New Cooperative Medical System in Rural China” Health
Economics 18: S119–S127 (2009).
Zhang L; Yan Y.; S. Rozelle; and Wang H. (2006) “An empirical analysis of China’s New Collective
Medical System: from a policy prospective.” Social Sciences in China XXVII(3): 107–116.
Zhang Tihua; Tian Qingfeng; and Shi Songhe (2007) “A Study of the New-Type Rural CMS
Influence on Outpatient Service Utilization of Peasants” Chinese Journal of Misdiagnostics, 2007
7(28): 6951-6952 (in Chinese).
Zhu Dongmei; Jin Guoping; Wu Hui; Zhang Dongxia; and Tian Qingfeng (2007) “Study of
Utilization of Hospital Health Service before and after the New Rural Cooperatives Medical
Scheme” Henan Medical Research, 2007 16(3): 261-264 (in Chinese).

36

Figure 1: Histogram of village-level take-up rate, conditional on NCMS counties

Figure 2: Propensity score distribution of NCMS and non-NCMS counties

37

Figure 3: School enrollment rate by NCMS/non-NCMS counties and propensity score bins

% in school

Non-NCMS
counties
NCMS counties
actual NCMS
take up rate

Propensity score bins

Cutoff points for bin definition:
Mean of p score

Min of p score

Max of p score

bin 1

0.71

0.355

0.745

bin 2

0.755

0.745

0.762

bin 3

0.768

0.762

0.774

bin 4

0.782

0.774

0.79

bin 5

0.798

0.79

0.806

bin 6

0.814

0.806

0.819

bin 7

0.824

0.819

0.828

bin 8

0.833

0.828

0.839

bin 9

0.846

0.839

0.855

bin 10

0.872

0.855

0.978

38

Table 1: Summary of village-level mortality of young children and pregnant women, by NCMS status

Total # of

non-

All

County

Counties

NCMS counties

NCMS

NCMS

with

with

village take up

village take up

counties

counties

NCMS in

NCMS in

rate above

rate below

2004

2006

median (84.1%)

median (84.1%)

2017

1960

483

1477

980

980

# of young child

1.10

0.77

0.93

0.72

0.754

0.788

deaths

(1.63)

(1.32)

(1.44)

(1.26)

(1.28)

(1.35)

0

52.65%

61.68%

55.91%

63.57%

61.22%

62.14%

1

18.69%

18.06%

19.67%

17.54%

19.08%

17.04%

2

13.09%

10.87%

12.01%

10.49%

11.02%

10.71%

3

8.28%

5.14%

5.59%

5.34%

5.00%

5.82%

3+

7.29%

4.25%

6.83%

3.06%

3.67%

4.29%

young child

0.011

0.0077

0.0094

0.0072

0.009

0.009

mortality rate

(0.016)

(0.018)

(0.01)

(0.024)

(0.02)

(0.04)

# of pregnant

0.059

0.028

0.021

0.03

0.026

0.029

women deaths

(0.296)

(0.167)

(0.143)

(0.174)

(0.158)

(0.175)

0

95.14%

97.29%

97.83%

97.09%

97.14%

97.45%

1

4.31%

2.66%

2.07%

2.84%

2.76%

2.55%

2

0.25%

0.05%

0%

0.07%

0.10%

0%

2+

0.3%

0%

0%

0%

0%

0%

pregnancy

0.023

0.011

0.012

0.010

0.008

0.013

women

(0.134)

(0.09)

(0.098)

(0.011)

(0.08)

(0.1)

villages

mortality rate
Standard deviation in parentheses.

39

Table 2: Summary of school enrollment, by NCMS status
nonNCMS

NCMS counties
All

counties

Total # of school

All counties

County

Counties

not

enrolled

with

with

enrolled

in NCMS

NCMS in

NCMS in

in

2004

2006

NCMS

male

female

776,854

643,831

151901

491930

128,166

515,665

763364

657334

% in school all age

84.13%

88.09%

86.5%

88.5%

86.27%

88.55%

85.4%

86.4%

age 6

29.28%

45.26%

36.7%

47.9%

41.19%

46.32%

37.5%

37.5%

age 7

79.97%

90.86%

86.3%

92.3%

88.94%

91.36%

85.8%

85.8%

age 8

91.74%

96.02%

94.4%

96.5%

94.79%

96.34%

94.2%

93.2%

age 9

95.14%

97.34%

96.4%

97.6%

96.55%

97.54%

96.4%

95.9%

age 10

95.58% age 100
97.39%

96.8%

97.6%

96.53%

97.61%

96.7%

96%

age 11

96.52%

97.41%

97.2%

97.4%

96.79%

97.56%

97.1%

96.7%

age 12

95.79%

97.03%

96.5%

97.2%

95.98%

97.30%

96.6%

96%

age 13

95.14%

96.58%

95.5%

96.9%

95.65%

96.81%

96.1%

95.4%

age 14

91.49%

93.39%

92.3%

93.7%

91.22%

93.90%

92.9%

91.7%

age 15

85.13%

87.52%

86.6%

87.8%

84.91%

88.15%

86.9%

85.7%

age 16

68.86%

71.60%

73.9%

70.9%

68.10%

72.42%

70.9%

69.4%

age children

40

Table 3: Across county comparison
County Name
Year to first adopt NCMS
Local fiscal income per capita (2004)
Fiscal expenditure per capita (2004)

1

1

A

B

C

D

E

F

G

H

2004

2006

2006

2006

2007

2007

2007

2007

162

166

122

320

141

149

114

68

493

381

352

660

499

434

366

398

Per-capita income (2004)1

1562

1968

1503

2119

1540

1515

1511

1410

# of children per HH2

2.40

2.16

2.01

2.22

1.72

2.37

2.47

2.33

2.42

2.49

2.39

2.42

2.34

2.41

2.41

2.52

0.05

0.25

0.25

0.28

0.34

0.19

0.16

0.33

9.44

9.70

9.55

9.67

9.79

9.64

9.44

9.65

3.86

2.93

3.08

2.40

3.15.

2.35

3.37

2.84

0.02

0.02

0.03

0.02

0.05

0.02

0.03

0.03

0.03

0.03

0.05

0.02

0.10

0.02

0.03

0.03

0.59

0.66

0.37

0.60

0.44

0.65

0.65

0.47

0.33

0.38

0.35

0.44

0.20

0.45

0.31

0.13

# of adult labor per HH

2

Fraction of HH with migrants
Log(house value)
Contract land

2

2

2

Fraction of HH with non-rural hukou

2
2

Fraction of HH with non-local hukou

% of villages with national poverty status
% of villages for minority gathering

2

2

Note: 1. Source: the 2004 statistical year book of the study, in RMB. 2. Source: the study sample.

41

Table 4: Compare households across NCMS participants, NCMS non-participants and non-NCMS counties
Non-NCMS
counties

All

NCMS counties
Non-takeup

5.97
(3.03)
4.22
(1.57)
2.46
(1.28)
0.38
(0.69)
0.19
(0.39)
0.04
(0.19)
0.037
(0.19)
0.02
(0.14)
9.42
(0.999)
3.35
(2.55)

6.28
(3.16)
4.14
(1.64)
2.5
(1.43)
0.42
(0.71)
0.29
(0.46)
0.04
(0.19)
0.04
(0.20)
0.02
(0.14)
9.55
(1.02)
2.97
(2.33)

6.25
(3.44)
3.99
(1.69)
2.37
(1.41)
0.4
(0.70)
0.29
(0.46)
0.05
(0.24)
0.08
(0.27)
0.04
(0.20)
9.42
(1.02)
2.7
(2.27)

6.29
(3.10)
4.18
(1.63)
2.54
(1.44)
0.43
(0.72)
0.29
(0.46)
0.03
(0.19)
0.03
(0.18)
0.02
(0.12)
9.59
(1.02)
3.03
(2.35)

0.094
(0.29)
0.342
(0.47)
0.51
(0.50)
1.47
(2.12)
6.7
(6.39)
7.5
(7.49)
726906

0.1
(0.31)
0.25
(0.44)
0.49
(0.50)
1.2
(1.96)
5.5
(5.34)
5.5
(5.33)
688328

0.13
(0.34)
0.25
(0.43)
0.48
(0.50)
1.2
(1.87)
5.4
(5.87)
5.5
(5.99)
136859

0.1
(0.31)
0.25
(0.43)
0.49
(0.50)
1.2
(1.97)
5.5
(5.2)
5.5
(5.16)
551469

Takeup

Household Variables
years of edu of HH head
household size
# of 17-60 year old
# of 60+ year old
# of migrating workers
have non-local hukou
have non-rural hukou
have government worker
log (house value)
contract land (mu)
Village Variables
is the center of the town
is a minority gathering village
has national poverty status
distance to nearest elementary
school (km)
distance to nearest secondary
school (km)
distance to nearest hospital
(km)
Observation

42

Table 5: regression results of village-level mortality
Any 0-5 year old death
NCMS offered

NCMS take-up rate

Any pregnancy death

-0.087

-0.02

(-1.49)

(-0.91)

0.012

-0.031

0.003

-0.003

(0.17)

(-0.37)

(0.11)

(-0.12)

0.007

-0.005

0.000

-0.003

(0.19)

(-0.16)

(0.000)

(-0.20)

-0.034

0.038

0.005

0.01

(1.97)*

(1.63)

(0.76)

(1.04)

0.023

0.004

-0.006

-0.008

(1.40)

(0.19)

(-0.94)

(-1.22)

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

(10.70)**

(6.72)**

(4.76)**

(4.03)**

0.003

-0.001

0.002

0.001

(2.32)*

(0.35)

(2.35)*

(1.19)

No

Yes

No

Yes

Observations

3977

3977

3977

3977

R-square

0.04

0.07

0.02

0.03

is the center of the town

is a minority gathering village

has national poverty status

# of households in the village

distance to the nearest hospital

County dummies

Errors clustered by township.
Robust t statistics in parentheses,* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%

43

Table 6: OLS results of individual-level school enrollment
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

age 6-16

age 7-15

age 6-16

age 7-15

0.014

0.007

(4.93)**

(2.68)**

0.018

0.014

0.017

0.013

(8.36)**

(6.52)**

(8.64)**

(6.78)**

counties

All

All

All

All

town dummies

NO

NO

YES

YES

Observations

1420685

1154614

1420685

1154614

R-square

0.28

0.05

0.29

0.06

NCMS offered
NCMS takeup

All regressions control for individual, household and village variables as described in the paper. Error
clustered by village. Robust t statistics in parentheses,* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%,

Table 7: Classical propensity score matching, all using nearest neighbor matching
Average

std err

t-stat

treatment
effect
Panel A: Conditional on 4 NCMS counties
Individual-level School Enrollment

0.016

0.001

11.38**

0.026

0.001

31.11**

Village level of having any 0-5 year old death

-0.067

0.026

-2.63**

Village level young child mortality rate

0.000

0.001

0.154

Village level of having any pregnant women death

-0.013

0.009

-1.427

Village-level pregnant women mortality rate

-0.003

0.003

-0.984

Panel B: Conditional on all 8 counties
Individual-level school enrollment
Panel C: Conditional on all 8 Counties

* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.

44

Table 8: DID estimates for village-level mortality rate, including all 8 counties
Panel A: Predicted value of village medical insurance participation ratio
Number

Mean

Std

Min

Max

Non-NCMS

2017

0.8

0.053

0.357

0.995

NCMS

1960

0.8

0.055

0.355

0.989

Panel B: DID estimates
Children Death

Pregnant Women Death

-0.037

0.004

(-1.15)

(0.25)

-0.057

-0.002

(-1.71)

(-0.11)

-0.033

-0.018

(-0.86)

(-1.08)

-0.065

-0.038

(-1.49)

(-2.21)*

-0.016

-0.012

(-0.31)

(-0.53)

-0.047

-0.027

(-0.95)

(-1.35)

-0.034

-0.004

(-0.66)

(-0.17)

-0.091

0.014

(-1.67)

(-0.66)

NCMSoffered

absorbed

absorbed

county dummy

Yes

Yes

Observations

3977

3977

R-square

0.06

0.02

bin 2 (lowest 20-40% of pscore)
bin 3
bin 4
bin 5 (highest 20% of pscore)
bin 2*NCMSoffered
bin 3*NCMSoffered
bin 4*NCMSoffered
bin 5*NCMSoffered

Errors clustered by township. Robust t statistics in parentheses,* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.

45

Table 9: DID estimates for individual-level school enrollment
(1)

(2)

All counties

County A vs. non-NCMS counties

-0.011

0.058

(2.51)*

(9.49)**

-0.009

-0.015

(3.06)**

(3.32)**

-0.011

-0.02

(3.25)**

(4.31)**

-0.009

-0.014

(2.65)**

(2.71)**

0.000

-0.001

(0.14)

(-0.34)

0.011

0.008

(3.26)**

(1.84)

0.017

0.02

(5.21)**

(4.25)**

0.018

0.02

(5.22)**

(4.01)**

0.022

0.027

(6.16)**

(4.98)**

0.016

0.018

(3.69)**

(3.08)**

0.002

-0.006

(0.600)

(-1.68)

0.003

-0.002

(0.69)

(2.46)*

0.002

-0.004

(0.51)

(-1.52)

0.005

0.004

(1.33)

(1.87)

0.004

-0.005

(1.09)

(-1.26)

0.003

0.003

(0.62)

(0.89)

0.003

-0.001

(0.75)

(0.71)

0.003

0.002

(0.62)

(0.40)

0.006

-0.004

(1.11)

(2.09)*

county dummies / individual variables

yes / yes

yes / yes

Observations

1420685

950681

0.27

0.29

Sample
NCMS offered
bin 2 (lowest 10-20% of pscore)
bin 3
bin 4
bin 5
bin 6
bin 7
bin 8
bin 9
bin 10 (highest 10% of pscore)
bin 2 * NCMS offered
bin 3 * NCMS offered
bin 4 * NCMS offered
bin 5 * NCMS offered
bin 6 * NCMS offered
bin 7 * NCMS offered
bin 8 * NCMS offered
bin 9 * NCMS offered
bin 10 * NCMS offered

R-square

Error clustered by village. Robust t statistics in parentheses,* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.
46

Table 10: DID estimators, separating NCMSoffered and NCMStakeup
School Enrollment
bin 2 * NCMS offered

-0.007
(1.32)

bin 3 * NCMS offered

-0.009
(1.23)

bin 4 * NCMS offered

-0.018
(2.24)*

bin 5 * NCMS offered

-0.008
(1.24)

bin 6 * NCMS offered

-0.007
(1.23)

bin 7 * NCMS offered

-0.007
(1.26)

bin 8 * NCMS offered

-0.003
(0.56)

bin 9 * NCMS offered

-0.009
(1.38)

bin 10 * NCMS offered

-0.011
(1.63)

bin 2 * NCMS take-up

0.012
(2.45)*

bin 3 * NCMS take-up

0.015
(2.38)*

bin 4 * NCMS take-up

0.025
(3.48)**

bin 5 * NCMS take-up

0.016
(2.81)**

bin 6 * NCMS take-up

0.013
(2.63)**

bin 7 * NCMS take-up

0.011
(2.19)*

bin 8 * NCMS take-up

0.007
(1.37)

bin 9 * NCMS take-up

0.012
(2.29)*

bin 10 * NCMS take- up

0.018
(3.32)**

NCMStakeup

0.007
(1.93)

Observations/R-square

1420685/0.27

Error clustered by village. NCMSoffered is absorbed in the regression. Controls for all bin dummies, county dummies,
and individual variables. Robust t statistics in parentheses,* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.
47

Table 11: DID estimator on individual-level school enrollment, by child age
age 6

age 7

age 8

age 9-14

age 15-16

0.002

0.022

0.003

-0.004

0.004

(0.14)

(1.97)*

(0.51)

(1.1)

(0.36)

0.009

0.009

-0.003

-0.001

0.006

(0.59)

(0.75)

(0.38)

(0.18)

(0.51)

0.004

0.012

0.006

0.002

0.000

(0.23)

(0.97)

(0.76)

(0.42)

(0.03)

0.028

0.021

0.002

0.002

0.001

(1.87)

(1.71)

(0.27)

(0.60)

(0.08)

0.029

0.005

0.000

-0.002

0.015

(1.68)

(0.41)

(0.01)

(-0.49)

(1.44)

0.038

0.007

0.007

-0.006

0.007

(2.22)*

(0.59)

(0.97)

(-1.86)

(0.65)

0.029

0.017

0.009

-0.002

0.006

(1.68)

(1.34)

(1.29)

(-0.57)

(0.60)

0.041

0.009

-0.006

-0.002

0.013

(2.43)*

(0.70)

(0.82)

(0.70)

(1.18)

0.038

0.006

0.004

-0.003

0.006

(2.14)*

(0.44)

(0.42)

(0.75)

(0.50)

absorbed

absorbed

absorbed

absorbed

absorbed

bin 2 – bin 10 dummies

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

County dummies

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Individual variables

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

192999

184504

191658

768766

236244

0.11

0.07

0.03

0.02

0.05

bin 2 * NCMS offered
bin 3 * NCMS offered
bin 4 * NCMS offered
bin 5 * NCMS offered
bin 6 * NCMS offered
bin 7 * NCMS offered
bin 8 * NCMS offered
bin 9 * NCMS offered
bin 10 * NCMS offered
NCMS offered

Observations
R-square

Error clustered by village. Robust t statistics in parentheses,* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.

48

Table 12: DID estimator on individual-level school enrollment, by % of household members being 17-60 year old
(adult labor)
% of adult labor

% of adult labor

st

% of adult labor

2 quartile

3 quartile

4th quartile

0.002

0.002

0.006

-0.001

(0.28)

(0.42)

(1.15)

(-0.11)

-0.006

0.007

0.015

0.001

(-0.84)

(1.22)

(2.67)**

(0.12)

-0.001

0.008

0.008

0.004

(-0.16)

(1.24)

(1.35)

(0.56)

-0.002

0.01

0.018

0.000

(-0.39)

(1.70)

(3.19)**

(0.05)

0.002

-0.003

0.009

0.015

(0.34)

(-0.47)

(1.70)

(1.99)*

-0.003

0.003

0.004

0.008

(-0.43)

(0.57)

(0.70)

(1.04)

0.001

0.004

0.012

-0.002

(0.22)

(0.68)

(2.21)*

(-0.31)

0.003

0.004

0.006

0.005

(0.52)

(0.66)

(1.00)

(0.80)

0.005

0.017

0.014

0.008

(0.78)

(2.16)*

(2.29)*

(1.23)

absorbed

absorbed

absorbed

absorbed

bin 2 – bin 10 dummies

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

County dummies

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Individual variables

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

364480

380721

376187

299297

0.32

0.33

0.28

0.18

bin 3 * NCMS offered
bin 4 * NCMS offered
bin 5 * NCMS offered
bin 6 * NCMS offered
bin 7 * NCMS offered
bin 8 * NCMS offered
bin 9 * NCMS offered
bin 10 * NCMS offered
NCMS offered

Observations
R-square

rd

% of adult labor

1 quartile
bin 2 * NCMS offered

nd

Error clustered by village. Robust t statistics in parentheses,* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.

49

