NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EMPLOYMENT, HOURS, AND
EARNINGS IN THE DEPRESSION:
AN ANALYSIS OF EIGHT
MANUFACTURING INDUSTRIES

Ben S. Bernanke

Working Paper No. 1642

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138

June 1985

Stanford Graduate School of Business. I thank participants in
workshops at Stanford, M.I.T., Harvard, Chicago, Carnegie—Mellon,
Rochester, Princeton, and Pennsylvania for comments on the first
draft of this paper. Numerous colleagues were also helpful. The
Center for Economic Policy Research and the Hoover Institution
provided support. The research reported here is part of the NRER's
research program in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed
are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NEER Working Paper #1642
June 1985

Employment, Hours,

and Earnings in the Depression:
An Analysis of Eight Manufacturing Industries

ABSTRACT

This paper employs monthly, industry—level data in a study of Depression—era labor

markets. The underlying analytical framework is one in which, as in Lucas (1970), employers can vary total labor input not only by changing the number of workers but also by
varying the length of the work—week. This framework appears to be particularly relevant

to the 1930s, a period in which both employment and hours of work fluctuated sharply.
With aggregate demand treated as exogenous, it is shown that an econometric model based

on this framework, in conjunction with some additional elements (notably, the adjustment

of workers' pay to permanent but not transitory variations in the cost of living, and the
effects of New Deal legislation) can provide a good explanation of the behavior of the key

time series. In particular, the empirical model is able to explain the puzzle of increasing
real wages during a period of high unemployment.

Ben Bernanke
Graduate School

of Business
Stanford University

Stanford CA 94305
(415) 497—2763

Introduction
Seismologists learn more from one large earthquake than from a dozen small tremors.

On the same principle, the Great Depression of the 1930s would appear to present an
important opportunity for the study of the effects of business cycles on the labor market:
In no other period for which we have data do output, labor input, and labor compensation
exhibit such severe short-run variations.
Despite this apparent opportunity, modern econometric analyses of labor markets have

typically made little use of pre—Worid War II data. There are some important exceptions:

In the class of papers that assume continuous labor market equilibrium, the best known
example is by Lucas and Rapping (1969). This extremely influential piece was followed by

Darby (1976), who basically supported the Lucas-Rapping approach, and by Altonji and
Ashenfelter (1980) and Altonji (1982), who were critical of it. Among papers that allow for

market disequilibrium, work by Rosen and Quandt (1978) and Ashenfelter (1980) should
be noted.' However, none of the papers cited, I think it is fair to say, is the definitive study
of 1930s labor markets. They share at least two deficiencies in this regard:

First, all of this work has used annual and highly aggregated data. This reflects the
fact that none of the papers is focused on the 1930s per se but include pre-war data only
as part of a longer-period study. Since none of the papers uses data from before 1929, any
conclusion drawn about the pre-war period is based on at most ten or eleven observations.
Second, none of the papers mentioned has been particularly successful in rationalizing

the movements of the key Depression-era time series. For example, none of the papers
even addresses the radical fluctuations in the length of the work-week during this period, a

phenomenon which the present research will argue is a quite important part of the overall

story. Probably the most difficult unsolved puzzle, however, is the behavior of the real
wage: Real wages rose steadily in 1930-31, even as output and employment fell sharply.
There were further large rises in real wages in 1933-34 and 1937, although unemployment
remained high.

Why real wages should rise when the demand for labor is presumably very low is
difficult for any existing approach, equilibrium or disequilibrium, to explain: On the equilibrium side, Lucas and Rapping (1972) admitted in a reply to Rees (1970) that their model

could not explain the relation of wages and employment for the period from 1933 until the
1

war; they did claim success for 1929—33. However, as Rees (1972) noted in his rejoinder,

even this more restricted claim requires that the negative effect of falling nominal wages
and prices on labor supply in 1929—33 strongly dominate the positive effect of the steadily
rising real wage.
How could deflation have reduced labor supply even though real wages were rising? The

original Lucas—Rapping explanation appears to be that falling nominal wages and prices
depressed current labor supply by raising workers' expectations of inflation (expectations
are assumed to be adaptive in the log of the price level) and lowering ex ante real interest

rates. In light of Lucas (1972), an alternative rationale for this effect of deflation is that
workers mistakenly interpreted the fall in money wages as a (local?) decline in real wages.

The first explanation is hard to maintain, especially given that, ez post, real interest rates
in 1930—33 were the highest of the century. The second explanation relies on an extremely

slow diffusion of information about wages and prices. In either case, it seems unlikely that

the impact of falling wages and prices would be strong enough and persistent enough to
explain the data.2

The disequilibrium, or Keynesian, explanation for the behavior of real wages in the

'thirties (at least in 1930—33) is that nominal wage "stickiness" and the sharp deflation
combined to create an unplanned increase in real wages; higher real wages forced firms up
their labor demand curves, adding to unemployment.3 Now it cannot be denied that money

wages are more "inertial" than prices (in the sense that they exhibit less high-frequency
variation), although the economic interpretation of this fact is in dispute. Indeed, the
present paper will conclude that the inertia of nominal wages must be given some role in
the explanation of real wage behavior. However, the problem with the Keynesian story as

a complete explanation, in my view, is the degree of unexplained wage rigidity that must
be accepted in order to rationalize such a long period of labor—market "disequilibrium".
For example, for their 1930—73 sample, Rosen and Quandt estimated that up to four years

are required to eliminate half of an initial discrepancy between the actual wage and its
equilibrium path.4
How can we decide how much wage—stickiness is "reasonable"? Modern Keynesians

have frequently argued that we must take existing labor market institutions (such as non-

indexed labor contracts) as "given" in our analyses of wage and labor market adjustment
2

(see, e.g., Fischer (1977)). If this principle is applied to the 1930s, it becomes apparent
that the very slow rates of wage adjustment attributed by Keynesians to that period are
inconsistent with what we know of pre-war labor market institutions and practices. Space

constraints preclude a full documentation of this claim, but a few points can be made:
1) Profitability in the 1920s in manufacturing (the sector studied in this paper), and survival

in the 1930s, depended on vigorous cost-cutting (the 1920s in particular were a period of
highly competitive cost competition); in this spirit, firms seemed quite willing to cut wage
rates sharply whenever they thought conditions warranted (as in 1921—22 and 1931—33).

Wage rates were typically set unilaterally by the firm and could be varied frequently, if
desired. There were also many ways of changing effective wages without reducing wage
rates; e.g., elimination of bonuses, reclassification of workers, even firing workers and then

re-hiring them at a lower wage (Dunn (1929), pp. 125-128.) 2) The labor movement in
manufacturing was almost completely quiescent between 1923 and the later New Deal5, and
employers fought worker attempts to install collective bargaining energetically—sometimes

ruthlessly—and effectively. 3) The relatively low skill levels of the majority of workers6,

plus the ample supplies of willing replacements7, reduced worker bargaining power still
further. 4) Before the New Deal, government played relatively little role in labor markets,
either as a regulator of labor market practices (an exception was the child labor laws) or as

a provider of social insurance. Interventions by the courts in the labor market were most

often on the side of employers (see Bernstein (1960), ch. 4). All of these factors reduce
the plausibility of extremely rigid nominal wages as the primary explanation of 1930s real
wage behavior.

The present paper gives a new structural analysis of Depression—era labor market
performance, with particular attention to rectifying the two problem just cited. Instead of
aggregate annual data, I employ monthly data for each of eight manufacturing industries.

I also extend the sample period back to 1923, which gives more than two hundred time
series observations for each industry. This previously unexploited data set (described in
more detail in Section I and in the appendix) appears to be a rich source of information.
My treatment of the real wage issue is somewhat eclectic. However, the central insight

motivating my approach is one due to Lucas (1970). Lucas noted that if firms vary hours of
work or rates of capacity utilization (the intensive margin) as well as the number of workers
3

or machines (the extensive margin), then the cyclical behavior of the measured real wage

is less restricted than when only the extensive margin is used. This observation seems
particularly germane to the Depression, a period in which hours of work in some industries

dropped by more than half. I show in this paper that an econometric model based on
Lucas's insight, in conjunction with some additional elements (notably, the adjustment of
workers' pay to permanent but not transitory variations in the cost of living, and the impact
of government legislation) can give a good explanation of real wage behavior in the 1930s.

This model (which may be of independent theoretical and empirical interest; see Section

II.g) also improves our understanding of the determination of employment and hours of
work during this period.

It should be stressed at the outset that this paper focuses on the labor market, not on

the economy on the whole. This reduction to a partial equilibrium has the advantage of
not requiring a commitment to any specific explanation of pre-war fluctuations in aggregate

demand. In particular, I do not rule out (indeed, I firmly accept) the possibility that the
fall in aggregate demand during the 'thirties was the result of major market failures outside
the labor market. (See my 1983 paper for a discussion of the effects of the general financial

collapse on the economy.) Thus, in analyzing labor markets with what is essentially a
market-clearing approach, I am not committed to any claim that the level of output or
employment during the 1930s was efficient. Taking aggregate demand as given also has
certain econometric advantages; see below.
The paper is organized as follows: Section I discusses the data set and documents a few

facts, notably the apparently perverse behavior of real wages and the large fluctuations in
weekly hours. A partial equilibrium model of the labor market which builds on the insight
of Lucas (1970) is described in Section II. An empirical analysis which uses this model as

the starting point is discussed in Section III. Section IV reports results from some useful
simulation exercises. Section V considers an alternative, more dynamic specification of the

supply side of the model. Section VI concludes.

I. The Data: A Prelimary Look
As noted in the Introduction, a virtue of the present research is that it brings to bear

a new and more extensive data set. In this section I first briefly describe this data set.
4

(The data appendix has more details. Also see the discussion in Bernanke and Powell
(forthcoming).) I then point out some basic empirical observations which motivate the
model developed in subsequent sections.

The data set constructed for this research includes, for each of eight manufacturing
industries, monthly observations on the following variables:

1. Production
2. Price of output (wholesale)
3. Employment (of wage-earners)

4. Hours of work per week (per wage-earner)

-

5. Average hourly earnings (of wage-earners)

The sample period runs from January 1923 to December 1939. The data from the 1920s

were included so that the Depression might be studied in a broader context, including a
period of "normalcy". It is unfortunate that it was impossible to extend the sample even
further back (see appendix).

The eight manufacturing industries covered, with measures of their relative impor-

tance, are listed in Table 1. (Tables and figures are at the end of the text.) The industries are diverse with respect to type of output (producers of durables, nondurables,
and semidurables are represented), market structure, stage of development, geographical

location, and the skill composition and demographics of the labor force. The choice of
industries was not arbitrary; this was the largest set for which complete and reasonably

consistent data series could be found. In particular, the desire to have series on weekly
hours restricted me to industries regularly surveyed, beginning in the early 1920s, by the

National Industrial Conference Board. (The Bureau of Labor Statistics, which surveyed
many more industries, did not collect hours data before 1932.) Also, a number of candidate industries were eliminated by the requirement that the industrial production series be

based on a measure of the physical volume of output (e.g., tons of iron), not imputed by
using measures of inputs.8

It will be useful to have a compact summary of the cyclical properties of some of
these data. To obtain such a summary, I employed a simple technique closely related
to the National Bureau of Economic Research's traditional reference cycle approach (see,
5

e.g., Burns and Mitchell (1946)). I will refer to this technique as the "standardized cycle

approach". To construct a set of standardized business cycles, I began with the official
NBER datings of turning points (Burns (1969)). For this period, the turning points were
Peak

Trough

May 1923

July 1924

October 1926

November 1927

August 1929

March 1933

May 1937

June 1938

(February 1945)

Each of the cycles was divided into nine stages: The initial and terminal peak months

were designated stages I and IX, respectively, and the trough month was designated stage

V.9 The months between the initial peak and trough were divided as evenly as possible'°

into stages H to W; similarly, the period between the trough and the terminal peak was
broken into stages VIto VIII. (Obviously, except at peaks and troughs, the length in mcnths

of a "stage" depends on the duration of the complete cycle.)
The next step was to select a list of basic and derived variables whose cyclical behavior

was to be summarized. For each industry, each of these variables was first deseasonalized,

then the average value of each variable during each stage of each cycle was calculated.
Finally, the average values at each stage were normalized relative to the value of the variable

at the initial peak of the cycle (which was set equal to 100.0). This "standardization"
procedure makes it easy to compare the behavior of variables between cycles.1'

Table 2 reports the results of this procedure for three of the industries and for a
selected set of variables. (Because the sample ends in December 1939, the final cycle is incomplete.) The three industries were chosen so as to include one producer of durables (iron

and steel), one of nondurables (paper and pulp), and one of semidurables (leather tanning

and finishing); otherwise, there was nothing "special" about the selected industries. The
variables displayed are 1) the Federal Reserve index of industrial production ("output");
2) employment of wage-earners; 3) length of the work-week ("hours of work"); 4) average
hourly earnings ("wages"); 5) average hourly earnings, deflated by the cost of living ("real

wages"); and 6) average hourly earnings, deflated by the product price ("product wages").

Table 2 summarizes quite a bit of information. For example, consider the production
6

and employment columns: Although the great severity of the 1929-37 cycle is well-known,

one observes here that even the "milder" pre-war cycles were quite pronounced, especially
for durable goods industries.
Of particular interest in Table 2, however, is the behavior of real wages. The "perverse"
wage behavior alluded to in the Introduction can be easily seen: Except for the 1937-39 cycle

in iron and steel, in which the real wage dipped slightly, in each of the three industries and
in each cycle (including the two mild cycles in 1923—29) the real wage rose as production and

employment fell. The tendency towards real wage countercyclicality in the pre-war period

has been confirmed more formally by Bernaulce and Powell, who studied the same data
using vector autoregression and frequency domain techniques.12 This countercyclicality is

equally apparent if indexes of wage rates13 are used instead of average hourly earnings to

measure real wages; it also seems to hold for the manufacturing sector as a whole (see,
e.g., Stockman (1983)). The tendency of real wages to rise despite high unemployment is

especially striking during the major Depression cycle (1929-37): Real wages rose during
the initial downturn (1930-31). They rose sharply again in 1933-34 and 1937, despite

unemployment rates of 20.9% in 1933, 16.2% in 1934, and 9.2% in 1937 (according to
Darby's (1976) correction of Lebergott's (1964) figures). In contrast, Bernanke and Powell

found some evidence of real wage procyclicality in similar data for the postwar period.'4
Under the consensus view15 that pre-war business cycles were driven by fluctuations

in aggregate demand, not aggregate supply, the behavior of real wages during this time is

something of a puzzle. In the simplest supply—demand framework, if a recession can be
represented as a downward shift in the current demand for labor, and the supply of labor is

relatively stable, one would expect a decline in real wages as output and employment fall.
Even the more sophisticated intertemp oral substitution or Keynesian models (as discussed
in the Introduction) have difficulty in fully explaining this behavior of wages.
A model in which countercyclical real wage behavior can be rationalized (in the weak

sense that the model has no implication for the cyclical behavior of wages) has been set

forth in a short paper by Lucas (1970).b0 The key feature of that model is that firms
can vary not only the number of workers and machines they employ, but the number of
hours per period which the workers and machines work. Firms face stable wage schedules

which define what workers must earn to be willing to accept a work-week of a certain
7

length. The optimization over the number of workers and the length of the week is welldefined. However, the first-order condition that determines the work-week depends on the

marginal wage, i.e., the increment to total earnings required to induce workers to work a

marginal hour. This marginal wage will not necessarily be systematically related to the
average wage, i.e., total earnings divided by total hours of work, which depends on the
infra-marginal properties of the wage schedule. Thus the cyclical behavior of the average
wage (which is the conventionally measured real wage) can be shown not to be restricted

by the theory.
Given Lucas's observation, one may wonder if variations in the work-week could be
an element in the explanation of the behavior of the real wage during the pre-war period.
The columns headed Hour8 of work in Table 2 reveal readily that short work-weeks were

indeed an important way of cutting back labor input in downturns. The magnitude of the
work-week reductions, which was impressive, appears to have been a result not only of the

severity of pre-war cycles but also (as documented by Bernanke and Powell) of a greater
reliance of pre-war employers on short weeks instead of layoffs as a means of reducing labor

input. The cut-backs in hours were long as well as deep: For example, in iron and steel
the hours of work (which were about fifty-five hours per week in the late 1920s) did not
average as much as forty hours weekly in any year from 1932 to 1939, and for long periods
were considerably less.

Variations in hours were thus quite significant; indeed, the persistence of short work-

weeks is something of a puzzle in itself. In what follows I investigate how the two phenomena, countercyclical real wages and variable hours of work, may be related. The next
section develops a model in which, as in Lucas (1970)17, the distinction between the num-

ber of workers and the hours of work is important. This model forms the basis (with the
imposition of specific functional forms and some additional elements) for the subsequent
empirical analysis of these data.

II. The Supply and Demand for Workers and Hours of Work: A Model
a. Setting
Since my data are for individual manufacturing industries, for concreteness in what
follows I will consider the supply and demand of labor for a "primary" (manufacturing)
8

sector. Each primary sector is to be thought of as being surrounded by its own "secondary"

or alternative sector, in which people work at agriculture, trade, or services, or are not
formally employed. The demand for the output of primary sectors is assumed to be more
cyclically sensitive than the demand for secondary—sector output. Primary sectors are also
assumed to be separated on some dimension (geographical or otherwise) from other primary

sectors and thus do not compete directly with each other for workers. (This last assumption

seems to be realistic for the 1930s; while there was much movement of workers between
manufacturing and the secondary sector, few workers moved from one manufacturing sector

to another. See, e.g., Bakke (1940), p. 242.)

To re-emphasize: Discussions below of the supply or demand for labor refer onty. to
the primary sector. The secondary, less cyclical sector is not explicitly modelled.

6. The supply side

In this model we shall be concerned with the determination of both 1) the length of
the work-week, and 2) the number of workers employed, not just the total number of hours

worked. Thus, on the supply side, we shall have to consider both the willingness of the
individual worker to increase hours of work and the sensitivity of the participation rate to

the returns available in the primary sector. Let us first examine the supply of hours of
work by an individual worker, worker i. I will characterize the individual's supply curve
of hours indirectly, through a function describing his reservation level of earnings for each

level of hours worked. (This is the analogous construct to Lucas's (1970) wage schedule,
w(s).) Let E; be the nominal earnings received by worker i in period t,

H be the nuniber

of hours worked by i in t, and Oj be a set of unspecified exogenous indicators knowa to
worker i in t. Let COLE be the period-t cost of living, which will be assumed for now to
be public knowledge. Now define the earnings function
COLE, O,)

(2.1)

to be the minimum (nominal) earnings necessary to induce worker i to work H1 hours (in

the primary sector) in period t, given the cost of living COLE and indicators O.

I have begun by introducing the earnings function to emphasize that it is a very
general concept, well-defined for almost any specification of the worker's preferences and
9

environment. However, I will here make a number of restrictive assumptions in order to
derive the earnings function for a specific, particularly simple case. I assume first that the
worker has a temporally separable utility function, with within-period utility
U. =

U,(C,!i— H1)

(2.2)

C is consumption and H — H, the complement of hours of work, is leisure. I assume
also that the worker cannot borrow or lend, but simply consumes his earnings each period

(C = E,/COL).

With these two assumptions I rule out some complexities that occur

when workers can intertemporally substitute consumption and leisure; but see Section V

below. Finally, suppose that the worker has a reservation level of utility U1, which he is

able to obtain in the secondary or alternative sector. (Here, U is the datum affecting the
worker's labor supply, i.e., O =

U.)

In this case the earnings function can be constructed

period by period; it is defined by

= U,•
for H, >

0;

(2.3)

E = 0, otherwise. That is, the earnings function is an indifference curve

in (E, H)—space. With normal curvature assumptions on the utility function, (2.3) implies

that the earnings function will be increasing and convex in hours, as well as increasing in

the reservation level of utility. See Figure 1.
An important feature of the earnings function defined in (2.3) is that there is a disconti-

nuity at zero hours: No payment is required to induce zero hours, but the earnings function

is positive as hours approach zero from the right. The implicit assumption underlying this

feature is that a worker who works any positive amount of hours in the primary sector
must leave the secondary sector completely, i.e., there is no moonlighting. Although the
existence of the jump at zero hours is important for obtaining countercyclical real wages,
it should be emphasized here that the no-moonlighting assumption is much stronger than

I need. With moonlighting, the earnings function will take lower values for small H than
is suggested by (2.3), because workers will be able to make use of the extra time; however,

as long as there is any fixed cost associated with moving between jobs, or simply a cost of
going to work, the discontinuity in the earnings function will exist.
10

Consider now the second component of labor supply, the supply of individual workers

(i.e., the primary sector participation rate). I model labor supply to the primary sector
as increasing in the utility level offered by that sector. This can be motivated simply as
follows: Assume that workers are alike in their productivity and in their utility functions,

but that they differ in their secondary sector opportunities (or in other factors that affect
reservation utility, such as dislike for primary-sector types of work). Specifically, let

=

(2.4)

where 'y is a purely time-dependent scalar and fl, is an individual-specific constant. The
distribution function of (TZ in the population is G(O); G(O) = 0 and G(oo) = N, where
N is the total population of potential workers. Assume that the reservation utilities of
individual workers are private information, so that workers must be treated identically.18
Then, if the primary sector wishes to employ N workers, it must provide each worker with

a utility equal to at least 'ytG'(N). Alternatively, the supply curve of workers in period
t, N(U;, 'ye), can now be defined by

N(U','y) G(U/'y)

(2.5)

The total cost to the primary sector of employing N workers for H hours each in period t

can be written

NE(H, COLC, 'yG(N))

(2.6)

Per-worker earnings E can now be seen to depend positively on the level of primary-sector

employment N and the index of alternative opportunities 'y,

as

well as on hours of work H

and the cost of living COL.'9
c. The demand side
We now examine the behavior of the representative firm in the primary sector, firm

j. The price of the firm's output is taken as given; thus, to calculate the firm's derived
demand for labor, we need only to specify the production function.

The usual specification of the production function assumes that employment and the
number of hours each employee works enter multiplicatively, e.g., as

= F(L1,X1)
11

(2.7)

where Qjt is the output of firm j in t, L,2 is simply total worker-hours (i.e., Lj =

where N, is firm employment and H3 is the length of the work-week), and

is a

vector of non-labor inputs. However, as Feldstein (1967) and Rosen (1968) have noted, the

assumption that employment and hours worked enter multiplicatively may not be a good

one: For example, lengthening the work-week by a given percentage may affect output
differently than increasing the number of workers by the same percentage.2° Since here I

particularly want to focus on the distinction between hours of work and the number of
workers, I follow Feldstein in specifying the production function as

Q. F(N,,ii,-,X1)

(2.8)

This is more general than (2.7) if the assumption is maintained that (say, for technological
reasons) each worker in the firm has a work-week of the same length.

The profit maximization problem for finn j can be written
max

pF(Nj,Hj,Xj) — N1E(Hj,COL,U) — r(X1)

(2.9)

where p is the output price, r(X1) is the cost of X1, and the time subscripts are suppressed.

U, the reservation utility of the marginal worker, depends on sectoral employment N, not
firm employment N1, and is parametric to the firm; its determination will be discussed in
a moment.
The relevant first-order conditions are

PFN = E

(2.10)

PFH = NJEH

(2.11)

where now the capitalized subscripts denote differentiation (with respect to firm—specific

variables) and the notation has been abbreviated further, in the obvious way. Equation

(2.10) says that the firm should hire extra workers up to the point that their marginal
revenue product each week just equals their weekly earnings. (2.11) says that the marginal
benefit of increasing the length of the firm's work-week, H1, should be set equal to the

marginal cost, which is the number of workers employed times the increment to their
earnings required to get them to work the extra time.
12

The second-order conditions are

f

PFNN <0

(2.12)

PFHH - NJ EHH <0

(2.13)

PFNH-EH \

pFNN

1>0

\SPFNH - EH PFHH - NJEHH)

(2.14)

which are assumed to hold.21

This treatment of the number of employees and the length of the shift as separate
inputs allows for an explicit analysis of finn preferences for, say, layoffs instead of worksharing as a way of reducing labor input when demand falls. By implicit differentiation we
obtain

(FN(NJEHH -PFKH)+FH(PFNH - EH))

L=

(—PFHFNN

+ FN(PFNH - Eff))

(Z.15)

(2.16)

where > 0 is given in (2.14). The second-order conditions imply that the expressions. in
(2.15) and (2.16) will normally be positive, that is, they will be positive unless EH greatly
exceeds PFNH 22 Thus, we may expect finns to react to depressed demand with both layoffs

and work-sharing, as indeed they did in the Depression.23

It is also possible to calculate how the firm's input demands will respond to a change

in the reservation level of utility U. By implicit differentiation

=

((PFHH

=

—

NJEHH)EU. +

Nj(E - PFNH)EHU..)

-PFNH)EUS +PNJFNNEHU..)
13

(2.i7)

(.18)

Eu., which is equal to

is known to be positive. EHU. is positive if UCCUH —

UCHUC <0, which will be true for example if consumption and leisure are complements or

weak substitutes. Under the same assumption that guaranteed above that employment is
not an inferior input, i.e., that EH —PFNH is not large positive, we can conclude from (2.17)

that dN1/dU < 0, or that the firm's demand for workers decreases as their reservation
utility U rises. If EH — PFNH is not large positive, (2.18) says that hours per employee
will also decline as reservation utility rises.
d. Sectoral equilibrium

Determination of equilibrium employment and hours in the primary sector is now
straightforward. We have seen that the supply of employment increases with the level

of utility U available in the primary sector, while the demand for employment can be
expected to decrease with U. If there are a firms in the primary sector, the equilibrium
level of reservation utility, call it U, satisfies

N;(U,-) = >2N,(U,pe)

(2.19)

This level of utility is just enough to make the marginal worker indifferent between the
secondary and primary sectors; inframarginal workers obtain a surplus in equilibrium.
Given U, p, and the N1's, we may think heuristically of firms choosing hours of work
H, according to condition (2.11). (Of course, strictly speaking everything is determined

simultaneously.) This is represented in Figure 2, which shows H being chosen at the
level at which the per capita total revenue product curve (pF/N1, written as a function
of H1) is parallel to the earnings function. Since the earnings function is an indifference
curve, workers do not care what level of hours the firm chooses: Different firms in the
industry (if they have different production functions) may well choose different work-weeks
in equilibrium. Indeed, since "wages" are simply average hourly earnings, and since earnings

functions are not rays through the origin (recall the discontinuity at zero), firms using
different work-weeks may also be paying different wages in equilibrium. This result, which

would be paradoxical in the traditional model, poses no problem here; workers comparing

jobs look not at the wage but at the total utility (the combination of earnings and hours
of work) available.
14

Although workers are indifferent to the point on the earnings function selected by the

firm, Figure 2 suggests an interesting observation. Note that a ray from the origin (OA)
intersecting the earnings function at H cuts through the earning function from below. This
implies that, as might often be the case, the average wage (E/H) exceeds the marginal wage

(EH) at equilibrium hours. Thus, workers would happily work more hours at the average
wage. That they are "constrained" not to do so is not the result of any market failure or
disequilibrium, but of the difference between the marginal and average wage.
e. Countercyclical real toagea

It is straightforward to generate countercyclical real (average) wages in this set-up.
Since the primary sector is by assumption cyclically sensitive, declining aggregate demand

will cause the relative price of its output to fall. Without loss in generality, assume that
the cost of living COL is unchanged while the output price p falls.

If N, and H, are normal inputs (i.e., the expressions in (2.15) and (2.16) are positive)

firm (and industry) usage of both will fall as demand falls. For the moment, ignore the
decline in N, and consider only the effects of falling H,:
Falling hours of work can be represented as a movement to the left on the earnings

function (cf. Figure 1). The reduced demand for hours will unambiguously reduce the
marginal wage, EH. However, the effect of falling hours on the average wage (and the
average real wage, since COL is fixed) is ambiguous. The necessary condition for average

wages to rise as hours fall is that the elasticity of earnings with respect to hours be less
than one. This would be satisfied, for example, if U is not close to zero and the marginal

disutility of labor does not increase quickly (i.e., the earnings function is close to linear,

with a positive intercept). (To anticipate, the empirical results do typically confirm that
this elasticity is less than one.)
The intuitive story underlying countercyclical real wages is as follows: A fall in industry

demand causes employers to shorten the work-week. (The use of short work-weeks is
rationalized in the current setting on static efficiency grounds, e.g., it may be technologically

more efficient to run the factory part-time with a full complement of workers than to
operate full-time with a skeleton crew. In a more explicitly dynamic set-up, as discussed in

the next section, the preference for short time may also reflect a labor-hoarding motive.)
15

Workers will be benefited by the shorter hours of work, but will dislike the reduction in
weekly earnings arising from short work-weeks. The rate at which firms can reduce weekly

earnings as the work-week falls depends on workers' preferences and reservation utilities.
Especially at low levels of work and earnings, when consumption is highly valued relative

to leisure, it may not be possible to cut weekly earnings as sharply as hours and still meet

the reservation utility constraint. Thus the wage (i.e., hourly earnings) may rise even as
labor demand and work-weeks fall.

The iron and steel industry, as described by Daugherty et al. (1937) provides an
illustration of these points. The work-week dropped extremely sharply during the 1930s
in this industry. This occurred both because firms found it efficient to cut production
by running certain operations only part-time, and because firms' desires to maintain their
work-forces relatively intact led them to adopt "staggered" or "spread-work" schedules

under which many workers worked only a few days a week (pp. 163-5). The problem
posed by short work-weeks for most workers was the obtaining of a basic sufficiency of
income: It was estimated that in 1932—33 the weekly earnings of the average steelworker

(not to mention the lowest paid) was less than half of that needed to reach a standard of
"minimum health and decency" for a family of four (pp. 155-7). Moreover, "in most iron
and steel communities there [were] few other opportunities for supplemental employment

and income" (p. 167). Firms must have recognized that their ability to keep cutting
total earnings as the work-week shortened was limited, since if workers could not attain a
subsistence level in the mill town they would be forced to try elsewhere. Thus real hourly
earnings in iron and steel rose, or fell relatively slightly, as the work-week was cut.
The above discussion has emphasized the possibility that, ceteri8 paribu8, a reduction

in the work-week may tend to raise the real wage. This effect of falling hours of work
will be offset to the degree that lower demand for industry output also results in lower
primary—sector employment N. Declining demand for employment, as well as any reduction

in secondary-sector opportunities which result from the general downturn, will lower the

equilibrium reservation utility level U. Lower U translates into a downward shift of
the earnings function, which implies lower average wages for a given H. The net impact
of the decline in the demand on average wages will depend on the relative strength of the
various influences. In general, as in Lucas (1970), the cyclical behavior of the wage will be
16

unrestricted.
An interesting implication of this analysis is that economies which rely more heavily
on short work-weeks (rather than employment reductions) as a way of reducing labor input
are more likely to have countercyclical real wages. Using the same data as this paper, plus a

matched data set for the post-war period, Bernanke and Powell verified that Depression-era

manufacturing industries did indeed exhibit both a greater relative reliance on variations in
the work-week and greater countercyclicality in wages than did their post-war counterparts.

f. Skilled and unskilled workers

Until now we have assumed that workers are alike with respect to the production
process. In the empirical work it turns out that the changing skill mix over the cycle is of
some importance. We consider this issue briefly now.

Suppose there are two types of workers, skilled and unskilled. Assuming that skilled

and unskilled workers have systematically different opportunities in the secondary sec-

tor, or that they differ in number, they will have different supply functions. We can
write the two supply functions in a given period, lit the obvious analogy to (2.5), as

N;(ur,1) = G1(U/1'1) and N2!(U,')'2) = C2(U/j2), where the indexes 1 and 2 denote
skilled and unskilled workers respectively, and time and firm subscripts are suppressed. The

corresponding earnings functions for the two groups are E(H, U?) where U =
and I = 1, 2. Normally, if H1 = H2, we expect to observe only N such that E1 > E2; that
is, skilled workers earn more than unskilled.

On the demand side, assume that skilled and unskilled workers must be used in fixed
coefficients, but that the ratio of skilled to unskilled falls as the length of the work-week (a
proxy for the scale of production) expands.24 Specifically, assume that if a firm is running

the factory H hours per week, then a fraction g1(H) of its workers must be skilled and a
fraction g2(H) unskilled, where Yi + g = 1 and gi(H) is decreasing in H. Then the firm's

production function can still be written as in (2.8). Moreover, under the assumption that

the skilled and unskilled must work the same number of hours, it is possible to write an
average earnings function for the firm

(H, COL, U, Ufl = g(H)E,(H, COL, U,)
17

(2.20)

where as before the U depend on total sectoral employment but are parametric to the
firm.

The firm's optimization problem is not substantially complicated by the extension to

skilled and unskilled workers (under the convenient assumptions that have been made):

The firm finds optimal hours and total employment in precisely the same manner as in
ILc above, except that the average earnings function E defined in (2.20) is used in place
of the simple earnings function E. The division of employment into skilled and unskilled

is then found by applying the ratios gi(H*) and g2(H*) to the optimal level of total firm
employment.

The point of this digression is to highlight the effect of the changing skill mix on the
properties of the empirically observed, average earnings function E. Earnings functions

defined for workers with identical utilities and productivities, e.g., the E1 and E2, must
be increasing, convex functions of hours, for H > 0. However, since the low-skilled and
low-earnings fraction of tie work-force varies procyclically, the average earnings function

will be flatter and have a lower elasticity than either E1 or E2 taken separately. This has
two implications: First, the empirically observed earnings function may not be convex in
hours.25 Second, as was shown above, a lower elasticity of the earnings function increases

the probability of observing countercyclical real wages. Thus cyclicality of the skill mix
may be an additional factor contributing to the solution of the wage puzzle.

g. Implicationa for the 8tandard approach

The model set forth in the preceding sections may seem outlandish to users of the
standard labor market model (in which total worker-hours supplied and demanded are
simply written as functions of the real wage). I claim, however, that the present model has

a stronger prior claim than does the standard approach to being the correct way to model

aggregate labor markets. The problem with the standard model is that, contrary to its
major premise, workers are in fact typically not able to vary their labor supply continuously

with respect to a parametric real wage; instead, they must choose among 'packages" of
total compensation, hours of work, and other job attributes offered by employers. The
economic reason for the prevailing arrangement, as suggested above, is that there are usually
economies or diseconomies of "bundling" of worker-hours: Supplying one hour of work each
18

to eight different employers is not the same to a worker as supplying eight hours to a single
employer. Similarly, employers are not indifferent between receiving one hour of work from

eight different workers and receiving eight hours from one worker. As long as economies

or diseconomies of bundling worker-hours exist, the standard model cannot be literally
correct.

Inappropriate use of the standard model can lead to misconceptions. For example, the
debate between supporters and defenders of the Lucas-Rapping intertemporal substitution
hypothesis has centered on the time series properties of the real wage (see, e.g., Altonji and

Ashenfelter (1980)). However, if the approach of the present paper is correct, rather than
the standard model, then the behavior of the real wage is largely irrelevant to that debate.
Another example concerns the estimation of labor supply elasticities: Suppose workers

have identical utility functions, given by

U = (E/COL) — czSHt

(2.21)

That is, the marginal utility of consumption (equal to real earnings) and the marginal
disutility of hours of work are constant. The labor supply elasticities of these workers (in
the conventional sense) are infinite. But what will researchers using aggregate data and
assuming the standard model find? Suppose that the model of the present paper actually

applies, and that reservation utilities U are distributed in the population as assumed in
Section II.b above. Then it is easy to show that the aggregate real wage to is given by

= 'mG'(N) +

(2.22)

Note that 8w/ON > 0, Ow/OH < 0. The observed relationship between worker-hours

and the wage thus depends on whether N or H is more variable. Suppose, at one extreme, that the work-week is institutionally fixed: Then the econometrician regressing
total worker-hours against the wage will find a positive (although not infinite) elasticity,
since all variation in worker-hours is attributable to changes in employment. At the other
extreme, suppose that work-weeks but not employment vary. Then the estimated aggregate

labor supply curve will be backward-bending. The econometrician may well be concerned

about the "instability" over time of his estimates, and their lack of relation to labor supply
19

elasticities found in micro-level panel data. The problem, however, does not lie with data
or identification problems, but with the use of the wrong model.

III. Empirical Implementation
This section specifies an empirical model and reports the results of its estimation for

each of the eight manufacturing industries. The estimated model is based closely on the
analysis of the previous section but contains substantive additional elements as well.
a. Specification of the aupply 8sde

The supply side in this model is summarized by the earnings function faced by each

primary sector (manufacturing industry), as in (2.6). Average weekly nominal earnings
received by wage-earners in an industry have been shown to depend on four elements:
1) the length of the industry work-week H (now assumed to be the same for all firms)

2) industry employment N

3) factors affecting workers' reservation utilities, '
4)

the cost of living COL

Hours and employment for each industry and the economy-wide cost of living are directly observed. The most difficult problem is to identify monthly determinants of workers'

reservation utilities. Two factors which I expected to be important here were the level of
government relief and the strength of the labor movement. As measures of these factors I

constructed two (monthly) variables, EMERGWORK and UNIONPOWER. (A list of
all variables used in estimation is given in Table 3, below.) EMERG WORK is the log
of the number of "emergency workers" employed by the Federal government, including all

of the major work relief programs. UNIONPOWER attempts to capture the resurgence
of the labor movement after the favorabie legislation of the New Deal: This variable is set

equal to zero until May 1935, the month the Wagner Act was passed. (The labor movement was extremely weak between 1923 and 1935; see note 5.) Starting with May 1935,

UNIONPOWER is set equal to the cumulative number of man-days idled by strikes (in
the economy as a whole26). The idea here is that strikes are an investment in the capital

good of union credibility, which in turn affects the level of earnings workers are able to
demand. (There is in fact a close correlation in this period between strike activity and the
major new union recognitions and contracts that were achieved.)
20

The basic earnings function that I estimated was of the form

EARNS =

o + HHRSt + aEEMPLF
+ wEMERGWORKt + zuUNIONPOWEZ
+ aNNRA + COLE + crt

(3.1)

where

EARNS

log(uominai weekly earnings —
cost of living * INTERCEPT)

(3.2)

and where the variables are as in Table 3. Equation (3.1) says that the log of nominal weekly

earnings (less an intercept term, to be discussed in a moment) is a positive function of the
log of hours worked per week, ERS; a positive function of the log of industry employment

(normalized by national labor-force), EMPLF; a positive function of workers' reservation

utilities, as measured by EMERG!WORK and UNIONPOWER; and is related one-forone to the log of the current cost of living COL (i.e., there is no money illusion or imperfect

information about price levels). Also included in the equation are a time trend (to capture
secular influences on reservation utilities, like demographics or wealth accumulation); and a
dummy for the National Recovery Act period of September 1933—May 1935 (NRA), during

which legislation affecting wages and hours may have had a direct impact on earnings.

The dependent variable of (3.1), which is defined in (3.2), is not simply the log of
nominal weekly earnings, but the log of nominal weekly earnings less an expression which

is constant when measured in real terms. This is in order to conform to a basic premise of
the theory, that there is a discontinuity in the earnings function at zero; i.e, workers require

some minimum pay "just to come to work". I did not expect to be able to estimate a value

of the constant term INTERCEPT from the data, since sample values of hours worked
are never very near zero and the earnings function is likely to be non-linear in a relatively

unrestricted way. Instead, for each industry I arbitrarily set INTERCEPT equal to the
real value of six hours' pay at the rate paid in June 1929; i.e., the "fixed cost of coming

to work" was assumed to be equal to one hour's real pay for each day in the standard
21

work-week. The exact value chosen for INTERCEPT was not at all crucial; I tried values
from zero to twelve hours' pay without affecting the qualitative nature of the results.
Equation (3.1) was estimated, and "worked" fairly well empirically, in the sense that

the estimated coefficients were of the right sign and were statistically significant. However, the estimated equations also had low Durbin—Watson statistics and did not perform

particularly well in simulations. After some examination of the data, I recognized that
the restriction in (3.1) that nominal earnings must be directly proportional to the current

cost of living is not a good one. If this constraint were correct, it would imply that the
high-frequency variation of earnings should be similar to that of the cost of living. In fact,
the usual result that nominal labor compensation variables are "smoother" than price-level

variables holds in these data.
To capture this smoothing effect, I assumed that nominal earnings respond only to the

"permanent" component of cost-of-living changes, in the sense of Muth (1960). That is,

nominal earnings are proportional not to COL but to COL, where COL is defined by

COL = pCOL + (1 — )tp)COL_1

(3.3)

Alternative interpretations of this assumption are that earnings are set each period on the

basis of adaptive forecasts of the cost of living (cf. Lucas and Rapping (1969)); or that
costs of rapidly adjusting wage rates cause employers to attempt to smooth out the effects
of cost-of-living changes (cf. Rotemberg (1982)).

The final earnings function therefore was (3.1), with COL replacing COLE. A Koyck

transformation of this equation, using (3.3), yields an observable model. Non-linear esti-

mation methods were used so that estimates of the original parameters ajj, a, aw, au,

a, at, and \p could be obtained. These results are discussed in conjunction with the
demand-side results below.

b. Specification of the demand aide

The primary constituent of the demand side of the model is the production function

F. To obtain a specific functional form for F, I assumed that employment and hours of
work aggregate as a generalized CES:

Qt

+ (1 — a)e9ItH)(_kM
22

where B,Cr,p,!C,gN and gjj are parameters. This formulation allows for non-constant returns

to scale and factor-augmenting technical change. Explicit dependence of output on the
capital stock and other non-labor factors is suppressed because of lack of data; the hope
is that these effects can be adequately represented, for the purposes of our short-run and

medium-run analyses, by the exponential trend terms. (I experimented with quadratic
as well as linear exponential trends in the estimation, without a significant effect on the
results.) The expression (3.4) was chosen basically because it rationalizes simple log-linear
relationships that have been shown to be empirically successful in other applications. Note
however, that if the capital stock follows a time trend, then (3.4) is more general than some
standard specifications, e.g., the Cobb-Douglas form estimated by Feldstein (1967).
With this specification, the first-order condition for employment (2.10) can be written
as
Po + i9Zqqt — i9Ze(et — Pt)

+ $t

(3.5)

where n is the log of employment; q is the log of output; e —p is the log of weekly earnings

divided by the output price; and the coefficients are defined by

= log(kcxB_l/IC)/(1 + p)

Pg = (k + p)/(k(1 + p))
=

(3.6)

fit = gy/(1 + p)
n may be thought of as the desired level of employment in period t; that is, it is
the level of employment that exactly satisfies the first order condition. We may suspect,

however, that (3.5) will not be successful empirically, because costs of adjustment will

prevent this relation from holding instantaneously (especially in monthly data, such as
these). A possible response to this is to make the underlying model explicitly dynamic and
solve the resulting maximum problem, as in Sargent's (1978) study. Such an approach can

become extremely complicated, however; and, as Sargent noted, it is not likely to reduce
the need for auxiliary ad hoc assumptions. Here I follow the bulk of the previous work in

simply assuming gradual adjustment of employment toward the desired level. That is, if

n is the desired level of employment defined by the first order condition, I assume that
23

firms adjust actual employment nt according to
—

where

st—i

=

—

flt—i)

(3.7)

is the speed of adjustment. Given (3.7), a Koyck transformation of (3.5) gives an

equation for actual employment of the form:
= firs0 + fingqt — j9(e

—

Pt) + firitt + fi,rnt—i

(3.8)

where

fin0 = n$no
a — a
I-'nq

'

"nIrzq

=
first

(3.9)

=

fi= (i—)
Similarly, with the given production function the first order condition (2.11) for desired

hours of work becomes
ht* = fiZ + I9qqt — fiZhco8tt +

fit

(3.10)

where h* is the log of hours, hcoat the log of the marginal cost of hours of work (as
obtained from the earnings function; see below), and the coefficients are defined by the
obvious analogies to (3.6).

As there are costs to adjusting employment levels, it seems reasonable that there may

be costs to rapid adjustment of the length of the work-week. These include the costs
of reorganizing production schedules and of inducing workers to rearrange their personal
schedules. Assuming that the length of the work-week adjusts slowly lead to a specification

for hours analogous to (3.8):

= fiho + fihqqt — fihc(hcoatt) + fihtt + fihhht_1

where the coefficients are defined analogously to those in (3.9), and
adjustment of hours27.
24

(3.11)

is the rate of

Equations (3.8) and (3.11) may be viewed as representative-firm demand functions

for employment and hours of work (length of the work-week). In both cases demand is
positively associated with the level of production and negatively related to a cost variable.

Except for the inclusion of the cost variables and the specification of separate equations
for employment and hours, (3.8) and (3.11) are quite conventional short-run labor demand

functions; see for example Brechling (1965), Ball and St. Cyr (1966), Smyth and Ireland
(1967), and the survey in Fair (1969), as well as Lucas and Rapping (1969).

In the construction of empirical versions of (3.8) and (3.11), several practical issues

,rri fri 1p rppr
1) A basic question was the treatment of seasonality, which is fairly significant in these

data. Fair (1969) has argued against deseasonalization in this context, on the grounds
that the factors which explain cyclical movements in employment, etc., should also explain seasonal movements. There is also some danger that deseasonalization may introduce
spurious relationships or obscure genuine ones. For these reasons the data were not deseasonalized prior to estimation, and seasonal dummies were not used in the equations.
(Note that leaving in seasonal fluctuations causes an essentially spurious deterioration in

fit.) I did, however, allow for the possibility that employment and hours demand might
respond differently to the seasonal and non-seasonal components of production, as follows:

For each industry I constructed a variable QSEAS, the "seasonal component of production", as the residual of the deseasonalization of industry output. I then allowed QSEAS
and Q — QSEAS (the seasonally adjusted component of production) to enter the demand
for workers and hours equations with separate coefficients.
2) At an early stage of my analysis of this data set, I looked at the cross-correlations,

at various leads and lags, of the log-differences of output and the labor market variables

(employment, hours, earnings). My concern was, given that the data are monthly and
that the output and labor variables are from different sources, that there might be an
alignment problem. This examination revealed little potential difficulty, except in the
relation of the employment and output series: For a few industries, employment seemed
more strongly related to output one month ahead than to current output. Given that the
other labor series lined up with output, this seemed likely to reflect a genuine economic
phenomenon, e.g., hiring in advance of production, rather than a data alignment problem.
25

In any case, for the employment demand equations, I allowed both current and one-month-

ahead production to enter. (Since both seasonal and non-seasonal production were used,

this gave a total of four output variables in these equations.) Actual one-month-ahead
non-seasonal production was instrumented for rather than treated as exogenous in the
estimation of the employment demand equations; thus its estimated coefficients may be
interpreted as measuring the impact of one-month-ahead forecasts of output (rather than
actual future output) on current employment. One-month-ahead seasonal production was

taken to be exogenous, on the grounds that the recurring seasonal component should be
perfectly forecasted.

The inclusion of one-month-ahead output did not appear necessary in the hours demand equation.
3) The marginal cost of extending the work-week one hour, HCOST, was defined for
the empirical application by

HCOST = EMP + EARN - HRS

-P

(3.12)

where EARN is defined by (3.2) and P is the industry output price. This follows directly
from (2.11) and the form of the earnings function (3.1). (HCOST is actually proportional
to, not equal to, the marginal cost of increasing the work-week; the factor of proportionality

will be absorbed into the estimated coefficient of HCOST.)

The marginal cost of adding a worker, PAY, is simply given by EARN — P; note
that the intercept of the earnings function has no bearing on the construction of this cost
variable.

4) Industry codes drawn up under the National Recovery Act imposed some direct
constraints on firm employment nd hours decisions e.g., through the work-sharing provi-

sions. To allow for this, in the estimation the dummy variable NRA was added to both
the employment and hours demand equations.

These considerations, in conjunction with equations (3.8) and (3.11), allow the specification of employment demand and hours demand equations that can be estimated for
each industry. (For a list of the independent variables in these two equations, see the left-

hand columns of Tables 5 and 6, and the variable definitions in Table 3.) The results of
26

this estimation will be discussed in HI.d below, following a digression on the identification

problem.

c. Identification

The earnings equation and the two demand equations form a simultaneous system,
which raises the standard estimation issues of identification and the availability of instru-

ments. It was evident in this case that, as is often true, a strict application of the criteria
for valid instruments would leave no instruments (except the constant and time), no iden-

tification, and no hope of proceeding further. In particular, it is difficult to come up
with measured exogenous variables that are highly correlated with the fluctuations in the
demands for industry outputs.28

After some consideration, I made the tactical decision to treat industry output as
exogenous in estimation. Although the assumption of output exogeneity is not ideal, there

are a few arguments in its favor (beyond the obvious one of necessity): First, there are

many precedents (Lucas and Rapping (1969) and virtually all papers in the traditional
literature on the short-run demand for labor make this assumption). Second, and more
important, treating output as exogenous seems likely to provide considerable identifying
power at a relatively low cost in induced bias: Since the large output swings of the prewar period are attributable primarily to aggregate demand variation (reflecting forces such

as the financial crises and the monetary collapse), the correlation of industry output with
disturbances to the industry production function and earnings equation should be relatively

small. (Bernan.ke and Powell's Table 11 shows for these data that, for most industries,
output Granger-causes employment and hours; evidence for causality in the other direction

is weak.) Output exogeneity should be a particularly acceptable assumption with respect
to the industry earnings equations, since labor supply disturbances were probably a trivial

component of output variation during this period; this is fortunate, because the earnings
equations are the principal innovation and focus of the present research.
Besides output, other variables treated as exogenous included:
1) The co8t of living. A virtue of this paper's industry—level specification is that the cost

of living deflates labor cost on the supply side, while the product price is the appropriate
deflator on the demand side. The cost of living may therefore be excluded from, and thus
help to identify, the two demand equations. Lagged values of the cost of living were also
27

helpful as instruments.

2) Government policy variables. The two variables reflecting New Deal legislation,

NRA and UNIONPOWER, may reasonably be treated as exogenous, or at least as predetermined with respect to the current period. NRA is not excluded from any equation,

but UNIONPOWER is excluded from the two demand equations and is a particularly
useful instrument with respect to the two labor cost variables.

Finally, at some risk of bias in the presence of serial correlation, I treated lagged
employment, work-weeks, and earnings as pre-determined variables. Given all of these
assumptions, the three estimated equations are well—identified, both in the formal sense

and in the sense that sharp estimates are obtained in the sample.
A method of achieving identification that I might have used but did not was the imposition of cross-coefficient restrictions implied by the structural derivations of the various

equations. For example, the specified production function implies relationships between
the coefficients in the demand for employment and the demand for hours equations. My

reason for avoiding this route is that, because of the aggregation of the data, there is no
serious reason to believe that such cross-equation restrictions will hold. The demand equa-

tions, for example, were derived for a hypothetical individual firm and will not literally

apply (because logarithms do not add) to the industry-level data at hand. The strongest
justifiable assumption, I believe, is that the qualitative magnitude and sign relationships
survive the aggregation process; this is the assumption that underlies my interpretations
of the results.
Note that, given that the previous assumptions make the cross-coefficient restrictions

inessential to identification, failure to impose them at worst may cause a small loss in
efficiency. This is not a serious issue, given the size of the data set.

d. Estimation results
We proceed now to the estimates. The results of estimating the demand equations are

in Tables 4 and 5; the earnings function results are in Table 6. Two-stage least-squares
was used to correct for simultaneity bias (for the earnings equations, non-linear 2SLS was

used). Instruments and variables treated as endogenous are given in the data appendix.
Each equation was estimated separately for each industry.
28

The employment and hours demand equations are modest extensions of the conventional formulation and should be uncontroversial; they will be discussed first. (See Tables

4 and 5.) The estimates suggest the following:
First, there appear to be significant costs of adjustment (or some other source of inertia)

for both employment and weekly hours of work; i.e., the lagged value of the dependent
variable shows up as highly significant in every case. We would expect employment to be

more inertial than hours of work, and this is confirmed by the estimates in every industry
except automobiles. The rates of adjustment implied by the estimates are rather rapid: On

average, the industries are able to eliminate about one=quarter of the gap between actual
and desired employment each month, and nearly half of the gap between actual and desired

hours. (It is true that these estimates may be biased by the presence of serial correlation of

the disturbances; but the normal expectation is that serial correlation will bias estimated
speeds of adjustment downward, not upward.)

For both employment and hours demand, the cost variables (PAY and HCOST)
enter with the expected negative signs for each industry (except for one case, in which
the coefficient of PAY is effectively zero). However, the statistical significance of the

cost variable in the employment demand equation is low for some industries. The low
significance of PAY is possibly due to the use of monthly data, which may obscure the
presumably slow substitution between workers and other factors of production. The effect

of the cost variable in the hours demand equation, in contrast, tends to be large and is
in each case highly statistically significant. The lower inertia of hours of work and its
greater sensitivity to short-run cost changes suggest that work-weeks will lead employment

in cyclical downturns; this conforms to the findings of Moore (1955), Bry (1959), and
Bernanke and Powell.

The effect of production on input demand is broken down, for employment, into the

effects of current 'seasonal" production, current non-seasonal production, and seasonal
and non-seasonal production one month in the future. Not too much systematic emerges
from this breakdown; in particular, employment in some industries seems to depend most

strongly on current output, while other industries hire "one month ahead". However,
although a few negative signs are scattered through the estimated effects of components
of production on employment, the total estimated effects of output on employment are, as
29

expected, positive and strongly significant. (See the last row in Table 4.) In conjunction

with the estimated speeds of adjustment, the estimated output effects confirm in some
cases, although not all, the familiar finding of short-run increasing returns to labor.29

For hours, it was necessary to consider only current output effects. As can be seen
from Table 5, both the seasonal and non-seasonal components of production, and of course
their sum, have a strongly significant, positive effect on hours of work. Short-run increasing

firms to this factor appear to exist for all industries.
The final estimated parameters show the effects of the NRA codes on industry demands

for labor inputs. The results imply that, for the most part, the NRA tended to increase
employment and reduce hours. This is consistent with one of the legislation's explicit goals,

which was to increase employment through "work-sharing". It also helps to explain the
persistence of part-time work during the post-1933 recovery.

The residual serial correlation in the two demand equations appears to be relatively
low, although it must be remembered that the Durbin-Watson statistic will be biased by
the presence of the lagged dependent variables. (Calculated values of Durbin's h-statistic,

which corrects for the lagged dependent variable problem, implied that the hypothesis of

no serial correlation could be rejected for each equation; however, this statistic gives no
information about the extent of serial correlation.) Re-estimation of the demand equation
using Fair's method gave qualitatively similar results, except that in a few cases the wrong
sign was obtained for the estimated coefficient of PAY; because of this sign problem I use

the equations estimated without serial correlation correction in the simulations reported
below. I also estimated the two demand equations for each industry jointly, so that contemporaneous correlation of residuals could be accounted for; this led to virtually identical
results.

In tests for stability across the 1920s and 1930s sub-samples, five of the eight employ-

ment equations and four of the eight hours equations failed at the .05 significance level.
This is not really surprising, given the stark differences in the economic environments of

the two periods. When the demand equations are estimated for the sub-samples separately, however, they do not look grossly different. In particular, estimates for the 1930s
sub-sample, as well as for 1923—29 and 1923—33, have the right signs and look very much

like the whole-sample results.
30

Overall, the estimated labor demand equations seem reasonably successful, certainly

of sufficient quality to use in simulation exercises. They also lend some support to the
treatment of employment and hours as "separate" factors of production.

Estimates of the earnings equations, which make up the "supply side" of the model, are

given in Table 6. The estimated parameters are those defined in equations (3.1) and (3.3)
of the text: The most important are czE and ajj-, which capture the sensitivity of earnings to
employment (normalized by the labor force) and to hours of work, and Ap, which measures

the speed of adjustment to cost-of-living changes. I have reported separate estimates for
1923-33 (which avoids the effects of New Deal legislation; that is, ajj = au =
= 0)
and for the whole period.
If we look first at the results for 1923—33, we find that overall the results conform closely

to the predictions of the theory. First, for a given level of weekly hours there is typically
a strong positive relationship between earnings and employment. This is interpretable as

a supply relationship; that is, to induce more workers to enter an industry, firms must
increase the utility value of the earnings—hours packages they offer. Second, the elasticity

of earnings with respect to hours of work is highly significant, positive, and typically less

than one30; as argued above, finding this elasticity to be less than one is consistent with
countercyclicality of real wages. Finally, nominal earnings adjust only partially to current

changes in the cost of living; for the 1923-33 sample, the average rate of adjustment is
about 17% per month. Although this is a significant amount of "stickiness", it is much less
than is usually assumed by Keynesians.

One industry that looks somewhat different from the others is automobiles. For both
sample periods, the measured sensitivity of earnings to employment is low, while the sen-

sitivity of earnings to hours is the highest of any industry. The earnings function for the
automobile industry was even more striking when it was re-estimated without an imposed

intercept (i.e., RARN rather than EARN was used as the dependent variable): In that
case, for both sample periods, the elasticity of earnings with respect to employment was
almost exactly zero and the elasticity of earnings with respect to hours was almost exactly
one. This result (which was quite different from what was obtained for the other industries)
would be consistent with an industry policy of setting a flat wage rate, which is not changed
31

even when the workweek changes, and of rationing the available jobs among applicants. It

is worth noting in this connection that Henry Ford was a prominent maverick of this time
in wage and employment policies; a fixed, high wage plus job rationing might not be a bad
description of his announced strategy for improving worker motivation.

The estimates of the basic parameters for the whole sample (the bottom half of Table

6) are fairly similar to those for 1923—33, although the rate of adjustment of earnings to
prices is estimated to be under .1 in three cases (instead of in just one case for 1923—33).
The major difference is that the equation for the 1923—39 period also incorporates estimates

of the effects of the New Deal on earnings. Briefly, the estimates show, first, that the NRA

codes had relatively small but positive effects on weekly earnings. Second, the expansion

of union power after the Wagner Act appears to have had a strong positive impact on
earnings, raising weekly earnings by about ten per cent or more in six of the industries. (In
lumber, the effect of unionization appears to have been positive but negligible; in boots and
shoes, workers suffered significant pay cut8 during the late New Deal.31) Finally, government

employment programs appear to have had little systematic effect on the earnings of those
privately employed in manufacturing.32'33

For both the short and long samples, diagnostic checks did not seem to indicate important amounts of serial correlation. Because of this, and because the nonlinear version
of Fair's method imposes some computational costs, I did not make any serial correlation
correction.

I performed some additional diagnostic analyses of the estimated equations. Of these,
the most interesting were within-sample simulations of the complete model. A few of these

are described in the next section.

IV. Simulation Results
Simulations were performed, for each industry and for a number of different sample
periods, using various estimated employment demand, hours demand, and earnings equations. All simulations were dynamic, i.e., the coefficients of lagged endogenous variables

were applied to the lagged simulated, not actual, values of the variables. Industry output

was taken in each case as exogenous; given output (as well as industry prices, the cost
of living, and government policy variables), the three—equation model generates paths for
32

employment, hours of work, and earnings (or wages, i.e., earnings divided by hours).

The model typically did quite well in matching the sample values of the variables,

even during the turbulent 'thirties. Yet, cases where the model failed to match the data
were perhaps the most instructive, because of the insights gained in studying the reasons

for failure. I will illustrate both of these assertions by reporting the results of industry
simulations for the critical 1930—33 period. I will also discuss very briefly some simulations

of the New Deal.
1. 1930-89

Employment demand, hours demand, and earnings equations estimated for the 1923-

33 sub-sample were used to simulate the months between January 1930 and June 1933,
the period of the Great Contraction. (Estimates of the earnings equations for 1923—33 are

in Table 6; demand equations for this period are not reported. Sub-sample rather than
whole—sample estimates were used in these simulations to avoid any coefficient instability

associated with the changes wrought by the New Deal.) Table 7 compares the behavior
of actual and simulated values of three endogenous variables (employment, hours of work,

and the real wage), for each industry. Reported are mean values, standard deviations,
and minimum and maximum values over the period, in each variable's natural units.34
Also reported are the root mean squared errors of simulation, expressed as fractions of the
forecasted variables (%RMSE).

Direct inspection of the data plots suggested that the model does rather well in reproducing the 1930—33 period, and, for the most part, Table 7 confirms this impression.
Despite the sharp business—cycle fluctuations of the period, as well as the large seasonal

movements, the simulated variables tend to approximate the actual in volatility, and in

magnitude and timing of swings. The real wage in particular is predicted with a low
%RMSE, although in a few cases the standard deviation of the simulated wage is too low.
One place where the model is relatively unsuccessful (in terms of %RMSE) is in simu-

lating employment and hours in the two durable goods industries (iron and steel, automo-

biles). This partly reflects the greater volatility of these industries, as well as my inability
(because of lack of data) to introduce inventory dynamics into the analysis. However, from

inspection of the data it is also evident that, in early 1932, both of these industries consciously adopted policies of work-sharing (i.e., substituting short hours for layoffs). In the
33

case of iron and steel, even though output and hence simulated employment fell steadily
through most of the period, actual employment suddenly increased from an index of 54.7 to

an index of 75.7 in one month (January 1932). In the same month, (actual) hours of work
per week fell from 40.9 to 29.8. (The work-week was cut similarly in 1932 in automobiles.)

This no doubt reflected a desire of these firms to maintain their workiorces (or to protect
the welfare of their workers, under a generous imputation of motives) in the face of what

they hoped would be a temporary decline in demand. In any case, this abrupt change in
policy deviates sharply from what is predicted by the model.
Since the model is based on the assumption of competition, the difference between its
predictions and the behavior of these two industries may be attributable to the oligopolistic

nature of those industries, and their resulting ability to deviate from short-run competitive

behavior. However, it is interesting to note that the divergence of these two industries

from the predicted paths turned out to be relatively transitory: After the big January
1932 increase in employment in iron and steel, for example, employment in that industry

fell steadily and sharply. By early 1933, iron and steel employment had returned to the
simulated path. Hours of work returned to the simulated path even more quickly, by August

1932. The same sort of behavior occurred in automobiles. Thus the efforts of industry to
preserve their workforces in the face of deepening Depression were quite limited in scope
and duration.35

Since the Introduction stressed the failure of earlier models to explain the behavior of
real wages during this period, it is worth exploring a bit the capacity of the present model

to simulate wage movements. As can be seen either from data plots or from the statistics
given in Table 7, the model simulations do a creditable job of tracking the real wage in each

of the eight industries. In particular, the tendency of real wages to rise even as output and
employment fell is evident in the simulations.

The model has two ways of rationalizing increasing real wages during this period.
First, the elasticity of earnings with respect to hours has been found to be typically less
than one. The significance of this finding, which may in part reflect the procyclicality of the
proportion of unskilled workers, was extensively discussed in Section II above. An additional

point may be made here: It was shown in Section II.e that real—wage countercyclicality is

more likely if employers respond to reduced demand for output by cutting work-weeks,
34

rather than by laying off workers. In the static model of Section II, employers' propensities

to reduce hours rather than employment depend only on the shape of the single—period
production function. However, in the more dynamic model that served as the basis of the
estimation, costs of adjustment also play a role in the layoffs versus short hours decision.
Specifically, the finding that work-weeks are less inertial than employment suggests that in

the early stages of a downturn employers are more likely to cut hours than employment;

firms' attempts to maintain their work-forces in the early part of a recession by "sharing
the work" thus increase the probability of observing real wage countercyclicality.

The second feature of the model that contributes to rising real wages is the partial

adjustment of nominal earnings to current changes in the cost of living. As this was a
period of sharp deflation, the lag of nominal earnings behind prices led to an increase in
the measured real wage.
Here once again the simulations help us learn something about the model: Although it

captures the major wage movements over the period, the model tends to under-predict the

wage somewhat in the first six to nine months of 1931 (for some of the industries). Since
1931 was a year of sharp deflation, this suggests that wages had a higher nominal inertia
at the beginning of the Depression than is captured by the estimates.
It is perhaps not surprising that the model under-predicts the degree of nominal inertia

in 1931, given that it requires the sensitivity of nominal earnings to cost-of-living changes

to be the same in all periods: A more realistic approach (but one less easily implemented)
would be to assume that the sensitivity to cost-of-living changes depends on recent experi-

ence. Since the 1920's were a period of very stable prices, this alternative approach might
be able to rationalize the failure of wages to fall immediately in 1931.
As in the case of iron—and—steel and automobile industy work—sharing discussed above,

however, the deviation of the simulations from the actual variable paths proved transitory:

By the last quarter of 1931, or by early 1932 at the latest, actual wages in each industry
were at or below their simulated values.

To see how much the assumption of nominal stickiness contributed to the model's
capacity to generate countercyclical real wages over the period as a whole, I conducted the
following experiment: I ran the simulations of 1930—33 again, this time assuming perfect

adjustment of nominal earnings to the cost of living (Ap =
35

1).

All other coefficients

were unchanged. I found that, first, although a rising real wage was still predicted by
the simulations, the ability of the simulations to track the actual real wage deteriorated
significantly, for most of the industries. In several cases %RMSE increased by half or more;
also, the maximum real wage over the period predicted by the simulations tended to be quite

a bit lower than what was actually attained. There was also, however, a rather surprising
second finding from these simulations: The assumption of perfect wage adjustment to the

cost of living had virtually no effect on the ability of the model to track employment and
hours. Indeed, on average, fits improved slightly. Lagged adjustment of earnings to prices

thus seems to be important for explaining observed real wage behavior in this period, but
it may not have great ailocative significance.

b. 1938-89
I also carried out various simulations of the New Deal period, 1933—39. While space

does not permit a detailed discussion, I briefly report one experiment.

It has often been asserted that New Deal legislation significantly affected post-1933
labor market performance. For example, Weinstein (1981) has attributed much of the slow-

ness of the recovery from Depression to the effects of the National Recovery Act. I cannot

effectively address Weinstein's or similar contentions with the present model, because de-

mand and output are taken as exogenous. I can address a much more limited question:
Given the path of output, how did the New Deal affect the behavior of labor market variables (in these industries)? To examine this question, I simulated a counterfactual history
of 1933—39, in which there was no New Deal, but in which the path of output was the same

as in actuality. The earnings equations used were the ones estimated for 1923—33 (which
seemed slightly superior to the whole-sample equation, and which contain no terms for the

NRA, unionization, or government public works programs). The employment and hours
demand equations used were those estimated for the whole sample, as reported in Tables

4 and 5, with the NRA dummy set equal to zero. The results of this simulation were
compared to the actual paths of the variables.

Even with no New Deal effects, the model predicted an upward trend in real wages
for 1933-39; this reflected both the increases in employment and the relative weakness of

the recovery in work-weeks (see Table 2). However, this experiment confirmed that the
effect of the New Deal on wages was very strong. There were two major wage pushes after
36

Roosevelt's election that are not well predicted in the counterfactual history: The first of

these took place in the last half of 1933 as the NRA codes went into effect, the second

in early 1937, at about the time that important Supreme Court decisions affirming the
constitutionality of the Wagner Act contributed to a burst of union activity. At the end
of 1939, actual wages were almost 30% higher than simulated in iron and steel and 20%
higher in automobiles. (Both industries signed major union agreements in 1937.) Wages
were 10—20% higher in 1939 than predicted in the other industries, except for shoes (which
had big wage increases during the NRA but lost ground later on; see note 31) and lumber
(in which wage growth actually remained below the simulated level).
This exercise, together with the simulations carried out for 1930—33, suggests that. the

best explanation for rising wages in the 'thirties is probably an eclectic one. The effects of
short work—weeks, cyclical variations in the skill mix, nominal stickiness, and government

actions all made contributions. (It is unfortunate that complex phenomena do not have
simple explanations; but there is not much that can be done about it.)

The effect of the New Deal on the patterns of labor usage are also apparent but
somewhat less dramatic than the impact on wages. There was a cliscernable tendency to

cut work-weeks and increase employment (i.e., use work-sharing), especially during the
NRA. Work-sharing inspired by the New Deal seemed to be quantitatively important in
iron and steel, but in most of the other industries the unpredicted amount of work-sharing

was relatively small. The total quantity of labor input, as measured by worker-hours
(admittedly a flawed measure, given the results of this paper) might have been expected

to have been forced down, as the New Deal's high-wage policy induced substitution to

non-labor inputs. In fact, total worker-hours employed appears to have been relatively
unaffected by the New Deal.

All of this is, of course, for fixed paths of output. To answer the broader question of

how the New Deal affected output, a general equilibrium model would be required. It is
not evident how such an exercise would come out: The restricted experiment reported here
suggests that the New Deal was effective at raising worker incomes (by raising wages without

inducing substitution away from labor, and through relief programs). Higher incomes must

have increased aggregate demand. But the New Deal also raised unit labor costs and thus

prices, which would depress demand. The net impact of the New Deal would depend on
37

which of these countervailing forces was stronger.

V. A Dynamic Labor Supply Equation
A possible objection to the supply side of the model developed and estimated in this

paper is that it is rather static in nature. I have made strong assumptions (that workers
cannot borrow or lend, and that they have intertemporally separable utility functions) in
order to avoid consideration of the intertemp oral substitution of leisure and consumption.
In addition, the implicit assumption that there are no mobility costs to moving between the
secondary and primary sectors implies that workers need consider only current returns (and
not long-run returns) when deciding whether to change sectors. Only the partial adjustment

of nominal earnings to cost-of-living changes (in the estimated earnings functions) induces
a modest dynamic element.
Although developing a more explicitly dynamic representation of this paper's model of

labor supply is not particularly difficult conceptually, there are some substantial problems

of empirical implementation. Rather than tackle those here, I propose to do something

more limited: I will try to show that one of the more empirically successful models of
Depression—era labor supply, the intertemp oral substitution model of Darby (1976), can

be re-interpreted as a dynamic version of the supply model in this paper. Estimates of
a Darby—type model on these data will then be presented. The reasonableness of these
estimates, it will be argued, constitutes evidence that the present paper's model of labor
supply could survive the transition to a more dynamic specification.

Darby's model of labor supply is an extension of the basic Lucas—Rapping (1969)
formulation. Lucas and Rapping argued, it will be recalled, that labor supply (i.e., workerhours, normalized by the number of households) should depend
1) poaltiveig on the current returns to working

2) negatively on the long-run, or "normal" returns to working

3) negatively on the ratio of the "normal" to the current price level

The reasoning should be familiar: 1) High current returns to work increase labor
effort by improving the rate of exchange between work and consumption. 2) High long-rim

returns to work depress current labor supply by making it more profitable to substitute

present for future leisure. 3) Finally, assuming that nominal interest rates don't adjust
38

fully to inflation, an increase in the ratio of the normal to the current price level lowers
labor supply by leading workers to anticipate lower real rates of interest.

An important issue in this context, and one that I do not believe has been adequately
addressed by the intertemporal substitution literature, is how to measure the returns from

working. Lucas and Rapping, and most other authors, have assumed that the real wage

is a good proxy for these returns. However, as was discussed in the Introduction, this
assumption does not work well for the 19303.36 One of the contributions made by Darby
(1976) was the substitution of full-time-equivalent earnings37 for the wage as the measure

of the returns to work. Darby showed that using earnings instead of wages significantly
improved the capacity of the model to fit the 1930s.
What is the rationale for using earnings rather than wages as a measure of the returns
to work? Darby's argument was that, because the NRA codes required shorter work-weeks,

actual hours of work either were under-reported by firms (leading to an upward bias in the

measurement of hourly wages) or, possibly, were rationed. For these reasons he expected
average earnings per FTE employee to "more accurately reflect the development of wages
in the 1930s" Ip. 10] than the official wage series.

A problem with Darby's argument is that the NRA codes were in effect for less than
two years, but the substitution of earnings for wages seems to be empirically preferable for

the entire pre-war period. (See Darby's paper, and the results below.) An alternative explanation for the superiority of the earnings variable follows from the analysis of the present

research: It has been suggested here that, in an environment where hours of work are not

constant, the correct measure of the returns to working is neither of the variables just
mentioned but the total utility of the earnings—hours package offered by the job, perhaps
measured relative to the utility of remaining in the secondary sector. An obvious problem,

however, is that this utility is not observable to the econometrician; thus we might ask
which, if any, of the observables is likely to be correlated with the total utility of a job. The

wage is not a good choice; as has been shown at length, wages and the utility of a job can
easily move in opposite directions. However, in the case where fluctuations in employment

are due primarily to variations in demand rather than supply (the probable situation in

the 1930's), the utility from holding a job and earnings will be highly correlated. This
is straightforward to show: Increased demand in the primary sector, which increases the
39

equilibrium utility of workers, will also typically both move the equilibrium earnings func-

tion upward and increase hours of work. Thus increased primary—sector demand will also

increase earnings. The explanation for the superiority of Darby's specification, therefore,

is simply that earnings are a good proxy for the total utility of holding a job, and wages
are not.
These considerations suggest that estimating a model in the spirit of Darby (1976) on

the present data set may be a valuable exercise. I specify an empirical model as:

EMP * HRS1 - LABORFORCE = fib + fii(EARNt - COLE)
+fi(EARNe — COLE) + fi3(COL; — COLE)

+XNNRAt + ruUNIONPO WERE

+cwEMERGWORKe + at
(EARNs - COLE)

(5.1)

.Xp(EARN - COLE)

+(i — )p)(EARN_i

—

COL_1)

COL = ApCOL + (1 — .Ap)COL_1

(5.2)

(5.3)

where an asterisk denotes the "permanent" or long-run component of a variable, and variables definitions are given in Table 3.

Equation (5.1) is a labor supply equation, of the general form first written down by
Lucas and Rapping (1969). The dependent variable is total worker-hours supplied to an
industry, normalized by Lebergott's aggregate labor force estimates. (Lebergott's annual

data was linearly interpolated to obtain a monthly series.) Equation (5.1) follows the
discussion above in specifying that the supply of worker-hours to an industry depends
differentially on the current and long-run returns to working (where the returns to work
are measured by real weekly earnings), as well as on the ratio of the long-run to current cost-

of-living. The use of earnings to measure the returns to work reflects Darby's innovation.
By the logic of the intertemporal substitution model, the expected signs of the coefficients
are

0, 82 < 0, and fi < 0.
40

The labor supply equation (5.1) also contains terms reflecting New Deal government

actions. The expected signs of the coefficients are: for aN, ambiguous (since the NRA
codes increased employment but reduced hours); for au, negative (since unionization should

restrict labor supply below competitive levels; and for aw, negative (since increased public

works programs should reduce the supply of labor to industry). A time trend is also added
to allow for secular factors such as wealth accumulation, educational attainment, etc.

Equations (5.2) and (5.3) follow Lucas and Rapping in assuming that the permanent
components of returns and the cost of living are updated adaptively, with the same "rate of

learning" applying in both cases. Constants and trends are excluded from (5.2) and (5.3);
if included they would be absorbed into the constant and trend of the estimated equation,
with no effect on the important estimated parameters.
Using (5.2) and (5.3), the. labor supply equation (5.1) can be transformed so that only

observable variables appear (see Lucas and Rapping). The use of a non-linear estimation
procedure permits the recovery of the original parameters of (5.1) to (5.3).

The results of estimating the system (5.1)—(5.3) are reported in Table 8. The estimation method was (non-linear) two-stage least-squares, used to correct for simultaneity

bias. (Instruments are listed in the data appendix.) The sample was January 1G23—
December 1939; estimates obtained for the sample ending before the New Deal, which

set au = aw =

ajq

=

0,

are also reported. The Durbin-Watson statistics are for the

Koyck-transformed equations.

The most important result in Table 8 is that the estimate of fir, which measures the
elasticity of worker-hours supplied to earnings, is positive and highly significant in every
case. There is also a remarkable uniformity across industries and sample periods of the
magnitude of this estimated parameter. This is consistent with the idea that (5.1) is a true
supply curve in which earnings are acting as a proxy for the total utility from working.38

The estimates of fl2 are also all positive, although magnitudes and statistical signif-

icance vary. The finding that fl2 is positive, i.e., that higher long-run returns to work
increase labor supply, is the opposite of the prediction of the intertemporal substitution
model. An explanation of this finding is available, if we are willing to re-interpret (5.1):
Recall that these estimates have been obtained from industry-level, not aggregate, data. At
the level of the industry, labor supply depends not only on the decisions of workers already
41

gin" the sector (e.g., already living in the mill town) but also on the number of workers
that can be drawn from the rest of the economy. If there are mobility costs to switching
sectors, higher long-run returns in an industry will incrca8e the industry's labor supply,
by making it more worthwhile for workers to incur the fixed costs of entering the sector.
Thus it might be argued that long-run earnings belong in (5.1) because of their relevance
to worker mobility decisions, not for any reason of intertemporal substitution.

This alternative interpretation of (5.1) is an attractive one, and not simply because it
rationalizes /32 > 0: A drawback of the intertemporal substitution hypothesis as a model

of 1930's labor supply is that it assumes perfect capital markets. This assumption appears
at variance with the tremendous disarray of the financial sector in the Depression, and the
resulting large difference between lending and borrowing rates for consumers.39 In contrast,

the mobility—cost interpretation of (5.1) does not require perfect capita.l markets; indeed,

under this interpretation (5.1) is consistent with the Section II model of this paper, with
its no—borrowing, no—lending assumption.

For the sake of space, I will not carry on with a line-by-line discussion of Table 8.
However, the estimated effects of the New Deal on effective labor supply deserve a brief
mention: Table 8 finds the same result as the estimated earnings function in Table 6; namely,

that the legislation—supported unionization drive was the most important New Deal change

in labor markets. In contrast to the NRA codes and government work programs, which
had little systematic impact, unionization appears to have had a strong effect in a number
of industries.
Overall, the Darby—type specification seems to work well in these data. if the interpre-

tation of this specification that I have given is accepted, this bodes well for the development

of a more explicitly dynamic version of this paper's model of labor supply.

VI. Conclusion
This paper has employed monthly, industry-level data in a study of Depression labor
markets. The framework of analysis was a model in which, as in Lucas (1970), both firms

and workers are concerned with the distinction between the number employed and the

number of hours each worker works. In the context of the Depression, this distinction
appears to be an important one; and, in conjunction with additional empirical elements,
42

this model does a rather good job of explaining the behavior of the key time series. This

raises the possibility that the decomposition of aggregate labor supply into participation

rates and hours per worker may be important for understanding other macroeconomic
episodes as well.

A limitation of this analysis is its partial equilibrium nature: Output is treated as
exogenous. A really satisfactory analysis of the 1930s would have to consider labor markets,

product markets, and financial markets in a simultaneous general equilibrium. This should

be pursued in future research.

43

Notes
1. Baily (1983) gives an interesting discussion of labor markets in the 1930s but does not
estimate a structural econometric model.
2. Darby (1976) estimates an equilibrium model that does better than the model of Lucas
and Rapping in explaining the 1930s. This model is discussed and re-interpreted in Section
V below.

3. The Keynesian story does not have a very satisfactory answer to why firms prefer laying
off workers to cutting the wage, although some theoretical attempts (relying, e.g., on adverse

selection problems) have been made in that direction. The sticky—wage story is also not
very useful for explaining 1933—39, when real wages rose despite high unemployment and
rising prices.

4. Rosen and Quandt's cited paper postulated sticky real (rather than. nominal) wages.
in recent unpublished work these authors estimated a sophisticated disequilibrium model
in which sticky nominal wages are assumed; they again found very slow speeds of wage
adjustment.

5. Union membership peaked at 5.05 million in 1920, then fell to 3.62 million in 1923,
from where it trended slowly downward. The percentage of nonagricultural employees who

belonged to unions fell from 19.4 in 1920 to 10.2 in 1930; moreover, the powerful unions

that did exist were almost completely outside manufacturing (Bernstein (1960), p. 84,
citing Leo Wolman).

6. Technical innovations in the 1920s made many traditional skills and specialties obsolete
and increased the percentage of low-skilled labor. See Bernstein (1960). Documentation of
the decline in skill levels for individual industries in this study may be found in McPherson

(1940), Davis (1940), Brody (1960), and Dunn and Hardy (1931), among others.

7. Declines in European immigration in the 1920s were more than compensated for by the

influx of workers into manufacturing areas from the rural U.S. (According to Bernstein,
p. 48, during 1922—29 over two million people per year left the farm for the city; the U.S.
farm population fell in 1920—30 while the nonfarm population grew by a quarter.)
44

8. Aggregate industrial production indices are heavily contaminated by input-based mea-

sures of output. For this reason I obtained estimates only at the industry level, not for all
manufacturing.

9. This is the opposite of the usual reference cycle convention.
10. If the number of months in the descending or ascending part of the cycle was not evenly

divisible by three, the first extra month was assigned to the second of the three stages, the

second extra month to the third stage.
11. Note that at this point the extra step of averaging across the standardized cycles would
create a "reference cycle".
12. The countercyclicality found by Bernanice and Powell is actually somewhat out of phase;

that is, the peak in the real wage occurs some months after the trough in production.
13. The data on wage rates, available for the first six industries and through August 1931
only, are from Creamer (1950).

14. However, the sensitivity of the real wage to the cycle in the post-war period is not
strong, and the sign of the relationship is controversial. Few recent studies have considered

pre-war real wage behavior. See Bernanke and Powell for a survey of this literature.
15. For very different discussions of the sources of business cycles during the whole period,

see Friedman and Schwartz (1963) and Gordon (1974). Also see Brunner (1981), Temin
(1976), Roose (1969), and Bernanke (1983) for analyses of the 'thirties. While the views
expressed by these authors are diverse, all emphasize the aggregate demand channel.

16. Another, very different, model which does not restrict the (contemporaneous) cyclical
behavior of the real wage is given in Sargent (1978).

17. It should be made clear that Lucas is not to be implicated for the details of what
follows, which differ substantially from his paper. Plessner and Yitzliaki (1983) contains a

model similar to that below.
18. Since workers have identical utility functions and productivity, there is no opportunity
for firms to induce self-selection among workers, as in Weiss (1980).

19. The expression for total labor cost (2.6) assumes that primary sector firms pay workers

just enough to make the marginal worker indifferent between the primary and secondary
45

sector. An alternative assumption, suggested by the "efficiency wage hypothesis" (see,
e.g., Yellen (1984)), is that firms avoid the costs of continuous monitoring of employees by
paying more than the minimum required earnings (thus giving employed workers a surplus),

then firing workers caught shirking in random "spot checks". This alternative assumption,
which could easily be incorporated into the present framework, has the advantage of being
able to explain such phenomena as the long queues at employment offices and the extreme
reluctance of the employed to leave their jobs.
20. Lengthening the work-week may have diminishing returns because of increased worker
fatigue; increased employment does not increase fatigue but will typically dilute the capital-

labor ratio. See Feldstein for further discussion.

21. It is not difficult to construct examples that satisfy (2.12)—(2.14): E.g., F(N, H) =
NcH$, $ >

satisfies these conditions for any E. Note also that (2.13) is actually

redundant, given (2.12) and (2.14).
22. Equivalently, by (2.11), we require that FH/N2 not greatly exceed FNH. This is likely

to hold, since N1 and H, by their nature must be strong complements, i.e., FNH will be
large positive.

23. This single-period rationalization of the layoff vs. work-sharing decision ignores an

important dynamic element, i.e., the differential costs of adjusting workforces and shift
lengths. This will be incorporated in the empirical model below.
24. See Rosen (1968) and references therein for evidence supporting this assumption.

25. Note that convexity of the earnings function is not necessary for the second-order
condition (2.13) to hold. The earnings function estimated below is log-linear, i.e., earnings
is concave in hours; empirically, this seemed to work best.

26. Economy-wide rather than industry series are used primarily because of lack of data.
Arguably, however, union successes in individual industries had "spillover" effects on industries not directly involved. (But see note 31 below.)

27. For simplicity I have assumed that the adjustment of hours depends only on the
difference between actual and desired hours, not on the difference between actual and
46

desired employment (and similarly, for the adjustment of employment). Arguments made
in Nadiri and Rosen (1973) would favor the relaxation of this restriction.

28. The money supply might seem to be a possible exception to this statement. I did
experiment with this variable. However, its correlation with industry variables in monthly

data is sufficiently low that it is of not much value as an instrument.

29. The "total output effect" coefficients in the last row of Table 4 (and Table 5) actually
double-count the effect of an output increase on employment (or hours), since they represent

the effect of a simultaneous increase in adjusted output and the (multiplicative) seasonal
adjustment factor. Short-run increasing returns exists when the sum of the coefficients on

either seasonal or non-seasonal output alone, divided by one minus the coefficient on the
lagged endogenous variable, is less than one.

30. Actually, the estimated coefficient H measures the elasticity of earnings less the
intercept, not earnings itself, to hours. The elasticity of earnings to hours is strictly less

than H

and is less than one for each industry except automobiles.

31. Davis (1940) notes: "Another significant point [regarding the decline in shoe industry

wagesj, as bearing on the year 1937, was the checking of the unionization drive in shoes

at the very time when unionism was getting established in several other manufacturing

industries for the first time." [p. 98J The unusual decline in shoe industry wages after
1937 probably also accounts for the very different estimates of a in the 1923—33 and the
1923—39 samples.

32. This is a bit of evidence against Darby's view that Federal employment displaced
private employment during this period.
33. Henning Bobn suggested that agricultural earnings, an additional measure of workers'

alternative opportunities, might belong in the industry earnings functions; so I tried this.

Monthly agricultural wage rates (nominal, without board) are reported for each quarter
in the sample in Sayre (1940); I interpolated this series and divided by the cost of living
to obtain a monthly series on real agricultural earnings. Re-estimated earnings functions

including this variable looked quite similar to those reported in Table 6. The estimated
coefficient of agricultural earnings was typically found to be positive, as predicted by the
47

theory, but of only moderate magnitude and statistical significance. An exception was the

lumber industry, for which agricultural wages appear to have had an important influence
on earnings.

34. Employment is measured as an index (1923=100). Hours is actual hours per week and

the real wage is in 1923 cents per hour.
35. No similar systematic attempt to promote work—sharing during this period (in excess
of what is predicted by the model) was noticeable for any of the other six industries.

36. It may be noted also that estimation of a Lucas-Rapping type model using these data
(equations (5.1)—(5.3) below with the real wage in place of real earnings) yielded a number

of wrong signs and a generally poorer fit than the Darby real earnings version.

37. The FTE earnings variable used by Darby is essentially identical to actual average
earnings for most industries, including manufacturing. That is, the variable reflects actual

rather than "normal" work-weeks. See the Surve,c of Current Bu8ine38, June 1945, pp.
17-18.

38. The positive and significant estimates of flu, it should be noted, did not simply reflect

the fact that weekly hours is a constituent of both the dependent variable and weekly
earnings. Re-estimates using employment as the dependent variable instead of workerhours also yielded positive and highly significant values for /.

See Bernanke (1983). The failure of the perfect capital markets assumption may
explain the difficulty the intertemp oral substitution model has in explaining the path of
39.

consumption in the 1930s (Altonji (1982)).

48

Data Appendix
The sources of the data used in this study are as follows:

1) Earnings, hours, and employment data are from Beney (1936) and Sayre (1940).
These data are the result of an extensive monthly survey conducted by the National Industrial Conference Board from 1920 until 1947.

All of the industries in the sample paid at least part of their workforce by piece rates
(see the MonthlyLabor Review, vol. 41, no. 3, September 1935, pp. 697—700). No correction

was made for this. This should not create any problem of interpretation, as long as the
mb,..b +b
2)

i...,1,...
LO

Y&

'...LI%.L jJJI.

....,,i.
ULU.U.....
LU i.1...
L.LLc ...t...i.
LLUL L WI.

Industrial production data are from the Federal Reserve Board. See "New Federal

Reserve Index of Industrial Production", Federal Reserve Bulletin, August 1940, pp. 753-69
and 825-74.

3) Wholesale price indexes are from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. See the following

publications of the U.S. Department of Labor: Handbook of Labor Statistics (1931 ed.,
Bulletin 541; 1936 ed., Bulletin 616; 1941 ed., Bulletin 694), and Wholesale Prices 1913 to

1927 (Washington: U.S.G.P.O., 1929, Bulletin 473). For the automobile industry I merged
two BLS series of motor vehicles prices. Neither series covered 1935; the price series on all

metal products was used to interpolate the automobiles price series for that year.
4) The consumer price series is from Sayre (1948).

5) The NRA dummy is set equal to one for all months from September 1933, when
the first NRA industry codes went into effect, until May 1935, when the Act was declared

unconstitutional. The monthly data on man-days idle due to strikes (used in the construction of the UNIONPOWER variable) is from the Bureau of Labor Statistics, Bulletins 651
and 694. The data series for total Federal emergency workers, which include the WPA, the
CCC, and other programs, is from the NICB's Economic Almanac for 1941-42.
The basic data were seasonally unadjusted. These data were used in estimation without

adjustment (see text for discussion). Seasonal adjustment by the TSP routine was used in
the construction of the standardized cycles ( Table 2).
The span of the sample is January 1923 to December 1939. Although some of the data

exist before 1923, there are two major problems with extending the sample further back:
49

1) Some of the industrial production data are missing and cannot be constructed. 2) There
is a six month gap in the NICB survey in 1922. The December 1939 stop date was chosen
so as to avoid consideration of the many special features of the wartime economy.

The variables treated as endogenous and the additional instruments used in estima-

tion in the principal equations are as follows: 1) Demand for workers equation. PAYS

and QADJt+j are taken to be endogenous. (QADJe+i is treated as endogenous because of the measurement error problem created when a future value of a variable is used

in place of a forecast. See the text.) Additional instruments are QADJt_i, HRS_1,
UNIONPOWER, and the current value and two lags of the cost-of-living variable COL.

2) Demand for hours of work equation. The endogenous variable is the cost variable,
HCOST. Additional instruments are EMP_1, UNIONPOWER, and the current value
and two lags of COL. 3) Earnings equation. Endogenous variables are EMP and HRSe.
Instruments were the current and two lagged values of production Q and current and two
lagged values of COL. Because it was observed earlier that current employment was highly

correlated with one-month-ahead production in some industries, I also used as an instru-

ment a forecast of one-month-ahead production based on a univariate autoregression. 4)
Dynamic labor supply, or "Darby", equation. Endogenous variable is EARNS. Instruments

are the same as in the earnings equation above.

50

References
ALTONJI, JOSEPH [1982], "The !ntertemporal Substitution Model of Labour Market Fluctuations: An Empirical Analysis," Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 49(5), pp.
783-824.

ALTONJI, JOSEPH AND ORLEY ASRENFELTER [1980], "Wage Movements and the Labour

Market Equilibrium Hypothesis," Economica, Vol. 47, pp. 217-45.
ASHENPELTER, ORLEY [1980], "Unemployment as Disequilibrium in a Model of Aggregate
Labor Supply," Econometrica, Vol. 48, pp. 547-64.

BAILY, MARTIN N. [1983], "The Labor Market in the 1930's." In James Tobin, Macroeconomics, Prices, and Quantities, Washington: Brookings Institution.

BAKKE, E. WIGHT [1940], The Unemployed Worker: A Study of the Task of Making a
Living Without a Job, New Haven: Yale U. Press.

BALL, R.J. AND E.B.A. ST. CYR [1966], "Short-term Employment Functions in
British Manufacturing Industry," Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 33, pp. 179207.

BERNANKE, BEN [1983], "Nonmonetary Effects of the Financial Crisis in the Propagation
of the Great Depression," American Economic Review, Vol. 73, pp. 257-76.
BERNANKE, BEN, AND JAMES POWELL [forthcoming], "The Cyclical Behavior of Indus-

trial Labor Markets: A Comparison of the Pre-War and Post-War Eras," NBER
conference volume on business cycles, R.J. Gordon, ed..
BERNSTEIN, IRVING [1960], The Lean Years: A History of the American Worker, 19201933, Boston: Houghton-Mifflin.
BREORLING, F . P. R. [1965], "The Relationship Between Output and Employment in
British Manufacturing Industries," Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 32, pp. 187216.

BRODY, DAVID [1960], Steelworkers in America: The Nonunion Era, Cambridge: Harvard
U. Press.
BRUNNER, KARL, ED. [1981], The Great Depression Revisited, Boston: Martinus Nijhoff.

BaY, GERHARD [1959], "The Average Workweek as an Economic Indicator," occasional
paper no. 69, NBER.
BURNS, ARTHUR F. [1969], The Business Cycle in a Changing World, New York: Columbia

U. Press.
BURNS, ARTHUR F., AND WESLEY C. MITCHELL [1946], Measuring Business Cycles,
New York: National Bureau of Economic Research.
CREAMER, DANIEL [1950], "Behavior of Wage Rates During Business Cycles," occasional

paper no. 34, NBER.
DARBY, MICHAEL R. [1976], "Three-and-a-Half Million U.S. Employees Have Been Mis-

laid: Or, an Explanation of Unemployment, 1934-41," Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 84, pp. 1-16.

DAUGHERTY, CARROLL R., ET AL. [1937], The Economics of the fron and Steel Industry,
New York: McGraw-Hill.
DAVIS, HORACE B. [19401, Shoes: The Workers and the Industry, New York: International

Publishers.

DUNN, ROBERT W. [1929], Labor and Automobiles, New York: International.
DUNN, ROBERT W. AND JACK HARDY [1931], Labor and Textiles, New York: International.
FABRICANT, SOLOMON [1940], The Output of Manufacturing Industries, 1899-1939, New
York: National Bureau of Economic Research.
[1942], Employment in Manufacturing, 1899-1939, New York: National Bureau of Economic Research.

FAIR, RAY C. [1969], The Short-run Demand for Workers and Hours, Amsterdam: NorthHolland.
FELDSTEIN, MARTIN [1967], "Specification of the Labour Input in the Aggregate Production Function," Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 34(4), pp. 375-86.

FISCHER, STANLEY [1977], "'Long-Term Contracting, Sticky Prices, and Monetary Policy': A Comment," Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 3, pp. 317-24.

FRIEDMAN, MILTON, AND ANNA J. SCHWARTZ [1963], A Monetary History of the
United States, 1867-1960, Princeton: Princeton U. Press.
GORDON, ROBERT A. [1974], Economic Instability and Growth: The American Record,
New York: Harper and Row.

IRELAND, J.J. AND D.J. SMYTH [1967], "Short-term Employment Functions in Australian Manufacturing," Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 49, pp. 537-44.
LEBERGOTT, STANLEY [1964], Manpower in Economic Growth: The American Record
Since 1800, New York: McGraw-Hill.

LUCAS, ROBERT E., JR. [1970], "Capacity, Overtime, and Empirical Production Functions," American Economic Review, Vol. 60, pp. 23-27.
[1972], "Expectations and the Neutrality of Money," Journal of Economic
Theory, Vol. 4, pp. 103-24.
LUCAS, ROBERT E., JR., AND LEONARD A. RAPPING [1969], "Real Wages, Employment, and Inflation," Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 77, pp. 721-54.
[1972], "Unemployment in the Great Depression: Is There a Full Explanation?," Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 80, pp. 186-91.

MCPHERSON, WILLIAM H. [1940], Labor Relations in the Automobile Industry, Washington: Brookings Institution.
MOORE, GEOFFREY H. [1955], "Business Cycles and the Labor Market," Monthly Labor
Review, Vol. 78, pp. 288-92.

MUTE, JOHN F. [1960], "Optimal Properties of Exponentially Weighted Forecasts," Journal of the American Statistical Association, Vol. 55, pp.

NADIR!, M. ISHAQ AND SHERWIN ROSEN [1973], A Disequilibrium Model of Demand
for Factors of Production, New York: Columbia U. Press for NBER.
PLESSNER, YAKIR AND SHLOMO Y!TZHAKI [1983], "Unemployment and Wage Rigidity:

The Demand Side," Oxford Economic Papers, Vol. 35, pp. 202-12.
REES, ALBERT [1970], "On Equilibrium in Labor Markets," Journal of Political Economy,
Vol. 78, pp. 306-10.
[1972], "Real Wages and Inflation: Rejoinder," Journal of Political Economy,
Vol. 80, pp. 192.
ROOSE, KENNETH D. [1954], The Economics of Recession and Revival, New Haven: Yale
U. Press.

ROSEN, HARVEY S., AND RICHARD E. QUANDT [1978], "Estimation of a Disequilibrium Aggregate Labor Market," Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 60, pp.
371-79.

ROSEN, SHERWIN [1968], "Short-run Employment Variation on Class-I Railroads in the
U.S., 1947-1963," Econometrica, Vol. 36, pp. 511-29.

ROTEMBERG, JULIO [1982], "Sticky Prices in the United States," Journal of Political
Economy, Vol. 90, pp. 1187-1211.

SARGENT, THOMAS [1978], "Estimation of Dynamic Labor Demand Schedules Under
Rational Expectations," Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 86, pp. 1009-44.
SAYRE, R.A. [1940], "Wages, Hours, and Employment in the United States, 1934-1939,"
Conference Board Economic Record, Vol. 2, pp. 115-37.
[1948], Consumers' Prices, 1914-1948, New York: National Industrial Conference Board.

STOCKMAN, ALAN C. [1983], "Aggregation Bias and the Cyclical Behavior of Real
Wages," Research Paper, U. of Rochester.
TEMIN, PETER [1976], Did Monetary Forces Cause the Great Depression?, New York:
W.W. Norton.
WEINSTEIN, MICHAEL M. [19811, "Some Macroeconomic Impacts of the National Industrial Recovery Act, 1933-1935." In Karl Brunner, The Great Depression Revisited,
Boston: Martinus Nijhoff.
WEISS, ANDREW [1980], "Job Queues and Layoffs in Labor Markets with Flexible Wages,"
Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 88, pp. 5 26-38.

YELLEN, JANET C. [1984], "Efficiency Wage Models of Unemployment," American Economic Review, Vol. 74, pp. 200-5.

Table 1
Industries Included in the Data Set
Value — added

Wage — earners1

Industry

% Total Mfg.

Thousands

% Total Mfg.

$Milhons

419.6

5.02

1622.8

5.40

2. Automobiles

226.1

2.70

1315.0

4.37

(AUTOS)
3. Meat packing

122.5

1.46

460.5

1.53

128.0

1.53

482.8

1.61

205.6

2.46

450.9

1.50

179.6

2.15

414.8

1.38

49.9

0.60

143.7

0.48

509.2

6.09

1088.5

3.62

1840.5

22.01

5979.0

19.89

(mnemonic)

1. Iron and
steel

(IRON)

(MEAT)
4. Paper and
pulp

(PAPER)
5. Boots and
shoes

(SHOES)
6. Wool textiles

(WOOL)
7. Leather
tanning and
finishing
(LEATH)
8. Lumber and
millwork3

(LUMBER)
TOTAL

Notes
1. Number of wage earners, and percentage of wage-earners in all manufacturing employed in

the industry, 1929; from Fabricant (1942), Appendix B.
2. Millions of dollars of value added, and percentage of all manufacturing value added originating
in the industry, 1929; from Fabricant (1940), Appendix C.
3. Furniture is excluded.

Table 2
Standardized Business Cycles
1. Iron and Steel

Output
1923-26

I
II
III
IV
V

VI
VII

VIII
IX
1926-29

I
II
III
IV

V
VI
VII
VIII
IX
1929-37

I
II

III
IV
V

VI
VII
VIII
IX
1937-39

I
II
III
IV
V
VI

Employment

Hours
of work

100.0
103.0

100.0

Real

Product

Wages

wages

wages

100.0
103.9
111.6
108.8
109.0
108.5
108.0
108.2
108.5

100.0
103.6
110.1
107.6
108.3
106.7
104.0
103.6
105.5

100.0
106.1
116.4
118.8
123.5
126.1
131.2
132.5
132.6

100.0
102.3
101.7
103.0
102.6
103.6
104.8
106.2
104.9

100.0
103.6
105.2
106.4
107.8
108.0
107.3
105.8
105.1

100.0
97.2
90.5
77.2
51.2
89.0
93.4
100.2
106.8

98.3
101.7

100.0
93.5
91.5
82.2
80.6
93.0
103.0
112.4
115.6

100.0
94.3
92.0
88.3
87.2
88.1
94.4
97.5
100.4

102.2
101.8

100.0
102.6
101.5
101.1
100.9
101.7
102.0
102.9
102.9

100.0
75.3
43.7
22.4
15.9
47.4
50.1
83.8
99.4

100.0
91.4
65.9
62.4
49.3
76.4
83.8
105.2
118.9

100.0
92.6
78.9
49.7
48.2
62.1
57.4
72.9
69.5

100.0
101.2
97.9
80.5
73.6
87.6
99.8
106.7
132.1

100.0
104.0
112.4
105.1
103.0
114.5
123.2
126.9
151.8

100.0
106.1
114.3
99.6
94.9
103.8
113.0
116.8
130.6

100.0
95.3
48.3
36.1
34.0
73.9

100.0
101.1

100.0

100.0
100.1
94.8
95.3
98.5
97.3

100.0
100.0
95.3
97.6
101.2
101.5

100.0
99.3
94.6
94.8
96.8
100.4

98.3
93.5
71.4
89.4

93.7

90.3
72.9
71.0
78.3

96.9
96.9
83.5
79.9
88.7
89.7
91.4

91.0
100.0
101.0

98.4
96.7
97.3
99.1

99.8

99.1
69.4
65.7
66.4
86.7

Table 2 (continued)
4. Paper and Pulp

Real

Product

Wages

wages

wages

100.0
97.5
95.9
93.9
92.2
95.7
96.7
98.0
98.3

100.0
100.7
101.2
102.6
103.1
103.5
103.3
102.9
102.6

100.0
100.5

98.6
99.8

100.0
101.6
104.9
107.3
109.3
105.4
100.2
104.4
115.2

100.0
100.6

98.0

99.0
97.9
100.9
98.7
97.8
99.9
100.7

100.0
101.2
102.3
100.4
100.5
101.7
101.1
103.4
102.0

100.0
100.9
102.6
102.2
102.2
103.6
103.8
106.7
104.0

100.0
100.4
102.2
101.0
101.3
103.8
105.1
108.6
107.4

100.0
95.5
86.1
72.6
69.9
86.7
92.1
113.6
131.8

100.0
96.2
83.3
77.3
75.6
89.0
97.6
101.9
108.1

100.0
96.9
84.9
77.3
74.4
76.1
74.6
82.2
83.5

100.0
100.7
99.6
86.2
78.5
88.1
98.9
103.3
114.1

100.0
103.5
114.4
112.7
109.8
115.3
122.1
122.9
131.2

100.0
102.8
106.9
100.5
95.2
96.3
107.7
109.5
106.0

100.0
93.6
72.7
74.1
73.2
92.3

100.0

100.0

99.9
92.8
88.5
87.2

97.2
87.1
86.3
84.7
92.5

100.0
105.0
105.6
106.2
106.7
104.5

100.0
104.9
106.2
108.7
109.7
109.0

100.0
105.7
109.8
113.8
117.8
120.2

Employment

Hours
of work

100.0
96.1
95.4
98.9
90.1
105.6
106.9
116.2
115.7

100.0

100.0
103.1
101.2
100.5
103.4
106.2
108.0
114,7
114.8

100.0

Output
1923-26

I
II
III
IV
V

VI
VII
VIII
IX
1926-29

I
II
III
IV
V

VI
VII
VIII

IX
1929-37

I

II

In
IV
V
VI
VII
VIII
IX

1937-39

I
II
III
IV
V

VI

97.4
93.8
96.1

86.9
94.1
100.5
107.4
107.0

96.0
92.8
92.8

91.7
90.7
94.3

95.7

91.7

99.9
101.4
102.5
101.8
99.5

Table 2 (continued)
7. Leather Tanning and Finishing

Product

Wages

Real
wages

100.0
97.4
97.1
96.8
88.5
96.5
96.9
95.7
95.6

100.0
101.5
103.8
105.0
104.5
104.1
105.1
106.3
106.2

100.0
101.2
102.4
103.8
103.8
102.4
101.2
101.9
103.3

100.0
105.9
113.0
113.6
118.1
107.7
110.1
114.4
116.8

100.0
98.8
97.7
98.5
98.4
99.2
98.0
94.7
92.5

100.0
99.7
97.4
98.7
101.1
98.4
97.2
100.6
102.4

100.0
101.2
103.8
104.0
103.1
104.5
104.5
101.2
100.5

100.0
100.9
104.1
105.9
104.8
106.4
107.4
104.5
102.4

100.0
100.0
98.3
89.4
86.6
80.2
82.6
87.2
88.9

100.0
98.0
84.4
78.7
77.3
96.0
100.7
99.6
110.2

100.0
97.7
94.1
86.2
87.0

100.0
100.6

100.0
106.0
124.1
152.0
153.7

83.8

95.3

78.8
83.0
83.7

105.9
109.2
118.7

100.0
103.4
111.6
113.6
108.4
124.5
130.7
129.9
136.5

100.0
96.6
84.3
76.9
76.2
83.1

100.0
95.2
86.6
83.2
87.0
96.3

100.0
102.6
103.2
104.2
101.9
102.7

100.0
102.4
103.8
106.6
104.8
107.1

100.0
105.3
116.1
126.6
125.6
121.0

Output

ment

Hours
of work

100.0

70.1
79.2
77.2
81.0
86.3

100.0
97.9
96.8
92.2
85.2
86.8
88.0
91,8
90.5

100.0
99.0
95.9
99.4
95.6
98.0
92.2
89.2
94.3
100.0
96.3
82.6
71.7
71.4
89.6

Employ1923-26

I
II
III
IV
V

VI
VII
VIII
IX
1926-29

I
II
III
IV

V
VI

VII
VIII
LX

1929-37

I
II
III
IV
V
VI
VII

1937-39

91.6
86.0
76.7

96.2

VIII
IX

100.5
113.8

I
II
III

100.0
85.3
68.6
67.9

IV
V
VI

67.8
82.1

97.2
86.9
77.4

wages

137.1
152.5
137.3
129.8

Table 3
Definitions of Variables Used in Estimation

Variable name

Definition

COL

Cost-of-living index
Nominal weekly earnings (per wage-earner)
Nominal weekly earnings, less intercept; see (3.2)
"Emergency workers" hired under New Deal

EARN
EiTkN
EMERGWORK

EMP
EMPLF
HCOST
HRS
INTERCEPT
LABORFORCE
NRA

P
PAY
Q

QSEAS
Q — QSEAS
t

UNIONPOWER

Employment of wage-earners
EMP - LABORFORCE
Marginal cost of HRS; see (3.12)
Weekly hours of work (per wage-earner)
Intercept in earnings equation; see (3.2)
Aggregate labor force (Lebergott), interpolated
National Recovery Act dummy
Industry output price
Nominal weekly earnings deflated by product price
Real production (not deseasonalized)
Purely seasonal component of real production
Deseasonalized real production
Time
Cumulative man-days idled by strikes; =0, May 1935

All variables except COL, EMERGWORK, LABORFORCE, NRA, t, and UNIONPOWER
are defined separately for each of the eight industries.

Other than NRA, INTERCEPT, 1, and UNIONPOWER, variables are in logarithms.

Table 4
Industry Demands for Workers
Dependent variable: EMPt

Industries

Independent
variables

IRON AUTOS MEAT PAPER SHOES WOOL LEATH LUMBER

EMPt_j

.740
(19.6)

.610
(11.3)

.916
(16.7)

.881
(42.5)

.720
(13.2)

.578
(11.8)

.771
(19.2)

.684
(16.1)

PAYt

-.135
(.3.70)

-.134
(-1.04)

-.094
(-1.98)

-.046
(-1.59)

-.202
(-1.87)

-.229
(-2.82)

.008
(0.16)

-.204
(-2.91)

Qj— QSEASt+i

.123
(1.69)

.450
(5.39)

.918
(1.87)

.179
(1.27)

-.033
(-0.32)

.002
(0.02)

-.046
(-0.26)

.216
(1.39)

QSEASi

.102
(1.94)

.343
(4.94)

.124
(1.90)

.039
(0.98)

.220
(8.12)

.286
(2.61)

.147
(2.36)

.279
(3.50)

Qg—QSEASt

.058
(1.94)

-.125
(-2.06)

-.532
(-1.37)

-.050
(-0.37)

.240
(1.86)

-.008
(-0.11)

.236
(1.37)

.071
(0.42)

QSEASt

.081
(1.47)

-.160
(-2.35)

-.016
(-0.23)

.082
(2.01)

-.030
(-1.03)

.393
(5.10)

.160
(2.55)

.172
(1.73)

NRAg

.010
(1.04)

.035
(1.48)

.026
(1.40)

.019
(2.72)

.018
(1.85)

-.002
(-0.16)

.015
(2.38)

-.024
(-1.04)

DurbinWatson

1.46

1.79

1.81

2.11

1.90

1.91

1.65

1.55

Sum of output
coefficients

.364
(6.71)

.508
(6.69)

.494
(3.68)

.250
(4.76)

.397
(4.74)

.673
(8.06)

.497
(6.69)

.737
(7.34)

Sample: January 1923—December 1939
Estimation was by 2SLS.
See Table 3 for variable definitions; instruments are given in the appendix.
Estimates of the constant and the trend term are not reported.
t-statistics are in parentheses.

Table 5

Industry Demands for Hours of Work
Dependent variable: HRSt

Industries
Independent
variables

IRON AUTOS MEAT PAPER SHOES WOOL LEATH LUMBER
.512
(10.1)

.562
(10.0)

.381
(5.83)

-.509

-.334

(-6.42)

(-7.82)

-.217
(-5.22)

-.159
(-3.70)

.474
(7.50)

.242
(9.17)

.130
(5.05)

.254
(7.44)

.160
(3.29)

.348
(5.31)

.263
(3.63)

.357
(5.70)

.397
(5.58)

HRSt_t

.560
(14.0)

.761
(11.0)

.521
(10.6)

.612
(14.5)

-.312
(-7.76)

-.162
(-2.85)

-.116
(-6.88)

-.056

HCOSTt

(-2.51)

.323
(12.4)

.131
(4.01)

.196
(7.11)

.220
(8.70)

QSEASt

.231
(3.99)

.062
(1.96)

.111
(5.01)

.162
(3.49)

-.041
(-3.40)

-.010

-.016

-.026

.047

-.042

-.007

-.062

NRAt

(-2.34)

(-4.86)

(3.06)

(-3.95)

(-0.80)

(-4.61)

DurbinWatson

1.99

1.57

1.73

1.80

1.47

1.44

1.49

1.54

.553
(8.17)

.193
(3.42)

.307
(7.54)

.382
(7.06)

.634
(6.42)

.590
(7.65)

.394
(4.94)

.611
(6.89)

—

QSEAS

Sum of output
coefficients

(-0.53)

Sample: January 1923—December 1939
Estimation was by 2SLS.
See Table 3 for variable definitions; instruments are given in the appendix.
Estimates of the constant and trend term are not reported.

t-statistics are in parentheses.

Table 6
Earnings Functions

Industries

Estimated
parameter

IRON AUTOS MEAT PAPER SHOES WOOL LEATH LUMBER
1. Sample: January 1923 — June 1933

DurbinWatson

.352
(4.13)

.048
(0.98)

.202
(2.71)

.496
(2.95)

(5.76)

Liii

.285
(4.95)

.267
(3.07)

.364
(3.33)

.951
(11.8)

1.172
(22.1)

.648
(8.79)

.869
(7.43)

.784
(7.53)

.737
(9.22)

1.010
(17.8)

.817
(4.16)

.11.)

100
.100

n0
.UI0

.Ut

I
.J.iU

(3.19)

(2.99)

(3.88)

(2.57)

(3.30)

(3.97)

i it
.1'*)
(3.40)

(4.52)

1.99

1.82

1.96

2.16

2.09

1.97

2.25

2.20

2. Sample: January 1923 - December 1939

aH

au

Ap

DurbinWatson

.320
(4.08)

.004
(0.14)

.118
(1.85)

.419
(2.84)

.317
(2.46)

.326
(5.76)

.252
(3.90)

.369
(4.28)

1.030
(18.9)

1.203
(27.0)

.713
(8.52)

.913
(11.8)

.983
(12.2)

.697
(9.13)

.966
(18.1)

.698
(4.76)

.029
(1.47)

.020
(1.25)

.009
(0.53)

.008
(0.64)

.053
(2.38)

.057
(3.11)

.040
(3.73)

.036
(0.98)

.229
(2.42)

.183
(1.61)

.210
(4.00)

.137
(2.23)

-.250
(-1.60)

.117
(1.63)

.097
(2.32)

.030
(0.24)

-.069
(-0.88)

-.131
(-1.94)

.163
(2.64)

.007
(0.17)

.008
(0.08)

-.035
(-0.47)

.045
(1.03)

.020
(0.17)

.129
(3.84)

.073
(2.22)

.204
(4.81)

.095
(3.27)

.068
(1.97)

.163
(4.45)

.157
(4.50)

.217
(4.60)

1.83

1.84

2.03

2.20

1.95

1.97

2.10

2.32

Estimation was by NL2SLS.
See text for parameter definitions; instruments are given in the appendix.
Estimates of the constant and trend term are not reported.
The estimates of au and aw are multiplied by i0 and 10 respectively, for legibility.
t-statistics are in parentheses.

Table 7
Statistics of Model Simulation, January 1930—June 1933
1. Employment

Mean

Std. Dev.

Mm.

Max.

Actual
Simulated

71.0
70.4

14.4
13.6

51.7
52.7

94.6

.098

Actual
Simulated

66.0
66.0

14.3
20.2

37.3
33.3

94.4
107.3

.143

Actual
Simulated

79.2
79.2

6.4
6.0

69.2
69.0

93.8
94.9

.026

Actual
Simulated

89.9
90.7

8.2

80.0

9.1

77.3

109.0
106.4

.033

Actual
Simulated

83.9
84.8

4.4
4.1

76.5
79.8

96.1
94.3

.027

Actual
Simulated

59.7

8.2

59.4

7.5

37.2
41.5

77.8
75.5

.060

Actual
Simulated

71.2
72.3

5.9

57.5
63.8

85.2
81.5

.054

Actual
Simulated

46.3
46.5

29.8
30.5

73.8

Industry

IRON

AUTOS

MEAT

PAPER

SHOES

WOOL

LEATH

LUMBER

7.2

12.7

12.7

%RMSE

98.3

69.3

.066

Table 7. continued
2. Hours of work

Mean

Std. Dcv.

Mm.

Max.

%RMSE

Actual
Simulated

38.7
38.1

9.6
8.3

24.2
26.8

54.5
52.3

.087

Actual
Simulated

35.9

6.1

37.3

2.4

20.5
33.5

44.6
41.9

.221

Actual
Simulated

48.8
48.7

1.5
1.1

44.5
46.8

52.1
51.1

.021

Actual
Simulated

44.1
44.4

4.1
3.8

36.9
38.9

52.1

Actual
Simulated

41.8
39.2

3.1
3.2

36.8
34.8

49.0

Actual
Simulated

40.9

3.0
3.0

34.0
32.8

47.1

Actual
Simulated

43.5
43.1

3.3

34.8

2.3

39.1

Actual
Simulated

39.3
38.9

4.6
3.6

29.4

Industry

IRON
AUTOS

MEAT

PAPER
SHOES

WOOL

LEATH

LUMBER

40.7

34.3

51.7

49.9

.028

.089

48.8

.039

48.4
47.7

.049

46.4
46.0

.045

Table 7. continued
3. Real wage

Mean

Std. Dev.

Mm.

Max.

%RMSE

Actual
Simulated

0.69
0.69

0.035
0.012

0.63
0.66

0.76
0.71

.044

Actual
Simulated

0.76
0.76

0.032
0.028

0.68
0.70

0.81
0.81

.021

Actual
Simulated

0.56
0.56

0.021
0.015

0.53
0.53

0.60
0.58

.038

Actual
Simulated

0.59
0.58

0.023
0.017

0.54
0.54

0.62
0.60

.026

Actual
Simulated

0.51
0.53

0.022
0.019

0.46
0.49

0.56
0.59

.072

Actual
Simulated

0.51
0.51

0.029
0.018

0.46
0.47

0.56
0.54

.052

Actual
Simulated

0.57
0.57

0.020
0.017

0.52
0.53

0.61
0.60

.012

Actual
Simulated

0.57
0.57

0.033
0.007

0.52
0.55

0.62
0.58

.051

Industry

IRON
AUTOS

MEAT

PAPER

SHOES

WOOL

LEATH

LUMBER

Table 8

Dynamic Labor Supply Equation
Industries

IRON AUTOS MEAT PAPER SHOES WOOL LEATH LUMBER
Sample: January 1923—June 1933
$1

1.63
(11.1)

1.77
(6.98)

1.45
(8.51)

1.04
(12.1)

2.10
(10.1)

1.21
(11.1)

1.80
(3.24)

2.29
(3.43)

2.99
(0.97)

0.30
(0.41)

0.29
(0.83)

0.42
(0.67)

2.92
(2.31)

(0.58)

1_n '7AI
•

-0.95

-0.66
(fl Ac.

-2.55
1_

')

-1.51
(_q sc

1_i

.137
(2.57)

.148
(3.49)

.093
(1.59)

.071
(2.30)

.184
(3.17)

.199
(3.26)

.095
(2.72)

.351
(4.24)

2.02

1.85

1.81

2.06

2.04

2.23

1.86

2.08

1.78
(8.25)

0.03
132

—

Ap

DurbinWatson

(0.08)

'.'I

-2.69
&i 1_k
iJ
1_', -1.24
ATI•

-0.74

0.26
-3.121
1_i

2. Sample: January 1923—December 1939
131

1.43
(16.3)

1.99
(10.5)

1.86
(7.54)

1.38
(12.5)

1.38
(15.2)

2.24
(14.8)

1.31
(12.9)

1.59
(8.28)

0.52
132

(2.05)

2.61
(3.34)

4.11
(1.62)

0.79
(1.71)

0.10
(0.23)

0.67
(1.25)

3.01
(3.35)

0.52
(1.46)

133

-1.93
(-2.74)

-0.32
(-0.21))

-3.11
(-4.39)

-1.64
(-5.97)

0.07
(0.12)

-2.01
(-2.35)

-1.53
(-4.17)

-4.21
(-3.99)

-.021
(-0.49)

.085
(0.98)

-.003
(-0.06)

.011
(0.65)

.020
(0.62)

.032
(0.66)

-.009
(-0.42)

(-0.87)

-.035
(-1.56)

-.102
(-2.57)

-.088
(-2.04)

-.030
(-1.92)

-.051
(-3.24)

-.009
(-0.43)

-.027
(-1.98)

(1.00)

.142
(0.86)

.098
(0.31)

-.149
(-0.87)

.019
(0.28)

-.145
(-1.10)

.157
(0.89)

.065
(0.76)

-.211
(-1.03)

.128
(3.90)

.170
(3.89)

.094
(2.49)

.081
(3.68)

.136
(2.76)

.165
(4.03)

.107
(3.99)

.174
(4.52)

1.85

1.79

1.82

2.13

2.21

2.07

1.93

2.20

aw

DurbinWatson

Estimation was by NL2SLS.
See text for parameter definitions; instruments are given in the appendix.
Estimates of the constant and trend term are not reported.
The estimates of au and aw are multiplied by 10 for legibility.
t-statistics are in parentheses.

-.046
.023

E

E(14)

H
Figure 1. The Earnings Function

E

I

I
I
I

I
I
I
I
(

I
I
I
I

0

14*

Figure 2. The Determination of H

H

