                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     COUNTERCYCLICAL CURRENCY RISK PREMIA

                                          Hanno Lustig
                                        Nikolai Roussanov
                                        Adrien Verdelhan

                                       Working Paper 16427
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w16427


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2010




The authors thank seminar participants at many institutions and conferences for helpful comments.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Hanno Lustig, Nikolai Roussanov, and Adrien Verdelhan. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Countercyclical Currency Risk Premia
Hanno Lustig, Nikolai Roussanov, and Adrien Verdelhan
NBER Working Paper No. 16427
September 2010, Revised February 2013
JEL No. F3,F31,G12

                                              ABSTRACT

We describe a novel currency investment strategy, the ‘dollar carry trade,’ which delivers large excess
returns, uncorrelated with the returns on well-known carry trade strategies. Using a no-arbitrage model
of exchange rates we show that these excess returns compensate U.S. investors for taking on aggregate
risk by shorting the dollar in bad times, when the U.S. price of risk is high. The counter-cyclical variation
in risk premia leads to strong return predictability: the average forward discount and U.S. industrial
production growth rates forecast up to 25% of the dollar return variation at the one-year horizon. The
estimated model implies that the variation in the exposure of U.S. investors to world-wide risk is the
key driver of predictability.


Hanno Lustig                                          Adrien Verdelhan
UCLA Anderson School of Management                    MIT Sloan School of Management
110 Westwood Plaza, Suite C413                        100 Main Street, E62-621
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481                            Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER                                              and NBER
hlustig@anderson.ucla.edu                             adrienv@mit.edu

Nikolai Roussanov
University of Pennsylvania
Wharton School, Finance Department
2400 Steinberg-Dietrich Hall
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367
and NBER
nroussan@wharton.upenn.edu




An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w16427
1     Introduction

Currency carry trades, which go long in baskets of currencies with high interest rates and short
in baskets of currencies with low interest rates, have been shown to deliver high Sharpe ratios. In

particular, the dollar-neutral high-minus-low carry trade which only uses the ranking of foreign
interest rates to build portfolios and hence ignores all information in the level of short-term U.S.
interest rates, has received lots of attention. Our paper examines a different investment strategy
that exploits the time-series variation in the average U.S. interest rate difference vis-à-vis the rest of

the world: this strategy goes long in a basket of foreign currencies and short in the dollar whenever
the average foreign short-term interest rate is above the U.S. interest rate, typically during U.S.
recessions, while it shorts all foreign currencies and takes long positions in the dollar otherwise.
This simple investment strategy, which we refer to as the ‘dollar carry trade,’ produces Sharpe

ratios in excess of 0.50, higher than those on both the high-minus-low portfolio carry trades and
the U.S. stock market over the same sample.

    We develop a no-arbitrage asset pricing model to show how the dollar carry trade exploits the
connection between U.S. short-term interest rates and the volatility of the U.S. pricing kernel.
When the volatility of the U.S. pricing kernel is high, U.S. short-term interest rates tend to be

low relative to the rest of the world, because of large precautionary savings and increased demand
for liquidity. As a result, U.S. investors in the dollar carry strategy are long in foreign currencies
and short in the dollar when the U.S. pricing kernel is more volatile than foreign pricing kernels.
This strategy is risky, because the absence of arbitrage implies that the dollar appreciates in case

of a bad shock to the U.S. pricing kernel, when its volatility is higher than abroad. U.S. investors
in the dollar carry strategy thus bear the risk of a dollar appreciation in bad times, when they
are long foreign currencies and short in the dollar. When U.S. short-term interest rates are high
relative to the rest of the world, the dollar carry trade takes a short position in foreign currencies

and a long position in the dollar: investors then bear the risk of a dollar depreciation in case of a
good innovation to the U.S. pricing kernel.

    Hence, the expected excess returns on a long position in foreign currency, funded by a short

                                                    1
position in the dollar, should be high in bad times for the U.S., but low or even negative in good
times. U.S. investors collect a positive currency risk premium because they are betting against
their own intertemporal marginal rates of substitution.

   We document new evidence of predictability for the returns on a basket of foreign currencies

funded by a short position in the dollar that is consistent with counter-cyclical variation in currency
risk premia. This evidence accounts for the profitability of the dollar carry trade strategy. A version
of our model estimated to match the dynamics and the cross-section of interest rates and exchange
rates generates a large dollar carry trade risk premium. The parameter estimates imply that the

key novel feature of our model – time-variation in U.S.-specific exposure to global risk – is the
main driver of currency return predictability and the dollar carry risk premium.

   The key predictor in our study is the average forward discount on foreign currency against the
U.S. dollar which is the difference between the average short-term interest rate across a broad set of

developed countries and the U.S. short-term interest rate. The one-month ahead average forward
discount on foreign currency against the dollar explains around 3% of the variation in the foreign
currency excess returns on a basket of developed country currencies over the next month. As the
horizon increases, the R2 increases, because the average forward discount is persistent. At the 12-

month horizon, the average forward discount explains up to 13% of the variation in returns over the
next year. These effects are economically meaningful. As the U.S. economy enters a recession, U.S.
investors who short the dollar earn a larger interest rate spread, the average forward discount on
foreign currency, and they earn an additional 145 basis points per annum in currency appreciation
per 100 basis point increase in the interest rate spread as well. In other words, an increase in

the average forward discount of 100 basis points increases the expected excess return by 245 basis
points per annum and it leads to an annualized depreciation of the dollar by 145 basis points.

   Our predictability findings are not simply a restatement of those documented in the large

literature on violations of the uncovered interest parity (UIP) that originated with the classic
papers by Hansen and Hodrick (1980) and Fama (1984). We find that the average forward discount
has forecasting power at the individual currency level above and beyond that of the currency-

                                                  2
specific interest rate differential – both in terms of the slope coefficients and the average R2 . In
fact, the average forward discount drives out the bilateral one in a panel regression for developed
currencies. Consistent with our predictability results, a version of the carry trade that goes long
or short individual currencies based on the sign of the individual forward discount, rather than the

average forward discount, only delivers a Sharpe ratio of 0.3 (which becomes essentially zero once
transaction costs are taken into account), on the same basket of currencies. The average forward
discount on the U.S. dollar against a basket of developed country currencies is a strong predictor of
the excess returns on a basket of foreign currencies, even when the basket consists only of emerging
markets currencies. All of this evidence points to the economic mechanism behind exchange rate

and currency return predictability, namely variation in the home country-specific price of risk.

   The dollar premium is driven by the U.S. business cycle, and it increases during U.S. reces-
sions. The U.S.-specific component of macroeconomic variables such as the year-over-year rate of
industrial production growth predicts future excess returns (with a negative sign) on the basket of
foreign currencies, even after controlling for the average forward discount. These two predictors

deliver in-sample R2 s of 23% at the one-year horizon for the average returns on the basket of de-
veloped country currencies, and 25% for the basket including all currencies. The effects are large:
a 100 basis point drop in year-over-year U.S. industrial output growth raises the expected excess
return, and hence increases the expected rate of dollar depreciation over the following year, by 90
basis points per annum, after controlling for the average forward discount. We also show that the

volatility of U.S. consumption growth volatility forecasts dollar returns. As in the model, these
macro-economic variables do not predict the returns on the high-minus-low currency carry trade,
which is consistent with the notion that the high-minus-low carry trade premium is determined by
the global price of risk in financial markets.

   If markets are complete, the percentage change in the spot exchange rate reflects the difference

between the log of the domestic and the foreign pricing kernels. As a simple thought experiment,
we can decompose the log pricing kernels, as well as the returns, into a country-specific component
and a global component. In a well-diversified currency portfolio, the foreign country-specific risk

                                                 3
averages out, and the U.S. investor holding this portfolio is compensated only for bearing U.S.-
specific risk and global risk. The high-minus-low carry trade portfolio also eliminates U.S.-specific
risk and, hence, the high-minus-low carry premium has to be exclusive compensation for taking
on global risk. On the contrary, the dollar carry trade average returns compensate U.S. investors

for taking on both U.S.-specific risk and global risk when the price of these risks is high in the
U.S. Indeed, the high-minus-low carry trade returns are strongly correlated with changes in global
financial market volatility, as shown by Lustig, Roussanov and Verdelhan (2011), while the dollar
carry trade is not. At the same time, the dollar carry trade returns are correlated with the
average growth rate of aggregate consumption across O.E.C.D. countries, a proxy for world-wide

macroeconomic risk, and the rate of U.S.-specific component of industrial production growth.

   Most of our paper focuses on the U.S. dollar, but a similar basket-level carry trade can be
implemented using any base currency. We call such strategies base carry trades. These base carry
trades can be implemented in other currencies, but they only ‘work’ for base currencies whose
forward discounts are informative about the local price of risk, such as the U.S. and the U.K. In

other countries, such as Japan, Switzerland, Australia, and New Zealand, the base carry trade is
highly correlated with the high-minus-low currency carry trade. Our no-arbitrage model traces out
a U-shaped relation between the mean of a country’s average forward discount and the correlation
between base carry and global carry trade returns that is confirmed in the data.

   The paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 discusses the relation of our paper to the existing
literature. Section 3 describes the data, the construction of currency portfolios and their main

characteristics, and motivates our analysis by presenting a simple investment strategy that exploits
return predictability to deliver high Sharpe ratios. Section 4 presents a no-arbitrage model of
exchange rates, which belongs to the essentially-affine class that is popular in the term-structure
literature. Section 5 takes the model to the data. The model matches the key moments of interest

rates and exchange rates in the data, reproduces the key features of the dollar carry and high-minus-
low carry trade risk premia, and offers an interpretation of our predictability findings. Section 6
shows that macroeconomic variables such as the rate of industrial production growth as well as

                                                 4
aggregate consumption growth volatility have incremental explanatory power for future currency
basket returns. Section 7 concludes.




2         Related Literature

Our paper relates to a large literature on exchange rate predictability that is too vast to sur-
vey here.1 Instead, we limit our literature review to recent work that explores currency return
predictability from a finance perspective.2 In recent work on currency portfolios, Ang and Chen

(2010) show that changes in interest rates and term spreads predict currency excess returns, while
Chen and Tsang (2011) show that yield curve factors containing information both about bond
risk premia and about future macroeconomic fundamentals have forecasting power for individual
currencies as well. Adrian, Etula and Shin (2010) show that the funding liquidity of financial
intermediaries in the U.S. predicts currency excess returns on short positions in the dollar, where

funding liquidity growth is interpreted as a measure of the risk appetite of these intermediaries.
Hong and Yogo (2012) show that the futures open market interest has strong predictive power for
returns on a portfolio of currency futures. Bakshi and Panayotov (forthcoming) present evidence
that long-short carry trade returns are predictable using a measure of foreign exchange volatility

and commodity prices. Asness, Moskowitz and Pedersen (2012) show that the predictability of
foreign exchange returns using lagged exchange rates in the cross-section of currencies is system-
atically related to momentum and reversals in other asset classes. Our paper is the only one that
explicitly links currency return predictability to U.S.-specific business cycle variation.

        Our work is also closely related to the literature that documents time-varying risk premia in

various asset markets. The ability of the average forward discount to forecast individual exchange
rates and returns on other currency baskets echoes the ability of forward rates to forecast returns on
bonds of other maturities, as documented by Stambaugh (1988) and Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005).

    1
    This literature is surveyed, for example, in Hodrick (1987) and Lewis (1995).
    2
    While our paper focuses on the expected returns on currency portfolios, Campbell, Medeiros and Viceira (2010)
focus on the second moments of currency returns, because they are interested in the risk management demand for
individual currencies from the vantage point of U.S. bond and equity investors.

                                                       5
Ludvigson and Ng (2009), Joslin, Priebsch and Singleton (2010), and Duffee (2011) document
that U.S. industrial production growth contains information about bond risk premia that is not
captured by interest rates (and, therefore, forward discounts). The industrial production index
is highly correlated with the output gap used by Cooper and Priestley (2009) to predict stock

returns. We find similar evidence of countercyclical risk premia in currency markets.

       Our model of the stochastic discount factor belongs to a class of essentially affine models
common in the literature on the term structure of interest rates. Models in this class have been

applied to currency markets by Frachot (1996), Backus, Foresi and Telmer (2001), Brennan and
Xia (2006), Lustig et al. (2011), and Sarno, Schneider and Wagner (2012). In our model the bulk
of the stochastic discount factor variation is common across countries, consistent with Brandt,
Cochrane and Santa-Clara (2006), Bakshi, Carr and Wu (2008), Colacito (2008), and Colacito and

Croce (2011). While ours is a no-arbitrage model, it shares some key features with equilibrium
models of currency risk premia that emphasize time-varying volatility of the pricing kernel and its
procyclical effect on the short-term interest rate, such as Verdelhan (2010), Backus, Gavazzoni,
Telmer and Zin (2011), and Bansal and Shaliastovich (2012).3

       While this paper focuses on Gaussian shocks and the first two moments of stochastic discount
factors, Gavazzoni, Sambalaibat and Telmer (2012) argue that future work should consider higher
moments. Earlier work on higher moments include Evans and Lewis (1995), who study the link

between peso problems and the estimation of currency risk premia. More recently, Bhansali (2007)
documents the empirical properties of hedged carry trade strategies. Brunnermeier, Nagel and
Pedersen (2008) show that risk reversals increase with interest rates. Jurek (2009) provides a
comprehensive empirical investigation of hedged carry trade strategies. Burnside, Eichenbaum,

Kleshchelski and Rebelo (2011) use currency options to construct carry-trade positions that are
hedged at-the-money. Farhi, Fraiberger, Gabaix, Ranciere and Verdelhan (2012) estimate a no-
arbitrage model with disaster risk using a cross-section of currency options. Chernov, Graveline
and Zviadadze (2012) study jump risk at high frequencies.

   3
    Atkeson and Kehoe (2008) argue that this effect is important for understanding the impact of monetary policy
on interest rates.

                                                       6
3         Returns to Timing the U.S. Dollar

Currency excess returns correspond to simple investment strategies: investors pocket the interest
rate difference between two countries, known at the time of their investment, but expose themselves
to the risk stemming from exchange rate fluctuations over the investment horizon. The literature

has mostly focused on the predictability of excess returns for individual foreign currency pairs. By
shifting the focus to investments in baskets of foreign currencies, our paper shows that most of the
predictable variation in currency markets is common across currencies.

        In this section, we describe our primary data set and give a brief summary of currency returns

at the level of currency baskets. We use the quoted prices of traded forward contracts of different
maturities to study return predictability at different horizons. Hence, there is no interest rate risk
in the investment strategies that we consider. Moreover, these trades can be implemented at fairly
low costs.



3.1 Preliminaries

3.1.1 Currency Excess Returns using Forward Contracts


We use s to denote the log of the nominal spot exchange rate in units of foreign currency per
U.S. dollar, and f for the log of the forward exchange rate, also in units of foreign currency per
U.S. dollar. An increase in s means an appreciation of the U.S. dollar. The log excess return rx
on buying a foreign currency in the forward market and then selling it in the spot market after

one month is simply rxt+1 = ft − st+1 . This excess return can also be stated as the log forward
discount on foreign currency minus the change in the spot rate: rxt+1 = ft − st − ∆st+1 . In normal
conditions, forward rates satisfy the covered interest rate parity condition; the forward discount
on foreign currency is equal to the interest rate differential: ft − st ≈ i⋆t − it , where i⋆ and i

denote the foreign and domestic nominal risk-free rates over the maturity of the contract.4 Hence,
    4
    Akram, Rime and Sarno (2008) study high frequency deviations from covered interest parity (CIP). They
conclude that CIP holds at daily and lower frequencies. While this relation was violated during the extreme
episodes of the financial crisis in the fall of 2008 (e.g., see Baba and Packer (2009)), including or excluding those
observations does not have a major effect on our results.

                                                         7
the log currency excess return equals the interest rate differential less the rate of depreciation:
rxt+1 = i⋆t − it − ∆st+1 .


3.1.2 Horizons


Forward contracts are available at different maturities. We use k-month maturity forward contracts
to compute k-month horizon returns (where k = 1, 2, 3, 6, and 12). The log excess return on the
k-month contract for currency i is rxit+k = −∆sit→t+k + ft→t+k
                                                         i
                                                               − sit , where ft→t+k
                                                                              i
                                                                                    is the k-month
forward exchange rate, and the k-month change in the log exchange rate is ∆sit→t+k = sit+k − sit .

For horizons above one month, our series consist of overlapping k-month returns computed at a
monthly frequency.


3.1.3 Transaction Costs


Profitability of currency trading strategies depends on the cost of implementing them. Since we
have bid-ask quotes for spot and forward contracts, we can compute the investor’s actual realized
excess return net of transaction costs. The net log currency excess return for an investor who
goes long in foreign currency is: rxlt+1 = ftb − sat+1 . The investor buys the foreign currency or

equivalently sells the dollar forward at the bid price (f b ) in period t, and sells the foreign currency
or equivalently buys dollars at the ask price (sat+1 ) in the spot market in period t + 1. Similarly,
for an investor who is long in the dollar (and thus short the foreign currency), the net log currency
excess return is given by: rxst+1 = −fta + sbt+1 . For our regression-based analysis we use midpoint
quotes for spot and forward exchange rates in constructing excess returns, instead of the net excess

returns.


3.1.4 Data


We start from daily spot and forward exchange rates in U.S. dollars. We build end-of-month series
from November 1983 to June 2010. These data are collected by Barclays and Reuters and available
on Datastream. Our main data set contains the following countries/currencies: Australia, Austria,

                                                   8
Belgium, Canada, Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hong Kong,
Hungary, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Kuwait, Malaysia, Mexico, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Norway, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, South Africa, South
Korea, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Taiwan, Thailand, Turkey, United Arab Emirates, United

Kingdom, as well as the Euro. The euro series start in January 1999. We exclude the euro area
countries after this date and only keep the euro series. Some of these currencies have pegged their
exchange rate partly or completely to the U.S. dollar over the course of the sample; for this reason,
we exclude Hong Kong, Saudi Arabia, and United Arab Emirates. We also exclude Turkey to
avoid our results being driven by near-hyperinflation episodes. Based on large failures of CIP, we

deleted the following observations from our sample: South Africa from the end of July 1985 to the
end of August 1985; Malaysia from the end of August 1998 to the end of June 2005; and Indonesia
from the end of December 2000 to the end of May 2007.


3.1.5 Baskets of Currencies

We construct three currency baskets. The first basket is composed of the currencies of developed
countries: Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, France, Finland, Germany, Greece,

Italy, Ireland, Japan, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
and the U.K., as well as the euro. The second basket groups all of the remaining currencies,
corresponding to the emerging countries in our sample. The third basket consists of all of the
currencies in our sample. All of the average log excess returns and average log exchange rate

changes are equally weighted within each basket.
                                                                                                PNtj
   The average log excess return on currencies in basket j over horizon k is rxjt→t+k =    1
                                                                                          Ntj     i=1   rxit+k ,
where Ntj denotes the number of currencies in basket j at time t. Similarly, the average change in
                           j           PNtj
the log exchange rate is ∆st→t+k = N1j i=1   ∆sit→t+k , and the average forward discount (AFD) on
                                     t
                                                             j                PNtj i
foreign currency against the U.S. dollar for maturity k is f t→t+k − sjt = N1j i=1 ft→t+k − sit .
                                                                            t



                                       [Figure 1 about here.]

   The AFDs are negatively correlated with the U.S. short-term interest rates. However, the AFD

                                                  9
is clearly stationary, while U.S. short-term interest rates trend downward from 10% (3-month
Treasury bill rate) to essentially 0%, notably because of the secular decline in (global) inflation
over the sample. The AFDs computed on developed and emerging countries are virtually identical
in the first half of the sample, but diverge dramatically during the period around the Asian financial

crisis of 1997-1998, with emerging countries interest rates shooting up relative to both the U.S.
and the developed countries interest rates. This disparity suggests that one should expect different
patterns of predictability for the different baskets.

   At the 12-month horizon, the average AFD of foreign currencies against the dollar is 60 basis
points per annum in the the sample of developed countries. This means that on average 12-month
interest rates are 60 basis points higher in these countries than in the U.S. In the sample of emerging

countries, this average difference is 257 basis points.

   The AFDs are persistent, especially at longer horizons: the AFD of developed countries using

12-month forward rates has an autocorrelation of 0.98 at monthly frequency (corresponding to an
annualized autocorrelation is 0.78). At shorter horizons, the autocorrelation is much smaller: the
average forward discount for developed countries based on one-month forward rates, which we will
use to construct the monthly trading strategy, has an autocorrelation of 0.89 at the monthly fre-
quency (i.e., 0.25 annualized). Therefore, the AFDs are less persistent than some of the commonly-

used return-forecasting variables such as the dividend yield on the U.S. stock market, which has
an annualized autocorrelation of 0.96.



3.2 The Dollar Carry Trade

We design a simple, implementable investment strategy that exploits the predictability of currency
returns by the AFD. Investors go long all foreign currencies when the average foreign currency
trades at a forward discount, i.e. when the average foreign interest rate (across all developed

countries) is above the U.S. short-term interest rate, and short all foreign currencies otherwise.
We call this investment strategy the Dollar carry trade strategy. We incorporate bid-ask spreads
in order to account for the cost of implementing this strategy. As is clear from the top panel

                                                  10
of Figure 1, the dollar carry trade typically shorts the dollar during and after NBER recessions
(when the AFD is positive), and goes long the dollar during NBER expansions (when the AFD
turns negative).

       Figure 2 reports the return indices on this dollar carry trade strategy compared to other currency
trading strategies, as well as the aggregate equity market returns, using both the entire sample of
currencies and the smaller subsample of developed countries; all of these were levered to match the

volatility of U.S. stock returns.

       As an alternative to the dollar carry strategy, we use a similar strategy implemented at the

country (or, rather, individual currency) level. For each currency in our sample, investors go long
in that currency if the corresponding forward discount is positive, and short otherwise. There is
substantial heterogeneity in terms of average excess returns and Sharpe ratios at the individual
currency level. We report the equal-weighted average excess return across all currencies, which is

a simple measure of returns earned on a diversified portfolio comparable to investing in a broad
basket. We call this the country-level FX carry trade strategy. We compare these strategies
to another popular currency trading strategy, the high-minus-low (HML) currency carry trade,
and to U.S. equity market returns. The HML carry trade strategy corresponds to currency carry

trades that go long in a portfolio of high interest rate currencies and short in a portfolio of low
interest currencies, with no direct exposure to the U.S. dollar. This strategy is implemented using
the currency portfolios sorted by interest rate differentials in Lustig et al. (2011) extended to
our longer sample, with five portfolios for the subsample of developed country currencies and six
portfolios including all currencies in our sample.

       To compare these strategies, we scale the currency positions so that all currency returns are

as volatile as equity returns - this can be thought of as constructing a levered position, except
that the weights are based on in-sample estimates of volatility.5 In our sample, the volatility of
U.S. stock market excess returns is 15.5%. An investor starting with $100 in December 1983 in

   5
    This construction of the levered strategy is for the purpose of illustrating the risk-return trade-off in the currency
strategies, and is not implementable in practice as it is based on the ex-post standard deviations of exchange
rate changes and and stock returns. A more sophisticated construction could be based on the lagged realized or
contemporaneous implied stock market and FX volatility and rebalanced dynamically.

                                                           11
the dollar carry trade would have ended up with $1,467 at the end of the sample. The interest
rate component (or carry) accounts for $860 and the rest ($607) is due to the fluctuations in the
signed position in the U.S. dollar against the basket of foreign currencies, suggestive of predictable
changes in the exchange rate. On the other hand, the HML currency carry trade delivers $356

dollars, while the country-level strategy barely breaks even.

   Table I reports the means, standard deviations, and Sharpe ratios of the returns on these three

investment strategies. We report (in brackets) standard errors on the means. The currency excess
returns take into account bid-ask spreads on monthly forward and spot contracts, while equity
excess returns do not take into account transaction costs. The standard errors are obtained by
resampling the series using stationary bootstrap procedure of Politis and Romano (1994) in order

to capture the autocorrelation and heteroscedasticity properties of the series. The sample average
of dollar carry returns, our estimate of the dollar premium, are 5.60% (4.28%) per year for the
basket of developed (all) currencies. The annualized Sharpe ratios are 0.66 (0.56) respectively. The
exchange rate component of the dollar carry trade strategy (i.e., the part due to the depreciation

or appreciation of the dollar and not due to the interest rate differential) delivers an average return
of 3.77%, which is statistically different from zero (the bootstrap standard error is 1.67% – these
numbers are not reported in the table).

   By comparison, the average HML carry trade returns are 3% (4.4%) for the basket of developed
(all) currencies, respectively, corresponding to Sharpe ratios of about 0.3 (0.5). Interestingly, the
country-level F X carry strategy, that has elements of both dollar and HML carry trades, does

not perform nearly as well as either of these aggregate strategies with an average return of about
0.5% (which is not statistically significant) and a Sharpe ratio that is close to zero. If bid-ask
spreads are not taken into account, the country-level carry strategy does exhibit positive average
excess returns with a Sharpe ratio of about 0.3, but the returns on the other two carry strategies

computed without transaction costs are even higher, with Sharpe ratios close to 0.9 (not reported
in the table for brevity). The dollar carry trade returns also do not exhibit much negative skewness
(−0.27, compared to the HML carry skewness of −0.98, also not reported in the table).

                                                  12
   The right panel of Table I reports the mean, standard deviation and Sharpe ratios of the
returns on these three investment strategies scaled to deliver the same volatility as equity markets.
The dollar carry strategy delivers an average excess return of over 10.2%, while the country-
level strategies deliver an average excess return of below 1%. Using a greater number of signals

contained in individual currency pairs’ forward discounts does not appear to provide an advantage
over a simple strategy that pits the U.S. dollar against a broad basket of currencies. The superior
performance of the dollar carry trade relative to the other trading strategies is also apparent from
Figure 2. Given that the dollar carry strategy has essentially zero correlation (unconditionally)
with both the HML carry trade and with the stock market, the high average returns and Sharpe

ratios earned by this strategy are clear evidence that the average interest rate difference between
the U.S. and a broad group of developed countries contains substantial information about risk
premia in currency markets.


                                       [Table 1 about here.]


                                       [Figure 2 about here.]



3.3 Predictability in Currency Markets

The dollar carry trade is highly profitable because the average forward discount on foreign cur-
rencies of developed countries against the dollar forecasts basket-level exchange rate changes and

returns, even in a horse race with the individual currency pairs’ forward discounts.


3.3.1 Predictability Tests


We run the following regressions of basket-level average log excess returns on the AFD, and of
average changes in spot exchange rates on the AFD:


                                                      Dev
                             rxjt→t+k = ψ0 + ψf (f t→t+k − sDev
                                                            t   ) + ηt+k ,                        (1)
                               j                      Dev
                          −∆st→t+k = ζ0 + ζf (f t→t+k − sDev
                                                         t   ) + ǫt+k ,                           (2)

                                                 13
for each basket j ∈ {Dev, Emerg, All}. Since the log excess returns are the difference between
changes in spot rates at t + 1 and the AFD at t, for the developed countries basket, j = Dev, these
two regressions are equivalent and ψf = ζf + 1. The Uncovered Interest Parity (UIP) hypothesis
states that expected changes in exchange rates are equal to interest rate differentials, while currency

excess returns are not predictable. With our notation, UIP implies that ζf = −1 and ψf = 0 for
j = Dev (thus, Equation (2) is equivalent to the classic Fama (1984) regression, up to the sign of
the slope coefficient on the average, not country-specific, interest rate difference).

       We report t-statistics for the slope coefficients ψf and ζf for both asymptotic and finite-sample
tests. The AFD are strongly autocorrelated, albeit less so than individual countries’ interest rates.

We use Hansen and Hodrick’s (1980) methodology in order to compute asymptotic standard errors
with the number of lags equal to the horizon of the forward contract plus one lag. Our results are
robust to using instead Newey-West standard errors computed with the optimal number of lags
following Andrews (1991) in order to correct for error correlation and conditional heteroscedasticity,
as well as Newey-West standard errors using non-overlapping data.

       Bekaert, Hodrick and Marshall (1997) note that the small sample performance of these test

statistics is also a source of concern. In particular, due to the persistence of the predictor variable,
estimates of the slope coefficient can be biased [as pointed out by Stambaugh (1999)] as well as
have wider dispersion than the asymptotic distribution. To address these problems, we compute
bias-adjusted small sample t-statistics, generated by bootstrapping 10,000 samples of returns and

forward discounts from a corresponding VAR under the null of no predictability. We resample the
residuals in blocks of random lengths, following the stationary bootstrap procedure of Politis and
Romano (1994).6

       The regressions in Equations (1) and (2) test different hypotheses. In the regression for excess
returns in Equation (1), the null states that the log expected excess currency returns are constant.

   6
    Our bootstrapping procedure follows Mark (1995) and Kilian (1999) and is similar to the one recently used by
Goyal and Welch (2005) on U.S. stock excess returns. It preserves the autocorrelation structure of the predictors and
the cross-correlation of the predictors’ and returns’ shocks. The random-block resampling allows for the potential
heteroscedasticity in residuals while preserving stationarity of the underlying series. Ang and Bekaert (2007) and
Bakshi, Panayotov and Skoulakis (2011) study the power and size properties of different estimation procedures in
the context of persistent predictors.

                                                         14
In the regression for log exchange rates changes in Equation (2), the null states that changes in
the log spot rates are unpredictable, i.e., the expected excess returns are time varying and they
are equal to the interest rate differentials (i.e., forward discounts).



3.3.2 Predictability Results


Table II reports the test statistics for these regressions. The left panel focuses on developed
countries. There is strong evidence against UIP in the returns on the developed countries basket,
at all horizons.7 The estimated slope coefficients, ψf , in the predictability regressions are highly

statistically significant, regardless of the method used to compute the t-statistics, except for annual
horizon non-overlapping returns; we have too few observations given the length of our sample. The
R2 increases from about 3% at the monthly horizon to up to 13% at the one-year horizon. This
increase in the R2 as we increase the holding period is not surprising, given the persistence of the

AFD.

       Moreover, given that the coefficient is substantially greater than unity, average exchange rate
changes are also predictable, although statistically we cannot reject the hypothesis that they follow
a random walk. The R2 s for the the exchange rate regressions are lower, ranging from just over
1% for monthly to 4% for annual horizon.

       As noted in the introduction, the impact of the AFD on expected excess returns is large. At
the one-month horizon, each 100 basis point increase in the forward discount implies a 245 basis
points increase in the expected return, and it increases the expected appreciation of the foreign
currency basket by 145 basis points. The estimates are very similar for all maturities, except the

12-month estimate, which is 33 basis points lower. The constant in this predictability regression is
0.00 (not reported) at all maturities. This is why our naive investment rule used for implementing
the dollar carry trade is actually optimal.

       The central panel in Table II reports the results for the emerging markets basket. We use the
   7
    Hansen and Hodrick (1980) and Fama (1984) conclude that predicted excess returns move more than one-for-one
with interest rate differentials, implying some predictability in exchange rates, even though the statistical evidence
from currency pairs is typically weak.

                                                         15
AFD of the developed country basket to forecast the emerging markets basket returns. There is
no overlap between the countries used to construct the AFD and the currencies in the portfolio
of emerging market countries. There is equally strong predictability for average log excess returns
and average spot rate changes for the emerging markets basket because the AFD of developed

countries is not very highly correlated with the AFD of emerging countries. In fact, for the
emerging countries basket, excess returns are not at all predictable using their own AFD, and
the UIP condition cannot be rejected (these results are not reported here for brevity). This is
consistent with the view that, among emerging market currencies, forward discounts mostly reflect
inflation expectations rather than risk premia. It is also consistent with the findings of Bansal

and Dahlquist (2000), who argue that the UIP has more predictive power for exchange rates of
high-inflation countries and in particular, emerging markets (Frankel and Poonawala (2010) report
similar results). Nevertheless, as our predictability results indicate, risk premia are important for
understanding exchange rate fluctuations even for high inflation currencies.

   The right panel in Table II pertains to the sample of all countries. Not surprisingly, excess
return predictability is very strong there as well.



                                          [Table 2 about here.]



3.4 The Average Forward Discount and Bilateral Exchange Rates

We now compare our predictability results to standard tests in the literature, which mostly focus
on bilateral exchange rates. By capturing the dollar risk premium, the average forward discount
is able to forecast individual currency returns, as well as their basket-level averages. In fact, it
is often a better predictor than the individual forward discount specific to the given currency

pair. One way to see this is via a pooled panel regression of excess returns on the AFD and the
currency-specific forward discount:


                                              Dev
                      rxit→t+k = ψ0i + ψ̃f (f t→t+k − sDev
                                                       t   ) + ϕf (fti − sit ) + ηt+k
                                                                                  i
                                                                                      ,          (3)

                                                     16
and a similar regression for spot exchange rate changes:


                                                 Dev
                      − ∆sit→t+k = ζ0i + ζ̃f (f t→t+k − sDev
                                                         t   ) + ξf (fti − sit ) + η̃t+k
                                                                                     i
                                                                                         ,          (4)


where ψ0i and ζ0i are currency fixed effects, so that only the slope coefficients are constrained to be
equal across currencies.

   Table III presents the results for the developed and emerging countries subsamples, as well as
the full sample of all currencies. The coefficients on the AFD are large, around 2 for developed

countries for both excess returns and exchange rate changes (as we are controlling for individual
forward discounts). The coefficients are highly statistically significant. In contrast, the coefficients
on the individual forward discount are small for the developed markets sample, not statistically
different from zero (and in fact negative for spot rate changes). For emerging countries, individual

forward discounts are as important as the AFD for predicting excess returns, but not for exchange
rate changes.


                                           [Table 3 about here.]


   A similar picture emerges from bivariate predictive regressions run separately for individual
currencies. We do not report these results here, but they are briefly summarized as follows. Using
the AFD of the developed countries basket to predict bilateral currency returns and exchange rate
changes over six-month horizons yields average R2 s (across all developed country currencies) of

10% and 5%, compared to the average R2 s using the bilateral forward discount of 7.3% and 2.3%,
respectively. Similarly, at 12-month horizons the average R2 s using the AFD are 15% and 9%
for excess returns and spot rate changes, respectively, compared to the average R2 s of 11.6% and
4.1%, respectively, using currency-specific forward discounts. While the differences are smaller at
shorter horizons and for emerging market currencies, the results are broadly consistent with the

average forward discount containing information about future exchange rates above and beyond
that in individual currency forward discounts.

   We thus find that a single return forecasting variable describes time variation in currency

                                                       17
excess returns and changes in exchange rates even better than the forward discount rates on the
individual currency portfolios. This variable is the AFD of developed countries. The results are
consistent across different baskets and maturities. When the AFD is high (i.e., when U.S. interest
rates are lower than the average world interest rate), expected currency excess returns are high.

Conditioning their investments on the level of the AFD, U.S. investors earn large currency excess
returns that are not correlated with the HML currency carry trades. We turn now to a no-arbitrage
model that offers an interpretation of our empirical findings.




4     A No-arbitrage Model of Interest Rates and Exchange

      Rates

We develop a no-arbitrage model that can quantitatively account for the bulk of our empirical
findings and explains the link between risk prices in the U.S. and currency return predictability.




4.1 Pricing Kernel Volatility and Currency Returns

We assume that financial markets are complete, but that some frictions in the goods markets
prevent perfect risk-sharing across countries. As a result, the change in the real exchange rate ∆q i
                                            i
between the home country and country i is ∆qt+1 = mt+1 − mit+1 , where m denotes the log SDF
(also known as a pricing kernel or intertemporal marginal rate of substitution, IMRS) and q i is

measured in country i goods per home country good. An increase in q i means a real appreciation
of the home currency. For any variable that pertains to the home country (the U.S.), we drop the
superscript.

    The real expected log currency excess return equals the interest rate difference or forward
discount plus the expected rate of appreciation. If pricing kernels m are log-normal, the real
expected log currency excess return on a long position in a basket of foreign currency i and a short

                                                 18
position in the dollar is equal to:

                      1 X              1 X i        1                 1 X
    Et [rxbasket
          t+1 ] = −
                                i
                          Et [∆qt+1 ]+     rt − rt = [V art (mt+1 ) −     V art (mit+1 )].            (5)
                      N i              N i          2                 N i

The dollar carry trade goes long or short depending on the magnitude of the average interest rate
                 P
differential ( N1 i rti −rt ). In order for this strategy to earn positive average returns, investors must
be long in the basket when expected returns on foreign currency investments are high, i.e., when

the volatility of the U.S. pricing kernel is high (relative to foreign pricing kernels), and short in the
basket when the volatility of the U.S. pricing kernel is low. Therefore, these expected returns are
driven by the U.S. economic conditions. By contrast, the real expected log currency excess return
on the HML currency carry trade is given by:
                                   "                                            #
                                 1   1 X                    1 X
                   Et [rxbasket
                         t+1 ] =          V art (mjt+1 ) −        V art (mjt+1 ) ,                    (6)
                                 2 NL j∈L                  NH j∈H


where H(L) denote high (low) interest rate currencies respectively. The expected returns on the
HML currency carry trade are high when the gap between the SDF volatilities of low and high
interest rate currencies increases. These expected returns are driven by global economic conditions

(e.g., volatility in the world financial markets).

   We use a no-arbitrage asset pricing model in the tradition of the affine term structure models
to interpret the evidence on the conditional expected returns earned on the U.S. dollar basket doc-

umented above. We show that the model can replicate these empirical facts while also matching
other key features of currency excess returns and interest rates. The model makes new predic-
tions about the cross-sectional properties of average returns on currency baskets formed from the
perspective of different base currencies, which we verify in the data.



4.2 Setup

We extend the no-arbitrage model developed by Lustig et al. (2011) to explain high-minus-low
carry trade returns. In the model, there are two types of priced risk: country-specific shocks and

                                                     19
common shocks. Brandt et al. (2006), Bakshi et al. (2008), Colacito (2008), and Colacito and
Croce (2011) emphasize the importance of a large common component in SDFs to make sense
of the high volatility of SDFs and the relatively ‘low’ volatility of exchange rates. In addition,
there is a lot of evidence that much of the stock return predictability around the world is driven

by variation in the global risk price, starting with the work of Harvey (1991) and Campbell and
Hamao (1992). Lustig et al. (2011) show that, in order to reproduce cross-sectional evidence on
currency excess returns, risk prices must load differently on this common component.

   In our model, carry trade returns are driven by real variables and inflation is not priced.
Hollifield and Yaron (2001) have documented that nearly all of the predictable variation in currency
returns is due to real, not nominal, variables. This was confirmed by Lustig et al. (2011) who found

that the carry trade portfolios sorted by (nominal) forward discounts produce almost equally large
spreads in real interest rates.

   We consider a world with N countries and currencies. We do not specify a full economy complete
with preferences and technologies; instead we posit a law of motion for the SDFs directly as being
driven by both global and country-specific shocks. The risk prices associated with country-specific

shocks depend only on the country-specific factors, but we allow the risk prices of world shocks
to depend on world and country-specific factors. To describe these risk prices, we introduce a
common state variable ztw shared by all countries and a country-specific state variable zti . The
country-specific and world state variables follow autoregressive square root processes:

                                                               p
                             i
                            zt+1 = (1 − φ)θ + φzti − σ     zti uit+1 ,                                   (7)
                             w
                                                                  p
                            zt+1   = (1 − φw )θw + φw ztw − σ w ztw uw t+1 .                             (8)


   Intuitively, zti captures variation in the risk price due the business cycle of country i, while ztw

captures global variation in risk prices. We assume that in each country i, the logarithm of the
real SDF mi follows a three-factor conditionally-Gaussian process:

                                         p                          p                    p
                  − mit+1 = α + χzti +       γzti uit+1 + τ ztw +       δ i ztw uw
                                                                                 t+1 +    κzti ugt+1 ,   (9)

                                                      20
                                                            g
where uit+1 is a country-specific SDF shock while uw
                                                   t+1 and ut+1 are common to all countries SDFs.

All of these three innovations are i.i.d Gaussian, with zero mean and unit variance, independent of
one another. There are two types of common shocks. The first type uw
                                                                   t+1 is priced identically in all

countries that have the same exposure δ, and all differences in exposure are permanent. Examples

of this type of innovation would be a global financial crisis or some form of global uncertainty.
This dollar-neutral innovation will be the main driving force behind the HML carry trade. The
second type of common shock, ugt+1 , is not, as heterogeneity with respect to this innovation is
transitory: all countries are equally exposed to this shock on average, but conditional exposures
vary over time and depend on country-specific economic conditions. This, for example, could

be a global productivity shock that affects some economies more than others depending on each
country’s current consumer demand or monetary policy.8 This innovation, in conjunction with the
U.S.-specific innovation, is the main driving force behind the dollar carry trade, and is obviously
not dollar-neutral. We include this last type of shock to allow the exposure of each country’s

intertemporal marginal rate of substitution to global shocks, and therefore the price of global risk,
to vary over time with that country’s economic and financial conditions (zti ).

       To be parsimonious, we limit the heterogeneity in the SDF parameters to the different loadings
δ i on the world shock uw
                        t+1 ; all the other parameters are identical for all countries. The only

qualitative departure of our model from the model in Lustig et al. (2011) is the separation of the
                                                   g
world shock into two independent shocks, uw
                                          t+1 and ut+1 dictated by the correlation properties of

different carry trade strategies.


4.2.1 Currency Risk Premia for Individual Currencies

                                                                                                      
In our model, the forward discount on currency i relative to USD is equal to: rti −rt = χ − 21 (γ + κ) (zti −
zt )− 12 (δ i − δ) ztw . The three same variables, zt , zti , and ztw , determine the time variation in the con-
ditional expected log currency excess returns on a long position in currency i and a short position
   8
    Gourio, Siemer and Verdelhan (2011) propose an international real business cycle model with two common
shocks: in their model, shocks to the probability of a world disaster drive the HML carry trade risk. Productivity
shocks are correlated across countries and thus exhibit a common component, akin to a second type of common
shock.

                                                       21
in the home currency: Et [rxit+1 ] = 21 [(γ + κ) (zt − zti ) + (δ − δ i ) ztw ].

    Accounting for the variation in expected currency excess returns across different currencies
requires variation in the SDFs’ exposures to the common innovation. Lustig et al. (2011) show

that permanent heterogeneity in loadings, captured by the dispersion in δs, is necessary to explain
the variation in unconditional expected returns (why high interest rate currencies tend not to
depreciate on average), whereas the transitory heterogeneity in loadings, captured by the κzti term
in Equation (9), is necessary to match the variation in conditional expected returns (why currencies

with currently high interest rate tend to appreciate). While much of the literature on currency risk
premia focuses on the latter (conditional) expected returns [e.g., see Lewis (1995) for a survey],
the former (unconditional) average returns are also important [e.g. Campbell et al. (2010)] and
account for between a third and a half of the carry trade profits, as reported in Lustig et al. (2011).



4.2.2 Currency Risk Premia for Baskets of Currencies


We turn now to the model’s implications for return predictability on baskets of currencies. We use
a bar superscript (x) to denote the average of any variable or parameter x across all the countries
in the basket. The average real expected log excess return of the basket is:

                                            1                     1      
                               Et [rxt+1 ] = (γ + κ) (zt − zt ) +   δ − δ ztw .                   (10)
                                            2                     2

We assume that the number of currencies in the basket is large enough so that country-specific

shocks average out within each portfolio. In this case, z is approximately constant (and exactly
in the limit N → ∞ by the law of large numbers). As a result, the real expected excess return
on this basket consists of a dollar risk premium (the first term above, which depends only on zt )
and a global risk premium (the second term, which depends only on ztw ). The real expected excess

return of this basket depends only on z and z w . These are the same variables that drive the AFD:
                                           
rt −rt = χ − 12 (γ + κ) (zt −zt ) + 21 δ − δ ztw . Thus, the AFD contains information about average
excess returns on a basket of currencies.

                                                        22
4.2.3 HML Unconditional Carry Trades

The model has strong predictions on HML currency carry trades; Lustig et al. (2011) study them in
detail. Here, to keep things simple, we consider investment strategies that do not entail continuous
rebalancing of the portfolios, i.e., unconditional HML carry trades.
   If one were to sort currencies by their average interest rates (not their current rates) into

portfolios, then, as shown by Lustig et al. (2011), investors who take a carry trade position would
only be exposed to common innovations, not to U.S. innovations. The return innovations on this
HML investment (denoted hmlunc , for unconditional carry trades) are driven only by uw shocks:

                                                                            !
                     unc        unc         1 Xp i w      1 Xp i w
                  hmlt+1 − E[hmlt+1 ]=            δ zt −        δ zt            uw
                                                                                 t+1 .           (11)
                                           NL i∈L        NH i∈H


We thus label the uw shocks the HML carry trade innovations. This HML portfolio yields positive
average returns if the pricing kernels of low interest rate currencies are more exposed to the global
innovation than the pricing kernels of high interest rate currencies.


4.3 The Dollar Carry Risk Premium in the Model

We turn now to the dollar carry strategy. In order to build intuition for dollar carry risk, it helps
to a consider a special case.


4.3.1 Special Case: Average Exposure to Global Shocks

Consider the case of a basket consisting of a large number of developed currencies, such that the
average country’s SDF has the same exposure to global shocks uw as the base country (the U.S.):
δ = δ. In this special case, the dollar, measured vis-à-vis the basket of developed currencies, does
not respond to the common shocks uw that are priced in the same way in the U.S. and, on average,

in all the other countries. However, the dollar does respond to U.S.-specific shocks (u in the model)
and to global shocks (ug ) that are priced differently in each country. A short position in the dollar
is risky because the dollar appreciates following negative U.S.-specific shocks and negative global

                                                 23
shocks to which the U.S. is more exposed than other countries.

       In this case, the log currency risk premium on the basket only depends on the U.S.-specific
factor zt , not the global factor:

                                                      1
                                         Et [rxt+1 ] = (γ + κ) (zt − zt ) .                                        (12)
                                                      2

Hence, the currency risk premium on this basket compensates U.S. investors proportionally to
their exposures to the local risk governed by γ and to their exposure to global risk governed by κ.
Given the assumption of average exposure, the dollar risk premium is driven exclusively by U.S.
variables (e.g., the state of the U.S. business cycle). U.S. investors expect to be compensated more
for bearing this risk during recessions. We refer to the risk premium as the domestic component of

the dollar carry trade risk premium or dollar premium because its variation depends only on the
U.S.-specific state variable.

       Similarly, given the average exposure assumption, the AFD only depends on the U.S. factor zt :

                                                                
                                                         1
                                      rt − rt =       χ − (γ + κ) (zt − zt ).                                      (13)
                                                         2


       Reproducing the failure of the UIP requires assuming that χ < 12 (γ + κ). Then during “bad
times,” when zt increases, U.S. interest rates are low and the average forward discount is high.9
Since the parameters guiding country-specific state variables are the same across countries, the

mean AFD should be equal to zero. Empirically, the basket of developed countries currencies
formed from the U.S. perspective has a mean AFD of less than 1% per annum, which is not
statistically different from zero. As a result, the assumption that the U.S. SDF has the same
sensitivity to world shocks as the average developed country appears reasonable.

       By creating a basket in which the average country shares the home country’s exposure to global
shocks, we have eliminated the effect of foreign idiosyncratic factors on currency risk premia and

   9
     Requiring that the state variables are always positive at least in the continuous-time approximation is not
sufficient to ensure that the real interest rates are positive. Nominal interest rates are almost always positive in our
simulations. See also the related discussion in Backus et al. (2001).

                                                           24
on interest rates. For this specific basket, the slope coefficient in a predictability regression of the
                                                                                   
average log returns in the basket on the AFD is ψf = − 21 (γ + κ)/ χ − 12 (γ + κ) . Correspondingly,
the slope coefficient in a regression of average real exchange rate changes on the real forward
                                    
discount is ζf = −χ/ χ − 21 (γ + κ) . Provided that χ < 12 (γ + κ) (i.e., interest rates are low in

bad times and high in good times), a positive average forward discount forecasts positive future
excess returns.10


       Under the assumption that δ = δ, the dollar carry trade strategy is long the basket when
the average forward discount (and therefore the dollar premium) is positive, and short otherwise.

Therefore, the dollar carry risk premium is given by:

                                              1
                       Et [Dollar Carryt+1 ] = (γ + κ) (zt − zt ) sign (zt − zt ) > 0.                           (14)
                                              2

The dollar premium is driven entirely by the domestic state variable zt . This state variable influ-
ences the market price of local risk (i.e., the compensation for the exposure to U.S.-specific shocks
ut+1 ), as well as the market price of global risk (i.e., the compensation for the exposure to global
shocks ugt+1 ).


       In contrast to the dollar strategy, the expected excess returns on the unconditional HML carry
trade portfolio do not depend on zt , the U.S. specific factor, but, given our assumptions, they
depend only on the global state variable ztw . Hence we do not expect the AFD to predict returns
on HML carry (or other currency trading strategies that are dollar-neutral) as long as δ ≈ δ. This

prediction is confirmed in the data: there is no evidence of predictability of HML carry trade
returns using the AFD.




  10
    If χ = 0, the Meese and Rogoff (1983) empirical result holds in population: the log of real exchange rates follows
a random walk, and the expected log excess return is equal to the real interest rate difference. On the other hand,
when γ + κ = 0, UIP holds exactly, i.e., ζf = −1.

                                                         25
4.3.2 General Case


In general, the innovations to the dollar carry returns are driven by all three shocks that drive the
stochastic discount factor:
                                                                                   
                                                              √
                                                         γzt ut+1                  
                                               √          P p i g                
 Dollar Carryt+1 − Et [Dollar Carryt+1 ] = 
                                             +    κz t − 1
                                                          N    i   κzt ut+1          sign (rt − r(15)
                                                                                                 t) .
                                            p             P    p                 
                                             +    δztw − N1 i δ i ztw uw t+1



The first two parts constitute the domestic component of the dollar carry premium, driven by the
domestic state variable zt . The last part is the global component. If the U.S. has average exposure
to global shocks, then the last component, driven by the global state variable, is approximately
zero. However, if the U.S. investor’s SDF is more exposed to the global risk than the average

(δ > δ), the AFD will tend to be higher on average, and the long position in the basket of foreign
currencies is profitable more often; the converse is true when (δ < δ).

   Froot and Ramadorai (2005) show that much of the exchange rate variation is driven by tran-
sitory shocks to expected excess returns. Accordingly, in our model, the U.S.-specific shock ut
and the world shock uw
                     t that drive the innovations to the U.S. dollar exchange rate also drive the

conditional prices of risk.


4.3.3 Interpreting Shocks


Is there a potential economic interpretation of these shocks? Lustig et al. (2011) show that the

HML strategy returns are highly correlated with the changes in the volatility of the world equity
market portfolio return, making it a good candidate for the uw shock and giving the global state
variable z w the interpretation of global financial market volatility. Menkhoff, Sarno, Schmeling
and Schrimpf (2012) show that carry trade returns co-move with global exchange rate volatility.

Interestingly, these variables are uncorrelated with the dollar carry returns, as is the HML portfolio
itself. The dollar carry portfolio is however correlated with the average growth rate of aggregate
consumption across OECD countries (the correlation is 0.19 and is statistically significant), as is

                                                 26
the HML portfolio. This suggests world consumption growth as a good candidate for the ug shock.
Further, the dollar carry is correlated with the U.S.-specific component of the growth rate of U.S.
industrial production (obtained as a residual from regressing the U.S. industrial production growth
rate on the world average), suggesting that the innovations to the home-country state variable z

capture the domestic component of the cyclical variation in the volatility of the stochastic discount
factor (and therefore the price of global risk). We pursue this interpretation further in Section 6.



4.3.4 Predictability and Heterogeneity


When the home country exposure to the global shock uw differs from that of the average foreign
country (δ 6= δ), then the currency risk premium loads on the global factor, and so does the forward
discount for that currency. Therefore, in the general case the average forward discount would have
less forecasting power for excess returns and exchange rate changes because the local and global

state variables may affect them differently. In the special case of average loading, δ = δ, the
presence of heterogeneity in these loadings still matters. This type of heterogeneity will invariably
lower the UIP slope coefficient in a regression of exchange rate changes on the forward discount in
absolute value relative to the case of a basket of currencies. The UIP slope coefficient for individual

currencies using the forward discount for that currency is given by

                                                              
                                              χ χ − 12 (γ + κ) var(zti − zt )
                           ζfi   =−               2                                        .     (16)
                                    χ − 12 (γ + κ) var(zti − zt ) + 41 (δ i − δ)2 var(ztw )

    The UIP regression coefficient of the average exchange rate changes in the basket on the average
forward discount has the same expression as the UIP coefficient for two ex ante identical countries:

                                                                    
                                                1            1
                                          ζf = − (γ + κ)/ χ − (γ + κ) .                           (17)
                                                2            2

It follows that the basket-level slope coefficient on AFD is the largest of all individual FX slope

coefficients: ζf ≥ ζfi .

    Intuitively, at the level of country-specific investments, the volatility of the forward discount

                                                            27
is greater, relative to the case of a basket of currencies, but the covariance between interest rate
differences and exchanges rate changes is not. Hence, heterogeneity in exposure to the global
innovations pushes the UIP slope coefficients towards zero, relative to the benchmark case with
identical exposure. Therefore, we expect to see larger slope coefficients for UIP regressions on

baskets of currencies, not simply due to the diversification effect of reducing idiosyncratic noise,
but because these baskets eliminate the effect of heterogeneity in exposure to global innovations
that attenuates predictability. This prediction of the model is consistent with the data (subject to
the sampling error). In our entire sample of developed and emerging country currencies, only two
exchange rate series, the U.K. pound sterling and the Euro (moreover on a shorter sample), exhibit

slope coefficients in the UIP regressions that are slightly greater (but not statistically different)
from the coefficient of 1.45 estimated for the developed country basket.



4.3.5 Correlation Between Carry Strategies


To study the correlation of returns on different carry strategies, we proceed again in two steps,
starting with the case of a country with average exposure to the common shock. In this case,
the innovations to the dollar carry trade returns are independent of the uw shocks, but are driven
exclusively by U.S.-specific u shocks and ug shocks:
                    "                                           !       #
                     √                √       √        1 Xp i
                         γzt ut+1 +       κ       zt −     zt       ugt+1 sign (zt − zt ) .
                                                       N i

                                                                                            P √
To derive this result, we assume that the dispersion in δ i is sufficiently small so that N1 i δ i ≈
√     √
  δ = δ. In this case, the uw shocks simply do not affect the dollar exchange rate. Hence, if the
U.S. is a country with an average δ, then the dollar carry will only depend on the second shock
ugt+1 and its correlation with the unconditional carry trade returns hmlt+1
                                                                        unc
                                                                            will be zero, because
the innovations there only depend on uw
                                      t+1 .

   If the home country’s exposure δ is either well above or below the average, then the dollar
carry trade returns have a positive correlation with the unconditional HML carry trade, and hence

                                                       28
a higher correlation with the conditional HML carry trade as well. In general, the correlation
between the HML currency carry trade (sorting currencies by current interest rates) and the dollar
carry depends on the relative contributions of the common SDF shock ugt+1 to their returns.11 In
Section 5.7, we trace out this U-shaped relation between the correlation and the average forward

discount, determined in the model by δ i . But to do that, we first need to estimate the model
parameters.




5      Model Estimation

In this section, we estimate the model on a small sample of moments and compared its predictions
to the data. To summarize, the model is defined by the following set of equations:

                                             p                  p               p
                  − mit+1 = α + χzti +      γzti uit+1 + τ ztw + δ i ztw uw
                                                                          t+1 +  κzti ugt+1 ,                 (19)
                                                     p
                       i
                      zt+1   = (1 − φ)θ + φzti − σ zti uit+1 ,                                                (20)
                       w
                                                           p
                      zt+1   = (1 − φw )θw + φw ztw − σ w ztw uw t+1 ,                                        (21)
                       i
                      πt+1 = π0 + η w ztw + σπ ǫit+1 .                                                        (22)


There is a single source of heterogeneity in the countries’ exposure to the global shocks. On the
real side, the model thus has 11 parameters that are identical for all countries (α, χ, γ, τ , κ, φ,
θ, σ, φw , θw , and σ w ). Additionally, countries differ according to their exposure (δ i ) to world

shocks that are priced globally. The parameters δ i are assumed to be distributed on the interval
[δh , δl ]. We are not targeting individual countries, but assume that the domestic δ is equal to the

  11
   The correlation between the HML carry trade and the dollar carry depends on the relative contributions of the
common SDF shock ugt+1 to their returns, as the conditional correlation between the two strategies is given by:
                                                 √        P p i  1 P          p         P      p 
                                              κ zt − N1       i z t  NL    i∈L  z i− 1
                                                                                  t  NH    i∈H    zti
          Corrt (Dollar Carryt+1 , hmlt+1 ) =       p                          p                      ,       (18)
                                                       V art (Dollar Carryt+1 ) V art (hmlt+1 )

                                                   √         P p     2
where    V art (Dollar Carryt+1 )      =   γzt +     κzt − N1 i κzti ,              and     V art (hmlt+1 )     =
          p                 p       2       p               p 2
  1 P                    P                 P              P
 NL    i∈L  δ i ztw − N1H i∈H δ i ztw + N1L i∈L κzti − N1H i∈H   κzti .


                                                       29
average across δ i s, thus adding three parameters to the model (we do not need to make any other
assumptions on the distribution of δ i s for the purpose of the estimation). On the nominal side, the
model has 3 parameters (π0 , η w , and σπ ). The model thus has a total of 17 parameters. We use
a version of the Generalized Method of Moments (GMM) estimator that targets 18 moments. We

first define the moments and then describe how we obtain their empirical values.




5.1 Targets

Table IV reports all the moments used in the estimation, along with their weights in the GMM
objective function. When available, the table also reports closed-form expressions. Panel A of Table

IV lists the 12 moments used in the optimization procedure, while Panel B focuses on additional
moments used to identify the remaining parameters (these moments are matched exactly). Finally,
for completeness, Panel C of Table IV reports additional moments not used in the estimation:
the implied first and second moments of nominal interest rates, as well as their cross-country

correlations, and the volatility of nominal changes in exchange rates.

   The GMM objective function targets 12 moments to estimate the following 11 country-invariant
parameters (and the home-country’s δ which is assumed equal to the average of the δ i s):


                                   {χ, τ, γ, κ, φ, θ, σ, φw , θw , σ w , δ}.


These target moments are the slope coefficients for the regression of average exchange rate changes

on the average forward discount (ζf ), the R2 of this regression (which is closely related to the
                                                                                      
                                             2                                    i
Sharpe ratio on the dollar carry strategy) (Rζf ), the standard deviation (Std rt − rt ) and the
                                                                          
                                                          i      i
autocorrelation of the average forward discount (Corr rt − rt , rt+1 − rt+1 ), the standard devia-
tion (Std(r)), and autocorrelation (Corr(rt, rt+1 )) of the U.S. real short-term interest rates, the

cross-country correlation of real interest rates (Corr(rt, rti ) ), the standard deviation of changes in
real exchanges rates (Std(∆q)), the average excess return on the developed country currency basket
(E(rxdollar
     t      )), the average slope of the nominal term structure of interest rate in the U.S., calculated

                                                     30
as the average nominal 10-year yield minus the average nominal risk-free rate (E(y $,10 − r $ )), as
well as two Feller conditions that ensure the non-negativity of the volatility processes.12 A Feller
coefficient of (at least) 20 guarantees that all of the state variables following square-root processes
are positive (this is exact in the continuous-time approximation, and implies a negligible proba-

bility of crossing the zero bound in discrete time, a possibility never realized in our simulations
given these parameter values, even with samples as long as 1,000,000 periods). We set both Feller
coefficients to 30 (otherwise θ and θw are not identified).

       The GMM objective function minimizes a weighted sum of the squared differences between
closed-form expressions for these moments and their empirical counterparts. The minimization
procedure also imposes a set of economically-motivated constraints: χ − 0.5(γ + κ) < 0 (pro-
cyclical real risk-free rates), σ > 0, θ > 0, φ < 1, as well as σ w > 0, θw > 0, φw < 1 (stationary
volatilities), γ > 0 and κ > 0 (positive standard deviations), and δ < 2 × AF Dmax /θw (positive

exposures to the world shock for all countries). These constraints are not binding at the optimum
but they help to ensure convergence of the minimization algorithm.

       Panel B of Table IV lists the six additional moments that pin down


                                               {α, η w , π0 , σ π , δh , δl }


directly. The first four are country-invariant. The last two determine the domain for δ i , the only
source of heterogeneity. First, the mean U.S. real risk-free rate (E(r)) is uniquely determined by
the parameter α, once the other real parameters (χ, γ, τ , κ, θ, and θw ) are obtained. Second,
  12
     The nominal log zero-coupon yield of maturity n months in the currency of country i is given by the standard
affine expression
                                                      1 i                       
                                          yt$,i,n = −   Ãn + B̃ni zti + C̃ni ztw ,
                                                      n
where the coefficients satisfy the recursion:
                                                                                            1
                     Ãin   =   −α − π0 + Ãin−1 + B̃n−1
                                                     i                  i
                                                          (1 − φ) θ + C̃n−1 (1 − φw ) θw + σπ2 ,            (23)
                                                                                          2
                                       1                            √      1 i        2
                     B̃ni   =                           i
                                − χ − (γ + κ) + B̃n−1 (φ + σ γ) +              B̃n−1 σ ,                    (24)
                                       2                                   2
                                                                    √  1               2
                                              1
                     C̃ni   =   − η w + τ − δ i + C̃n−1i
                                                             φw + σ w δ i +          i
                                                                                   C̃n−1  σw .              (25)
                                              2                                 2



                                                            31
the three parameters that determine inflation rates are determined by three simple moments. The
mean inflation rate E(π) determines π0 , once η w and θw are known. The common component
of all inflation rates is governed by the parameter η w ; its value is derived from the average R2
of regressions of country-specific inflation rates on world inflation and the average volatility of

the country-specific inflation rates (η w = R2 × σπ2 /σz2w ). The volatility of the country-specific
inflation shocks (σπ ) is derived from the average volatility across countries, corrected for its common
component. Third, the heterogeneity in the model is pinned down by two moments that capture
the cross-country differences in interest rates. The home country is assumed to have the average
δ = δ i . As a result, the time-series mean of the AFD is zero. The mean forward discount on

currency i is given by E (rti − rt ) = − 21 (δ i − δ) θw , so the range of unconditional mean AFDs is
                                               2E (rti −rt )
used to estimate the range of δs: δ i = δ −        θw
                                                             .


                                             [Table 4 about here.]



5.2 Empirical Implementation

The specific values we target are listed in the third column of Table IV. The table reports the
annualized versions of means and standard deviations (the former scaled by 12 and the latter
          √
scaled by 12), as well as monthly autocorrelations. To compute these target moments, we use

one-month forward and spot exchange rates, expressed in U.S. dollars and obtained from Barclays
and Reuters (Datastream). We focus on the subset of developed countries for which long time-
series are available. The sample runs from 11/1983 to 06/2010 and contains the following countries:
Australia, Canada, Denmark, Germany (extended using the euro series), Japan, New Zealand,

Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, and United Kingdom. We use mean interest rate differentials for
the Swiss franc and the Australian dollar vis-à-vis the U.S. to determine the boundaries δh and δl ,
respectively.13

       Nominal interest rate differences (with respect to the U.S. short-term interest rates) are obtained
  13
   While these currencies do not produce the maximal spread in mean forward discounts over our sample (the
Japanese yen and the New Zealand dollar do), given the statistical uncertainty about these estimates we opt for the
more conservative targets.

                                                        32
as log differences between 1-month forward and spot rates (assuming that covered interest rate
parity holds). Adding the one-month Fama risk-free rate (from CRSP) leads to nominal short-
term interest rates in each country. Real interest rates are defined as nominal interest rates minus
expected inflation, which is approximated by the previous 12-month log change in the consumer

price index (CPI). Changes in exchange rates correspond to one-month log changes in spot rates.
Real exchange rates are obtained by multiplying spot rates by the ratio of home to foreign CPI
indices. Basket-level series are obtained as simple averages of all series in the sample. For example,
the real (nominal) average forward discount corresponds to the average real (nominal) interest rate
difference across countries in the sample. Realized inflation rates correspond to the one-month log

differences in CPIs.

   The table also lists the weights used in the estimation. The weights are chosen on economic, not
statistical grounds. For example, the exchange rate predictability produced by the AFD (charac-
terized by the slope coefficient and R2 ) is obviously less precisely estimated than the volatilities of
the U.S. risk-free rate and AFD. A pure statistical objective would lead to large and similar weights

for the exchange rate, U.S. interest rates, and AFD volatilities, as well as the autocorrelation of
U.S. interest rates and AFD, along with lower weights on the other moments. Yet, we choose to
weigh the predictability moments more than the second moments and autocorrelations because
they are the main focus of our paper. We also choose to overweight the volatility of real exchange
rates because matching this moment has been a challenge in international finance. By doing so,

we set a high hurdle for the model in terms of matching the dollar carry risk premium. In fact, the
model cannot match the one observed in the data exactly without imputing too much volatility
to exchange rates. This suggests that exchange rates are puzzlingly smooth when confronted with
the size of risk premia in currency markets. Brandt et al. (2006) had reached the same conclusion

based on equity risk premia.

   We provide standard errors for both the sample moments and for the moments implied by
the estimated parameter values. These standard errors are computed using a block-bootstrap
procedure, whereby both the sample moments and the parameter estimates are obtained for each

                                                  33
replication. We draw 1,000 samples of all the exchange rate and interest rate series used in the
estimation from the original data. Each sample is constructed by drawing (with replacement)
blocks of three observations in order to capture autocorrelation and heteroscedasticity present in
some of the series. This block-bootstrap procedure delivers 1,000 values of each target moment.

The estimation code is run on each set of targets. This procedure thus takes into account all the
uncertainty in the data, especially the small sample size.



5.3 Model Fit

We now review the target values and compare them to their model counterparts in Table IV.
Overall, the model delivers a reasonable fit.

   Panel A reports the moments used in the GMM estimation. The model matches the slope
coefficient of the basket-level change in nominal exchange rates on the average nominal interest
rate difference essentially exactly at 1.71 with the same standard error as that for the sample
moment (0.87). The R2 in this regression is more difficult to match, with a model-implied value of

only 0.32% compared to 1.89% in the data. There is considerable uncertainty about this moment;
the sample bootstrap standard error is 1.97 while the estimation standard error is 1.37. Thus, even
though we set up our estimation in order to allow the model to replicate the main predictability
result of our paper, exchange rates remain close to random walks.

   The model understates the volatilities of the U.S. real risk-free rate and the AFD. Empirically,
the standard deviation of the U.S. real interest rate (AFD) is 0.53% (0.61%). In the model, the

standard deviation of the U.S. real interest rate (AFD) is only 0.30% (0.26%). The model, however,
matches the three other moments of real interest rates. The persistence of the U.S. real risk-free
rate and the AFD are close to their empirical values: 0.96 vs 0.95 for the risk-free rate and 0.89
vs 0.91 for the AFD. The average pairwise correlation of real interest rates (with the U.S. real

interest rate) is 0.28 in the data vs. 0.27 in the model. Finally, the model underestimates the
slope of the nominal yield curve: the 10 year minus 1 month slope is 0.95% in the model vs. 2.15%
in the data, although the difference is not statistically significant (while the raw data moment is

                                                34
estimated quite precisely, with the standard error of only 12 basis points, the model-implied value
is not, as it has a standard error of 90 basis points). That the model produces a lower average
yield curve slope can be potentially due to the fact that unexpected inflation risk is not priced in
the model (only expected inflation is priced through its dependence on z w ).

   The model also matches the volatilities of real exchange rates. These values are simple av-
erages of all dollar-based exchange rates standard deviations in the sample. The average annual
standard deviation of real exchange rate changes is 11% in the data and the model matches this
value essentially exactly, given the large weight placed on this moment. The sample moment is

estimated very precisely with a sample bootstrap standard error of 0.46%. The model implies a
small unconditional dollar risk premium of 0.38% per annum, to be compared to a risk premium
of 0.82% in the data. While the latter has substantial uncertainty around it with the raw standard
error of 1.88% (and therefore not statistically different from zero), the GMM estimate is fairly

precise with the standard error of only 0.12%, and thus significantly lower than observed in the
data. This may be interpreted as evidence that our assumption that the U.S. has δ equal to that
of the average country is only approximately valid.

   Panel B reports the moments that are matched exactly. Note that the standard errors on

sample moments and model-generated moments coincide in this case. The model is estimated to
matche the mean U.S. one-month real interest rate of 1.31%, the mean inflation rate of 2.71%, and
its (cross-country) average standard deviation of 1.32%. The common inflation component across
countries accounts for 6.50% of inflation dynamics in the data and in the model; these numbers
correspond to the average of country-specific statistics. The mean interest rate differentials against

the highest-δ and lowest-δ countries are set to match the mean interest rate differentials for the
Swiss franc (−2.04%) and the Australian dollar (3.10%), respectively.

   Panel C reports some additional moments that were not used in the estimation. The model

slightly underestimates the mean U.S. one-month nominal interest rate (4.24% in the data vs
4.02% in the model) because the estimation targets the average inflation rate across countries
instead of the U.S. inflation rate. While the model matches closely the average correlation of

                                                 35
real risk-free rates across countries, it potentially understates the comovement of nominal interest
rates: the average correlation vis-á-vis the U.S. in the data is 0.6 (and very precisely estimated),
whereas the average estimated moment is only 0.33, albeit with a large standard error of 0.29.
Similarly, the average correlation of foreign nominal yield curve slopes with the world average,

Corr(ȳ $,10 − r̄t$ , y i$,10 − rti ), is 0.62 in the data but only 0.23 if simulated out of the model using
the benchmark parameter estimates (not reported in the table; empirical correlation is computed
using swap rate data available from Bloomberg and Datastream). This is in line with the evidence
in Sarno et al. (2012), who estimate an affine term-structure model targeting both the yield curve
and exchange rate moments across countries. They find that the model can either match the term

structures of the interest rates or the currency risk premia well, but not both. Finally, the standard
deviation of nominal exchange rate changes, reported in panel C, is 10.91% in the data vs. 11.16%
in the model (with a standard error of 0.46%).



5.4 Parameter Values

The estimated parameter values are reported in Table V, along with their standard errors. We
obtain standard errors for each of the parameters using the same bootstrap procedure as described
above, by taking standard deviations of corresponding parameter estimates across the bootstrap
replications. We also report the key moments of the stochastic discount factor dynamics implied

by the parameter estimates at the bottom of the table (in annualized units).

   The parameters α, φ, θ, σ, φw , as well as π0 , and σπ , appear significantly different from

zero, while χ, γ, τ , κ, θw , σ w , η w , δ, δh , δl are not. The estimation thus pins down precisely
the dynamics of the country-specific state variable, as well as the persistence of the world state
variable, but it does not precisely measure its mean and volatility. A clear difference between the
two state variables appears though: the contribution of the world state variable to the stochastic

discount factor volatility is much larger on average but less volatile conditionally than its country-
specific counterpart because it is more persistent (the annualized unconditional volatility of z
implied by these parameter estimates is 0.5 percent vs. 1.32 for z w ). This difference mirrors the

                                                    36
distinction between the dollar carry and the high-minus-low carry risk premia: the latter is close to
unpredictable and very volatile as it is driven solely by the world state variable z w , while the former
derives from the strong predictability of foreign currency returns following the country-specific state
variable z i .

    The average conditional SDF volatility is estimated to be 0.59. This conditional volatility
itself is highly variable, however, with annualized standard deviation of 4.21 percent. The model
reproduces the volatility of exchange rates while delivering large and volatile Sharpe ratios. As a

consequence, the pricing kernels are also highly correlated across countries at 0.98 on average (cf.
Brandt et al., 2006).


                                         [Table 5 about here.]


    The fact that parameters such as χ, γ, κ, and δs are not estimated very precisely is not very

surprising, given the statistical uncertainty around the estimates of slope coefficients in predictive
regressions. However, while it is hard to reject that χ is equal to zero, clearly the evidence on the
average returns earned by the dollar carry and the HML carry strategies indicates that κ and δ
cannot be equal to zero. In order to demonstrate this, we now use the estimated model to study

the properties of currency excess returns in simulated data.



5.5 Simulated Dollar and HML Carry Trades

We use the estimated parameters to simulate the model under the assumption that the world is

populated by N = 30 countries with the distribution of δ i s assumed uniform (given that it is
approximately symmetric around δ). We simulate the model for T = 336 periods and use the
artificial data to form the currency trading strategies analogous to those analyzed in Section 3.
Table VI reports the moments of the dollar and HML carry trade returns generated by the model.

Standard deviations (in brackets, except for the exogenously fixed standard deviation of levered
strategies) are obtained by simulating the model 1000 times and taking standard deviations for
each of the measures across the simulations). The unlevered average dollar carry trade return is

                                                   37
only 1.86% in the model, and the Sharpe ratio is half of that in the data (0.24 vs. 0.56), with
substantial uncertainty around both of the estimates. Levering up the return as we do in the data
to match the empirically observed stock market volatility of 15.5% produces an average dollar
carry excess return of 3.73% per annum. Hence, the dollar premium in the model is much smaller

than that in the data. We can increase the dollar premium by increasing the volatility of country-
specific risk, but only at the cost of overshooting the volatility of exchange rates. The HML carry
trade, on the contrary, is roughly as profitable in the model as in the data, with a Sharpe ratio
of 0.46; it is 0.31 in the data for developed countries and 0.49 in our large sample of developed
and emerging countries, albeit with a higher volatility (15.30 percent in the model vs. around 10

percent in the data). The correlation between the dollar and HML currency carry trade is 0.19,
which is higher than in the data but still very low. Overall, the model reproduces both of the carry
trade strategies, but it has more difficulty matching their volatility (overstating it for the HML),
while understating the dollar carry trade returns on average.


                                       [Table 6 about here.]


5.6 Return Predictability in Simulated Data

The model generates sizable returns on levered dollar carry trade strategies because the average
excess returns for baskets of currencies are predictable by AFDs in the model, in particular at
longer horizons.
   Table VII displays the results of the long-horizon predictability regressions for two types of

samples simulated from the calibrated model. The term structure of interest rates — and therefore
the long-horizon forward discounts — is computed in closed form. Panel A displays the results
generated using a single long sample of length T = 33600 that is meant to closely approximate
population values. Panel B presents results using a large number (1000) of small samples of length

T = 336 as in the actual data that allows us to evaluate the finite sample properties of these
regressions and compare them to the empirical counterparts in Table II.
   The slope coefficients for average excess returns and average exchange rate changes are very

                                                38
similar in the actual and in the simulated data, as are the R2 s. In the long sample regressions the
slope coefficient is about 2.4 for returns and 1.4 for exchange rate changes at the one-month horizon,
declining only slightly at the twelve-month horizon. The “population” R2 s appear slightly smaller
than in the data whereas the small sample R2 s are of essentially the same magnitudes as those

observed empirically. In the latter case, the AFD can explain 1.5% of the variation in one-month
excess returns, and 9.5% of variation in twelve-month returns, almost as much as in the data;
similarly, it explains up to 6.7% of variation in average exchange rate changes over twelve month
periods. However, comparison of the two sets of results indicate that both the slope coefficients
and the R2 of the small sample regressions may be upwardly biased compared to their population

values. They are also potentially imprecisely estimated as the t-statistics for the small sample
regressions based on the simulated distribution of estimated coefficients are in the neighborhood
of 1.4 for returns and of 1 for exchange rate changes.

                                        [Table 7 about here.]

   This simulation evidence indicates that even though some of the key model parameters are
not estimated precisely, they are well-identified by the predictability moments that we chose to
overweight in our estimation procedure. In particular, the point estimate of κ is 2.78 with a

standard error of 1.74, as reported in Table V. In our model this parameter is identified sharply by
the predictability regressions of dollar excess returns with the average forward discounts, as well as
the properties of returns on the dollar carry strategy. These empirical moments can be used to test
the hypothesis κ = 0 by simulating the model under the null (i.e. re-estimating the model under

the restriction κ = 0) and comparing the empirically-observed values of the moments with the
Monte Carlo distributions of their model analogues. Figure 3 displays histograms of excess return
predictability coefficients, R2 , dollar carry expected returns and Sharpe ratios for 1000 Monte
Carlo simulations using both the full model and the restricted model with κ = 0, along with the

empirically observed values of the moments. It is apparent from these graphs that the probabilities
of generating values as large as those observed in the data are negligible under the null of κ = 0
(always less than 5%), while under the full model the observed moments are comfortably within

                                                 39
the 95% confidence intervals. Therefore, even though there is substantial statistical uncertainty
around the estimated parameter κ, it is clearly significantly greater than zero, statistically as well
as economically.

                                       [Figure 3 about here.]


5.7 Base Carry vs. HML Carry

So far we have explored the quantitative implications of the model under the assumption that the

home country on average has exposure δ that is equal to the average exposure across all countries
in the basket. Since the heterogeneity in these exposures is necessary to explain the dispersion
in AFDs and unconditional currency risk premia across currencies in the data, it is interesting to
explore the predictions of the model for the returns on currency baskets formed from the perspective

of different base currencies. Again, we refer to strategies of going long a basket of all currencies
when the AFD on foreign currency is positive and short otherwise from a perspective of a given
country as base carry.
   We compute the returns on the HML carry strategy from the perspective of different base
currencies. The model predicts that the correlation between two strategies is U-shaped as a function

of the mean of the basket’s average forward discount. Countries with ‘average’ loadings δ will have
low correlation between the two strategies as documented above, whereas countries with either
high or low exposures will have higher correlations since they will tend to systematically have
either lower or higher interest rates, respectively, than the average country, causing the base carry

strategy to correlate with the HML strategy more often as they both load on the common shock
ug in the same direction.
   Figure 4 compares the correlations simulated from the model (solid line) to those observed in
the data for the so-called G10 currencies, i.e. the 10 most traded currencies: U.S. Dollar, U.K.

Pound Sterling, Deutschmark/Euro, Australian, Canadian, and New Zealand Dollars, Japanese
Yen, Swiss Franc, Norwegian Krone and Swedish Krona. Consistent with the model’s prediction,
for base currencies that have unconditional mean of the average froward discount close to zero

                                                 40
(e.g. U.S., U.K., Canada, Sweden) the correlation between the two carry strategies is also close to
zero. At the same time, for currencies that on average exhibit high interest rates and therefore low
mean AFD, these correlations are substantially higher, consistent with below-average global factor
exposure δ (Australia, New Zealand). The correlations are also somewhat higher for countries

with usually low interest rates, and therefore positive mean AFD, such as Japan and Switzerland,
suggesting they may have above-average δs. Note that this result is not mechanical, since the HML
strategy formed from the perspective of a given base currency does not include the base currency
itself, where as the base carry strategy always has the base currency in one leg of the position and
an equal-weighted average of all other currencies in the other leg (otherwise the correlation would

be much higher due to the overlap for the extreme currencies, such as Japan or New Zealand).
This pattern of correlations therefore supports the two-common-factors structure of our proposed
pricing kernel.


                                        [Figure 4 about here.]


5.7.1 Cross-section of Predictability


Given our calibration results, it appears that the average exposure assumption fits the data well for
the U.S. vis-a-vis the group of developed countries used to form our benchmark currency basket.

However, we should not expect the same results to hold for baskets formed from the perspective of
any arbitrary country – only for countries that exhibit an ‘average’ exposure to the global shocks.

   We compared the U.S. predictability results to those obtained for baskets formed from the

perspectives of the other base currencies. For the U.K. and Canada – countries with a sample
mean of the AFD close to zero, similar to the U.S. – we find strong predictability of returns on
long positions in foreign currencies and short positions in domestic currency, consistent with the
model. However, for Japan and Switzerland, which have much higher sample means for the average

forward discount, there is much weaker evidence of predictability, suggesting that these countries
loadings on the global shocks (δ i ) are greater than the average developed country. Similarly, for
Australia and New Zealand, whose AFDs on foreign currency are much lower than average as they

                                                 41
typically have high (real) interest rates, which from the standpoint of the model implies low loading
on the global shocks, there is also little evidence of predictability of excess returns or exchange
rate changes.



5.8 Dollar Carry and World Equity Returns

In Section 3 we showed that the correlation between the stock market returns and the dollar
carry trade is very low. Given the fact that in our model global innovations play a major role in
generating the dollar carry trade, it is a natural question whether the model produces a reasonable

correlation between the dollar carry and the global stock market returns. To answer this question,
we extend the model to equity markets. The aggregate stock market process in each country is a
claim to a stream of dividends. We assume that the dividend growth process of country i follows:

                                                      p             g
                                                                      p g
                         ∆dit+1 = µD + ψw ztw + σD     zti uit+1 + σD  zti ut+1 ,


so that the global state variable affects the conditional mean (e.g., long-run growth is common

across countries), but contemporaneous innovations are both common and idiosyncratic. The
logarithmic gross real rate of return on each country’s stock market index denominated in that
                    ei
country’s currency rt+1 is obtained using a standard log-linear approximation (detailed in the
Appendix).

   We construct an equal-weighted portfolio of all countries equity indices denominated in the
nominal home country units (U.S. dollars). The gross returns on this portfolio are calculated as

                                         N
                              W       1 X        ei      i
                                                                   
                             Rt+1   =       exp rt+1 − ∆qt+1 + πt+1 .
                                      N i=1

                                                                      g
   The four parameters of the dividend processes (µD , ψw , σD , and σD ) are estimated in order to

match the key moments of global dividend growth processes as well as the world equity market
returns reported in Table VIII. Specifically, the estimation matches the cross-country averages of
means and standard deviations of the dividend growth series, the average R2 of the regression of

                                                 42
each country’s dividend growth on the world-average dividend growth, and the mean of the world
stock market index return. These moments are obtained by computing dividends from the dividend
yield and market capitalization series built by Datastream. The sample comprises the same set of
countries used before in the estimation of the model. The sample period is 12/1983–6/2010, again

as in the rest of the paper. The parameters governing dividend dynamics are listed in the caption
of Table VIII.
    We match the average mean and standard deviation of the log dividend growth processes (at
monthly frequency, nominal, in local currencies) fairly closely (the mean is 9.79% in the model vs.
10.85% in the data, and the volatility is around 12% in both cases), as well as the average R2 of the

regression of each country’s 12-month dividend growth on the average dividend growth rate (just
under 8% in both model and data). The world equity market is obtained as an equal-weighted
portfolio of these indices (in nominal U.S. dollar terms) both in the model and in the data. Table
VIII reports the mean and standard deviation for this return. We match the former very closely,

at 12% per annum in both model and data, but we undershoot the global market volatility: the
model implies a standard deviation of 9.20% vs. 14.96% in the data. The key implication of
this calibration is that the correlation between the world equity market return (denominated in
dollars) and the dollar carry return is no greater in the model than it is in the data. The correlation

between world market returns and dollar carry returns is 0.1 in the model vs. 0.14 in the data.
The model, thus, does not appear to overestimate the common variation in pricing kernels and is
a useful framework for understanding international equity markets.

                                        [Table 8 about here.]



6     Countercyclical Currency Risk Premia

Our empirical results imply that expected excess returns on currency portfolios vary over time. The

no-arbitrage model in Section 4 suggests that this variation is driven by time-variation in the U.S.-
specific prices of domestic and global risk. A large literature in empirical asset pricing suggests that
risk premia in equity markets and bond markets increase in economic downturns. Consequently, we

                                                  43
expect the dollar risk premium to be counter-cyclical with respect to the U.S.-specific component
of the business cycle. Indeed, in this section we show that time variation in conditional expected
returns on U.S.-based currency baskets has a large U.S. business cycle component: expected excess
returns go up in U.S. recessions and go down in U.S. expansions, which is similar to the counter-

cyclical behavior that has been documented for bond and stock excess returns. This feature of asset
markets is a key ingredient of leading dynamic asset pricing models [see Campbell and Cochrane
(1999) and Bansal and Yaron (2004) for prominent examples]. The evidence at the level of currency
baskets is strong enough to survive most out-of-sample tests. Consistent with the predictions of
our model, this is not true for baskets formed from the perspectives of all countries. Finally, we

link time-varying risk premia to time-varying aggregate consumption and inflation volatility.



6.1 Cyclical Properties of the Average Forward Discount

       bt rxt+1 to denote the forecast of the one-month-ahead excess return based on the AFD for
We use E
a basket:
                                      bt rxt+1 = ψ0 + ψf (f t→t+k − st ).
                                      E                                                                     (26)


       Therefore, expected excess returns on currency baskets inherit the cyclical properties of the
AFDs. To assess the cyclicality of these forward discounts, we use three standard business cycle
indicators – the 12-month percentage change in U.S. industrial production index (IP), the 12-month
percentage change in total U.S. non-farm payroll index (P ay), and the 12-month percentage change
in the Help Wanted index (Help) – and three financial variables – the term spread (i.e., difference

between the 20-year and the 1-year Treasury zero coupon yields, T erm), the default spread (the
difference between the BBB and AAA bond yields, Def ), and the CBOE V IX index of S&P 500
index-option implied volatility.14 Macroeconomic variables are often revised. To check that our
results are robust to real-time data, we use vintage series of the payroll and industrial production
  14
    Industrial production data are from the IMF International Financial Statistics. The payroll index is from the
Bureau of Economic Analysis. The Help Wanted Index is from the Conference Board. Zero coupon yields are
computed from the Fama-Bliss series available from CRSP. The VIX index, the corporate and Treasury bond yields
are from Datastream.

                                                       44
indices from the Federal Reserve Bank of Saint Louis. The results are very similar. Note that
macroeconomic variables are also published with a lag. For example, the industrial production
index is published around the 15th of each month, with a one-month lag (e.g., the value for May
2009 was released on June 16, 2009). In our tables, we do not take into account this publication lag

of 15 days or so and assume that the index is known at the end of the month. We check our results
by lagging the index an extra month. The publication lag sometimes matters for short-horizon
predictability but does not change our results over longer horizons.

                                        [Table 9 about here.]

   Table IX reports the contemporaneous correlations of the AFDs (across horizons) with these

macroeconomic and financial variables. As expected, the AFD (and, therefore, forecasted excess
returns) is counter-cyclical: it is negatively correlated with all of the macroeconomic variables (IP,
P ay, and Help). We find roughly the same business cycle variation in AFD across horizons. At
every maturity we consider, the AFD appears counter-cyclical. Since excess returns load positively

on the AFD, they are also counter-cyclical, i.e high in bad times and low in good times. AFDs
are positively correlated with the slope of the U.S. term structure and the default spread, again
suggesting that basket excess returns are counter-cyclical. The AFD, however, is not correlated
with the VIX index (point estimates are negative but small and not statistically significant),
pointing again to the difference between dollar carry and HML carry trades, which are correlated

with stock market volatility (as shown in Lustig et al. (2011)).


6.2 Macro Factors and Currency Return Predictability

So far we have focused on the predictive power of the AFD, but the counter-cyclical nature of excess
returns suggests that macro variables themselves might help to forecast excess returns, potentially
above and beyond what is captured by the AFDs. We check this conjecture by focusing on the

predictive power of the IP variable, controlling for the AFD.
   In the benchmark version of the model there is only a single state variable that describes the
market price of U.S. risk, and it is spanned by the average forward discount. In a model with more

                                                 45
state variables, the average forward discount is a linear combination of these state variables, and as
long as the SDF loadings on these variables (χ, γ, and κ) differ, the conditional expected returns
are no longer proportional to the AFD. Adding other interest rate-related variables, such as the
slope of the term structure, may or may not help identify these other factors. Evidence from the

term structure of U.S. interest rates suggests that business cycle variables, such as IP growth rates,
contain information about risk premia in the bond markets that is not captured by the interest
rates themselves (see Ludvigson and Ng (2009), Duffee (2011), and Joslin et al. (2010)). We thus
expect similar U.S.-specific macroeconomic variables to have forecasting power for currency excess
returns, as well as spot exchange rate changes.



6.2.1 Industrial Production Growth


Using the same notation as in the previous sections, Table X reports two sets of regression results:


                     rxt→t+k = ψ0 + ψIP ∆ log IPt + ψf (f t→t+k − st ) + ηt+k ,                     (27)

                    −∆st→t+k = ζ0 + ζIP ∆ log IPt + ζf (f t→t+k − st ) + εt+k .                     (28)


We use the developed markets’ AFD since it is the strongest predictor of returns on all baskets
(developed, emerging, or all countries). All the estimated slope coefficients on industrial production

are negative and, for horizons of 3 months and above, strongly statistically significant. The Wald
tests reject the restriction that the two slope coefficients for excess returns are jointly equal to zero
for all baskets at horizons of three months and above (using various methods) and, for exchange
rate changes, at horizons of 6 and 12 months. The R2 for average excess returns at the 12-month
horizon are between 23% and 28% across different baskets, and between 15% and 34% for average

exchange rate changes.

   Since we are controlling for the average forward of the developed markets basket, the IP
coefficient for this basket is the same for excess returns and exchange rate changes, capturing the
pure effect of the counter-cyclical risk premium on expected depreciation of the dollar, rather than

                                                   46
the return stemming from the interest rate differential. Thus, holding interest rates constant, a one
percentage point drop in the annual change in IP raises the dollar risk premium by 50 to 100 basis
points per annum at the monthly horizon and by as much as 90 to 153 basis points at the annual
horizon, all coming from the expected appreciation of the foreign currencies against the dollar.

Since the AFD itself is counter-cyclical, the total effect is even greater, implying an increase in
expected returns of up to 120 basis points for annual data.


                                             [Table 10 about here.]


      The U.S. IP appears highly correlated with similar indices in other developed countries. For

example, its correlation with the average index for the G7 countries (excluding the U.S., and using
12-month changes in each index) is equal to 0.5.15 To check that the U.S.-specific component of
the U.S. IP index matters most here, we run the following predictive regressions using the residuals
from the projection of these 12-month changes on the average foreign IP indices:


                         ∆ log IPt = α + β∆ log IPt + IPres,t,                                        (29)

                          rxt→t+k = ψ0 + ψIPres IPres,t + ψf (f t→t+k − st ) + ηt+k ,                 (30)


where ∆ log IPt denotes the average of the 12-month changes in IP indices across 28 developed
countries (excluding the U.S.).

      The predictive power of IP lies mostly in the U.S.-specific component of IP , denoted IPres,t,
for long-horizon returns. We obtain R2 s between 16% and 25% with the IP residuals for both

average excess returns and average spot exchange rate changes at the 12-month horizon. The slope
coefficients are lower for the short-horizon returns, but larger for long horizons. For annual holding
periods, a one percentage point decline in the U.S. IP relative to the world average implies a 145
to 165 basis point increase in the risk premium, even if interest rate differentials do not change.

      To check that the U.S.-specific component of the AFD of developed countries matters most
here, we run predictability tests using the residuals from the projection of the AFD on the average
 15
      The G7 countries are Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, and the U.K., as well as the U.S.

                                                        47
12-month changes of foreign countries industrial production indices, which removes much of the
covariation of the AFD with the global macroeconomic conditions. For the basket of developed
currencies, the slope coefficients are only 20 basis points lower across different maturities, which
could be explained by the noise introduced in estimation of the residual. For the other baskets,

the results are similar.



6.2.2 Consumption Volatility


In consumption-based asset pricing models, time-varying risk premia can arise due to heteroscedas-
ticity of aggregate consumption growth [e.g. as in Kandel and Stambaugh (1991) and Bansal and
Yaron (2004)]; in models with a nontrivial nominal side, the conditional volatility of inflation can
also play an important role in generating the forward premium [e.g. as in Backus et al. (2011)]. In-

deed, the realized volatility of U.S. aggregate consumption growth (estimated as a rolling 36-month
standard deviation of monthly growth rates) is highly countercyclical, as is the realized volatility
of inflation. They both increase during recessions (when IP falls), as does the average forward
discount for the developed countries. If the time variation in the currency risk premia is due to

the time-varying consumption uncertainty, we should be able to detect a relation between the two
statistically, as long as a good empirical measure of consumption volatility can be constructed.

    We run regressions of average excess currency returns and exchange rate changes on these two
volatility measures: the estimated conditional volatilities of consumption growth σt (∆ct+1 ) and of
inflation σt (πt+1 ):


                           rxt→t+k = ψ0 + ψσc σt (∆ct+1 ) + ψσp σt (∆πt+1 ) + ηt+k ,           (31)

                        −∆st→t+k = ζ0 + ζσc σt (∆ct+1 ) + ζσp σt (∆πt+1 ) + εt+k .             (32)


Results of these regressions are reported in Table XI. Consumption growth volatility appears to
have substantial predictive power for currency excess returns and exchange rate changes, with R2 s
as high as 19%. However, the finite sample bias may potentially be severe, as the bootstrapped

                                                     48
t-statistics are large enough for the coefficients to be statistically significant only at the 12-month
horizon, and at all horizons are markedly different from the large asymptotic t-statistics.


                                         [Table 11 about here.]


    Overall, we find that the expected returns on shorting the U.S. dollar are counter-cyclical:
they increase when U.S. output declines (in particular, relative to the world average), and U.S.

consumption growth volatility increases. This suggests that the market price of U.S.-specific risk,
and thus z i in our model, is counter-cyclical. Our model thus provides a potential explanation
for our empirical findings — both the large excess returns on a novel trading strategy and the
strong predictability results on currency excess returns — and this explanation is clearly based on

counter-cyclical currency risk premia.



7     Conclusion

We document in this paper that aggregate returns in currency markets are highly predictable.
This predictability manifests itself in the form of high Sharpe ratios on the dollar carry trade. The
average forward discount and the change in the U.S. IP index explain up to 25% of the subsequent

variation in average annual excess returns realized by shorting the dollar and going long in large
baskets of currencies. The time variation in expected returns has a clear business cycle pattern:
U.S. macroeconomic variables are powerful predictors of these returns, especially at longer holding
periods, and expected currency returns are strongly counter-cyclical.
    We provide a simple, no-arbitrage model that reproduces our main findings and shows that the

source of predictability is U.S.–specific variation in the price of global as well as U.S. specific risk
that is unrelated to another global source of risk identified by the usual high-minus-low carry-trades
(e.g., global financial market volatility). However, the no-arbitrage model cannot fully match the
dollar carry trade risk premium without imputing too much volatility to exchange rates. Perhaps,

because the dollar is a reserve currency, investors are willing to forgo some return in exchange for
a long position in dollars, especially in bad times. We leave this question for future research.

                                                  49
References
Adrian, Tobias, Erkko Etula, and Hyun Song Shin, “Risk Appetite and Exchange Rates,”
    May 2010. Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports 361.

Akram, Q. Farooq, Dagfinn Rime, and Lucio Sarno, “Arbitrage in the Foreign Exchange
   Market: Turning on the Microscope,” Journal of International Economics, 2008, 76 (2), 237–
    253.

Andrews, Donald W.K., “Heteroskedasticity and Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix
   Estimation,” Econometrica, 1991, 59 (1), 817–858.

Ang, Andrew and Geert Bekaert, “Stock Return Predictability: Is it There?,” Review of
    Financial Studies, 2007, 20, 651–707.

    and Joseph S. Chen, “Yield Curve Predictors of Foreign Exchange Returns,” 2010. Working
    Paper Columbia University.

Asness, Cliff, Tobias Moskowitz, and Lasse Pedersen, “Value and Momentum Everywhere,”
   Journal of Finance, forthcoming, 2012.

Atkeson, Andrew and Patrick Kehoe, “On the Need for a New Approach to Analyzing
    Monetary Policy,” in Daron Acemoglu, Kenneth Rogoff, and Michael Woodford, eds., NBER
    Macroeconomics Annual 2008, University of Chicago Press, 2008.

Baba, Naohiko and Frank Packer, “From turmoil to crisis: Dislocations in the FX swap
    market before and after the failure of Lehman Brothers,” Journal of International Money and
    Finance, 2009, 28, 1350–1374.

Backus, David K., Federico Gavazzoni, Christopher Telmer, and Stanley E. Zin, “Mon-
    etary Policy and the Uncovered Interest Parity Puzzle,” July 2011. NBER Working Paper.

Backus, David, Silverio Foresi, and Chris Telmer, “Affine Models of Currency Pricing:
   Accounting for the Forward Premium Anomaly,” Journal of Finance, 2001, 56, 279–304.

Bakshi, Gurdip and George Panayotov, “Predictability of Currency Carry Trades and Asset
   Pricing Implications,” Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.

    ,      , and George Skoulakis, “Improving the predictability of real economic activity and
    asset returns with forward variances inferred from option portfolios,” Journal of Financial
    Economics, 2011, 100, 475–495.

                                              50
    , Peter Carr, and Liuren Wu, “Stochastic Risk Premiums, Stochastic Skewness in Cur-
    rency Options, and Stochastic Discount Factors in International Economies,” Journal of Fi-
    nancial Economics, January 2008, 87 (1), 132–156.

Bansal, Ravi and Amir Yaron, “Risks for the Long Run: A Potential Resolution of Asset
   Pricing Puzzles,” Journal of Finance, 2004, 59 (4), 1481 – 1509.

     and Ivan Shaliastovich, “A Long-Run Risks Explanation of Predictability Puzzles in Bond
    and Currency Markets,” Review of Financial Studies, 2012, 26 (1), 1–33.

     and Magnus Dahlquist, “The Forward Premium Puzzle: Different Tales from Developed
    and Emerging Economies,” Journal of International Economics, 2000, 51, 115–144.

Bekaert, Geert, Robert J. Hodrick, and David A. Marshall, “On Biases in Tests of the
    Expectations Hypothesis of the Term Structure of Interest Rates,” Journal of Financial Eco-
    nomics, 1997, 44(3), 30948.

Bhansali, Vineer, “Volatility and the Carry Trade,” The Journal of Fixed Income, Winter 2007,
    pp. 72–84.

Brandt, Michael W., John H. Cochrane, and Pedro Santa-Clara, “International Risk-
   Sharing is Better Than You Think (or Exchange Rates are Much Too Smooth),” Journal of
    Monetary Economics, 2006, 53, 671 – 698.

Brennan, Michael J. and Yihong Xia, “International Capital Markets and Foreign Exchange
   Risk,” Review of Financial Studies, 2006, 19 (3), 753–795.

Brunnermeier, Markus K., Stefan Nagel, and Lasse H. Pedersen, “Carry Trades and
   Currency Crashes,” in Daron Acemoglu, Kenneth Rogoff, and Michael Woodford, eds., NBER
   Macroeconomics Annual, University of Chicago Press, 2008.

Burnside, Craig, Martin Eichenbaum, Isaac Kleshchelski, and Sergio Rebelo, “Do Peso
   Problems Explain the Returns to the Carry Trade?,” Review of Financial Studies, 2011, 24
   (3), 853–891.

Campbell, John Y and Yasushi Hamao, “Predictable Stock Returns in the United States and
   Japan: A Study of Long-Term Capital Market Integration,” Journal of Finance, March 1992,
   47 (1), 43–69.

Campbell, John Y., Karine Serfaty De Medeiros, and Luis M. Viceira, “Global Currency
   Hedging,” Journal of Finance, 2010, 65 (1), 87–121.

                                               51
Campbell, J.Y. and J. H. Cochrane, “By Force of Habit: A Consumption-Based Explanation
   of Aggregate Stock Market Behavior,” Journal of Political Economy, 1999, 107, 205–251.

Chen, Yu-Chin and Kwok Ping Tsang, “What Does the Yield Curve Tell Us About Exchange
    Rate Predictability?,” Review of Economics and Statistics, forthcoming, 2011.

Chernov, Mikhail, Jeremy Graveline, and Irina Zviadadze, “Sources of Risk in Currency
   Returns,” 2012. Working Paper London School of Economics.

Cochrane, John H. and Monika Piazzesi, “Bond Risk Premia,” The American Economic
    Review, March 2005, 95 (1), 138–160.

Colacito, Riccardo, “Six Anomalies Looking For a Model. A Consumption-Based Explanation
    of International Finance Puzzles,” 2008. Working Paper.

     and Mariano M. Croce, “Risks For The Long Run And The Real Exchange Rate,” Journal
    of Political Economy, 2011, 119 (1), 153–182.

Cooper, Ilan and Richard Priestley, “Time-Varying Risk Premiums and the Output Gap,”
   Review of Financial Studies, 2009, 22 (7), 2801–2833.

Duffee, Gregory R., “Information in (and not in) the Term Structure,” Review of Financial
    Studies, 2011, 24, 2895–2934.

Evans, Martin D D and Karen K Lewis, “Do Long-Term Swings in the Dollar Affect Estimates
   of the Risk Premia?,” Review of Financial Studies, 1995, 8 (3), 709–42.

Fama, Eugene F., “Forward and Spot Exchange Rates,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 1984,
    14, 319–338.

Farhi, Emmanuel, Samuel P. Fraiberger, Xavier Gabaix, Romain Ranciere, and Adrien
    Verdelhan, “Crash Risk in Currency Markets,” 2012. Working Paper MIT.

Frachot, Antoine, “A Reexamination of the Uncovered Interest Rate Parity Hypothesis,” Journal
    of International Money and Finance, 1996, 15 (3), 419–437.

Frankel, Jeffrey and Jumana Poonawala, “The Forward Market in Emerging Currencies: Less
    Biased than in Major Currencies,” Journal of International Money and Finance, 2010, 29 (3),
    585–598.

Froot, Kenneth A. and Tarun Ramadorai, “Currency Returns, Intrinsic Value, and
    Institutional-Investor Flows,” Journal of Finance, 06 2005, 60 (3), 1535–1566.

                                              52
Gavazzoni, Federico, Batchimeg Sambalaibat, and Chris Telmer, “Currency Risk and
   Pricing Kernel Volatility,” 2012. Working Paper, Carnegie Mellon University.

Gourio, Francois, Michael Siemer, and Adrien Verdelhan, “International Risk Cycles,”
   Journal of International Economics, forthcoming, 2011.

Goyal, Amit and Ivo Welch, “A Comprehensive Look at The Empirical Performance of Equity
   Premium Prediction,” Review of Financial Studies, 2005, 21 (4), 1455–1508.

Hansen, Lars Peter and Robert J. Hodrick, “Forward Exchange Rates as Optimal Predictors
   of Future Spot Rates: An Econometric Analysis,” Journal of Political Economy, October 1980,
   88 (5), 829–853.

Harvey, Campbell R., “The World Price of Covariance Risk,” Journal of Finance, 1991, 46 (1),
   111–157.

Hodrick, Robert, The Empirical Evidence on the Efficiency of Forward and Futures Foreign
   Exchange Markets, Chur, Switzerland: Harwood Academic Publishers, 1987.

Hollifield, Burton and Amir Yaron, “The Foreign Exchange Risk Premium: Real and Nominal
    Factors,” 2001. Working Paper Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania.

Hong, Harrison and Motohiro Yogo, “What Does Futures Market Interest Tell Us about the
    Macroeconomy and Asset Prices?,” Journal of Financial Economics, 2012, 105 (3), 473–490.

Joslin, Scott, Marcel Priebsch, and Kenneth J. Singleton, “Risk Premiums in Dynamic
    Term Structure Models with Unspanned Macro Risks,” May 2010. Working Paper Stanford
    University.

Jurek, Jakub W., “Crash-neutral Currency Carry Trades,” 2009. Working Paper.

Kandel, Shmuel and Robert F. Stambaugh, “Asset Returns and Intertemporal Preferences,”
    Journal of Monetary Economics, February 1991, 27 (1), 39–71.

Kilian, Lutz, “Exchange Rates and Monetary Fundamentals: What Do We Learn from Long-
    Horizon Regressions?,” Journal of Applied Econometrics, 1999, 14 (5), 491–510.

Lewis, Karen K., “Puzzles in International Financial Markets,” in G. Grossman and K. Ro-
    goff, eds., Handbook of International Economics, Amsterdam: Elsevier Science B.V., 1995,
    pp. 1913–1971.

Ludvigson, Sydney C. and Serena Ng, “Macro Factors in Bond Risk Premia,” Review of
   Financial Studies, 2009, 22(12), 5027–5067.

                                             53
Lustig, Hanno, Nikolai Roussanov, and Adrien Verdelhan, “Common Risk Factors in
    Currency Returns,” Review of Financial Studies, November 2011, 24 (11), 3731–3777.

Mark, Nelson C., “Exchange Rates and Fundamentals: Evidence on Long-Horizon Predictabil-
    ity,” American Economic Review, 1995, 85 (1), 201–218.

Meese, Richard A. and Kenneth Rogoff, “Empirical Exchange Rate Models of the Seventies:
    Do They Fit Out of Sample?,” Journal of International Economics, 1983, 14, 3–24.

Menkhoff, Lukas, Lucio Sarno, Maik Schmeling, and Andreas Schrimpf, “Carry Trades
   and Global Foreign Exchange Rate Volatility,” Journal of Finance, 2012, 67 (2), 681–718.

Politis, Dimitris N. and Joseph P. Romano, “The stationary bootstrap,” Journal of the
    American Statistical Association, 1994, 89, 1303–1313.

Sarno, Lucio, Paul Schneider, and Christian Wagner, “Properties of Foreign Exchange Risk
    Premiums,” Journal of Financial Economics, 2012, 105 (2), 279–310.

Stambaugh, Robert F., “The information in forward rates : Implications for models of the term
    structure,” Journal of Financial Economics, May 1988, 21 (1), 41–70.

    , “Predictive Regressions,” Journal of Financial Economics, 1999, 54 (1), 375–421.

Verdelhan, Adrien, “A Habit-Based Explanation of the Exchange Rate Risk Premium,” Journal
    of Finance, 2010, 65 (1), 123–145.




                                              54
                     Table I: Currency Carry Trades and Equity Market Excess Returns

                                         Raw Returns                                                 Scaled Returns
                          USD           FX          HML          Equity               USD            FX          HML          Equity
                                                              Panel A: Developed Countries
   Mean                    5.60         0.48         3.00         6.26                10.18         0.91          4.77          6.26
                          [1.66]       [1.65]       [1.92]       [2.98]               [3.29]       [3.11]        [3.14]        [2.98]
   Std. Dev.               8.53         8.24         9.73        15.49                15.49        15.49         15.49         15.49
                          [0.42]       [0.39]       [0.62]       [0.92]               [0.92]       [0.92]        [0.92]        [0.92]
   Sharpe Ratio            0.66         0.06         0.31         0.40                 0.66         0.06          0.31          0.40
                          [0.20]       [0.20]       [0.21]       [0.20]               [0.20]       [0.20]        [0.21]        [0.20]
   Corr(USD,.)                          0.32        -0.03         0.01
                                       [0.10]       [0.09]       [ 0.07]
                                                                  Panel B: All Countries
   Mean                    4.28         0.36         4.41         6.26                 8.70         0.72          7.58          6.26
                          [1.48]       [1.53]       [1.80]       [3.03]               [3.23]       [3.08]        [3.26]        [3.03]
   Std. Dev.               7.61         7.77         9.02        15.49                15.49         15.49        15.49         15.49
                          [0.39]       [0.38]       [0.48]       [0.92]               [0.92]       [ 0.92]       [0.92]        [0.92]
   Sharpe Ratio            0.56         0.05         0.49         0.40                 0.56         0.05          0.49          0.40
                          [0.20]       [0.20]       [0.21]       [0.21]               [0.20]       [0.20]        [0.21]        [0.21]
   Corr(USD,.)                          0.29         0.01        -0.00
                                       [0.11]       [0.08]       [0.07]

Notes: The table reports the mean, standard deviation, and Sharpe ratios of three carry trade investment strategies in comparison to the
U.S. equity market returns. The first strategy (USD, or dollar carry trade) goes long all available one-month currency forward contracts
when the average forward discount of developed countries is positive, and short the same contracts otherwise. The second strategy (FX,
or individual currency carry trade) is similar to the first one, but implemented at the level of individual currencies. For each country,
the strategy goes long that currency if the corresponding one-month forward discount is positive, and short otherwise. We report the
mean excess return across all countries. The third strategy (HML, or high-minus-low carry trade) is long in a basket of the currencies
with the largest one-month forward discounts, and short in a basket of currencies with the lowest one-month forward discounts, with no
direct exposure to the U.S. dollar. To construct this strategy, we sort all currencies into six bins (five when we exclude emerging market
countries), and we go long in the last portfolio, short in the first, as in Lustig et al. (2011). The fourth (equity benchmark) strategy
is long the U.S. stock market and short the U.S. risk-free rate. In the left panel, we report the raw moments. In the right panel, we
scale each currency strategy such that they exhibit the same volatility as the U.S. equity market. Data are monthly, from Reuters and
Barclays (available on Datastream). Equity excess returns are for the CRSP value-weighted stock market index (available on WRDS).
                                                                                                   √
Excess returns are annualized (means are multiplied by 12 and standard deviations are multiplied by 12). Sharpe ratios correspond to
the ratio of annualized means to annualized standard deviations. Currency excess returns take into account bid-ask spreads on monthly
forward and spot contracts, while equity excess returns do not take into account transaction costs. We report standard errors for all of
the quantities (in brackets) obtained by stationary bootstrap. The sample period is 11/1983–6/2010.




                                                                   55
Table II: Forecasting Currency Excess Returns and Exchange Rates with the Average Forward
Discount

                         Developed Countries                       Emerging Countries                          All Countries
                Excess Returns       Exchange Rates       Excess Returns      Exchange Rates        Excess Returns      Exchange Rates
   Horizon        ψf        R2         ζf        R2        ψf         R2        ζf        R2         ψf        R2         ζf        R2
   1             2.45      2.91       1.45      1.03       2.06      2.21      2.28       2.63       2.19      2.93      1.56      1.51
   HH           [2.55]               [1.51]               [2.09]              [2.22]                [2.54]              [1.80]
   VAR          [2.61]               [1.53]               [2.20]              [2.47]                [2.57]              [1.93]
   2             2.49      5.00       1.49      1.86       2.09      3.96      2.34       4.70       2.25      5.08      1.64      2.75
   HH           [2.52]               [1.51]               [2.14]              [2.24]                [2.50]              [1.81]
   VAR          [2.37]               [1.51]               [2.02]              [2.12]                [2.39]              [1.66]
   3             2.46      6.52       1.46      2.40       2.04      4.94      2.29       5.84       2.21      6.49      1.60      3.53
   HH           [2.46]               [1.46]               [1.97]              [2.05]                [2.40]              [1.73]
   VAR          [2.19]               [1.47]               [1.94]              [2.16]                [2.39]              [1.63]
   6             2.45      10.23      1.45      3.84       2.02      6.96      2.29       8.25       2.19      9.95      1.61      5.63
   HH           [2.50]               [1.48]               [1.80]              [1.87]                [2.38]              [1.73]
   VAR          [2.49]               [1.49]               [2.03]              [2.12]                [2.48]              [1.93]
   12            2.12      13.14      1.12      4.05       2.27     12.94      2.54      14.86       1.90     12.37      1.32      6.45
   HH           [2.18]               [1.15]               [1.91]              [1.93]                [2.10]              [1.42]
   VAR          [2.14]               [1.20]               [2.79]              [3.19]                [2.21]              [1.51]


Notes:   This table reports results of forecasting regressions for average excess returns and average exchange rate changes for baskets
of currencies at horizons of one, two, three, six, and twelve months. For each basket we report the R2 , and the slope coefficient ψf in
the time-series regression of the log currency excess return on the average log forward discount of developed countries, and similarly the
slope coefficient ζf and the R2 for the regressions of average exchange rate changes. The t-statistics for the slope coefficients in brackets
are computed using the following methods. HH denotes Hansen and Hodrick (1980) standard errors computed with the number of
lags equal to the length of overlap plus one lag. The VAR-based statistics are adjusted for the small sample bias using the bootstrap
distributions of slope coefficients under the null hypothesis of no predictability, estimated by drawing from the residuals of a VAR with
the number of lags equal to the length of overlap plus one lag. Data are monthly, from Barclays and Reuters (available via Datastream).
The returns do not take into account bid-ask spreads. The sample period is 11/1983–6/2010.




                                                                    56
      Table III: Predictability Using Bilateral and Average Forward Discounts: Panel Regressions

                        Developed Countries                         Emerging Countries                           All countries
               Excess Returns       Exchange Rates        Excess Returns       Exchange Rates        Excess Returns        Exchange Rates
  Horizon        ψ̃f       ϕf         ζ̃f        ξf         ψ̃f        ϕf        ζ̃f       ξf         ψ̃f        ϕf          ζ̃f       ξf
  1             1.87       0.60      1.87       -0.40       1.59       1.12     1.59       0.12       1.56       0.95       1.56      -0.05
               [2.13]     [1.52]    [2.13]     [-0.99]     [1.91]     [2.30]   [1.91]    [ 0.25]    [ 2.02]    [ 2.47]    [ 2.02]    [-0.12]
  2             2.10       0.51      2.10       -0.49       1.35       1.19     1.35       0.19       1.52       1.01       1.52       0.01
               [2.74]     [1.15]    [2.74]     [-1.12]     [1.81]     [2.15]   [1.81]    [ 0.34]    [ 2.22]    [ 2.26]    [ 2.22]    [ 0.01]
  3             2.15       0.39      2.15       -0.61       1.15       1.30     1.15       0.30       1.38       1.07       1.38       0.07
               [3.02]     [0.88]    [3.02]     [-1.36]     [1.66]     [2.47]   [1.66]     [0.57]     [2.18]     [2.44]     [2.18]     [0.16]
  6             2.23       0.33      2.23       -0.67       1.02       1.31     1.02       0.31       1.34       1.09       1.34       0.09
               [3.45]     [0.77]    [3.45]     [-1.53]    [ 1.53]     [2.77]   [1.53]     [0.66]    [ 2.54]    [ 2.75]    [ 2.54]    [ 0.23]
  12            1.89       0.32      1.89       -0.68       1.00       1.56     1.00       0.56       1.10       1.22       1.10       0.22
               [4.12]     [0.99]    [4.12]     [-2.13]     [1.52]     [3.00]   [1.52]     [1.08]     [2.38]     [2.83]     [2.38]    [ 0.52]


Notes:    This table reports results of panel regressions for average excess returns and average exchange rate changes for individual
currencies at horizons of one, two, three, six, and twelve months, on both the average forward discount for developed countries and the
currency-specific forward discount, as well as currency fixed effects (to allow for different drifts). For each group of countries (developed,
emerging, and all), we report the slope coefficients on the average log forward discount for developed countries (ψf ) and on the individual
forward discount(ϕf ), and similarly the slope coefficient ζf and ξf for the exchange rate changes. The t-statistics for the slope coefficients
in brackets are computed using robust standard errors clustered by month and country. Data are monthly, from Barclays and Reuters
(available via Datastream). The returns do not take into account bid-ask spreads. The sample period is 11/1983–6/2010.




                                                                      57
                                                              Table IV: Estimation

Moment                            Closed Form                                                          Data           Weight       Model
                                  Panel A: GMM Target Moments for Parameters            {χ, τ, γ, κ, φ, θ, σ, φw , θ w , σw , δ}
                                             χ
ζf                                −                                                                    1.71           104          1.71
                                      (χ− 21 (γ+κ))
                                                                                                       [0.87]                      [0.87]
                                  2χ2 var(z)
R2ζ                                var(∆q)
                                                                                                       1.89%          104          0.32%
     f
                                                                                                       [1.97%]                     [1.37%]
                                  q                     2                 2
                                             1
Std(r)                                 χ−    2
                                                 (γ + κ) var(z) + τ − 12 δi var(z w )                  0.53%          10           0.30%
                                                                                                       [0.03%]                     [0.30%]
            
                                         1
Std rti − rt                                                                                                          102
                                                    
                                   χ−    2
                                             (γ + κ) Std(z)                                            0.61%                       0.26%
                                                                                                       [0.05%]                     [0.26%]
                             
Corr rti − rt , rt+1
                 i   − rt+1       φ                                                                    0.89           102          0.91
                                                                                                       [0.04]                      [0.05]
                                                          2           2
                                  φ(χ− 1 (γ+κ)) var(z)+(τ − 1 δ φw var (ztw )
                                                            2 )
Corr(rt , rt+1 )                       2
                                                   var(r)
                                                                                                       0.96           102          0.95
                                                                                                       [0.04]                      [0.03]
                                                 2   var(z w )
Corr(rt , rti )                    τ − 12 δi           var(r)
                                                                                                       0.28           104          0.27
                                                                                                       [0.05]                      [0.05]
E(y $,10 − r $ )                                                                                       2.15 %         10           0.85%
                                                                                                       [0.12%]                     [0.90%]
                                                                                                                      2 × 106
                                  p
Std(∆q)                            2γθ + 2χ2 var(z) + o                                                11.01%                      11.01%
                                                                                                       [0.46%]                     [0.46%]
E(rxdollar
    t      )                      γθ                                                                   0.82%          1            0.38%
                                                                                                       [1.88%]                     [0.12%]
                                             θ
F eller                           2(1 − φ) var(z)                                                      30.00          1            30.00
                                                          w
                                               θ
F eller                           2(1 − φw ) var(z w)                                                  30.00          1            30.00
                                       Panel B: Exactly Matched Moments for Parameters          {α, ηw , π        π
                                                                                                             0 , σ , δh , δl }
                                              1
                                                (γ + κ) + θ w τ − 12 δi
                                                                       
E(r)                              α+θ χ−      2
                                                                                                       1.31%                       1.31%
                                                                                                       [0.18%]                     [0.18%]
E rtl − rt                        − 21 δl − δ θ w
                                            
                                                                                                       3.10%                       3.10%
                                                                                                       [0.28%]                     [0.28%]
E rth − rt                        − 21 δh − δ θ w
                                            
                                                                                                       -2.04%                      -2.04%
                                                                                                       [0.24%]                     [0.24%]
                                  (η w )2 var(z w )
R2π                               var(inf lation)
                                                                                                       6.50%                       6.50%
                                                                                                       [1.56%]                     [1.56%]
E(π)                              π0 + η w θ                                                           2.71%                       2.71%
                                                                                                       [0.19%]                     [0.19%]
                                  p
Std(π)                             (ηw )2 var(z w ) + σπ
                                                       2                                               1.32%                       1.32%
                                                                                                       [0.04%]                     [0.04%]
                                                       Panel C: Additional Implied Moments
E(r $ )                           α + θ χ − (γ + κ) + θ w τ + ηw − 12 δi − 12 σπ
                                                      1                          2
                                                                          
                                                      2
                                                                                           4.24%                                   4.02%
                                                                                           [0.22%]                                 [0.30%]
                                  q                2                         2
Std(r $ )                            χ − 12 (γ + κ) var(z i ) + τ + ηw − 12 δi var(z w )   0.64%                                   0.32%
                                                                                           [0.04%]                                 [0.25%]
                                                 2 ar(z w )
Corr(rt$ , rt$,i )                 τ + ηw − 12 δi Vvar(r)                                  0.60                                    0.33
                                                                                           [0.04]                                  [0.29]
                                  p
Std(∆s)                                       2     i       2
                                    2γθ + 2χ var(z ) + 2σπ + o                             10.91%                                  11.16%
                                                                                           [0.47%]                                 [0.46%]




                                                                      58
                                                Table V: Parameter Estimates

                                                     Stochastic Discount Factor
            α (%)                       χ                            τ                    γ           κ                    δ
             0.76                     0.89                       0.06                    0.04        2.78               0.36
            [0.29]                   [0.56]                     [0.30]                  [0.13]      [1.74]             [0.94]
                                                       State Variable Dynamics
              φ                      θ (%)                      σ (%)                    φw        θw (%)             σ w (%)
             0.91                     0.77                       0.68                    0.99        2.09               0.28
            [0.04]                   [0.19]                     [0.25]                  [0.07]      [2.30]             [0.67]
                          Inflation Dynamics                                                               Heterogeneity
             ηw                     π0 (%)                      σ π (%)                               δh                   δl
             0.25                    −0.31                       0.37                                0.22               0.49
            [0.58]                   [0.08]                     [0.01]                              [0.51]             [0.75]
                                                        Implied SDF Dynamics
        E(Stdt (m))           Std(Stdt (m)) (%)                 E(Corr(mt+1 , mit+1 ))           Std(z) (%)        Std(z w ) (%)
             0.59                     4.21                                       0.98               0.50               1.32


Notes: This table reports the parameter values for the estimated version of the model. The model is defined by the following set of
equations:
                                                           q                     q              q
                                − mit+1     =   α + χzti +   γzti uit+1 + τ ztw + δi ztw uw
                                                                                          t+1 +  κzti ugt+1 ,                       (33)
                                                                     q
                                    i
                                   zt+1     =   (1 − φ)θ + φzti − σ zti uit+1 ,                                                     (34)
                                    w
                                                (1 − φw )θ w + φw ztw − σw ztw uw
                                                                             p
                                   zt+1     =                                     t+1 ,                                             (35)
                                    i
                                   πt+1     =   π0 +   ηw ztw   +   σπ ǫit+1 .                                                      (36)


The 17 parameters were obtained to match the moments in Table IV under the assumption that all countries share the same parameter
values except for δi , which is distributed uniformly on [δh , δl ]. The home country exhibits the average δ, which is equal to 0.36. The
standard errors obtained by bootstrapping are reported between brackets.




                                                                          59
                        Table VI: Excess Returns on Carry Strategies: Simulated Data

                                                        Raw Returns                                 Scaled Returns
                                              Dollar                   HML                    Dollar                  HML
              Mean                              1.86                    6.92                    3.72                   7.13
                                               [1.34]                  [2.62]                  [2.72]                 [2.92]
              Std.Dev.                          7.89                   15.30                   15.50                  15.50
                                               [0.57]                  [0.94]
              Sharpe Ratio                      0.24                    0.46                    0.24                   0.46
                                               [0.18]                  [0.19]                  [0.18]                 [0.19]

Notes: This table reports the mean, standard deviation and Sharpe ratios of two investment strategies using returns simulated from
the model. The first strategy, the Dollar carry, is conditional: it goes long the basket when the average forward discount is positive,
and short the same basket otherwise. The second strategy, the HML carry, corresponds to currency carry trades (long in a basket of
high interest rate currencies, short in a basket of low interest currencies). Currency excess returns are sorted by interest rates into five
                                                                                                                      √
portfolios. Excess returns are annualized (means are multiplied by 12 and standard deviations are multiplied by 12). Sharpe ratios
correspond to the ratio of annualized means to annualized standard deviations. We report (in brackets) standard errors on the means
calculated by simulating 1000 samples of length 336 periods and taking the standard deviations of the means across simulations. Scaled
returns are constructed to match the exogenously set volatility of 15.5%, which corresponds to U.S. equity return volatility in the data.




                                                                    60
              Table VII: Forecasting Basket Returns and Exchange Rates: Simulated Data

                                       Large sample                                             Small sample
                         Excess Returns           Exchange Rates                  Excess Returns           Exchange Rates
                                            2                        2                              2
         Horizon           ψf           R           ζf           R                  ψf          R            ζf          R2
         1                2.63         0.71        1.63         0.27               3.28        1.45         2.28        0.95
                         [11.63]                  [7.20]                          [1.42]                   [0.99]
         2                2.61         1.30        1.61         0.50               3.27        2.70         2.27        1.77
                         [12.61]                  [7.77]                          [1.41]                   [0.98]
         3                2.61         1.81        1.61         0.70               3.28        3.80         2.28        2.52
                         [13.03]                  [8.04]                          [1.41]                   [0.98]
         6                2.54         2.76        1.54         1.03               3.32        6.36         2.32        4.30
                         [12.94]                  [7.84]                          [1.42]                   [0.99]
         12               2.40         3.30        1.40         1.15               3.38        9.22         2.38        6.42
                         [11.59]                  [6.76]                          [1.41]                   [0.99]



Notes: This table reports the slope coefficients and R2 for the regressions of excess returns and exchange rate changes on the average
forward discount implied by the calibrated model. Left panel presents the large sample regression results, generated from a single
simulated sample of length T = 33, 600, with Hansen-Hodrick t-statistics in brackets. Right panel reports small sample results obtained
by averaging over the N = 1, 000 point estimates using simulated samples of length T = 336. The t-statistics in parentheses use standard
deviations of the point estimates across simulations as standard errors.




                                                                  61
                        Table VIII: World Equity Market and the Dollar Carry Trade

                  E(∆dit + πti )        σ(∆dit + πti )      Avg. R2          E(RtW )          σ(RtW )    corr(RtW , Carry $)
     Data              10.85                12.89              7.64            12.17            14.97             0.14
     Model              9.79                12.36              7.91            11.98            9.20              0.10

 Notes:   This table compares the world equity market and dollar carry trade returns in the model and in the data. In each country,
the dividend growth process is simulated as:
                                                                     q               q
                                                                                   g
                                         ∆dit+1 = µD + ψw ztw + σD    zti uit+1 + σD   zti ugt+1 .                                 (37)

                                          g
The model parameters (µD , ψw , σD , and σD ) are calibrated using the dividend series built by Datastream for the following countries:
Australia, Canada, Denmark, Germany, Japan, New Zealand, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, U.K. and U.S. The sample period is
12/1983–6/2010. Matching the cross-country averages of means and standard deviations of the dividend growth series, the average R2
of the regression of each country’s dividend growth on the world-average dividend growth, and the mean of the world stock market index
                                                       g
return leads to µD = 0.01, ψw = −2.00, σD = 0.40, and σD = 0.09. The mean of the monthly, nominal dividend growth rate in country
i is denoted E(∆dit + πti ); its standard deviation is denoted σ(∆dit + πti ). Both the mean and the standard deviation are annualized
                       √
(multiplied by 12 and 12). The table reports the cross-country average of those two moments, denoted by an upper bar. Each
country’s 12-month dividend growth is regressed on the world-average 12-month dividend growth. The world series is obtained as an
equally-weighted average of the country series. The table reports the cross-country average (denoted Avg. R2 ) of all the corresponding
R2s. The table also reports the annualized mean (denoted E(RW                                       W
                                                            t )) and standard deviation (denoted σ(Rt )) of the world equity return,

which is constructed as an equal-weighted portfolio of country indexes with monthly rebalancing, expressed in the U.S. dollars. The last
column of the table reports the correlation between the monthly world equity returns and the dollar carry trade returns.




                                                                  62
Table IX: Contemporaneous Correlations Between Average Forward Discounts and Macroeconomic
and Financial Variables

                   Horizon             IP           P ay       Help          T erm          Def          V IX
                   1                 -0.29         -0.20        -0.12          0.48          0.22         -0.09
                                    [0.05]        [0.06]       [0.06]        [0.04]        [0.06]        [0.05]
                   2                 -0.31         -0.21        -0.14          0.49          0.23         -0.09
                                    [0.05]        [0.06]       [0.06]        [0.04]        [0.06]        [0.05]
                   3                 -0.31         -0.21        -0.15          0.49          0.23         -0.08
                                    [0.05]        [0.06]       [0.06]        [0.04]        [0.06]        [0.05]
                   6                 -0.33         -0.23        -0.20          0.49          0.20         -0.06
                                    [0.05]        [0.06]       [0.06]        [0.04]        [0.06]        [0.05]
                   12                -0.37         -0.28        -0.28          0.48          0.15         -0.05
                                    [0.05]        [0.06]       [0.06]        [0.05]        [0.06]        [0.05]

Notes: This table reports the contemporaneous correlation between average forward discounts of developed countries and different
macroeconomic and financial variables: the 12-month percentage change in industrial production (IP ), the 12-month percentage change
in the total U.S. non-farm payroll (P ay), and the 12-month percentage change of the Help-Wanted index (Help), the default spread
(Def ), the slope of the yield curve (T erm) and the CBOE S&P 500 volatility index (V IX). Standard errors in brackets are computed
using stationary block-bootstrap. Data are monthly. The sample period is 11/1983–6/2010.




                                                                63
      Table X: Forecasting Excess Returns and Exchange Rates with Industrial Production and the Average Forward Discount


                                    Developed Countries                                                            Emerging Countries                                                             All Countries
                     Excess Returns                        Exchange Rates                        Excess Returns                         Exchange Rates                        Excess Returns                        Exchange Rates
 Horizon   ψIP         ψf       W        R2      ζIP         ζf       W        R2      ψIP         ψf       W          R2     ζIP         ζf       W        R2      ψIP        ψf        W        R2      ζIP         ζf       W        R2
 1         -0.54      2.14      7.00     3.40    -0.54      1.14      3.16     1.53    -1.15      -0.20     3.78      2.74    -1.15      -1.20     6.73     4.93    -0.65      1.68      5.00     2.72    -0.65      0.68      2.49     1.41
 HH        [-0.96]   [ 2.06]   [ 1.24]           [-0.96]   [ 1.10]   [29.79]           [-1.95]   [-0.27]   [28.75]            [-1.95]   [-1.57]   [ 7.64]           [-1.23]   [ 1.50]   [10.49]           [-1.23]   [ 0.61]   [49.35]
 VAR       [-1.02]   [ 2.32]   [ 0.00]           [-0.97]   [ 1.26]   [ 0.00]           [-2.39]   [-0.47]   [ 0.00]            [-2.32]   [-2.26]   [ 0.00]           [-1.31]   [ 1.66]   [ 0.00]           [-1.41]   [ 0.70]   [ 0.10]
 2         -0.65      2.09     10.35     6.25    -0.65      1.09      6.71     3.14    -1.17      -0.64     7.10      6.54    -1.17      -1.64     6.64     11.66   -0.74      1.64      7.53     5.24    -0.74      0.64      4.97     3.06
 HH        [-1.34]   [ 2.02]   [ 0.63]           [-1.34]   [ 1.05]   [17.97]           [-2.38]   [-0.80]   [ 9.83]            [-2.38]   [-2.05]   [ 2.40]           [-1.65]   [ 1.52]   [ 3.43]           [-1.65]   [ 0.60]   [25.98]
 VAR       [-1.24]   [ 1.90]   [ 0.00]           [-1.21]   [ 1.02]   [ 0.00]           [-2.35]   [-1.14]   [ 0.00]            [-2.32]   [-2.78]   [ 0.00]           [-1.41]   [ 1.52]   [ 0.00]           [-1.60]   [ 0.55]   [ 0.10]
 3         -0.72      1.99     23.67     8.68    -0.72      0.99     19.77     4.65    -1.28      -0.54     8.01      9.81    -1.28      -1.54     7.59     15.74   -0.82      1.52     10.17     7.57    -0.82      0.52      9.45     4.77
 HH        [-1.66]   [ 1.97]   [ 0.43]           [-1.66]   [ 0.98]   [12.21]           [-2.71]   [-0.68]   [ 3.00]            [-2.71]   [-1.94]   [ 1.33]           [-2.08]   [ 1.53]   [ 1.72]           [-2.08]   [ 0.53]   [13.49]




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                64
 VAR       [-1.28]   [ 1.69]   [ 0.00]           [-1.49]   [ 0.96]   [ 0.00]           [-2.64]   [-0.92]   [ 0.00]            [-2.67]   [-2.36]   [ 0.00]           [-1.76]   [ 1.23]   [ 0.00]           [-1.76]   [ 0.41]   [ 0.00]
 6         -0.87      1.84     38.02     15.58   -0.87      0.84     32.04     9.57    -1.48      -0.25     6.37      18.21   -1.48      -1.25     6.88     24.14   -0.96      1.59     11.94     15.92   -0.96      0.59     10.58     11.21
 HH        [-2.60]   [ 2.03]   [ 0.00]           [-2.60]   [ 0.93]   [ 0.53]           [-3.06]   [-0.35]   [ 0.27]            [-3.06]   [-1.74]   [ 0.50]           [-3.15]   [ 2.06]   [ 0.01]           [-3.15]   [ 0.76]   [ 0.22]
 VAR       [-1.71]   [ 1.78]   [ 0.00]           [-1.85]   [ 0.84]   [ 0.00]           [-3.46]   [-0.46]   [ 0.00]            [-3.24]   [-1.87]   [ 0.00]           [-2.16]   [ 1.37]   [ 0.00]           [-2.36]   [ 0.51]   [ 0.00]
 12        -0.91      1.37     16.75     23.20   -0.91      0.37     13.05     15.16   -1.53      -0.07     7.37      28.40   -1.53      -1.07     7.35     34.51   -1.00      1.14     12.55     24.36   -1.00      0.14     10.25     18.49
 HH        [-3.39]   [ 1.50]   [ 0.00]           [-3.39]   [ 0.41]   [ 0.00]           [-3.06]   [-0.08]   [ 0.24]            [-3.06]   [-1.24]   [ 0.60]           [-3.64]   [ 1.71]   [ 0.00]           [-3.64]   [ 0.21]   [ 0.01]
 VAR       [-2.15]   [ 1.35]   [ 0.00]           [-2.23]   [ 0.40]   [ 0.10]           [-5.27]   [-0.17]   [ 0.00]            [-5.00]   [-1.77]   [ 0.00]           [-2.89]   [ 1.18]   [ 0.00]           [-2.93]   [ 0.13]   [ 0.00]


Notes: This table reports results of forecasting regressions for average excess returns and average exchange rate changes for baskets of currencies at horizons of one, two, three,
six and twelve months. For each basket we report the R2 , and the slope coefficients in the time-series regression of the log currency excess return on the 12-month change in
the U.S. Industrial Production Index (ψIP ) and on the average log forward discount (ψf ), and similarly the slope coefficients ζIP , ζf and the R2 for the regressions of average
exchange rate changes. The t-statistics for the slope coefficients in brackets are computed using the following methods. HH denotes Hansen and Hodrick (1980) standard errors
computed with the number of lags equal to the length of overlap plus one lag. The VAR-based statistics are adjusted for the small sample bias using the stationary bootstrap
distributions of slope coefficients under the null hypothesis of no predictability, estimated by drawing random blocks of residuals of a VAR with the number of lags equal to the
length of overlap plus one lag. Data are monthly, from Barclays and Reuters (available via Datastream). We also report the Wald tests (W ) of the hypothesis that both slope
coefficients are jointly equal to zero; the percentage p-values in brackets are for the χ2 -distribution under the parametric cases (HH) and for the bootstrap distribution of the
F -statistic under V AR. Data are monthly, from Barclays and Reuters (available via Datastream). The returns do not take into account bid-ask spreads. The sample period is
11/1983–6/2010.
                Table XI: Forecasting Returns and Exchange Rates with Realized Consumption Volatility and Inflation Volatility


                                            Developed Countries                                                       Emerging Countries                                                              All Countries
                          Excess Returns                         Exchange Rates                        Excess Returns                       Exchange Rates                        Excess Returns                        Exchange Rates
      Horizon    ψσc       ψσp       W          R2      ζσc       ζσp       W        R2      ψσc        ψσp       W        R2      ζσc        ζσp       W        R2     ψσc        ψσp       W        R2       ζσc       ζσp       W        R2
      1          1.94      0.91      1.94       0.66    1.26      0.75      1.00     0.31    -1.66      1.90      1.82     0.62   -1.55       2.69      2.61     0.82    1.03      1.09      0.86     0.35     0.74      1.21      0.81     0.28
      HH        [ 1.32]   [ 0.42]   [52.58]            [ 0.88]   [ 0.35]   [80.04]           [-1.04]   [ 0.91]   [65.47]          [-0.94]    [ 1.26]   [53.51]          [ 0.78]   [ 0.54]   [80.91]           [ 0.57]   [ 0.60]   [85.86]
      VAR       [ 0.84]   [ 0.30]   [ 0.20]            [ 0.43]   [ 0.30]   [ 0.30]           [-0.80]   [ 0.63]   [ 0.30]          [-0.74]    [ 0.91]   [ 0.30]          [ 0.48]   [ 0.36]   [ 0.30]           [ 0.27]   [ 0.45]   [ 0.30]
      2          2.19      0.91      1.83       1.48    1.52      0.72      1.12     0.76    -1.57      2.12      2.37     1.20   -1.47       2.92      2.87     1.58    1.20      1.18      0.91     0.82     0.92      1.30      0.87     0.67
      HH        [ 1.48]   [ 0.43]   [39.43]            [ 1.06]   [ 0.34]   [69.10]           [-1.02]   [ 1.09]   [59.50]          [-0.90]    [ 1.46]   [44.12]          [ 0.90]   [ 0.63]   [71.60]           [ 0.71]   [ 0.69]   [77.14]
      VAR       [ 1.07]   [ 0.36]   [ 0.00]            [ 0.72]   [ 0.29]   [ 0.30]           [-0.80]   [ 0.79]   [ 0.10]          [-0.81]    [ 1.13]   [ 0.00]          [ 0.73]   [ 0.45]   [ 0.10]           [ 0.51]   [ 0.51]   [ 0.30]
      3          2.38      1.28      2.72       2.65    1.71      1.08      1.89     1.52    -1.49      2.58      3.63     1.93   -1.40       3.38      4.15     2.56    1.36      1.57      1.60     1.63     1.08      1.68      1.65     1.42
      HH        [ 1.56]   [ 0.61]   [24.99]            [ 1.17]   [ 0.51]   [52.34]           [-0.93]   [ 1.38]   [47.94]          [-0.83]    [ 1.77]   [29.20]          [ 0.98]   [ 0.85]   [55.14]           [ 0.81]   [ 0.92]   [59.31]
65




      VAR       [ 1.13]   [ 0.47]   [ 0.00]            [ 0.81]   [ 0.37]   [ 0.10]           [-0.83]   [ 1.02]   [ 0.00]          [-0.75]    [ 1.36]   [ 0.00]          [ 0.75]   [ 0.65]   [ 0.00]           [ 0.52]   [ 0.66]   [ 0.10]
      6          2.95      1.36      4.57       6.73    2.33      1.12      4.46     4.54    -1.08      2.77      7.58     2.59   -0.96       3.59      6.90     3.68    1.86      1.62      2.43     4.23     1.63      1.75      2.77     3.95
      HH        [ 1.96]   [ 0.62]   [ 6.48]            [ 1.61]   [ 0.51]   [19.50]           [-0.68]   [ 1.42]   [50.78]          [-0.58]    [ 1.80]   [30.16]          [ 1.34]   [ 0.84]   [34.89]           [ 1.22]   [ 0.91]   [32.85]
      VAR       [ 1.53]   [ 0.58]   [ 0.00]            [ 1.18]   [ 0.49]   [ 0.00]           [-0.66]   [ 1.17]   [ 0.10]          [-0.55]    [ 1.55]   [ 0.00]          [ 1.02]   [ 0.62]   [ 0.00]           [ 0.85]   [ 0.79]   [ 0.20]
      12         3.75      1.00     18.18      19.57    3.23      0.71     12.99     15.69   -0.35      1.86      3.29     1.45   -0.20       2.81      3.60     3.09    2.67      1.05      8.89     12.45    2.52      1.24      8.28     12.67
      HH        [ 3.19]   [ 0.56]   [ 0.01]            [ 2.79]   [ 0.39]   [ 0.13]           [-0.23]   [ 0.88]   [86.32]          [-0.13]    [ 1.29]   [68.42]          [ 2.38]   [ 0.58]   [ 4.11]           [ 2.33]   [ 0.69]   [ 2.06]
      VAR       [ 1.97]   [ 0.52]   [ 0.00]            [ 1.83]   [ 0.36]   [ 0.00]           [-0.31]   [ 1.26]   [ 0.20]          [-0.15]    [ 1.94]   [ 0.10]          [ 1.71]   [ 0.66]   [ 0.00]           [ 1.62]   [ 0.69]   [ 0.10]


     Notes: This table reports results of forecasting regressions for average excess returns and average exchange rate changes for baskets of currencies at horizons of one, two, three,
     six and twelve months. For each basket we report the R2 , and the slope coefficients in the time-series regression of the log currency excess return on the 36-month standard
     deviations of the monthly growth rates of the U.S. aggregate consumption of nondurables and services (ψσc ) and of the corresponding inflation rate (ψσp ), and similarly the
     slope coefficients ζσc , ζσp and the R2 for the regressions of average exchange rate changes. The t-statistics for the slope coefficients in brackets are computed using the following
     methods. HH denotes Hansen and Hodrick (1980) standard errors computed with the number of lags equal to the length of overlap plus one lag. The VAR-based statistics are
     adjusted for the small sample bias using the stationary bootstrap distributions of slope coefficients under the null hypothesis of no predictability, estimated by drawing random
     blocks of residuals of a VAR with the number of lags equal to the length of overlap plus one lag. Data are monthly, from Barclays and Reuters (available via Datastream). The
     returns do not take into account bid-ask spreads. The sample period is 11/1983–6/2010.
            Figure 1: Average 12-month Forward Discounts on Three Currency Baskets



                  15                                                                Developed Countries
                                                                                    Emerging Countries
                                                                                    All Countries



                  10




                   5




                   0




                  −5




                 −10
                       1985          1990            1995           2000            2005            2010




This figure presents the average 12-month forward discounts on three currency baskets (developing countries, de-
veloped countries, and all countries). The shaded areas are U.S. recessions according to NBER. The sample period
is 11/1983–6/2010.




                                                      66
                                    Figure 2: Carry Trade Excess Return Indexes


                 2000
                                     Dollar Carry
                 1800                Dollar Carry (spot only)
                                     Country−Level FX Carry
                 1600                High−minus−Low Carry
                                     U.S. Equity (benchmark)
                 1400

                 1200

                 1000

                   800

                   600

                   400

                   200

                         1985             1990              1995             2000              2005             2010




The figure plots the total return index for four investment strategies, starting at $100 on November 30, 1983. The dollar carry trade
goes long all one-month forward contracts in a basket of developed country currencies when the average one-month forward discount
for the basket is positive, and short the same contracts otherwise. This strategy is labeled dollar carry. The component of this strategy
that is due to the spot exchange rate changes, i.e., excluding the interest rate differential, is dollar carry (spot only). The individual
country-level carry trade is an equal-weighted average of long-short positions in individual currency one-month forward contracts that
depend on the sign of the bilateral forward discounts; this strategy is labeled Country-Level FX Carry. The third strategy corresponds
to dollar-neutral high-minus-low currency carry trades in one-month forward contracts (High-minus-Low Carry). The fourth strategy,
U.S. Equity (benchmark), is simply long the excess return on the CRSP value-weighted U.S. stock market portfolio. All strategies are
levered to match the volatility of the stock market.




                                                                   67
            Figure 3: Return Predictability and Dollar Carry: Monte Carlo Simulations.


             Panel A. Excess Return Predictability Coefficient, ψ                              Panel B. Excess Return Predictability − R
                                                                                                                                          2
                                                                            f
           1000                                                                      800
                                               Full model
                                               Restricted model, κ=0                 700
            800
                                                                                     600

            600                                                                      500

                                                                                     400
            400                                                                      300

                                                                                     200
            200
                                                                                     100

             0                                                                         0
             −4      −2        0   2       4       6   8       10      12                  0           2            4           6             8



                  Panel C. Dollar Carry Expected Excess Return                                    Panel D. Dollar Carry Sharpe Ratio
            200                                                                      160

                                                                                     140

            150                                                                      120

                                                                                     100

            100                                                                       80

                                                                                      60

             50                                                                       40

                                                                                      20

             0                                                                         0
             −4           −2           0       2           4           6              −0.6      −0.4   −0.2     0       0.2   0.4   0.6       0.8




Histograms of estimated predictive regression coefficients ψf (panel A) and the corresponding R2 (panel B), as well
as average returns and Sharpe ratios on the dollar carry strategies (panels C and D, respectively), simulated 1, 000
times from the model using samples of length T = 336 periods. Each moment is simulated using both the full model
estimates and the estimates obtained under the restriction κ = 0. The vertical lines depict the empirical estimates
of the moments. Data are monthly, from Barclays and Reuters (available via Datastream). The sample period is
11/1983–6/2010.




                                                                                68
                                                      Figure 4: Correlations Between Base Carry and HML Carry Trades



                                               0.7
      Correlation, Base Carry and HML Carry




                                               0.6

                                                                    Australian Dollar
                                               0.5


                                               0.4    NZ Dollar                                      DM/Euro
                                                                                                                             Japanese Yen
                                               0.3
                                                                                                                   Swiss Franc
                                               0.2                             Swedish Krona
                                                                                       Canadian Dollar
                                                                          Norwegian Krone
                                               0.1
                                                                            UK Pound
                                                0                                                US Dollar

                                              −0.1


                                              −0.2
                                                 −4        −3        −2      −1         0        1      2      3         4        5
                                                                  Mean Basket Average Forward Discount

The solid line plots the predicted correlations simulated from the model using samples of length T = 100, 000
periods. Each circle plots the correlation between the returns on a base carry strategy (long or short the basket
of all foreign currencies depending on the sign of the average forward discount, from the perspective of a given
base country) and returns on a global (hml ) carry strategy (long the portfolio of high interest rate currencies, short
portfolio of low interest rate currencies, based on six forward-discount sorted portfolios formed from the perspective
of the same base currency). The vertical error bars depict 95% confidence intervals for these correlations. Data are
monthly, from Barclays and Reuters (available via Datastream). The sample period is 11/1983–6/2010.




                                                                                            69
                                   Countercyclical Currency Risk Premia
                                       - Supplementary Online Appendix -
                                           NOT FOR PUBLICATION


A         Solution for Equity Returns
To find the price-dividend ratio of the dividend claim, we can use the standard log-linear approxi-
mation for the log gross return on the claim,

                                             ei
                                            rt+1 ≈ k0 + k1 xit+1 − xt + ∆dit+1 ,

                      Pi
where xit+1 = log Dt+1
                   i   and the coefficients for the expansion around its mean x̄ are k0 = log (1 + exp (x̄))−
                         t+1
 x̄ exp(x̄)               exp(x̄)
1+exp(x̄)
              and k1 =   1+exp(x̄)
                                   .   We conjecture that the log price-dividend ratio is affine in the state
variables,
                                                  xit = Aie + Bei zti + Cei ztw .

Then the Euler equation
                                                                e
                                                                    
                                                 Et exp mt+1 + rt+1   =1

implies
                                                        
                                  1          i        1 i w
                 0 = −α − χ − (γ + κ) zt − τ − δ zt + ψ0                                                (38)
                                  2                   2
                                                        
                         1 2      1 g2     √       g√
                     +     σD + σD − σD γ − σD κ zti + ψw ztw − Aie − Bei zti − Cei ztw                 (39)
                         2        2
                                i                                                      
                     +k0 + k1 Ae + Bei φi zti + (1 − φi )θi + Cei ((1 − φw )θw + φw ztw )               (40)
                                                                                √ 
                         1      i
                                    2     i √      i      1          
                                                                  i w 2
                     +      k1 Be σ + k1 Be σ γ zt +         k1 Ce σ    + k1 Ce σ δ i ztw .
                                                                               i w
                                                                                                        (41)
                         2                                 2

Consequently, the coefficients can be found by solving the following equations:
                                      
                              1              1 2   1 g2
                     0 = − χ − (γ + κ) + σD      + σD                                                   (42)
                              2              2     2
                            √     g √                 √     1          2
                         +σD γ + σD   κ + Bei k1 φi + σ γ − 1 +   k1 Bei σ ,                            (43)
                                                                2
                             1 i          h        √  i 1            2
                                        i     w   w   i
                     0 = −τ + δ + ψw + Ce k1 φ + σ δ − 1 +   k1 Cei σ w ,
                             2                             2
and
                                       α − ψ0 − k0 + k1 Bei θi (φi − 1) + k1 Cei θw (φw − 1)
                               Aie =                                                         .
                                                              k1 − 1

                                                                1
There are two solutions each for B and C:
                                 v
                                 u
                                 u                            i     √      2
                        √                              k  1 φ   + σ  γ  − 1    +
             k1 φ + k1 σ γ − 1 ± t          2    1                1 2    1 g2    √      g√
                                                                                             
                                    2 (k1 σ) χ − 2 (γ + κ) − 2 σD − 2 σD + σD γ + σD       κ
  Bei = −                                                                                       (44)
                                                   k12 σ 2
                                    r 
                          √                          √          2                        
             k1 φw + σ w δ i − 1 ±       k1 φw + σ w δ i − 1 + 2 (k1 σ w )2 τ − 12 δ i − ψw
  Cei = −                                                                                     . (45)
                                                 k12 σw2

We look for the solutions consistent with the assumption that E (x) = x̄ (since k0 and k1 are
functions of x̄). Only the negative roots satisfy this restriction.


B      Additional Results
This separate appendix reports the following results:

    • Table XII: Summary Statistics — Average Forward Discounts and Average Excess Returns

    • Table XIII: Forecasting Returns and Exchange Rates with the U.S.-specific Component of the
      Average Forward Discount of Developed Countries;

    • Table XIV: Forecasting Returns and Exchange Rates with Real-Time Industrial Production Index
      and the Average Forward Discount;

    • Table XV: Forecasting Returns and Exchange Rates with Industrial Production Residual and the
      Average Forward Discount;

    • Table XVI: Forecasting Excess Returns with Average Forward Discounts - Foreign Investors;

                                        [Table 12 about here.]

                                         [Table 13 about here.]

                                         [Table 14 about here.]

                                         [Table 15 about here.]

                                         [Table 16 about here.]




                                                    2
     Table XII: Summary Statistics – Average Forward Discounts and Average Excess Returns


        Horizon                       1                     2                      3                     6                      12
                                                   Panel A: Developed Countries
                                                          Average Forward Discount, f t→t+1 − st
        M ean                       0.91                  0.90            0.87              0.78                               0.60
        Std.                        2.11                  2.02            1.97              1.88                               1.75
        Auto                        0.89                  0.96            0.97              0.98                               0.98
                                                             Average Spot Change, −∆st→t+1
        M ean                       1.33                  1.32            1.45              1.56                               1.80
        Std.                        8.65                  9.06            9.30              9.92                               9.87
                                                               Average Excess Returns, rxt+1
        M ean                       2.25                  2.23            2.33              2.35                               2.43
        Std.                        8.73                  9.20            9.50             10.27                              10.37
                                                   Panel B: Emerging Countries
                                                           Average Forward Discount, f t→t+1 − st
        M ean                       3.10                   3.04             2.99             2.83                              2.57
        Std.                        3.32                   3.09             2.98             2.76                              2.50
        Auto                        0.84                   0.91             0.93             0.95                              0.96
                                                              Average Spot Change, −∆st→t+1
        M ean                      -3.55                  -3.49            -3.36            -3.30                             -3.14
        Std.                        8.30                   8.76             9.19            10.42                             11.26
                                                                Average Excess Returns, rxt+1
        M ean                      -0.33                  -0.49            -0.46            -0.72                             -0.62
        Std.                        8.44                   8.66             9.05            10.28                             11.17
                                                       Panel C: All Countries
                                                          Average Forward Discount, f t→t+1 − st
        M ean                       1.82                  1.79            1.76              1.66                               1.44
        Std.                        1.74                  1.65            1.62              1.61                               1.57
        Auto                        0.84                  0.93            0.95              0.96                               0.97
                                                             Average Spot Change, −∆st→t+1
        M ean                       0.08                  0.09            0.22              0.29                               0.55
        Std.                        7.65                  8.09            8.36              9.01                               9.03
                                                               Average Excess Returns, rxt+1
        M ean                       1.97                  1.91            1.99              1.95                               2.09
        Std.                        7.79                  8.23            8.55              9.33                               9.55

Notes: This table reports the summary statistics of the currency baskets for developed countries, emerging markets, and all countries in
our sample. We consider different horizons: 1, 2, 3, 6, and 12 months. For each basket j ∈ {Developed, Emerging, All} and each horizon,
                                                                                                                   j
the table presents the annualized means, standard deviations and autocorrelations of average forward discounts f t→t+1 − sjt , average
                       j
spot rate changes −∆st→t+1 , and average log excess returns rxjt+1 , in percentage points. The sample period is 11/1983–6/2010.

                                                                   3
Table XIII: Forecasting Returns and Exchange Rates with the U.S.-specific Component of the
Average Forward Discount of Developed Countries

                          Developed   Countries                   Emerging   Countries                     All Countries
                  Excess Returns      Exchange    Rates   Excess Returns      Exchange   Rates   Excess Returns   Exchange   Rates
      Horizon        ψf       R2         ζf        R2        ψf      R2          ζf       R2       ψf      R2        ζf       R2
      1             2.24     2.23       1.24      0.70      1.64    1.29       1.60      1.26     1.96    2.14     1.27      0.94
      HH          [ 2.17]             [ 1.21]             [ 1.66]             [ 1.58]            [ 2.11]          [ 1.38]
      VAR         [ 2.43]             [ 1.41]             [ 1.99]             [ 1.88]            [ 2.38]          [ 1.63]
      2             2.23     3.66       1.23      1.16      1.61    2.17       1.65      2.23     1.95    3.51     1.29       1.58
      HH          [ 2.07]             [ 1.15]             [ 1.61]             [ 1.56]            [ 2.01]          [ 1.34]
      VAR         [ 2.11]             [ 1.30]             [ 1.58]             [ 1.67]            [ 2.15]          [ 1.41]
      3             2.16     4.63       1.16      1.40      1.51    2.48       1.55      2.55     1.86    4.25     1.21       1.87
      HH          [ 1.98]             [ 1.08]             [ 1.41]             [ 1.38]            [ 1.88]          [ 1.23]
      VAR         [ 1.97]             [ 1.14]             [ 1.44]             [ 1.45]            [ 2.01]          [ 1.36]
      6             2.20     7.60       1.20      2.43      1.51    3.57       1.60      3.89     1.89    6.78     1.25       3.16
      HH          [ 2.05]             [ 1.13]             [ 1.32]             [ 1.31]            [ 1.90]          [ 1.27]
      VAR         [ 2.18]             [ 1.27]             [ 1.47]             [ 1.64]            [ 2.16]          [ 1.41]
      12            1.95     9.96       0.95      2.63      1.80    7.32       1.89      7.93     1.66    8.53     1.03       3.64
      HH          [ 1.88]             [ 0.93]             [ 1.46]             [ 1.42]            [ 1.71]          [ 1.07]
      VAR         [ 1.95]             [ 1.03]             [ 2.26]             [ 2.42]            [ 1.82]          [ 1.26]


 Notes: This table reports results of forecasting regressions for average excess returns and average exchange rate changes for baskets
of currencies at horizons of one, two, three, six and twelve months. For each basket we report the R2 , and the slope coefficient in the
time-series regression of the log currency excess return of a given basket on the U.S.-specific component of average log forward discount
for developed countries (ψf ), and similarly the slope coefficient ζf and the R2 for the regressions of average exchange rate changes. The
U.S. specific component is estimated as the residual from the regression

                                            (f t→t+k − st )   =   α + β∆ log IPt + AF Dres,t ,                                        (46)
                                                   rxt→t+k    =   ψ0 + ψf AF Dres,t + ηt+1 ,                                          (47)


where ∆ log IPt denotes the average of the 12-month changes in IP indices across 28 developed countries (excluding the U.S.). The
t-statistics for the slope coefficients in brackets are computed using the following methods. HH denotes Hansen and Hodrick (1980)
standard errors computed with the number of lags equal to the length of overlap plus one lag. The VAR-based statistics are adjusted
for the small sample bias using the bootstrap distributions of slope coefficients under the null hypothesis of no predictability, estimated
by drawing from the residuals of a VAR with the number of lags equal to the length of overlap plus one lag. Data are monthly,
from Barclays and Reuters (available via Datastream). The returns do not take into account bid-ask spreads. The sample period is
11/1983–6/2010.




                                                                    4
    Table XIV: Forecasting Excess Returns and Exchange Rates with Real-Time Industrial Production Index and the Average Forward
    Discount

                                           Developed Countries                                                       Emerging Countries                                                              All Countries
                         Excess Returns                         Exchange Rates                        Excess Returns                       Exchange Rates                        Excess Returns                        Exchange Rates
     Horizon   ψIP         ψf       W          R2     ζIP         ζf       W        R2      ψIP         ψf       W        R2     ζIP         ζf       W        R2      ψIP         ψf       W         R2     ζIP          ζf       W        R2
     1          -0.41     1.79     13.49      4.57    -0.41      0.79      8.35     2.73    -0.22      -0.34     1.83     0.78   -0.22      -1.34     4.95     3.01    -0.35      1.55      7.15      3.40   -0.35       0.55      4.68     2.10
     HH        [-2.06]   [ 1.81]   [ 0.06]            [-2.06]   [ 0.80]   [ 3.63]           [-1.25]   [-0.44]   [69.88]          [-1.25]   [-1.73]   [22.56]           [-2.04]   [ 1.42]   [ 1.52]           [-2.04]    [ 0.51]   [12.38]
     VAR       [-1.92]   [ 1.88]   [ 0.00]            [-1.96]   [ 0.83]   [ 0.00]           [-1.13]   [-0.66]   [ 0.20]          [-1.18]   [-2.52]   [ 0.00]           [-1.93]   [ 1.51]   [ 0.00]           [-2.00]    [ 0.60]   [ 0.00]
     2          -0.41     1.77     12.17      7.93    -0.41      0.77      8.10     4.88    -0.22      -0.80     1.79     2.68   -0.22      -1.80     3.11     8.00    -0.35      1.56      9.60      5.91   -0.35       0.56      7.04     3.75
     HH        [-2.26]   [ 1.74]   [ 0.02]            [-2.26]   [ 0.76]   [ 1.60]           [-1.34]   [-0.95]   [58.50]          [-1.34]   [-2.13]   [12.66]           [-2.25]   [ 1.48]   [ 0.59]           [-2.25]    [ 0.53]   [ 6.56]
     VAR       [-2.04]   [ 1.60]   [ 0.00]            [-2.15]   [ 0.72]   [ 0.00]           [-1.16]   [-1.44]   [ 0.00]          [-1.16]   [-3.00]   [ 0.00]           [-1.97]   [ 1.41]   [ 0.00]           [-2.06]    [ 0.51]   [ 0.20]
     3          -0.40     1.72     11.14      10.36   -0.40      0.72      7.44     6.40    -0.24      -0.71     1.84     3.40   -0.24      -1.71     3.14     9.75    -0.34      1.52      9.27      7.74   -0.34       0.52      6.75     4.95
     HH        [-2.23]   [ 1.73]   [ 0.07]            [-2.23]   [ 0.73]   [ 3.04]           [-1.41]   [-0.84]   [58.01]          [-1.41]   [-2.03]   [15.47]           [-2.24]   [ 1.52]   [ 1.17]           [-2.24]    [ 0.52]   [ 9.26]
     VAR
5




               [-2.03]   [ 1.64]   [ 0.00]            [-1.96]   [ 0.71]   [ 0.10]           [-1.29]   [-1.25]   [ 0.00]          [-1.23]   [-2.84]   [ 0.00]           [-1.97]   [ 1.24]   [ 0.00]           [-1.98]    [ 0.40]   [ 0.10]
     6          -0.32     1.82      8.56      14.47   -0.32      0.82      5.16     8.38    -0.26      -0.47     1.65     4.46   -0.26      -1.47     3.15     11.39   -0.28      1.80      7.50     12.04   -0.28       0.80      4.71     7.11
     HH        [-1.84]   [ 1.97]   [ 0.29]            [-1.84]   [ 0.89]   [10.44]           [-1.54]   [-0.58]   [54.78]          [-1.54]   [-1.82]   [21.54]           [-1.94]   [ 2.16]   [ 1.03]           [-1.94]    [ 0.96]   [16.59]
     VAR       [-1.69]   [ 1.70]   [ 0.00]            [-1.77]   [ 0.78]   [ 0.00]           [-1.54]   [-0.86]   [ 0.20]          [-1.47]   [-2.22]   [ 0.00]           [-1.73]   [ 1.64]   [ 0.00]           [-1.79]    [ 0.74]   [ 0.00]
     12         -0.27     1.51      6.66      19.04   -0.27      0.51      3.89     10.57   -0.29      -0.29     4.06     7.94   -0.29      -1.29     4.03     15.79   -0.26      1.40      6.95     15.90   -0.26       0.40      4.01     9.38
     HH        [-1.81]   [ 1.63]   [ 0.41]            [-1.81]   [ 0.55]   [13.13]           [-1.91]   [-0.32]   [28.94]          [-1.91]   [-1.42]   [23.25]           [-2.13]   [ 1.96]   [ 0.49]           [-2.13]    [ 0.56]   [12.76]
     VAR       [-1.85]   [ 1.48]   [ 0.00]            [-1.79]   [ 0.65]   [ 0.00]           [-2.33]   [-0.47]   [ 0.00]          [-2.41]   [-2.14]   [ 0.00]           [-2.02]   [ 1.40]   [ 0.00]           [-1.89]    [ 0.40]   [ 0.00]


    Notes: This table reports results of forecasting regressions for average excess returns and average exchange rate changes for baskets of currencies at horizons of one, two, three,
    six and twelve months. For each basket we report the R2 , and the slope coefficients in the time-series regression of the log currency excess return on the 12-month change in
    the U.S. Industrial Production Index (ψIP ) and on the average log forward discount (ψf ), and similarly the slope coefficients ζIP , ζf and the R2 for the regressions of average
    exchange rate changes. The Industrial Production Index is based on the vintage initial release (i.e., real-time) data, available from the Federal Reserve Board. The t-statistics for
    the slope coefficients in brackets are computed using the following methods. HH denotes Hansen and Hodrick (1980) standard errors computed with the number of lags equal to
    the length of overlap plus one lag. The VAR-based statistics are adjusted for the small sample bias using the bootstrap distributions of slope coefficients under the null hypothesis
    of no predictability, estimated by drawing from the residuals of a VAR with the number of lags equal to the length of overlap plus one lag. We also report the Wald tests (W )
    of the hypothesis that both slope coefficients are jointly equal to zero; the percentage p-values in brackets are for the χ2 -distribution under the parametric cases (N W ) and for
    the bootstrap distribution of the F statistic under V AR. Data are monthly, from Barclays and Reuters (available via Datastream). The returns do not take into account bid-ask
    spreads. The sample period is 11/1983–6/2010.
     Table XV: Forecasting Returns and Exchange Rates with Industrial Production Residual and the Average Forward Discount


                                       Developed Countries                                                          Emerging Countries                                                             All Countries
                     Excess Returns                         Exchange Rates                        Excess Returns                         Exchange Rates                        Excess Returns                        Exchange Rates
 Horizon   ψIP         ψf       W          R2     ζIP         ζf       W        R2      ψIP        ψf        W         R2      ζIP         ζf       W        R2      ψIP         ψf       W        R2      ζIP         ζf       W        R2
 1         -0.22      2.42      5.44      2.94    -0.22      1.42      1.97     1.07    -0.68      1.97      4.98      2.52    -1.00      2.15      5.31     3.28    -0.27      2.16      5.14     2.99    -0.31      1.52      2.71     1.59
 HH        [-0.25]   [ 2.48]   [ 3.88]            [-0.25]   [ 1.45]   [51.45]           [-0.70]   [ 2.18]   [16.58]            [-1.02]   [ 2.30]   [12.49]           [-0.34]   [ 2.48]   [ 4.45]           [-0.39]   [ 1.75]   [32.00]
 VAR       [-0.32]   [ 2.62]   [ 0.00]            [-0.35]   [ 1.55]   [ 0.10]           [-0.99]   [ 2.18]   [ 0.10]            [-1.36]   [ 2.28]   [ 0.00]           [-0.44]   [ 2.63]   [ 0.10]           [-0.45]   [ 1.84]   [ 0.00]
 2         -0.68      2.39      6.75      5.53    -0.68      1.39      3.09     2.40    -0.91      1.95      3.13      5.03    -1.22      2.16      3.22     6.50    -0.65      2.15      5.94     5.68    -0.69      1.54      3.73     3.44
 HH        [-0.94]   [ 2.44]   [ 1.53]            [-0.94]   [ 1.42]   [30.90]           [-1.18]   [ 2.25]   [14.66]            [-1.54]   [ 2.35]   [ 9.68]           [-0.98]   [ 2.44]   [ 2.27]           [-1.03]   [ 1.73]   [17.26]
 VAR       [-0.97]   [ 2.38]   [ 0.00]            [-0.99]   [ 1.42]   [ 0.10]           [-1.31]   [ 1.85]   [ 0.00]            [-1.70]   [ 1.98]   [ 0.00]           [-0.97]   [ 2.33]   [ 0.10]           [-1.16]   [ 1.63]   [ 0.00]
 3         -0.85      2.32      6.21      7.67    -0.85      1.32      3.29     3.59    -1.16      1.85      3.10      7.31    -1.45      2.06      3.37     9.29    -0.80      2.08      5.31     7.74    -0.83      1.47      3.82     4.94
 HH        [-1.35]   [ 2.41]   [ 1.19]            [-1.35]   [ 1.37]   [23.34]           [-1.50]   [ 2.08]   [21.34]            [-1.82]   [ 2.18]   [13.45]           [-1.35]   [ 2.38]   [ 2.46]           [-1.42]   [ 1.67]   [14.22]




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 6
 VAR       [-1.12]   [ 2.13]   [ 0.00]            [-1.26]   [ 1.34]   [ 0.00]           [-1.67]   [ 1.75]   [ 0.00]            [-2.18]   [ 1.92]   [ 0.00]           [-1.23]   [ 2.17]   [ 0.00]           [-1.33]   [ 1.56]   [ 0.00]
 6         -1.24      2.19      8.02      14.47   -1.24      1.19      5.27     8.38    -1.56      1.70      3.63      13.65   -1.82      1.91      4.09     16.64   -1.16      1.96      6.19     14.39   -1.19      1.36      5.26     10.63
 HH        [-2.24]   [ 2.58]   [ 0.06]            [-2.24]   [ 1.40]   [ 3.52]           [-1.91]   [ 1.98]   [20.99]            [-2.14]   [ 2.07]   [11.81]           [-2.10]   [ 2.51]   [ 0.55]           [-2.19]   [ 1.72]   [ 2.88]
 VAR       [-1.81]   [ 2.07]   [ 0.00]            [-1.84]   [ 1.13]   [ 0.00]           [-2.40]   [ 1.62]   [ 0.00]            [-2.53]   [ 1.73]   [ 0.00]           [-1.93]   [ 2.05]   [ 0.00]           [-1.99]   [ 1.44]   [ 0.00]
 12        -1.46      1.70     29.77      24.60   -1.46      0.70     24.89     16.71   -1.65      1.80      7.71      25.44   -1.87      2.01      9.92     29.51   -1.36      1.51     16.77     24.00   -1.40      0.92     18.80     19.77
 HH        [-4.13]   [ 2.07]   [ 0.00]            [-4.13]   [ 0.86]   [ 0.00]           [-2.76]   [ 2.16]   [ 2.31]            [-3.10]   [ 2.18]   [ 0.39]           [-3.65]   [ 2.09]   [ 0.00]           [-3.91]   [ 1.22]   [ 0.00]
 VAR       [-2.38]   [ 1.75]   [ 0.00]            [-2.39]   [ 0.75]   [ 0.00]           [-3.48]   [ 2.16]   [ 0.10]            [-3.89]   [ 2.31]   [ 0.00]           [-2.49]   [ 1.66]   [ 0.00]           [-2.60]   [ 1.14]   [ 0.00]


Notes: This table reports results of forecasting regressions for average excess returns and average exchange rate changes for baskets of currencies at horizons of one, two, three,
six and twelve months. For each basket we report the R2 , and the slope coefficients in the time-series regression of the log currency excess return on the 12-month change in the
U.S. Industrial Production Index orthogonalized with respect to the world average Industrial Production (ψIP ) and on the average log forward discount (ψf ), and similarly the
slope coefficients ζIP , ζf and the R2 for the regressions of average exchange rate changes. The t-statistics for the slope coefficients in brackets are computed using the following
methods. HH denotes Hansen and Hodrick (1980) standard errors computed with the number of lags equal to the length of overlap plus one lag. The VAR-based statistics are
adjusted for the small sample bias using the bootstrap distributions of slope coefficients under the null hypothesis of no predictability, estimated by drawing from the residuals of
a VAR with the number of lags equal to the length of overlap plus one lag. Data are monthly, from Barclays and Reuters (available via Datastream). The returns do not take
into account bid-ask spreads. The sample period is 11/1983–6/2010.
                            Table XVI: Forecasting Excess Returns with Average Forward Discounts — Foreign Investors

      k            κf        R2           ζf      R2         κf        R2         ζf         R2         κf        R2         ζf        R2         κf        R2           ζf      R2
                                   UK                                    Canada                                  Switzerland                                     Japan

      1           2.63      2.57         1.63     1.00      3.38       2.44      2.38       1.23       0.88      0.50      -0.12      0.01       1.34       0.27         0.34    0.02
      HH         [ 2.31]                [ 1.43]            [ 2.65]              [ 1.87]               [ 1.32]              [-0.17]              [ 0.93]              [ 0.24]
      VAR        [ 2.82]                [ 1.66]            [ 2.47]              [ 1.74]               [ 1.21]              [-0.22]              [ 0.81]              [ 0.21]
      2           2.56      3.59         1.56     1.37      3.45       4.16      2.45       2.14       1.26      1.77       0.26      0.08       0.85       0.13      -0.15      0.00
      HH         [ 2.71]                [ 1.66]            [ 2.46]              [ 1.75]               [ 1.41]              [ 0.29]              [ 0.45]              [-0.08]
      VAR        [ 2.40]                [ 1.47]            [ 2.45]              [ 1.67]               [ 1.29]              [ 0.22]              [ 0.45]              [-0.04]
      3           2.22      3.66         1.22     1.14      2.97       4.04      1.97       1.82       1.08      1.71       0.08      0.01       0.40       0.04      -0.60      0.08
      HH         [ 2.45]                [ 1.35]            [ 1.91]              [ 1.26]               [ 1.11]              [ 0.08]              [ 0.20]              [-0.30]
7




      VAR        [ 1.88]                [ 1.03]            [ 2.04]              [ 1.32]               [ 0.90]              [-0.02]              [ 0.27]              [-0.29]
      6           1.78      3.95         0.78     0.78      2.47       4.26      1.47       1.55       0.93      2.16      -0.07      0.01       0.74       0.20      -0.26      0.02
      HH         [ 1.79]                [ 0.78]            [ 1.71]              [ 1.02]               [ 0.86]              [-0.07]              [ 0.34]              [-0.12]
      VAR        [ 1.41]                [ 0.59]            [ 1.53]              [ 1.02]               [ 0.65]              [-0.20]              [ 0.43]              [-0.06]
      12          1.80      6.37         0.80     1.33      2.65       8.23      1.65       3.36       1.16      5.72       0.16      0.11       1.58       1.40         0.58    0.19
      HH         [ 2.41]                [ 1.07]            [ 2.79]              [ 1.74]               [ 0.93]              [ 0.13]              [ 0.71]              [ 0.26]
      VAR        [ 1.33]                [ 0.64]            [ 1.64]              [ 1.05]               [ 0.85]              [ 0.12]              [ 0.81]              [ 0.31]


    Notes: This table reports the constant, slope coefficient and R2 in predictability tests of currency excess returns. We take the perspective of foreign investors in the UK, Canada,
    Switzerland and Japan in forming the baskets of currencies. For each home country, we use the corresponding Average Forward Discount formed from the perspective of the
    giving country’s investor. The t-statistics for the slope coefficients in brackets are computed using the following methods. HH denotes Hansen and Hodrick (1980) standard errors
    computed with the number of lags equal to the length of overlap plus one lag. The VAR-based statistics are adjusted for the small sample bias using the bootstrap distributions
    of slope coefficients under the null hypothesis of no predictability, estimated by drawing from the residuals of a VAR with the number of lags equal to the length of overlap plus
    one lag.
