                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       GIVE CREDIT WHERE CREDIT IS DUE:
              TRACING VALUE ADDED IN GLOBAL PRODUCTION CHAINS

                                            Robert Koopman
                                            William Powers
                                               Zhi Wang
                                             Shang-Jin Wei

                                         Working Paper 16426
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w16426


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2010




The views in the paper are solely those of the authors and may not reflect the views of the USITC,
its Commissioners, or of any other organization that the authors are affiliated with. The authors thank
participants of OECD-World Bank workshop "New metrics for global value chain analysis" in Paris,
IEFS China 2010 Conference in Beijing, and seminar at Purdue University for helpful comments and
suggestions. The authors are particularly grateful for the constructive discussion with Dr. Kei-Mu
Yi at the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia in developing the two-country cases and the relationship
between our new measures of vertical specialization and the original HIY measures. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Robert Koopman, William Powers, Zhi Wang, and Shang-Jin Wei. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Give Credit Where Credit Is Due: Tracing Value Added in Global Production Chains
Robert Koopman, William Powers, Zhi Wang, and Shang-Jin Wei
NBER Working Paper No. 16426
September 2010, Revised September 2011
JEL No. F1,F2

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper provides both a conceptual framework for decomposing a country’s gross exports into value-added
components by source and a new bilateral database on value-added trade. Our parsimonious framework
integrates all previous measures of vertical specialization and value-added trade in the literature. To
illustrate the potential of the decomposition, we present a number of applications including re-computing
revealed comparative advantages and constructing an index to describe whether a country-sector is
likely in the upstream or downstream of global production chains.


Robert Koopman                                      Zhi Wang
Research Division                                   Research Division
Office of Economics                                 Office of Economics
US International Trade Commission                   US International Trade Commission
500 E Street SW                                     500 E Street SW
Washington, DC 20436                                Washington, DC 20436
Robert.Koopman@usitc.gov                            zhi.wang@usitc.gov

William Powers                                      Shang-Jin Wei
Research Division                                   Graduate School of Business
Office of Economics                                 Columbia University
US International Trade Commission                   Uris Hall 619
500 E Street SW                                     3022 Broadway
Washington, DC 20436                                New York, NY 10027-6902
william.powers@usitc.gov                            and NBER
                                                    shangjin.wei@columbia.edu
1. Introduction

           As different stages of production are now regularly performed in different countries,
intermediate inputs cross borders multiple times. As a result, traditional statistics on trade values
become increasingly less reliable as a gauge of value contributed by any particular country. This
paper integrates and generalizes the many attempts in the literature at tracing value added by
country in international trade. We provide a conceptual framework that is more comprehensive
than other measures in the literature. By design, this is an accounting exercise, and does not
directly examine the causes and the consequences of global production chains. However, an
accurate accounting of value added by source country is a necessary step toward a better
understanding of all these issues.
           Supply chains can be described as a system of value-added sources and destinations
within a globally integrated production network. Within a supply chain, each producer purchases
inputs and then adds value, which is included in the cost of the next stage of production. At each
stage in the process, as goods cross an international border, the value-added trade flow is equal to
the value added paid to the factors of production in the exporting country. However, as all
official trade statistics are measured in gross terms, which include both intermediate inputs and
final products, they “double count” the value of intermediate goods that cross international
borders more than once. The conceptual and empirical shortcomings of gross trade statistics, as
well as their inconsistency with the System of National Accounts (SNA) accounting standards,
have been well recognized by the economics profession.1 The framework developed in this paper
provides a complete decomposition of gross exports into its value-added components, thus
making it possible to connect trade statistics with SNA standards.
           Case studies of global value chains in industries such as electronics, apparel, and motor
vehicles have provided detailed examples of the discrepancy between gross and value-added
trade. According to a commonly cited study of the Apple iPod (Dedrick, Kraemer, and Linden,
2008), while the Chinese factory gate price of an assembled iPod is $144, only $4 constitutes
Chinese value added. Other case studies of specific products show similar discrepancies. Case
studies, while useful, do not offer a comprehensive description of an economy’s participation in
cross-border production chains. Several researchers have examined the issue of vertical
specialization on a systematic basis, including the pioneering effort of Hummels, Ishii, and Yi
1
    See, for example, Leamer et al. (2006) and Grossman and Rossi-Hasberg (2008).

                                                         2
(2001). Some measures, such as those proposed by HIY, turn out to be accurate only under
special assumptions that do not hold in general. Others, to be reviewed in detail later, capture
pieces of the value added embedded in a country’s exports. This paper aims to provide the first
unified framework that integrates the older literature on vertical specialization with the newer
literature on value added trade. It completely decomposes gross exports and connects official
gross statistics to value-added measures of trade. The framework distributes all value-added in a
country’s exports to its original sources, and it expresses individual sources and destinations of
value added at either the country-wide or industry average level. Despite the breadth of the
framework, it is also quite parsimonious, expressing major value-added sources in gross exports
as the product of only three matrices.
        Several previous papers have investigated source of value-added in Asian supply chains
using the Asian input-output (AIO) tables produced by the Institute of Development Economies
in Japan. Such papers include Koopman, Wang, and Wei (2009), Pula and Peltonen (2011),
Wang, Powers, and Wei (2009), and WTO and IDE-JETRO (2011). However, these studies’
reliance on the AIO tables precludes them from tracking value-added to and from countries
outside of Asia, with the exception of flows to and from the United States.
        Truly global analyses have become possible only recently, with the advent of global
Inter-Country Input-Output (ICIO) tables based on the GTAP database. Such tables provide
globally consistent bilateral trade flows, and allow comparison of production networks in
different regions. Though usefully global in scope, the GTAP database does not separate
imported intermediate and final goods in bilateral trade flows, so improvement has to be made2.
        This paper is also related to Daudin, Rifflart, and Schweisguth (2010) and Johnson and
Noguera (2010). They analyze global value-added trade flows using an estimated ICIO table
based on the GTAP database, in which they proportionally allocate gross trade flows into
intermediate and final goods and distributing across users. Each shows that countries and sectors
differ widely in their ratio of value added to gross trade. This paper expands upon their analysis
in the following five aspects:



2
  Efforts sponsored by European commission are underway to produce better and more up-to-date global ICIO
tables, called the World Input-Output Database (WIOD), based on a compilation of single-country IO tables and
detailed bilateral trade statistics for the years 1995-2006. Once the WIOD is completed, the framework in this paper
can be applied to generate a time series decomposition of gross trade flows into their value added components.

                                                         3
        First, our unified and transparent framework incorporates all measures of vertical and
value-added trade in the existing literature. For example, our framework decomposes a country’s
exports into five broad value added components. Both HIY’s two original measures of vertical
specialization and newer measures of value-added trade are components of our decomposition or
their linear combinations. However, some measures have to be modified from their original
definition in order to correctly specify sources of value added in a multi-country framework.
        Second, by completely decomposing each country's gross exports into value-added
components, we can establish a formal and precise relationship between value-added measures
of trade and official trade statistics. We clearly show the similarities and differences between
value-added trade measures and domestic content measures for the first time in the literature.
Value-added trade is the value generated by one country but absorbed by another country, while
the domestic content of exports depends only on where value is produced, not where and how
that value is used.

        Third, with the value added decomposition of gross exports, we can construct a
quantitative index to assess whether a particular sector in a country is likely located in the
upstream or downstream of the global production chain.
        Fourth, our estimated global ICIO table better captures the international source and use of
intermediate goods than in previous databases in two ways. By estimating intermediate goods in
bilateral trade using the end-use classification (intermediate or final) of detailed import statistics,
rather than the conventional proportionality approach that assumes the same split of imports
between intermediate usage and final demands as in total absorption, we generate a global ICIO
table that is better than the previous databases.3 In addition, we estimate separate input-output
coefficients for processing trade in China and Mexico, the two major users of such regimes in the
world.4 While other studies have used a similar correction for Chinese exports, the new Mexican
IO table provides improved accuracy in estimates of NAFTA trade flows by distinguishing
domestic and Maquiladora production.




3
  Feenstra and Jensen (2009) use a similar approach to separate final goods from intermediates in U.S. imports. They
concord HS imports to end-use categories provided by the BEA. We concord HS imports to UN Broad Economic
Categories, which are more applicable to international trade flows.
4
  Processing trade regimes can foster exports that have dramatically higher imported intermediate content than
domestic use in some countries.

                                                         4
       Finally, we report a number of applications of our framework and database to illustrate
their potential to reshape our understanding of global trade. For example, if one uses the official
trade data to compute revealed comparative advantage, the business services sector is a
comparative advantage sector for India. In contrast, if one uses value added in exports instead,
the same sector becomes a revealed comparative disadvantage sector for India. As another
example, the value added decomposition shows that a significant portion of China’s trade surplus
to the United States in gross trade terms reflects indirect value added exports that China does on
behalf of Japan, Korea and Taiwan. While such stories have been understood in qualitative
terms, our framework offers to a way to quantify these effects.

       This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the conceptual framework for
decomposing gross trade into its value added components. Section 3 discusses computational
issues. In particular, we show how the required inter-country IO model can be estimated from
currently available data sources. Section 4 presents a number of applications that help to
illustrate how the decomposition may alter our understanding of issues in international trade and
in open-economy macroeconomics. Section 5 concludes.


2. Decomposing Gross Trade into Value Added Components: Concepts and Measurement


2.1 Concepts
       With modern international production chains, value added originates in many locations.
While detailing these sources and measuring their contribution to exports are important for a
number of research and policy questions, existing measures are unsatisfactory. As noted, HIY
provided the first empirical measures of participation in vertically specialized trade. However,
their measure of foreign value in exports is valid only in a special case; they did not
mathematically define their measure of indirect value-added exports through third countries; and
these two measures do not capture all sources of value added in gross exports.
       Two key assumptions are needed for the HIY’s measure to accurately reflect foreign
contents in exports. First, all imported intermediate inputs must contain 100% foreign value
added and no more than one country can export intermediates. In the HIY model, a country
cannot import intermediate inputs, add value, and then export semi-finished good to another
country to produce final goods. Nor can a country receive intermediate imports that embody its

                                                5
own value added, returned after processing abroad. Second, the intensity in the use of imported
inputs is assumed to be the same whether goods are produced for export or for domestic final
demand. This assumption is violated when processing exports raise the imported intermediate
content of exports relative to domestic use, especially in China and Mexico. Therefore, HIY’s
measures do not hold generally with the multi-country, back-and-forth nature of current global
production networks.
        Section 2.2 illustrates how an ICIO model can allocate all the value added to each
participating country using a block matrix formulation.This approach provides substantial clarity
relative to other approaches in the literature, as we show below. To present the major concepts of
our decomposition of gross exports by sources of value-added and show how they are related to
or differ from earlier measuresin the literature, we start with a two-country case.


2.2 Two-country case
        Assume a two-country (home and foreign) world, in which each country produces goods
in N differentiated tradable sectors. Goods in each sector can be consumed directly or used as
intermediate inputs, and each country exports both intermediate and final goods to the other.
        All gross output produced by country r must be used as an intermediate good or a final
good at home or abroad, or
X r  Arr X r  Ars X s  Yrr  Yrs ,           r,s = 1,2                                 (1)

Where Xr is the N×1 gross output vector of country r, Yrs is the N×1 final demand vector that
gives demand in country s for final goods produced in r, and Ars is the N×N IO coefficient matrix,
giving intermediate use in s of goods produced in r. The two-country production and trade
system can be written as an ICIO model in block matrix notation
 X 1   A11      A12   X 1   Y11  Y12 
X   A                          
                   A22   X 2  Y21  Y22 
                                                   ,                                      (2)
 2   21
and rearranging,
                                     1
 X 1   I  A11         A12            Y11  Y12   B11   B12   Y1 
X     A            I  A22         Y  Y    B        B22  Y2 
                                                                               .          (3)
 2         21                           21     22   21
where Bsr denotes the N×N block Leontief inverse matrix, which is the total requirement matrix
that gives the amount of gross output in producing country s required for a one-unit increase in


                                                            6
final demand in country r. Yr is a 2N×1 vector that gives the global use of r’s final goods. This
system can be expressed succinctly as:
X  ( I  A) 1 Y  BY ,                                                                 (4)
Where X and Y are 2N×1 vectors, and A and B are 2N×2N matrices.
        Having defined the Leontief inverse matrix, we turn to measures of domestic and foreign
contents, first for production, and then applied to trade. Let Vs be the 1×N direct value-added
coefficient vector. Each element of Vs gives the share of direct domestic value added in total
output. This is equal to one minus the intermediate input share from all countries (including
domestically produced intermediates):
Vr  u ( I  s Asr ) ,                                                                  (5)

where u is a 1×N unity vector. To be consistent with the multiple-country discussion below, we
also define V, the 2×2N matrix of direct domestic value added for both countries,
   V 0 
V  1    .                                                                             (6)
    0 V2 
        While variations of this framework have been used in a number of recent studies, none
uses the block matrix inverse as their mathematical tool and works out a complete tracing of all
sources of value added. We turn to this task next.
        Combining these direct value-added shares with the Leontief inverse matrices produces
the 2×2N value-added share (VAS) matrix, our basic measure of value-added shares by source.
           V B    V1 B12 
VAS  VB   1 11         .                                                             (7)
           V2 B21 V2 B22 
Within VAS, each column of V1B11 denotes domestic value-added share of domestically
produced products in a particular sector at home. Similarly, the columns of V2B21 denote the
share of country 2’s value-added in these same goods. Each of the first N columns in the VAS
matrix includes all value added, domestic and foreign, needed to produce one additional unit of
domestic products at home. The second N columns present value-added shares for production in
country 2. Because all value added must be either domestic or foreign, the sum along each
column is unity:
V1B11  V2 B21  V1B12  V2 B22  u .                                                    (8)



                                                7
        The VAS matrix contains all the needed information to separate domestic and imported
content shares in each country's production and trade at the sector level. Either final goods
exports or total exports could be used as weights to calculate these shares when aggregation is
needed. To compare with other measures of vertical specialization in the literature and to link our
measures with official trade statistics, we use gross exports.5 Let Ers be the N×1 vector of gross
exports from r to s. For consistency with the multi-country analysis below, we also define
E r *   s  r E rs   s ( Ars X s  Yrs ) , r,s = 1,2                                                   (9)

    E       0 
E   1*         , and                                                                                    (10)
    0      E2* 

     diag ( E1* )     0         
Eˆ  
                   diag ( E 2* )
                                   ,                                                                       (11)
         0

Where E is a 2N×2 matrix and Ê is a 2N×2N diagonal matrix.
        The combination of the value-added share matrix and an export matrix as weights
produces a 2×2N matrix VAS_ Ê , our sectoral measure of value-added share by source country:

                V B Eˆ V1 B12 Eˆ 2 
VAS_Ê  VBEˆ   1 11 1
                                  ˆ 
                                        ,                                                                  (12)
                        ˆ
                V2 B21 E1 V2 B22 E 2 
        The elements of this matrix provide disaggregated value added by source in gross exports
for each sector. It is important to note that this measure captures all upstream sectors’
contributions to value added in a specific sector’s exports. For example, in the electronics sector,
VAS_ Ê includes value added in the electronics sector itself as well as value added in inputs
from all other sectors (such as glass, rubber, transportation, and design) used to produce
electronics for exports by the source country. Such an approach aligns well with case studies of
supply chains of specific sectors and products, as in the iPod example cited earlier. As an
alternative, one could measure the value added produced by the factors of production employed
in a specific sector and then embodied in gross exports of all downstream sectors. This would
include, for example, the value added by the electronics sector and then incorporated into gross


5
 The application to intermediates exports presents no problems here, because the content share in a product depends
only on where it is produced. In other words, we maintain a basic assumption in the input-output literature that the
value-added shares in intermediate goods are the same as in final goods within the same sector in each country.


                                                           8
exports of computers, consumer appliances, and automobiles. This approach is closely related to
the literature on factor contents of trade.
         Domestic/foreign content of exports and value-added exports, while related, are different
concepts. Although both concepts measure the value generated by factors employed in the
producing country, domestic content of exports is independent of where that value is used. By
contrast, value-added trade depends on how a country’s exports are used by importers. It is the
value-added generated by a country but absorbed by another country. Therefore, equation (12)
defines related measures of domestic/foreign contents in sector level gross exports, not sector
level value-added exports. Because the later depends on where the value-added is absorbed, it
has to be defined in terms of final demand, as the following matrix after zeroing its diagonal:
            Vˆ 0   B11            B12  Y11      Y12 
VAT  VˆBY   1
                  ˆ                 B 22  Y21   Y22                                                  (13)
              0 V2   B 21
Where Ysr is an N by 1 vector and Y is 2N by 2 final demand matrix. Vˆr is a N by N diagonal
matrix with direct value-added coefficients along the diagonal,has different dimension with V
                                                      
matrix defined earlier. The resulting VAT is a 2N by 2 value-added production matrix, its
diagonal elements give each country's production of value-added absorbed by itself while its off
diagonal elements constitute the 2N by 2 bilateral value-added trade matrix. Because the value-
                                                                   
added trade matrix is the off-diagonal elements of VAT , it excludes value-added produced in
the home country that returns home after processing abroad6.
         To illustrate these two major concepts and their relations in the simplest possible terms,
we will focus on the aggregate version throughout the rest of this section. The aggregate (2×2)
measure of value-added by source in gross exports is given by
              V B E      V1 B12 E 2* 
VAS_E  VBE   1 11 1*               .                                                                     (14)
              V2 B21 E1* V2 B22 E 2* 
         Although rather elementary with only two countries, VAS_E expresses the major
concepts of our new value-added by source measure. Diagonal elements of VAS_E define the

6
 Due to production sharing between home and foreign countries, it is possible for value added exports to be zero
between two countries with positive gross exports. For example, if country 1’s exports to country 2 in car parts are
all used as intermediaries in country’s 2’s car production that is entirely exported back to country 1. Of course, the
reverse is also possible – two countries could have zero gross exports but positive value added exports. For example,
country 2 could record zero gross exports of steel to country 1 but have positive value added exports in steel if its
car exports to country 1 embed domestically produced steel.

                                                               9
domestic value-added in each country’s exports. Off-diagonal elements give the foreign value-
added embodied in each country’s exports.
           In the two-country case, explicit solutions for the four Brs block matrices are not overly
cumbersome, and allow us to demonstrate why HIY’s vertical specialization measures are a
special case of our new general measures. Applying the algebra of the partitioned matrix
inverse,7 we have
 B11     B12  ( I  A11  A12 ( I  A22 ) 1 A21 ) 1           B11 A12 ( I  A22 ) 1      
B                                                                                        1 
          B22  
                                                                                                   (15)
 21                    ( I 2  A22 ) 1 A21 B11                                        1
                                                           ( I  A22  A21 ( I  A11 ) A12 ) 
           Therefore, gross exports can be decomposed into foreign value-added (or VS, following
the HIY notation) and domestic value-added (DV) as follows:
      V1 B11 E1*  V1 ( I  A11  A12 ( I  A22 ) 1 A21 ) 1 E1* 
DV                                             1       1     ;                             (16)
     V2 B22 E 2*  V2 ( I  A22  A21 ( I  A11 ) A12 ) E 2* 

     V B E  u ( A21  A12 ( I  A22 ) 1 A21 )( I  A11  A12 ( I  A22 ) 1 A21 ) 1 E1* 
FV   2 21 1*                             1                               1    1      .    (17)
     V1 B12 E 2*  u ( A12  A21 ( I  A11 ) A12 )( I  A22  A21 ( I  A11 ) A12 ) E 2* 
They are both 2×1matrices.
           Using the same notation, the HIY measure of foreign value added can be expressed as
another 2×1matrix:
      uA ( I  A11 ) 1 E1* 
VS   21             1     .                                                                    (18)
     uA12 ( I  A22 ) E 2* 
           Comparing equations (17) and (18), we can see that the HIY measure only captures
foreign value added in gross exports when either A12=0 or A21=0; i.e., in the case when only one
country’s intermediate goods are used abroad. As Johnson and Noguera (2010) also point out,
whenever both countries export intermediate products, the HIY measure diverges from the true
measure of foreign value added in gross exports. Our new measure captures an important
element omitted from the HIY’s formula. For the home country, both domestic and foreign value
added differ from their true values by the term A12 ( I  A22 ) 1 A21 E 21 . Thus our new measure can
account for a country importing its own value added which has been exported but return home
after being processed abroad. In a more general context, VAS_E will properly attribute foreign
and domestic contents to multiple countries when intermediate products cross borders in even

7
    See, for example, Simon and Blume (1994, 182).

                                                           10
more complicated patterns. This will become clearer when we extend the measure to three or
more countries.
         The second HIY measure of vertical specialization (labeled as VS1 by HIY) details
domestic value-added in inputs exported indirectly to third countries. Although an expression for
such indirectly exported value-added (IV) has not been previously defined mathematically in the
literature, it can be specified precisely in our framework. In a two-country world, the home
country’s IV is identical to foreign country's FV:
         IV1  V1 B12 E21 .                                                                                (19)
This will not be true in the multi-country model that we turn to next.8


2.3 Three or more countries
         The analysis can be generalized to any arbitrary number of countries. Production, value-
added shares, and sources of value-added in gross exports are given succinctly by:
         X  ( I  A) 1Y  BY
         VAS  VB
         VAS _ E  VBE .                                                                                   (20)
With G countries and N sectors, X and Y are GN×1 vectors; A and B are GN×GN matrices; V and
VAS are G×GN matrices; E is a GN×G matrix; and VAS_E is a G×G matrix. While we focus on
the aggregate measures, all results continue to hold with full dimensionality and can be
expressed simply by replacing the relevant weighting matrix.
         In the multiple-country case, accurately calculating value added by source requires
adjustments for intermediate inputs that cross multiple borders. Examining a three-country case
in some details is useful for two reasons: (i) it exhibits nearly all the richness of the fully general
multi-country analysis, and (ii) analytical solutions remain tractable and have intuitive
explanations. For example, home’s domestic block inverse matrix is given by9
B11  {I  A11  A12 [ I  A22  A23 ( I  A33 ) 1 A32 ] 1 [ A21  A23 ( I  A33 ) 1 A31 ]
                                                                                              .            (21)
     A13 [ I  A33  A32 ( I  A22 ) 1 A23 ] 1 [ A31  A32 ( I  A22 ) 1 A21 ]}1



8
  But, consistent with the many-country case, foreign value in direct exports will be measured along columns, while
indirect value-added exports will be measured along rows.
9
  This expression is derived by iteratively applying the expression for the inverse of a partitioned matrix. (See
appendix in Wang, Powers, and Wei (2009) for other analytical results.

                                                             11
Comparing equation (21) with the equivalent term in equation (15), the three-country case
contains more adjustments than the two-country case, all involving intermediate exports via third
countries. Specifically, to measure domestic value-added share in country 1's total exports, the
value-added embodied in its intermediate exports to country 2 and country 3 has to be accounted
for. These intermediate goods could be used by the importing country (country 2 or country 3) to
produce final goods and export back to the home country; or they could be used to produce
intermediate goods exports to a third country (country 3 or country 2) that are then used to
produce exports to the home country. Thus, adjustments have to be made for each of these
intermediate flows.10Similar adjustments are made to all measures of value-added by source to
capture value added in production chains stretching across multiple borders.
            As before, the value-added shares can be applied to gross exports to produce VAS_E.
With three countries, VAS_E is a 3x3 matrix:
               V1 B11 E1* V1 B12 E 2* V1 B13 E3* 
VAS_E  VBE  V2 B21 E1* V2 B22 E 2* V2 B23 E3*  .                                                               (22)
               V3 B31 E1* V3 B32 E 2* V3 B33 E3* 

            The distinction between value-added from direct and indirect sources in gross exports is
much clearer with three countries than with two. The sum of off-diagonal elements along a
column is the true measure of value-added from foreign sources embodied in a particular
country’s gross exports:

FVr   V s B sr E r * .                                                                                             (23)
            sr

The sum of off-diagonal elements along a row provides information on a country’s value-added
embodied as intermediate inputs in third countries’ gross exports. This is the first explicit
derivation of indirect value-added exports provided in the literature:
IVr   Vr Brs E st                                                                                                  (24)11
           s t
                          .

The diagonal terms measure domestic value added in gross exports:


10
     For example, A23 ( I  A33 ) 1 A31 is the adjustment for country 2's exports of intermediate inputs to country 3 that
are used to produce exports shipped to country 1, while A23 ( I  A33 ) 1 A32 is the adjustment for country 2's exports
of intermediate inputs to country 3 that are used to produce exports shipped back to country 2.
11
   Domestic value-added returned home, labeled as VS1* in Daudin et al (2010), can be separated from IV, as
VS1r  Vr Brs E sr .

                                                               12
DVr  Vr Brr E r* .                                                                                        (25)

Equation (8) shows that columns of the VAS matrix sum to unity, so the sum of domestic and
foreign value added must account for all gross exports, ensuring that value-added from all
sources sum to official trade flows and this relation is true at both aggregate and sector level:
DVr  FVr  Er* .                                                                                          (26)


2.3 Extension to measures in the value-added trade literature
        Section 2.2 fully characterized value-added contributions from direct and indirect sources
in a country' gross exports, formally generalizing the concept of vertical specialization to account
for all sources of value-added in gross exports in a multi-country multi-sector framework. It also
connects the vertical trade literature with value-added trade literature, generalizing concepts such
as domestic value-added that returns home in goods and services after being processed or
finished abroad, denoted VS1* by Daudinet al. (2010). This measure can be sizable for some
large advanced economies.
        To do this, we first divide gross exports into final demand and intermediates. Within
intermediates, we further divide those goods that are consumed by the direct importer from those
goods that are processed and exported by the direct importer for consumption or further
processing in a third country:
E rs  Yrs  Ars X s        Yrs          Ars X ss  t  r , s Ars X st            A X sr           ,   (27)
                                                                           rs
                          Final goods     Intermediates                             Processedand
                                                          Processedand exported
                         exported to s     absorbedin s                           exported back to r
                                                             to third countries

where Xst is the output of country s used to produce goods absorbed in country t. It is the product
of the Leontief inverse matrix B and final demand matrix Y in equation (13). Note that the last
three terms sum to the bilateral gross trade in intermediate goods, and all three terms may
include both intermediates and final products produced in the importing country s.
        Combining equations (25) and (27), and summing over all trading partners as in equation
(9), and inserting into equation (26), we arrive at our key decomposition equation that states that
a country's gross exports to the world is the sum of the following five broad terms:




                                                              13
E r *  DV r  FV r
      V r B rr  Yrs  V r B rr  Ars X ss  V r B rr   Ars X st  V r B rr  Ars X sr  FV r
                                                                                                 .           (28)
       s     r
                     s      r
                                                 s  r t  r ,s
                                                                  s  r
                                                                                    
              (1)                (2)                        (3)                (4)          (5)

         (1) Domestic value-added embodied in exports of final goods and services absorbed by
the direct importer;
         (2) Domestic value-added embodied in exports of intermediate inputs used by the direct
importer to produce its domestically needed products;
         (3) Domestic value-added embodied in intermediate exports used by the direct importer
to produce goods for third countries (“indirect value added exports’)
         (4) Domestic value-added embodied in intermediate exports used by the direct importer
to produce goods shipped back to source (“reflected domestic value added”)
         (5) Value-added from foreign countries embodied in gross exports (“foreign value added
used in exports”).
         The decomposition formula is also diagrammed in Figure 1. Equation (28) (or Figure 1)
integrates the older literature on vertical specialization with the newer literature on value added
trade, while ensuring that measured value-added from all sources accounts for total gross
exports. The vertical specialization literature emphasized that gross exports contain two sources
of value added, domestic and foreign. Equation (28) shows that a country’s domestic value-
added could be further broken down into additional components that reveal the destination of a
country’s exported value added, including its own value-added that returns home in its imports.12
         The sum of (1), (2), and (3) equals each country's value-added exports to the world; the
sum of (1),(2),(3), and (4) equals domestic content in a country's gross exports, thus nicely
connecting the two major concepts in the vertical specialization and value-added trade literature
on the one hand, and clearly distinguishing them on the other hand.
         In addition, all other measures in the literature can be derived from a combination of the
five basic measures. For instance, the sum of (3) and (4) equals HIY's VS1 in gross exports;the
sum of (1),(2), and (3) divided by gross exports equals Johnson and Noguera's ratio of value-




12
  Since equation (27) decomposes all bilateral exports from country s to country r, it also simultaneously
decomposes bilateral imports.

                                                         14
added exports to gross exports (VAX ratio); and the sum of (4) and (5) equals the portion of
trade that is “double counted”in official trade statistics.13
         It is useful to note a caveat to the decomposition expressed in equation (28). In principle,
imported intermediates (e.g., chemical) in one sector may be used to produce another
intermediate (e.g., steel) that is used in the third sector at home (e.g., parts for chairs). That
intermediate is then used to produce a product in the fourth sector that is eventually exported. In
other words, the value added embedded in a given imported intermediate could travel through
many sectors at home before it is exported. The expression in Equation (28) traces only the direct
effect and the first round of the indirect effect. For this reason, it can be regarded as the first-
order approximation of the full order effect. The full order decomposition can be estimated by
using information on domestic final demand in the importing country to obtain domestic value
added embodied in the intermediate goods used by direct importers to produce domestically
needed final goods.14
         In any case, the first order decomposition has the nice property that the sum of the five
items in Equation (28) equals 100% of gross exports. This does not hold in general for the full
order decomposition at the sector or bilateral level due to indirect value-added trade via
                          15
intermediate goods.            For the full-order decomposition, however, the five value-added
components account for 100% of the country’s gross exports only when trade values are summed
over all sectors and all trading partners (to reach a country’s total exports to the world). In this
case, the only difference with the first order decomposition is the distribution across components
(2), (3) and (4), with a decrease in value-added absorbed by the direct importer (2) and an
equivalent increase of indirect value-added absorbed by other countries ((3) and (4)). The (full-
order) decomposition corresponding to Figure 1 using 2004 trade and production data is
presented in Figure A1 in the online appendix.




13
   Component (3) should not be included in double counting, because when this value crosses a border for the second
time, it becomes foreign value in the direct importer’s exports. For this reason, it is not included as double counting
to avoid an over-correction.
14
   This provides a modification of item (2) in equation (28); Modified versions of items (3) and (4) then could be
computed according to equation (24).
15
   Because value-added trade could diverge from gross trade significantly at the sector and bilateral level, the share
of indirect value-added exports (returning home or via third countries) could go to infinity when there is large
indirect value-added exports but near zero gross exports

                                                          15
3. Data and results
3.1 The construction of an Inter-Country Input-output (ICIO) table and its data sources
           To implement the above decomposition, we need an inter-country input output table, that
is, a database detailing international production and use for all flows of value added. The
database should specify (a) transactions of intermediate products and final goods within and
between each country at the industry level, (b) the direct value-added in production of each
industry in all countries, and (c) the gross output of each industry in all countries. Such an ICIO
table goes beyond a collection of single-country IO tables. It specifies the origin and destination
of all transaction flows by industry as well as every intermediate and/or final use for all such
flows. For example, an ICIO table would describe the number of electronics components
produced in Japan that were shipped to China. It would also distinguish the number that were
used as intermediate inputs in each Chinese sector and the number that were used in Chinese
private household consumption and capital formation. However, these tables are not available on
a global basis, and in fact are rarely available at the regional level. The available global
databases, such as the GTAP Multi-Country Input-Output (MCIO) tables, do not have enough
detail on the cross-border supply and use of goods to be directly used to implement our
methodological framework.
           To provide a workable dataset and empirically conduct our gross export decomposition,
we construct a global ICIO table for 2004 based on version 7 of the GTAP database as well as
detailed trade data from UN COMTRADE, and two additional IO tables for major emerging
economies where processing exports are a large portion of their external trade. We integrate the
GTAP database and the additional information with a quadratic mathematical programming
model that (a) minimizes the deviation of the resulting new data set from the original GTAP
data, (b) ensures that supply and use balance for each sector and every country, and (c) keeps all
sectoral bilateral trade flows in the GTAP database constant. The new database covers 26
countries and 41 sectors and is used as the major data source of this paper.16 ICIO tables specify
country r’s use in sector i of imports from sector j from source country s. To estimate these
detailed inter-industry and inter-country intermediate flows, we need to (i) distinguish
intermediate and final use of imports from different sources in each sector, and (ii) allocate
intermediate goods from a particular country source to each sector it is used within all

16
     See Appendix table A2 for countries included in each region and their concordance to GTAP regions.

                                                          16
destination countries. We address the first task by concording detailed trade data to end-use
categories (final and intermediate) using UN Broad Economic Categories (BEC), as described
below. No additional information is available to properly allocate intermediates of a particular
sector from a specific source country to its use industries at the destination economy, however.
Thus, sector j’s imported intermediate inputs of a particular product are initially allocated to each
source country by assuming they are consistent with the aggregate source structure of that
particular product.17
         Although the GTAP database provides bilateral trade flows, it does not distinguish
whether goods are used as intermediates or final goods. Our initial allocation of bilateral trade
flows into intermediate and final uses is based on the UN BEC applied to detailed trade statistics
at the 6-digit HS level from COMTRADE18. This differs from the approaches in Johnson and
Noguera (2010) and Daudin, Rifflart, and Schweisguth (2010), which also transform the MCIO
table in the GTAP database into an ICIO table. However, they do not use detailed trade data to
identify intermediate goods in each bilateral trade flow. Instead, they apply a proportionality
method directly to the GTAP trade data; i.e., they assume that the proportion of intermediate to
final goods is the same for domestic supply and imported products.
         The use of end-use categories to distinguish imports by use is becoming more widespread
in the literature and avoids some noted deficiencies of the proportionality method.19 Feenstra and
Jensen (2009) use a similar approach to separate final goods from intermediates in U.S. imports
in their recent re-estimation of the Feenstra-Hanson measure of material offshoring. Dean, Fung,
and Wang (2009) show that the proportionality assumption underestimates the share of imported
goods used as intermediate inputs in China’s processing trade. Nordas (2005) states that the large
industrial countries have a higher share of intermediates in their exports than in their imports,
while the opposite is true for large developing countries. These results imply that the




17
   For example, if 20% of U.S. imported intermediate steel comes from China, then we assume that each U.S.
industry obtains 20% of its imported steel from China. Such an assumption ignores the heterogeneity of imported
steel in different sectors. It is possible that 50% of the imported steel used by the U.S. construction industry may
come from China, while only 5% of the imported steel used by auto makers may be Chinese.
18
   Both the zero/one and a weighting scheme can be used with BEC, We used a zero/one classification. Shares based
on additional information could be applied to dual use products to further improve the allocation. These are areas for
future research.
19
   The literature notes that the UN BEC classification has shortcomings of its own however, particularly its inability
to properly identify dual-use products such as fuels, automobiles, and some food and agricultural products.

                                                         17
intermediate content of imports differs systematically from the intermediate content in domestic
supply.
          The less distorted intermediate share estimates provides a better row total control for each
block matrix of Asr in the ICIO coefficient matrix A, thus improving the accuracy of the most
important parameters (the IO coefficients) in an ICIO model. However, it still does not properly
allocate particular intermediate goods imported from a specific source country to each using
industry (the coefficients in each cell of a particular row in each block matrix Asr still have to be
estimated by proportionality assumption). This allocation is especially important to precisely
estimate value-added by sources for a particular industry, although it is less critical for the
country aggregates because total imports of intermediates from a particular source country are
fixed by observed data, so misallocations will likely cancel out.
          To provide an accurate comparison of the UN BEC method versus the proportionality
approach, we would need true inter-country IO coefficients as a reference, which unfortunately
do not exist on a global scale. The only available reference is an ICIO table for nine East-Asian
countries and the United States constructed by the Institute of Development Economics in Japan in
cooperation with National Statistical agencies in related countries based in part on a survey of
firms. The allocation of imports between intermediates and final demand in the pre-release version
of the 2005 Asian Input-Output (AIO) table provides a reference point for comparison with our
results, although it may also be considered as just another more extensive estimate. In Table 1, for
electronic machinery imports, we list the share of intermediate inputs in imports from 12 countries
and the world by the United States and Japan in three ways: (a) what is assumed by the
proportionality assumption, (b) what is implied by the BEC classification, both from our 2004
global ICIO table, and (c) what is reported in the 2005 AIO table.
    The information on imports by the United States is listed in Columns 1-4. Under the
proportionality assumption, the share of import across all exporting countries that are used as
intermediates is a constant (54.2%) as reported in Column 1. By definition, its correlation with the
shares in the AIO column is zero. Under BEC, the share varies by source countries (Column 2).
The correlation between the share under BEC and the share from AIO is 0.98.
    Similarly, we list the shares that go into intermediates for Japan’s imports of electronic
machinery. Again, the correlation between the share under the proportionality assumption and the
reference value is zero. In comparison, the correlation between the share under BEC and the

                                                   18
reference value is 0.64. These examples illustrate possible improvement of using the BEC
classification over the proportionality assumption20.


3.2 Complete decomposition of gross exports
        Table 2 presents a complete decomposition of each country’s gross exports to the world
in 2004 using the five basic value-added components specified in equation (28). The column
number in the first five columns corresponds to both the item number in Equation (28) and the
box number in Figure 1.
        Although these elements have been independently computed based on different elements
in the VAS_E matrix and equation (28), they sum to exactly 100 percent of gross exports, thus
verifying that the decomposition is complete. This is the first such decomposition in a global
setting. It provides a more detailed break out of domestic value-added in exports than has been
previously available in the literature and shows that there are large difference in value-added
components across countries, indicating substantial differences in the role that countries play in
global production networks.
        For example, for the United States, the share of foreign value added in its exports is
12.9%, indicating that most of its exports reflect its own domestic value added. In comparison,
for China’s processing exports, the share of foreign value added is 56.6%, indicating China’s
domestic value added accounts for less than half the value of its processing exports. Appendix B
provides additional detail on value-chain participation by different global regions.
        The right-hand panel of table 2 presents related measures (or their properly-measured
analogues) from the literature derived from the five basic value-added measures.To reiterate the
connection of these five basic components to measures in the existing literature: column (7)
reports the ratio of value-added exports to gross exports (VAX ratio) proposed by Johnson and
Noguera (2010) by adding columns (1), (2), and (3); column (8) reports share of VS1 proposed
by HIY by adding columns (3) and (4); column (9) lists the share of domestic contents
extensively discussed in the vertical specialization literature by summing columns (1), (2), (3)




20
  Appendix Table A1 compares the average splits between intermediates and the final consumption between the
two approaches in the aggregate.

                                                      19
and (4); Column (11) gives the share of vertical trade by adding columns (5)21 and (8), which is
an indicator of how intensively a country participant in global production chain.
           Column (10) reports the percentage of multiple counting in official trade statistics by
adding columns (4) and (5). At the global level, only domestic value added in exports absorbed
abroad are value-added exports; value added embodied in imported intermediates are other
country’s domestic value-added, and so cannot count as additional value-added for the importing
country. In addition to foreign value added in exports, domestic value-added that returns home
from abroad is also a part of double counting in official trade statistics, since it crosses borders at
least twice. Such reflected value added has to be separated from domestic value-added absorbed
abroad in order to fully capture multiple counting in official trade statistics. Therefore, for any
country’s gross exports, the double counting portion equals the share of gross exports greater
than the value-added exports between countries. It is the foreign value-added portion plus the
portion of domestic value-added that returns home. This share is about 25.6% for total world
exports in 2004 based on our ICIO database.
           Similar decompositions can be performed at the country-sector level. In Table A5, we
report the decomposition results for ten largest exporters (based on the value of gross exports) in
each of the 19 manufacturing sectors in our database. The sector-level results are subject to the
limitations discussed previously, since the inaccuracy of cross-country intermediate-use
coefficients could introduce unknown noise into both the sources of value-added I gross exports
and value-added trade estimates at the industry level.


3.3 Position of countries within global value chains: Evidence from sector-level decompositions
            By using the decomposition results at the country-sector level, we can construct an index
that helps us to gauge whether a country is likely to be in the upstream or downstream of the
global value chain (GVC) in any particular sector. We can also construct a separate index that
helps us to gauge the extent to which a country-sector is involved in the global production chain.
           For an index to capture a country’s position (i.e., upstream or downstream), it makes
sense to compare that country’s exports of intermediates in that sector that are used by other
countries, with that country’s use of imported intermediates in the same sector. If a country lies
upstream in the global value-chain, it participates by producing inputs for others, either by

21
     Column (5) corresponds to the VS share in HIY(2001).

                                                            20
providing raw materials (such as Russia), or by providing manufactured intermediates (such as
Japan), or both. For such a country, its indirect value added exports (IV) share in gross exports
will be higher than its FV share. In comparison, if a country lies downstream in the global value
chain, it will use a large portion of other countries intermediates to produce final goods for
exports, and its FV share will be higher than its IV share.

        We define a country-sector level index for the position in the global value chain as the
log ratio of a country-sector’s supply of intermediates used in other countries’ exports to the use
of imported intermediates in its own production.

                             IVir           FV
GVC_Position ir  Ln(1           )  Ln(1  ir )
                              Eir            Eir                                                       (29)


If the country-sector lies upstream in a supply chain, the numerator tends to be large. On the
other hand, if it lies downstream, then the denominator tends to be large. For example, in the
home electronics sector, if Japan specializes in providing components to assembly firms in
China, the index tends to take on a high value for Japan and a low value for China.

        Of course, two countries can have identical values of the GVC position index in a given
sector while having very different degrees of participation in GVCs. Therefore, the position
index has to be used in conjunction with another index that summarizes the importance of the
global supply chain for that country-sector. We define a GVC participation index as

                           IVir FVir
GVC_Participation ir           
                            Eir   E ir                                                                 (30)

        We compute these two indices for all countries and sectors. We organize the information
by sectors and present some of them in Figure 2. For example, the upper left graph of Figure 2
describes the electronic equipment sector. Numbers in the parentheses are 2 digit ISIC codes.
Japan, Mexico “normal” (i.e., non-processing exports), Western Europe (WEU)22 and the United
States are the most upstream countries in the electronics value chain (given on the left axis),
indicating that they are the main suppliers of components to firms in the same industry in other
countries. In comparison, Singapore, China processing exports, new EU member countries

22
  The original 15 EU members are referred to here as “Western EU”, while the next 12 members to accede are
referred to as “Eastern EU” or “new EU members”.

                                                      21
(EEU), Indonesia, and Thailand are at the most downstream end of the value chain, indicating
that their exports mostly use imported components for production. To see why it is important to
look at the participation index (right vertical axis) together with the position index (left vertical
axis), we take another look at Japan and Mexico normal. While they both occupy upstream
positions in the value chain, Japan has a high participation value, but Mexico normal has a
relatively trivial value for the participation index. Being a part of global production chain is a far
more important feature for the electronic equipment sector in Japan than for the same sector in
Mexico normal.

        In the upper right graph of Figure 2, we present the position and participation indexes for
the finished metal products sector. While Mexico, Japan, the United States and Mexico normal
are the most upstream based on the position index, participation in the GVC is only substantial
for the United States and Japan accordingto the participation index. At the other extreme, China
processing, Mexico processing, and Singapore 23 have the most downstream locations. The
participation index for them (all in excess of 70%) indicates that assembly using primarily
imported inputs is the main feature of their exports in this sector.

        The graphs for other sectors can be read similarly, which we will not go into detail to
save space. We would note a few broad patterns. First, the importance of separating processing
and normal exports for China and Mexico is clear. While their processing exports tend to be
heavy users of imported inputs, whereas their normal exports often supply intermediates to other
countries’ exports. Second, the original EU member countries and new accession countries also
tend to lie on the two ends of the global production chain. For example, in electronic equipment,
ferrous metal, and papers and publishing, Western EU countries tend to lie upstream, whereas
Central and Eastern EU countries tend to be more downstream in the value chains.

        We want to end this subsection with a note of caution in using sector-level
decompositions. As we discussed earlier, the lack of information in our current database on how
imported inputs are distributed among sector users within each country may introduce unknown
noise into both sources of value-added in gross exports and value-added trade estimates at sector


23
  For Singapore, because the GTAP database does not take out transshipment trade and re-exports as it did for Hong
Kong, the position index may exaggerate the extent to which Singapore is at the downstream of the production
chain.

                                                       22
level. If we focus on country rankings rather than the exact numerical numbers, the impact of the
errors is likely to be smaller.

        .
4. Broad implications for a better understanding of global trade
        The decomposition results have implications for a variety of research and policy
questions. In this section, to illustrate the potential importance of the decomposition, we brief
discuss a few applications.


4.1 Revealed Comparative Advantage index based on gross and value-added trade
        The concept of revealed comparative advantage (RCA for short), proposed by Balassa
(1965), has proven to be useful in many research and policy applications. In standard
applications, it is defined as the share of a sector in a country’s total gross exports relative to the
world average of the same sector in world exports. When the RCA exceeds one, the country is
said to have a revealed comparative advantage in that sector; when the RCA is below one, the
country is said to have a revealed comparative disadvantage in that sector. The problem of
multiple counting of certain value added components in the official trade statistics suggests that
the traditional computation of RCA could be noisy and misleading. Our value added
decomposition of exports provides a way to remove the distortion of multiple counting by
focusing on domestic value added in exports.
        We re-compute the RCA index at the country-sector level for all the countries and sectors
in our database. Due to space constraints, we select two sectors and compare the country
rankings of RCAs using both gross exports and domestic value added in gross exports. In Figure
3, we report the two sets of RCA indices for the finished metal products sector. Using gross
exports data, both China and India show a strong revealed comparative advantage (ranked the
first and fourth, respectively, among the set of countries in our database, and with the absolute
values of RCA at 1.94 and 1.29, respectively). However, when looking at domestic value added
in that sector’s exports, both countries ranking in RCA drop precipitously to 7th and 15th place,
respectively.24 In fact, for India, the sector has switched from being labeled as a comparative

24
  Sectoral value added here includes value produced by the factors of production employed in the finished metal
products sector and then embodied in gross exports of all downstream sectors, rather than the value added employed
in upstream sectors that are used to produce finished metal products in the exporting country. This distinction is
particularly important in the business services sector, discussed next.

                                                        23
advantage sector to a comparative disadvantage sector. Unsurprisingly, the ranking for some
other countries moves up. For example, for the United States, not only its RCA ranking moves
up from 10th place under the conventional calculation to the 3rd place under the new calculation,
finished metal products industry also switches from being labeled as a comparative disadvantage
sector to a comparative advantage sector.
       Another example is the “real estate and business services” sector. Using data on gross
exports, India exhibits a strong revealed comparative advantage in that sector on the strength of
its unusually high share of business services exports in its overall exports. However, once we
compute RCA using domestic value added in exports, the same sector becomes a comparative
disadvantage sector for India! One key reason for the change is that business services in
advanced countries are often exported indirectly by being embedded in these countries
manufacturing exports. Indeed, the RCA rankings for this sector in the United States, the
European Union and Japan all move up using data on the domestic value added in exports.
Therefore, compared to the share of this sector in other countries’ exports (after taking into
account indirect value added exports), the Indian share of the sector in its exports becomes much
less impressive.
       These examples illustrate the possibility that our understanding of trade patterns and
revealed comparative advantage could be modified substantially once we have the right data on
domestic value added in exports.


4.2 Magnification of trade costs from multi-stage production
       As noted by Yi (2003, 2010), multi-stage production magnifies the effects of trade costs
on world trade. There are two separate magnification forces. The first exists because goods that
cross national barriers multiple times incur tariffs and transportation costs multiple times. The
second exists because tariffs are applied to gross imports, even though value added by the direct
exporter may be only a fraction of this amount. Different participation in global networks affects
the extent to which different countries are affected by such cost magnification. However, Yi
(2003) does not actually measure the magnification of tariffs, though it is important to his
simulations exercise.
       Our value added estimates provide an ideal way to re-examine the magnification issue. In
Table 3, we first report standard trade costs applied to exports of final goods in columns (1)–(3).

                                                24
These include the trade-weighted average transportation margin (ad valorem cif-fob margin), the
trade-weighted tariff rate applied abroad (ad-valorem equivalent), and the total of these two trade
costs. Column (4) reports the share of foreign value added in final manufacture goods exports,
including domestic value that returns to the source country.25 These imported intermediate inputs
are used to produce final manufacture goods exports, and so incur multiple tariffs and
transportation costs. The foreign content shares are combined with tariff rates and transportation
margins applicable to each country’s own imports to calculate the trade costs that accompany use
of imported intermediate inputs in producing exports.These trade costs (as a share of f.o.b. export
value) are presented in columns (5)–(7). Specifically, these three columns report the trade-
weighted average costs for intermediate inputs from the other 25 countries/regions in our
database that are used in the exporting country to produce final manufacture goods exports.
         The next three columns report our illustrative calculation of the first order magnification
effect of using imported intermediate inputs to produce exports. Column (8) represents the
magnification effect if transport costs were the only factor that augments the trading costs;
Column (9) represents the magnification effect if tariffs were the only factor that augments the
trading costs. Finally, Column (10) is the magnification effect when both transport costs and
tariffs are taken into account. For instance, one additional stage of production increase trade
costs in Vietnam’s manufacturing sector by 91% of its standard cost.
         Although the number is already quite high for a number of countries26, these values still
represent only the lower bound of the true multi-stage trade costs, because these inputs may have
already crossed multiple borders before reaching the final exporter.
         Emerging Asia has some of the highest magnification ratios because their manufacturing
industries are involved in longer supply chain, use more imported inputs, in some cases (such as
Vietnam and Thailand) impose high tariffs on their intermediate imports. The effects of these
barriers on the magnification ratio are tempered somewhat by the high standard trade cost these
countries face on their exports because of longer distance transportation to final destination of
their exports than other emerging economies. China is notable for having the lowest trade costs
on imports in the region, and hence the lowest magnification factor in the region, since it applies
very low tariffs on its imported intermediate to produce its exports (about half of its exports are

25
  In practice, each country’s vector of foreign value shares for all products is used in the calculation.
26
  Table A6 in the online appendix reports descriptive statistics for the 16 manufacturing sectors included in table 3,
such as the range and standard deviation of the sector-level results.

                                                          25
processing trade with no tariff charged on intermediate imports). Relative to Asia, other
emerging countries in our dataset typically involve shorter supply chains, use less imported
inputs and apply lower tariffs to their own intermediate imports, and hence have lower ratios.27
         Developed economies tend to have low magnification ratios due to two reasons. First,
they apply relatively low tariffs to their intermediate imports. Second, the share of foreign value
added in their exports tends to be low.
         The second magnification force occurs because tariffs are applied to gross export value
instead of the value added in the direct exporting country. Table 3 also reports the magnification
ratio of the “effective” tariff rate to the standard tariff rate. Column (11) reports the effective
tariff rate, which equals the standard tariff rate in column (2) plus the tariff applied by the
producing country to its intermediate goods imports in column (6), divided by the domestic
content share (which is 100 minus column (4)). Column (12) reports the implied magnification
ratio due to the presence of vertical specialization. These effects are generally larger than the
tariff magnification factor reported in column (9).
         Generally speaking, tariffs play a greater role than transportation costs in the
magnification of trade costs in the presence of GVCs for emerging market economies, while the
opposite is true for most developed countries. The fact that the domestic value-added share in
emerging economies’ manufacturing exports is usually lower than that in developed countries
tends to amplify the effective trade cost for developing countries. Reducing tariffs and nontariff
barriers in manufacturing sectors globally is fully consistent with the interest of emerging market
economies by lowering the cost for developing countries' participation in GVCs. Lowering
“own” tariffs on intermediate inputs for domestic manufacturing production would significantly
reduce the magnification effects as demonstrated in column (9), while lowering such tariffs in
other countries would significantly reduce the effective rate of protection, as seen in columns
(11) and (12), due to the lower domestic value-added share in most developing countries’
manufacturing exports.




27
  Mexican processing exports is an unusual case. Although trade costs on imports are relatively low, the
magnification ratio is quite high, because the standard trade costs are low (1.5%) and the foreign content share in
exports is substantial (63.5%).

                                                          26
4.3 Bilateral trade imbalance

             Because a country’s gross exports embeds value added from other countries, bilateral
trade balance in value added terms can be very different from bilateral balance in gross trade
terms. This point is already well understood qualitatively. The decomposition results in this
paper allow us to quantify the difference.
            Figure 4 provides a scatter plot of the trade balance in value added terms against the trade
balance in standard trade statistics for all bilateral country pairs in our ICIO database. Without
loss of generality, the two countries in any pair are always ordered in such a way that the trade
balance in gross term is non-negative. A negative value-added to gross BOT ratio indicates there
is a sign change between BOT measured in gross and value-added terms. All observations that
lie below the 45 degree line have their bilateral trade imbalance smaller in value-added terms
than that in gross terms, and vice visa for observations that lie above the 45 degree line.
            Value-added flows give a much different picture of the contributions of China and Japan
to the U.S. and Western EU countries’ trade deficits. Because China is the final assembler in a
large number of global supply chains, and it uses components from many other countries,
especially East Asian countries, its trade surplus with US and Western EU countries measured in
value-added term is 41% and 49% less than that measured in gross terms. In contrast, Japan's
trade surplus with the U.S. and Western EU countries are 40% and 31% larger measured in
value-added terms, because Japan exports parts and components to countries throughout Asia
that are eventually assembled into final products and exported to the United States and Western
EU countries.28Zooming in near the origin shows that the trade balances of a number of country
pairs even have opposite signs measured in value-added and gross terms. For example, Japan’s
trade balance vis-à-vis China is switched from a surplus in gross trade terms to a deficit in value
added terms. This is consistent with the notion that a significant part of Japan’s exports to China
are components used by China-based firms for exports to the United States, the European Union
and other markets. This further illustrates potentially misleading nature of gross bilateral trade
imbalance.




28
     Figure 4 also shows that the Korea-China-U.S. triple trade relationship is similar to the Japan-China-U.S. one.

                                                             27
4.4 Other applications
       The set of examples discussed so far certainly does not exhaust the possible applications.
For example, the Federal Reserve Board and the IMF routinely compute effective exchange rates
using trade weights that are based on gross exports and imports. A conceptually better measure
should weight trading partners based on the relative importance in value added trade rather than
in gross trade terms. Our decomposition results make it feasible to do such computations.
       As another example, for some research or policy questions, one might need to look at the
response of a country’s bilateral or multilateral trade to exchange rate changes. Once one
recognizes that there is a potential mismatch between trade in value added and trade in gross
terms, one would want to take this into account. Our decomposition allows for a correction.


5. Conclusions
       We have developed a unified measure for sources of value-added in gross exports with a
transparent conceptual framework based on the block-matrix structure of an inter-country IO
model. This new framework incorporates all previous measures of vertical specialization and
value-added trade in the literature while adjusting for the back-and-forth trade of intermediates
across multiple borders. With a full concordance between value-added components and official
gross trade statistics, it opens the possibility for the System of National Accounts (SNA) to
accept the concept of value-added trade without dramatically changing current customs trade
data collection practice. This may in turn provide a feasible way for international statistical
agencies to report value-added trade statistics regularly in a relatively low cost fashion.

       The contributions of this paper lie largely in its comprehensive framework, its approach
to database development, and the new detailed decomposition of domestic value-added that has
revealed about each country’s role in global value chains at industry average level. To improve
the sector level results, current end use classifications, such as the UN BEC, need to be extended
to dual use products and services trade. In addition, methods need to be developed to properly
distribute imports to domestic users either based on cross country statistical surveys of the
domestic distribution of imports or based on firm level and Customs transaction-level trade data.

        The creation of a database that encompasses detailed global trade in both gross and
value-added terms, however, will allow us to move from a largely descriptive empirical exercise
to analysis of the causes and consequences of differences in supply chain participation. We have

                                                 28
discussed the use of the decomposition results to re-compute revealed comparative advantages
and bilateral trade balance. Surely there are other applications that may affect our understanding
of trade and other issues. We leave other applications to future research.



References

Balassa, Bela. 1965. “Trade Liberalization and ‘Revealed’ Comparative Advantage.”
Manchester School of Economic and Social Studies, 33, 99–123.

Johnson, Robert, Rudolfs Bems, and Kei-Mu Yi. 2011. “"Vertical Linkages and the Collapse of
Global Trade."American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings,101:2, May.

Daudin, Guillaume, Christine Rifflart, and Danielle Schweisguth. 2010. “Who Produces for
Whom in the World Economy?” OFCE Working Paper, Sciences Po Paris, July.

Dean, Judith, K.C. Fung, and Zhi Wang. 2011. “How Vertically Specialized is Chinese Trade?”
Review of International Economics, Forthcoming.

Dedrick, Jason, Kenneth L. Kraemer, and Greg Linden. 2008. “Who Profits from Innovation in
Global Value Chains? A Study of the iPod and notebook PCs.” Paper presented at the Sloan
Industry Studies Annual Conference, Boston, MA, May.

Feenstra, Robert and J. Bradford Jensen. 2009. “Evaluating Estimates of Materials Offshoring
from U.S. Manufacturing.” Paper presented at the National Academy of Public Administration
conference “Measurement Issues Arising from the Growth of Globalization,” November 6-7.

Grossman, G. and E. Rossi-Hansberg (2008). “Trading Tasks: A Simple Theory of Offshoring,”
American Economic Review, 98:5, 1978-1997.

Hummels, D., J. Ishii, and K. Yi. 2001. “The Nature and Growth of Vertical Specialization in
World Trade.” Journal of International Economics 54:75–96.

Johnson, Robert, and Guillermo Noguera. 2010. “Accounting for Intermediates: Production
Sharing and Trade in Value-added,” Paper presented at NBER ITI Program Meeting, Boston,
MA. August.

Koopman, Robert, Zhi Wang, and Shang-Jin Wei. 2008. “How Much Chinese Exports Is Really
Made in China—Assessing Foreign and Domestic Value-added in Gross Exports.” NBER
Working Paper 14109.

Koopman, Robert, Zhi Wang and Shang-Jin Wei. 2009. “A World Factory in Global Production
Chains: Estimating Imported Value Added in Exports by the People’s Republic of
China.”Forthcoming in Robert Barro and Jong-Wha Lee, eds, Costs and Benefits of Economic
Integration in Asia, Oxford University Press.

                                                29
Leamer, Edward (chair). 2006. “Analyzing the U.S. Content of Imports and the Foreign Content
of Exports.” National Research Council, National Academy of Sciences. National Academies
Press, Washington, DC.

Nordas, Hildegunn. 2005. “International Production Sharing: A Case for a Coherent Policy
Framework.” Discussion Paper No. 11, World Trade Organization.

Pula, Gabor and Tuomas Peltonen. 2011. “Has Emerging Asia Decoupled? An Analysis of
Production and Trade Linkages Using the Asian International Input-Output Table.” in Yin-Wong
Cheung, Vikas Kakkar, Guonan Ma (ed.) The Evolving Role of Asia in Global Finance
(Frontiers of Economics and Globalization, Volume 9), Emerald Group Publishing Limited,
pp.255-286.

Simon, Carl and Lawrence Blume. 1994. Mathematics for Economists. W.W. Norton: New
York.

Wang, Zhi, William Powers, and Shang-Jin Wei. 2009. “Value Chains in East Asian Production
Networks.” USITC Working Paper No. 2009-10-C, October.

Yi, Kei-Mu. 2010. "Can Multistage Production Explain the Home Bias in Trade?" American
Economic Review, 100(1):364-393.

Yi, Kei-Mu. 2003.“Can Vertical Specialization Explain the Growth of World Trade?” Journal of
Political Economy, 111(1): 52–102




                                             30
Table 1 Share of intermediate inputs in electronic machinery imports, 2004

                                     United States                                    Japan
                                   Share of intermediate inputs(%)            Share of intermediate inputs(%)
                                    Propor-       UN         Asia               Propor         UN
Country                   Valuea       tion      BECb         IO     Valuea       -tion       BECc    Asia IO
                             (1)        (2)          (3)       (4)      (5)        (6)         (7)        (8)
EU                       13,405        54.2       65.0       58.3     2,551       46.2        47.8      53.5
Japan                    23,364        54.2       57.5       51.9
United States                                                         7,165       46.2        67.6      62.4
Hong Kong                   348        54.2       41.4         43      112        46.2        48.1      44.2
Korea                    18,718        54.2       42.4       43.2     6,244       46.2        75.0      66.6
Taiwan                   13,175        54.2       62.4       57.5     8,423       46.2        77.9      72.1
Singapore                 7,678        54.2       52.5       46.0      112        46.2        48.1      43.5
China                    57,357        54.2       33.5       36.6    20,088       46.2        13.0      30.8
Indonesia                 1,765        54.2       34.9       37.2     1,074       46.2        33.3      46.5
Malaysia                 21,035        54.2       49.2       46.6     5,638       46.2        59.6      45.1
Philippines               3,245        54.2       82.2       71.0     4,999       46.2        73.0      60.8
Thailand                  4,787        54.2       30.4       39.5     3,901       46.2        60.0      38.9
India                       145        54.2       86.2       65.9        7        46.2        50.8      60.8
World Total             201,526        54.2       47.1       45.9    65,563       46.2        51.5      47.9
Correlation with AIOb     N=13         0.00       0.98       1.00     N=13        0.00        0.64      1.00

Source: Authors estimate based on domestic supply in GTAP database and UNBEC.
  a
    Imports of both intermediate and final goods, in millions of U.S. dollars.




                                                     31
     Table 2 Decomposition of gross exports, 2004

                                          Basic decomposition                                 Connection with existing measures
                        DVA          DVA in      Indirect    Returned    Foreign   Tota    VAX       VS1    Domestic   Multiple      GVC
                            in   intermediat        DVA         DVA        value      l     ratio   (HIY)    content   counting    Partici-
                       direct    es absorbed      exports                 added           (J&N)               (HIY)                 pation
                      exports       by direct     to third                                                                        (vertical
                      of final      importer    countries                                                                            trade,
Country or region      goods                                                                                                       OECD)
                          (1)            (2)          (3)         (4)        (5)    (6)      (7)      (8)        (9)      (10)        (11)
Advanced economies
Australia, New          27.0            33.6        27.4          0.6      11.5    100     88.0      27.9       88.5      12.0       39.4
Zealand
Canada                  23.5            36.2        10.9          1.3      28.1    100     70.5      12.2       71.9      29.5       40.4
EFTA                    23.0            36.3        14.7          0.8      25.2    100     74.0      15.5       74.8      26.0       40.8
Western EU              38.1            29.6        13.5          7.4      11.4    100     81.1      20.9       88.6      18.9       32.3
Japan                   38.4            18.5        28.0          2.9      12.2    100     84.9      30.8       87.8      15.1       43.1
United States           32.5            27.6        14.6        12.4       12.9    100     74.6      27.0       87.1      25.4       39.9
Asian NICs
Hong Kong               27.2            25.8        18.9          0.6      27.5    100     71.9      19.5       72.5      28.1       47.0
Korea                   29.5            13.5        22.3          0.9      33.9    100     65.2      23.2       66.1      34.8       57.0
Taiwan                  19.2            12.6        26.4          0.8      41.1    100     58.2      27.1       58.9      41.8       68.2
Singapore               11.0            13.1        12.2          0.6      63.2    100     36.3      12.8       36.8      63.7       76.0
Emerging Asia
China Normal            44.2            20.3        19.7          1.2      14.6    100     84.2      20.9       85.4      15.8       35.5
China Processing        28.8            10.2         4.1          0.3      56.6    100     43.1       4.4       43.4      56.9       61.0
Indonesia               20.0            28.1        28.4          0.6      22.9    100     76.5      29.0       77.1      23.5       51.9
Malaysia                16.7            17.7        24.1          0.9      40.5    100     58.6      25.0       59.5      41.4       65.5
Philippines             17.6            11.1        29.0          0.4      41.9    100     57.8      29.4       58.1      42.2       71.2
Thailand                27.9            14.0        18.1          0.3      39.7    100     60.0      18.5       60.3      40.0       58.1
Vietnam                 32.9            15.3        14.4          0.4      37.0    100     62.6      14.8       63.0      37.4       51.8
Rest of East Asia       35.3            26.9        16.1          0.1      21.7    100     78.2      16.2       78.3      21.8       37.9
India                   30.2            30.8        18.6          0.4      20.1    100     79.6      18.9       79.9      20.4       39.0
Rest of South Asia      48.8            19.2        10.6          0.1      21.3    100     78.6      10.7       78.7      21.4       32.0
Other emerging
Brazil                  27.4            40.7        19.0          0.3      12.7    100     87.0      19.2       87.3      13.0       31.9
EU accession            28.7            29.2        10.4          1.0      30.8    100     68.3      11.4       69.2      31.7       42.1
countries
Mexico Normal           23.5            41.1        17.4          0.6      17.3    100     82.1      18.1       82.7      17.9       35.3
Mexico Processing       20.6            10.1         5.6          0.3      63.4    100     36.3       5.9       36.7      63.7       69.3
Rest of Americas        23.8            40.6        20.4          0.7      14.4    100     84.9      21.2       85.6      15.2       35.6
Russian Federation        9.5           49.1        30.5          0.7      10.2    100     89.1      31.2       89.8      10.9       41.4
South Africa            23.1            34.5        24.0          0.2      18.2    100     81.6      24.2       81.8      18.4       42.4
Rest of the world       15.0            45.6        22.4          2.5      14.6    100     83.0      24.9       85.4      17.0       39.5
World average           29.2            27.7        17.5          4.0      21.5    100     74.4      21.5       78.5      25.6       43.0


     Source: Authors’ estimates
     Notes:All columns are expressed as a share of total gross exports. DVA refers to domestic value added.Country
     groupings follow IMF regions (www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2010/01/weodata/groups.htm#oem).




                                                                    32
      Table 3 Magnification of trade costs on final manufacturing goods exports from vertical
      specialization, 2004
Country or region          Standard trade costs      Foreign   Trade cost for imported      Magnification factora     Effec‐    Magnifi
                                                     content           inputs                                         ctive     ‐cation
                      Trans‐      Tariff   Total      share    Trans‐ Tariff     Total      Trans‐   Tariff   Total   tariff     ratio
                                                                                                                      rateb
                       port                                    Port                         port
                            (1)     (2)       (3)=       (4)      (5)       (6)      (7)=      (8)     (9)     (10)      (11)     (12)=
                                           (1)+(2)                                (5)+(6)                                       (11)/(2)
Advanced economies
Aus‐New Zealand             3.7     4.4       8.1       21.4     1.0        0.9      1.8       1.1     1.1      1.2      7.0        1.6
Canada                      1.3     0.5       1.8       41.7     0.8        0.3      1.1       1.4     1.2      1.6      2.8        5.7
EFTA                        2.0     2.0       3.9       37.1     0.8        0.1      0.8       1.2     1.0      1.2       4.8       2.4
WEU                         3.4     4.6       7.9       12.4     0.4        0.2      0.6       1.1     1.0      1.1       6.4       1.4
Japan                       3.2     5.4       8.6       11.6     0.3        0.0      0.4       1.0     1.0      1.0      7.2        1.3
USA                         2.4     2.4       4.8       14.3     0.4        0.1      0.6       1.1     1.0      1.1      4.0        1.7
Asian NICs

Hong Kong                   4.4     8.5      12.9       41.6     1.8        0.0      1.8       1.1     1.0      1.1     16.3        1.9
Korea                       3.3     5.0       8.2       31.5     0.8        1.3      2.1       1.1     1.2      1.3      9.0        1.8
Taiwan                      4.0     3.3       7.3       41.6     1.3        1.6      2.8       1.2     1.2      1.4       7.7       2.3
Singapore                   2.9     2.1       5.0       70.5     1.8        0.0      1.8       1.4     1.0      1.4     10.5        5.0
Emerging Asia

China normal                7.3     9.2      16.5       13.7     0.7        1.4      2.1       1.0     1.1      1.1     11.9        1.3
China processing            4.7     3.3       8.0       53.8     1.7        0.0      1.7       1.2     1.0      1.2      9.3        2.8
Indonesia                   6.1     5.9      12.0       36.6     1.8        1.8      3.5       1.2     1.2      1.3     11.1        1.9
Malaysia                    3.5     2.1       5.6       46.3     1.6        2.9      4.4       1.3     1.5      1.8       6.7       3.2
Philippines                 3.8     3.3       7.1       42.2     1.5        1.3      2.7       1.2     1.2      1.4      7.8        2.3
Thailand                    5.2     4.2       9.4       45.8     1.7        4.6      6.3       1.2     1.5      1.7     10.5        2.5
Vietnam                     7.7     8.8      16.5       48.0     3.2       11.8     15.0       1.2     1.7      1.9     20.2        2.3
Rest of East Asia           5.1     8.8      13.8       33.6     2.4        5.1      7.5       1.2     1.4      1.5     15.3        1.7
India                       5.2     6.7      11.8       20.4     1.0        3.2      4.2       1.1     1.3      1.4     10.0        1.5
Rest of South Asia          6.0     6.6      12.6       26.0     1.9        3.9      5.8       1.2     1.3      1.5     10.7        1.6
Other emerging economies

Brazil                      4.5     3.6       8.1       15.6     0.6        1.6      2.2       1.1     1.2      1.3      5.7        1.6
EU accession                3.9     1.4       5.3       35.3     1.2        0.6      1.8       1.2     1.1      1.3      3.9        2.8
Mexico processing           1.2     0.3       1.5       63.2     1.2        0.0      1.2       1.8     1.0      1.8       3.5      11.8
Mexico normal               3.6     2.3       5.9       12.8     0.5        0.9      1.4       1.1     1.2      1.2       4.0       1.7
Rest of America             4.6     5.9      10.5       23.0     1.3        2.3      3.6       1.1     1.2      1.4      9.2        1.6
Russian federation          5.5     4.0       9.5       20.0     1.0        1.8      2.7       1.1     1.2      1.3      6.5        1.6
South Africa                4.2     3.7       7.9       22.6     0.9        1.6      2.6       1.1     1.2      1.3      6.3        1.7
Rest of the world
                            5.1     2.1       7.2       27.6     1.5        2.4      3.9       1.2     1.3      1.5       4.7       2.3
      a
        Column (8) and (9) equals Columns (3)+(5) and (3)+(6) divided by column (3) respectively. Column (10) equals
      columns (8)+(9)‐1.
      b
        Column (11) equals Columns (2)+(6) divide by (100‐column (4))/100.



                                                                      33
Figure 1 Decomposition of gross exports: concepts


                                                       Gross exports




                              Domestic Value                                  Foreign Value
                               added (DVA)                                     added (FV)




         Exported in       Exported in           Exported in        Exported in        Other countries
         final goods       intermediates        intermediates      intermediates           DVA in
                           absorbed by         re-exported to        that return        intermediates
                           direct importers    third countries         home
              (1)          (2)                       (3)                 (4)                 (5)



                    Direct value-              Indirect value-
                    added exports              added exports
                       (1)+(2)                       (3)



Note:

a.(4) are also labeled as VS1* by Daudin et al (2011).

b. (5) is labeled as VS, and (3) + (4) is labeled as VS1 by HIY (2001).

c. (4) and (5) involve value added that crosses national borders at least twice, and are the sources
of multiple counting of value added in standard trade statistics.

d. The share of domestic content in a country's exports equals (1) + (2) + (3) + (4)

e. (1) + (2) +(3) divided by gross exports is the VAX ratio for each country’s exports to the
world defined by Johnson and Noguera (2010).




                                                  34
Figure 2 Global Value Chains - Position and Participation Indices




                                                   35
Figure 2: Global Value Chains – Position and Participation Indices - continued




                                                  36
Figure 3 Value-added-adjusted Revealed Comparative Advantage Indicators




                                                                37
Figure 4: Gross and VA Balance of Trade, 2004




Note: The first country labeled in each pair is the surplus country while the second runs a deficit. Numbers in parentheses are the ratio of value‐added to gross surplus.


                                                                                        38
For online publication only

Appendix A: Database construction and composition

A.1 Processing trade in China and Mexico

        The WTO reports that about 20% of developing country exports come from Export
Processing Zones (EPZs). Such processing regimes provide incentives to use imported
intermediate inputs, provided that the resulting final goods are entirely exported. Processing
trade can thus dramatically increase the imported content of exports relative to domestic use.
Failure to account for processing imports can dramatically overstate the domestic content of
exports (Koopman, Wang, and Wei, 2008).
        To reflect the reality and importance of Export Processing Zones (EPZs) in emerging
economies and their role in global value-added trade and production network, we incorporated an
expandedChinese IO table with separate accounts for processing exports and a 2003 Mexican IO
table with separate domestic and Maquiladora accounts. 1China and Mexico are the two largest
users of export processing regimes in the developing world, and together account for about 85%
of worldwide processing exports. 2We follow Koopman, Wang, and Wei (2008) to re-compute
domestic and foreign value added in China and Mexico, but in a multi-country global setting,
relaxing their assumption that all imports into China are 100% foreign value-added.


A.2 Further comparison of end-use and proportional measures
        As shown in table A1, for most developing countries, the end-use method produces a
lower intermediate share in exports. Developing countries (particularly Vietnam, China, South
Asia, and Thailand) export substantially more final goods to their major export markets than
what they supplied domestically. The exceptions are the natural-resource exporting countries
such as Brazil andRussia—the end-use method produces higher intermediate shares in their
exports.




1
  The Mexican table is from the Mexican statistical agencyInstitutoNacional de Estadística, Geografía e Informática
(INEGI).
2
  During 2000-2008, China alone accounted for about 67% of all reported processing exports in the world while
Mexico represents another 18% (Maurer and Degain, 2010). Similarly, based on IMF BOP statistics provided by
Andreas Maurer, we estimate that China and Mexico together accounted for about 80% of goods for processing in
the world in 2005 and 2007.
                                                          1
Appendix Table A1 Share of intermediate inputs in trade, proportion and end-use methods

                                              Gross exports                                          Gross imports
                           Value, billion       Share of intermediates (%)        Value, billion       Share of intermediates (%)
Country
                            U.S. dollars       Proportion       End-use            U.S. dollars       Proportion       End-use
             (1)                (2)                (3)               (4)               (5)                (6)            (7)
Advanced economies
Australia, New Zealand                122.5              71.7              69.4              131.5               56            50.2
Canada                                323.0               61               63.7              305.8               63            60.4
EFTA                                  259.5              71.2              66.7              208.0              65.6           61.8
Western EU                       1,575.5                 60.4              57.2         1,624.2                 62.8           61.1
Japan                                 618.9              60.4              56.7              513.9              64.2           61.9
United States                    1,062.3                 61.4              63.2         1,590.1                 57.2           54.7
Asian NICs
Hong Kong                             121.7              63.4              62.6              104.8              61.3           60.5
Korea                                 283.1              63.7              57.5              245.1              81.2           76.6
Taiwan                                219.8              67.9              68.4              170.3              75.4           72.6
Emerging Asia
China                                 670.6              54.6              43.1              568.8              82.6           77.4
Malaysia                              152.0              67.5              70.4              101.6              73.5           72.1
Philippines                            50.1               62               71.6               46.6              75.1           74.8
Thailand                              119.4              61.8              54.9               98.0              75.3           75.6
Vietnam                                32.3              55.8              42.7               34.5              72.9           72.1
Indonesia                              86.7              70.5              70.8               73.2              65.5             71
Rest of East Asia                      25.7              57.8              51.5               17.1              68.4           64.5
India                                  99.9              59.2              63.5              121.1              75.8           81.9
South Asia                             36.0              47.1              36.5               51.3              56.2           60.6
Other emerging economies
Brazil                                113.0              63.5              68.7               77.1              67.4           67.1
EU accession countries                273.7              58.2              57.9              306.1              66.9             64
Rest of Americas                      209.3              69.9              71.9              183.1              55.8           55.7
Mexico                                190.5              55.7              52.4              183.4              63.1           74.6
Russian Federation                    160.2              82.8              88.8              121.3              46.4           42.3
South Africa                           61.4               71               71.5               54.1              65.1             61
Rest of the world                     715.9              79.2              81.1              647.0              49.6           51.2
World                            7,733.4                 63.7              62.1         7,733.4                 63.7           62.1

Source: Authors’ estimates based on domestic supply in GTAP database and UN BEC end-use classification.




                                                                 2
A.3 Regional composition of the ICIO database
        As described in section 3, the ICIO database constructed for this paper includes 24
additional countries or regions that, together with Mexico and China, covers all global trade and
production. Table A2 lists the regions in the dataset along with the associated GTAP version 7
countries and regions.


Appendix Table A2 Countries in database and corresponding GTAP regions


 Country or region        Corresponding GTAP region(s)
 Australia, New Zealand   Australia, New Zealand
 Brazil                   Brazil
 Canada                   Canada
 China                    China
 China normal             N/A
 China processing         N/A
 EFTA                     Switzerland, Norway, Rest of EFTA
 EU accession             Bulgaria, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta,
                          Poland, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia
 EU 15(Western EU)        Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy,
                          Luxembourg, Netherlands, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, UK
 Hong Kong                Hong Kong
 Indonesia                Indonesia
 India                    India
 Japan                    Japan
 Korea                    Korea
 Mexico                   Mexico
 Mexico normal            N/A
 Mexico processing        N/A
 Malaysia                 Malaysia
 Philippines              Philippines
 Latin America and the    Argentina, Bolivia, Caribbean, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Ecuador, Guatemala,
 Caribbean                Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Rest of Central America, Rest of North
                          America, Rest of South America, Uruguay, Venezuela
 Rest of world            Albania, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Botswana, Central Africa, Croatia, Egypt,
                          Ethiopia, Georgia, Iran, Islamic Republic of, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Madagascar,
                          Malawi, Mauritius, Morocco, Mozambique, Nigeria, Rest of Eastern Africa, Rest of
                          E. Europe, Rest of Europe, Rest of Former Soviet Union, Rest of North Africa, Rest
                          of Oceania, Rest of South African Customs Union, Rest of Western Africa, Rest of
                          Western Asia, Senegal, South Central Africa, Tanzania, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda,
                          Ukraine, Zambia, Zimbabwe
 Russian Federation       Russian Federation
 Singapore                Singapore
 South Asia               Bangladesh, Pakistan, Rest of South Asia, Sri Lanka
 Thailand                 Thailand
 Taiwan                   Taiwan
 United States            United States
 Vietnam                  Vietnam
 Rest of East Asia        Cambodia, Laos, Myanmar, Rest of East Asia, Rest of Southeast Asia
 South Africa             South Africa



                                                        3
Appendix B.1 Differences in GVC participation across major regions in the world

         The gross export decomposition reported in Table 2 of the main text shows that there are
major differences in the extent of economic integration across different regions of the world.
Figure A1 graphically displays these differences. Among developing countries, emerging East
Asia has some of the lowest domestic value-added shares in exports. For example, for each
dollar of Chinese exports in 2004, Chinese factors contributed about 64.3 cents, of which 51.7
cents was absorbed by China's direct importers, 11.9 cents was re-exported by those direct
importers to third countries, and 0.8 cents returned to China. 3 Other East Asian countries have
even lower shares of domestic content in their exports. South Asian countries, such as India,
have higher shares of domestic content in their exports, indicating their lower integration into
global supply chains (on average across all goods and services). Among all emerging markets,
the natural resource exporters, such as Russia, have the highest domestic content shares in their
exports.
         Most Asian developing countries (China, Vietnam, Thailand, South Asia, and the rest of
East Asia), as well as Mexico and EU accession countries use substantial amounts of imported
content to produce final goods exports, while most developed countries and natural resource
exporters use imported value-added largely in the production of intermediate exports.
         Advanced economies generally have high shares of domestic content in their exports,
although a large portion of such value may return home via imports. The most notable feature
of U.S. domestic value-added appears in column (5). It has, by far, the highest share of its own
value-added returning home via imports (12.4% of its gross exports and 8.3% of its gross
imports in 2004). We look into the source structure of returned domestic value added in some
detail in next sub-section.
         Although Japan only has a moderate share of returned domestic value-added (2.9%), it is
the most integrated major economy as a supplier of intermediate inputs to exporters in other
countries. Column (4) presents indirect value-added exports equal to IV in equation (24),
excluding value added that has returned to home countries. (This is a cleaner measure of HIY’s
original VS1 measure.) For Japan, 28% of its gross exports are indirect exported value-added to
third countries. The high Japanese ranking on this measure is consistent with papers such as

3
  This estimate is higher than initial estimates of Chinese value added in exports, but consistent with estimates based
on the most recent Chinese IO table. For example, Koopman Wang and Wei (2008) estimated domestic value-added
share of 54% using a 2002 China benchmark IO table. In contrast, Koopman, Wang and Wei (2011) uses the
National Bureau of Statistics 2007 benchmark IO table—the same one employed in the current paper—to estimate
that domestic value added composed 60.6% of Chinese gross exports.
                                                            4
Dean, Lovely, and Mora (2009), which note that a high share of Japanese exports are processed
in China and then sent as finished goods to developed countries such as the United States. This
portion of value-added for the United States and Western EU 4 considerably lower (14.6% and
13.5% respectively).
        Among emerging markets, natural resource exporters such as Russia and Indonesia
export little of their domestic value added in final goods. These countries also tend to have high
shares of domestic value-added absorbed by their direct importers, such as Russian exports of
energy products absorbed by Europe, or Brazilian exports of primary products absorbed by the
United States.
        Emerging East Asia stands out with very low domestic value added in intermediates that
are absorbed by their direct importers. Instead, these countries generally export substantial
domestic value added in intermediate products that are subsequently re-exported to third
countries. Although re-exports to third countries are generally the smallest of the four
components of domestic content on average for the entire world, they represent much larger
shares in East Asia and the so called Asian Newly Industrialized Countries (NICs). These East
Asian economies are thus integrated into longer supply chains than other developing countries
and are located in the middle of the production network, providing a large share of manufactured
intermediates to both advanced and emerging economies. This result is consistent with single-
sector case studies that have examined Asian supply chains for products such as electronics and
automobiles. 5
        Mexico and the EU accession countries appear most similar to East Asia economies
among other emerging countries measured by their large share of foreign value-added in gross
exports. They are distinguished from East Asia countries, however, by their large share of value-
added exports absorbed directly by their large immediate neighbors. Low income Asian
countries (the rest of South and East Asian countries) as well as processing zones in China and
Mexico have very high shares of value-added exports coming from direct exported final
products, indicating that these economies are located in the end of global value chain.
        The three largest advanced economies (the US, Western EU and Japan) have a relatively
high share of domestic value-added embodied in their direct final goods exports in addition to
their high share of indirect value-added exports through third counties including that which

4
  “Western EU” refers throughout to the first 15 members of the EU; “EU Accession countries” refers to the next 12
members to join.
5
  For example, see Baldwin (2008) for disk drives and Nag et al. (2007) for automobiles.
                                                        5
 returns home, as we discussed earlier, indicating these economies are located in both upstream
 and downstream activities in the global production chain, consistent with the so called "smiling
 curve" phenomena found in the business economics literature.
               Figure A1. Decomposition of Gross Exports, actual data, 2004

                 Japan

                              Advanced economies
          United States
                    EU
               Canada
                 EFTA
Australia, New Zealand
            Singapore
               Taiwan
                Korea
                               Asia NICs
           Hong Kong
            Philippines
              Malaysia
              Thailand
               Vietnam
             Indonesia
                              Emerging Asia
                  India
    Rest of South Asia
     Rest of East Asia
EU accession countries
          South Africa
   Russian Federation
     Rest of the World
     Rest of Americas
                              Other emerging
                               China
                 Brazil
         China - Total
       China - Normal
    China - Processing
        Mexico - Total
                               Mexico
      Mexico - Normal
   Mexico - Processing
        World average


                          0        10             20         30           40             50            60            70       80              90            100
                                                                         Share of Gross Exports
                                 DVA in direct final goods        DVA in intermediates absorbed by direct importer        Indirect VA exports to third countries
                                 Reflected VA trade               Foreign VA




                                                                                     6
B.2. Domestic value-added that returns home after processing abroad

         Table A3 reports the share of domestic value-added that has returned from abroad in
bilateral gross imports of final goods for each of the three major advanced economies from each
of the listed source countries (in columns 2, 4, and 6). It also reports the weight that each source
country contributes to the returned domestic value-added totals (in columns 3, 5, and 7).
         Each of these economies exhibits different patterns of production sharing in global supply
chains. The United States contributes the highest share (10.0%) of its own value added to its
imports of final goods. One-quarter of U.S. imports from Canada consist of value added from the
United States itself, and a huge 40% of U.S. final good imports from Mexico consist of its own
value added. These two countries account for three quarters of all U.S. value added returned
from abroad. However, although the United States has the world’s highest share of its own value
added return from abroad, it does so largely through North American regional supply chains. 6
The EU contributes a lower share (7.8%) of value to its own final goods imports. This returning
value, however, is less concentrated among trading partners. It received about 50% of such value
from its European neighbors, and moderate shares of its own value from many more countries
than the United States, with moderate returned value shares from much of Asia (over 5% from
Vietnam, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Thailand, and Malaysia), and especially the “rest of the world”
region (14.3%). Japan imports the lowest share of its own value, at 4.3%. The vast majority of its
returned value comes from Asia, and China alone accounts for 58.5% of the total. Thus Japan,
like the United States, largely receives its own value through regional supply chains, though
through a more diverse set of partners.




6
 We also traced the returning value added one step further upstream for the United States, by computing the share of
U.S. value added in other countries’ exports of intermediate inputs to Canada and Mexico (which then return to the
United States).The results indicate that most U.S. inputs that return home after assembly and finishing in North
America travel through very short supply chains. Over 96% of the returned U.S. value from Canada and Mexico was
exported directly to those countries, so relatively a very small share of this value travels through third countries.
                                                            7
Table A3 Sources of domestic value added that returns home via final goods imports

                                              United States                      Japan                         EU
                                        U.S. share in   Partner’s    Japanese share    Partner’s    EU share in   Partner’s
       Exporter                        imports from      share of    in imports from   share of    imports from   share of
                                          partner          total          partner        total       partner        total
                     (1)                     (2)            (3)             (4)           (5)           (6)          (7)
       Advanced economies
       Australia, New Zealand                     2.2          0.2               0.7         0.5            2.9         0.5
       Canada                                    24.7         32.4               0.7         0.2            3.3         0.6
       EFTA                                       3.0          0.4               0.9         0.5           19.6        18.1
       EU                                         2.1          4.4               0.9         3.9                        0.0
       Japan                                      2.0          2.1                           0.0            1.8         2.0
       USA                                                     0.0               1.1         4.4            2.8         6.3
       Asian NICs
       Korea                                      5.4          2.2               5.1         4.7            4.3         2.3
       Hong Kong                                  3.1          0.6               4.3         3.0            5.6         1.0
       Taiwan                                     5.5          1.2               7.8         5.3            4.5         1.4
       Emerging Asia
       China                                      4.2          7.0               8.7        58.0            4.1         6.7
       Malaysia                                   7.5          1.5               8.0         3.5            8.0         1.4
       Indonesia                                  3.5          0.3               5.6         1.7            5.0         0.6
       Philippines                                3.7          0.2               9.6         3.2            5.1         0.3
       Thailand                                   4.4          0.8               8.3         6.2            5.3         1.4
       Viet Nam                                   2.8          0.2               4.0         1.0            5.1         0.7
       Rest of East Asia                          2.3          0.1               1.3         0.1            4.2         0.4
       India                                      1.5          0.2               0.5         0.0            3.8         1.0
       South Asia                                 1.9          0.2               1.0         0.1            3.5         0.7
       Other emerging economies
       Brazil                                     2.8          0.3               0.3         0.0            2.9         0.4
       EU accession countries                     1.7          0.2               0.9         0.2           20.8        34.3
       Mexico                                    39.8         42.2               1.4         0.2            3.6         0.2
       Rest of America                            6.3          1.9               0.5         0.2            3.2         1.2
       Russia                                     0.9          0.0               0.2         0.0            4.8         0.5
       South Africa                               1.6          0.0               3.3         0.5            5.8         0.7
       Rest of the world                          2.0          0.6               0.6         0.3            9.5        14.3
       World                                     10.0        100.0               4.3       100.0            7.8       100.0

       Comparison of export processing regimes

       China normal                               1.6          0.8               1.4         3.3            2.4         1.8
       China processing                           5.3          6.2              12.8        54.7            5.6         4.9
       Mexico normal                              5.1          0.7               0.3         0.0            1.7         0.0
       Mexico processing                         44.9         41.5               2.9         0.2            5.2         0.2


       Source: Authors’ estimates.




                                                         8
B.3 Position of countries within value chains: Evidence from broad sectors
        The export decomposition of this paper reported the components of domestic and foreign
value added in exports but did not examine the sector generating such value in each country
(except the RCA example in section 4.1). Appendix Table A4 breaks down three major value-
added components of gross exports into contributions by production factors employed in three
broad sectors (raw materials, manufacturing, and services). 7Columns (2) through (4) present the
value added to exports by these three broad sectors, as a share of total export value; while
column (5) presents their sum, equal to the VAX ratio proposed by Johnson and Noguera
(2010).They highlight the two types of countries that have high value-added to gross exports
ratios. First, countries that export much of their value added from their raw materials sectors
have the highest VAX ratios (e.g., Russia and “rest of world”, which is dominated by petroleum
exporters). Second, higher-income countries that export much of their value added from their
services sectors, including Hong Kong, the EU, and the United States, also have relatively high
overall VAX ratios, but lower than the natural resource exporters. Conversely, countries that
export most of their value added from their manufacturing sectors, such as Taiwan, Mexico, and
the Philippines, all have quite low VAX ratios.
        Table A4 also reports the broad sectoral composition of foreign value added used in gross
exports in columns (6) through (9). The production factors employed in the manufacturing sector
contribute most of foreign value added in every country’s gross exports.
        Table A4 also reports the sectors that provide value-added in exports that are indirectly
exported through third countries in columns (10) through (14). At the global level, value-added
generated by production factors employed in manufacturing sectors accounts for about one-half
of exports that are sent indirectly through third countries, and value-added generated by
production factors employed in raw materials account for another one-sixth. Countries with high
indirect exports may be more susceptible to global shocks (Bems, Johnson, and Yi, 2010). This
may be particularly true for those with high share of indirect value-added exports in
manufacturing (e.g., the Philippines, Japan, Taiwan, and Korea). These countries suffered major


7
  The value-added measures are computed after partitioning the VBE matrix into the three broad sectors. Sector
results include all value-added produced by factors of production employed in each of these broad sectors, and
exported by all sectors in the economy. See section 2.2. for further discussion of sectoral disaggregation.
                                                           9
production and export downturns in 2008, even though some of their major direct export
destinations (such as China) were less affected by the global slowdown.
        Figure 2 in the main text shows whether countries are upstream and downstream in global
supply chains for specific industries. For comparison to the literature, columns (14) through
(17)present an alternative measure of each country's position in GVCs, the IV/FV ratio. These
are analogous to the VS1/VS ratio presented by Daudin et al., 2010, though with additional detail
on the domestic sector that provides value added to indirect exports. 8At the global level, IV and
FV equal each other, therefore, the average IV/FV ratio is equal to 1. A ratio larger than 1
indicates the country lies upstream in the global value-chain, either by providing raw materials
(such as Russia) or by providing manufactured intermediates (such as Japan) or both. 9 These
countries, plus Australia, the United States, and the EU, have the highest IV/FV ratios. A ratio
less than one means the country lies downstream in the global value-chain, using more
intermediate inputs from other countries to provide final goods. Column (14) in table A4 shows
that two groups have low IV/FV ratios: (1) Asian economies (both emerging and NICs), and (2)
free trade partners neighboring large developed economies.
        Further detail on the types of goods that countries provide to value chains allows us to
separate these two types of countries. Columns (15) to (17) show that countries with higher than
average IV/FV fall into one of two distinct groups. Some upstream emerging economies (e.g.,
Russia and Indonesia) produce primary products for global supply chains, while the upstream
advanced economies produce both manufactured goods and services for these chains. (Almost
uniformly, countries with high IV in manufacturing have high IV in services as well.) Only a few
countries (Australia, Brazil, and Russia) have substantial indirect exports of both primary and
non-primary products. 10




8
  Columns (14) through (17) are calculated by dividing their respective column from (10) through (12) by column
(9).
9
  Upstream here refers to the amount of value added provided relative to the amount received. Upstream in other
literatures may denote the extent of primary product production. As we will see, some countries are upstream in both
senses.
10
   Note that these three regions also have the lowest FV shares in column 9.
                                                          10
Table A4 Decomposition of value-added exports from major sectors, share of gross exports, 2004
                                                                            Sector composition of foreign value-      Sector generating indirect value-added
                                Sector generating value-added exportsa                                                                                                  Sectoral IV/ total FV ratio
                                                                                     added in exportsb                   exports through third countriesc
      Exporter
                             Raw            Manu-                          Raw         Manu-                          Raw         Manu-                                  Raw          Manu-
                                                       Services   Total                           Services   Total                           Services   Total   Total                                 Services
                            materials      facturing                      materials   facturing                      materials   facturing                              materials    facturing
                              (2)             (3)        (4)       (5)      (6)          (7)        (8)       (9)      (10)         (11)       (12)     (13)    (14)      (15)          (16)            (17)
      Advanced economies
      Australia, New Zealand       30.3        21.1       36.5    88.0          3.6        5.6         2.3    11.5         9.8        8.7        9.4     27.9    2.4         0.86         0.76           0.82
      Canada                       14.8        32.1       23.6    70.5          2.2       24.5         1.4    28.1         2.9        5.6        3.8     12.2    0.4         0.10         0.20           0.13
      EFTA                         18.2        26.4       29.4    74.0          2.1       20.6         2.6    25.2         4.8        5.5        5.2     15.5    0.6         0.19         0.22           0.21
      EU                            4.0        34.9       42.2    81.1          0.5        9.3         1.6    11.4         0.9        9.8       10.2     20.9    1.8         0.08         0.86           0.89
      Japan                         1.1        49.9       34.0    84.9          0.1       11.6         0.6    12.2         0.3       18.8       11.7     30.8    2.5         0.03         1.53           0.96
      United States                 5.5        32.4       36.7    74.6          0.6       10.7         1.7    12.9         1.7       13.9       11.4      27     2.1         0.13         1.07           0.88
      Asian NICs
      Korea                          1.5       45.3       18.5    65.2          0.2       32.0         1.6    33.9         0.4       17.0        5.8     23.2    0.7         0.01         0.50           0.17
      Hong Kong                      2.7       11.7       57.5    71.9          0.1       11.3         16     27.5         1.3        5.8       12.4     19.5    0.7         0.05         0.21           0.45
      Taiwan                         0.9       37.0       20.2    58.2          0.4       39.7         1.0    41.1         0.2       18.7        8.2     27.1    0.7         0.01         0.46           0.20
      Emerging Asia
      China                         9.3        37.5       16.0    62.8          1.0       33.8         0.8    35.7        1.6         7.6         3.0    12.2    0.3         0.05         0.21           0.08
      Indonesia                    33.4        28.4       14.7    76.5          1.8       19.8         1.3    22.9       13.8        10.5         4.7     29     1.3         0.60         0.46           0.21
      Malaysia                     13.0        32.2       13.4    58.6          2.3       36.2         1.9    40.5        4.5        15.7         4.9     25     0.6         0.11         0.39           0.12
      Philippines                   6.4        38.5       12.8    57.8          1.2       38.8         1.8    41.9        1.6        21.8         5.9    29.4    0.7         0.04         0.52           0.14
      Thailand                     10.9        31.0       18.1    60.0          2.5       34.3         2.9    39.7        2.2        11.4         4.9    18.5    0.5         0.06         0.29           0.12
      Vietnam                      26.1        27.3        9.2    62.6          7.0       27.1         3.0    37.0        8.2         4.4         2.2    14.8    0.4         0.22         0.12           0.06
      Rest of East Asia            22.4        22.2       33.7    78.2          3.0       13.1         5.5    21.7        6.7         3.2         6.3    16.2    0.7         0.31         0.15           0.29
      India                        17.2        35.2       27.2    79.6          1.0       16.5         2.6    20.1        4.3         8.9         5.8    18.9    0.9         0.21         0.44           0.29
      South Asia                   14.0        30.8       33.8    78.6          1.3       18.0         2.1    21.3        1.8         3.8         5.0    10.7    0.5         0.09         0.18           0.24
      Other emergingeconomies
      Brazil                       22.8        37.7       26.5    87.0          2.9        9.0         0.8    12.7        4.7         8.6         6.0    19.2    1.5         0.37         0.68           0.47
      EU accession countries        5.7        35.7       26.8    68.3          1.2       26.7         2.9    30.8        0.8         6.2         4.3    11.4    0.4         0.03         0.20           0.14
      Mexico                       12.8        33.9        4.7    51.3          5.6       41.7         0.6    48.0        2.4         6.5         0.6     9.6    0.2         0.05         0.14           0.01
      Rest of Americas             34.8        24.2       25.9    84.9          4.5        7.6         2.3    14.4        8.0         7.7         5.5    21.2    1.5         0.55         0.53           0.38
      Russian Federation           37.4        23.0       28.7    89.1          2.8        6.4         1.0    10.2       13.2         8.9         9.1    31.2    3.1         1.30         0.87           0.90
      South Africa                 13.0        31.2       37.4    81.6          3.3       13.1         1.8    18.2        3.4        11.8         9.0    24.2    1.3         0.19         0.65           0.50
      Rest of the world            44.5        16.3       22.2    83.0          5.1        7.7         1.8    14.6       15.6         4.3         5.0    24.9    1.7         1.07         0.29           0.34
      Average                      12.4        32.6       29.4    74.4          1.6       18.0         1.9    21.5        3.6        10.3         7.6    21.5    1.0         0.17         0.48           0.35
Source: Authors’ estimates.
Note: Value-added exports equals box (1)+(2)+(3) in figure 1;Foreign value equals box (5); Indirect VA exports equals box (3)+(4).


                                                                                            11
Table A5 Decomposition of gross exports, selected sectors for the 10 largest exporters, 2004

                                                   Basic decomposition                            Connection with existing measures
                                            DVA in
                                 DVA                     Indirect                                                                  GVC
                        Gross               interme-
                                    in                    DVA                                                                     partici-
Sector and exporter    exports               diates                 Reflected   Foreign            Share   Domestic   Multiple
                                 direct                  exports                          Total                                   pation
                                          absorbed by                DVA          VA              of VS1    content   counting
                                  final                  to third                                                                (vertical
                                              direct
                                 goods                  countries                                                                  trade)
                                           importer
                                  (1)          (2) a      (3) a       (4) a       (5)      (6)     (8)       (9)        (10)       (11)
Finished Mental Products
Western EU             35,743     17.5          47.6        13.0         10.7     11.1    100.0     23.8      88.9       21.9        34.9
United States          17,766     12.9          34.2        13.1         29.0     10.8    100.0     42.0      89.2       39.8        52.8
China Normal           17,457     23.6          46.5        13.0          0.8     16.0    100.0     13.8      84.0       16.8        29.8
Japan                   9,631       8.2         53.9        26.9          2.6      8.3    100.0     29.6      91.7       10.9        37.9
Eastern EU              8,965     11.8          47.2        11.2          1.2     28.6    100.0     12.4      71.4       29.8        41.0
Taiwan                  7,602     15.7          36.1        14.6          0.2     33.3    100.0     14.8      66.7       33.5        48.1
Canada                  5,870       8.3         57.7         7.8          1.4     24.8    100.0      9.2      75.2       26.1        34.0
China Processing        5,864       9.9         13.6         6.7          0.1     69.7    100.0      6.8      30.3       69.8        76.5
EFTA                    4,403     12.6          47.1        12.5          0.6     27.2    100.0     13.1      72.8       27.8        40.3
Korea                   4,202     12.1          43.0        19.1          0.5     25.3    100.0     19.6      74.7       25.8        44.9
Motor Vehicles and parts
Western EU            148,265     58.0          17.7         6.0          5.6     12.7    100.0     11.6      87.3       18.3        24.3
Japan                 119,896     65.1          18.1         6.3          0.4     10.0    100.0      6.7      90.0       10.4        16.7
United States          80,619     34.5          12.0         5.4         29.6     18.5    100.0     35.0      81.5       48.1        53.5
Canada                 64,730     37.2          10.8         1.2          0.5     50.3    100.0      1.7      49.7       50.8        52.0
Eastern EU             37,352     26.7          25.0         5.9          0.8     41.7    100.0      6.6      58.3       42.5        48.3
Korea                  30,455     62.2           9.0         3.4          0.1     25.4    100.0      3.4      74.6       25.4        28.8
Mexico processing      29,791     16.5           4.7         1.0          0.0     77.8    100.0      1.0      22.2       77.9        78.8
Brazil                  9,977     39.4          31.9         9.2          0.3     19.2    100.0      9.5      80.8       19.6        28.7
China Processing        6,946     15.4           3.3         2.5          0.0     78.8    100.0      2.5      21.2       78.8        81.3
Thailand                5,877     37.7          11.4         6.8          0.1     44.0    100.0      6.9      56.0       44.1        50.9
Electronic Machinery
China Processing      161,070     28.4           8.0         6.5          0.0     57.1    100.0      6.5      42.9       57.1        63.6
Japan                 121,734     24.6          23.5        34.2          4.2     13.6    100.0     38.4      86.4       17.7        51.9
United States         110,294     23.3          21.7        18.0         14.0     23.1    100.0     31.9      76.9       37.1        55.0
Western EU             92,232     37.5          21.3        15.7          9.4     16.1    100.0     25.1      83.9       25.5        41.2
Korea                  91,101     21.8          13.3        22.4          0.8     41.8    100.0     23.1      58.2       42.5        64.9
Taiwan                 81,163     12.3          15.4        25.8          0.3     46.2    100.0     26.1      53.8       46.6        72.3
Malaysia               74,746     15.9          14.6        19.3          0.4     49.8    100.0     19.7      50.2       50.2        69.5
Singapore              53,458       5.7          5.3         7.8          0.1     81.1    100.0      7.9      18.9       81.2        89.0
Mexico processing      31,042     39.8          19.5        10.9          0.1     29.8    100.0     10.9      70.2       29.8        40.7
Philippines            30,204       9.5         17.5        25.7          0.2     47.1    100.0     25.9      52.9       47.3        73.0
Note: Columns (1) through (11) are expressed as a share of total gross exports. Column numbering reflects table 2 in main
text.
a
  First order approximations

                                                                    12
   Table A5 Decomposition of gross exports, selected sectors for the 10 largest exporters, 2004—
                                           Continued

                                                      Basic decomposition                           Connection with existing measures
                                           DVA in
                                DVA                        Indirect                                                                  GVC
                       Gross               interme-
Sector and                         in                       DVA                                                                     partici-
                      exports               diates                    Reflected   Foreign            Share   Domestic   Multiple
exporter                        direct                     exports                          Total                                   pation
                                         absorbed by                   DVA          VA              of VS1    content   counting
                                 final                     to third                                                                (vertical
                                             direct
                                goods                     countries                                                                  trade)
                                          importer
                                 (1)        (2) a           (3) a       (4) a       (5)      (6)     (8)       (9)        (10)       (11)

Meat and Dairy products
Western EU            13,477     75.0           13.5           2.1         1.2       8.2      100      3.3      91.8        9.4        11.6
Australia & NZ        13,288     75.6           12.2           4.0         0.1       8.2      100      4.1      91.8        8.3        12.3
USA                     8,060    55.7           31.3           3.5         2.6       7.0      100      6.1      93.0        9.6        13.0
Brazil                  6,556    88.8               3.7        0.6         0.0       6.9      100      0.6      93.1        6.9         7.5
Canada                  4,363    70.8           12.8           2.0         0.1      14.3      100      2.0      85.7       14.4        16.3
EU Accession            3,419    59.3           18.0           2.6         0.2      20.0      100      2.7      80.0       20.2        22.8
China normal            1,291    77.9               7.9        3.8         0.6       9.9      100      4.3      90.1       10.5        14.2
EFTA                      954    54.5           15.8           2.7         0.1      26.9      100      2.8      73.1       27.0        29.8
Thailand                  910    78.4               2.9        1.2         0.0      17.6      100      1.2      82.4       17.6        18.7
India                     629    65.0           24.1           4.2         0.1       6.6      100      4.3      93.4        6.7        10.9
Other Food Products
Western EU            29,390     62.0           22.7           4.1         2.5       8.7      100      6.6      91.3       11.2        15.3
USA                   19,365     52.7           28.5           5.9         5.5       7.5      100    11.4       92.5       13.0        18.9
Brazil                10,052     30.8           49.3          10.1         0.1       9.8      100    10.2       90.2        9.9        20.0
Canada                  9,492    61.5           14.7           3.0         0.2      20.7      100      3.2      79.3       20.9        23.9
China normal            8,928    81.9               3.5        1.6         0.1      13.0      100      1.7      87.1       13.1        14.6
Malaysia                8,169    11.4           46.6          12.2         0.2      29.6      100    12.4       70.5       29.8        42.0
Thailand                8,090    57.2           11.7           4.6         0.1      26.5      100      4.7      73.5       26.5        31.1
Indonesia               7,321    27.3           46.6          12.8         0.3      13.1      100    13.1       86.9       13.4        26.2
EFTA                    6,938    59.5               7.7        2.0         0.1      30.7      100      2.1      69.3       30.8        32.8
EU Accession            5,301    65.8           11.0           2.1         0.1      21.1      100      2.2      78.9       21.2        23.3
Beverages and Tobacco
Western EU            19,654     81.8               7.6        1.9         0.9       7.9      100      2.8      92.1        8.8        10.7
USA                     4,644    81.6               6.4        1.5         3.5       7.1      100      5.0      93.0       10.6        12.1
Australia & NZ          2,860    81.0               6.9        2.0         0.0      10.1      100      2.0      89.9       10.2        12.1
Mexico processing       1,365    13.3               0.0        0.0         0.0      86.7      100      0.0      13.3       86.7        86.7
Canada                  1,315    67.6           15.0           3.5         0.1      13.9      100      3.6      86.1       14.0        17.4
EU Accession            1,204    68.0               8.5        2.2         0.1      21.2      100      2.3      78.8       21.3        23.5
South Africa            1,143    78.3               7.5        2.2         0.0      11.9      100      2.3      88.1       11.9        14.2
Singapore                 834    53.0               0.7        0.3         0.0      46.0      100      0.4      54.0       46.1        46.4
China normal              804    84.1               6.7        1.5         0.1       7.6      100      1.6      92.4        7.7         9.2
Mexico normal             794    95.9               1.1        0.4         0.0       2.6      100      0.4      97.4        2.6         3.0


                                                                      13
Table A5 Decomposition of gross exports, selected sectors for the 10 largest exporters, 2004—
                                           Continued

                                                    Basic decomposition                            Connection with existing measures
                                         DVA in
                              DVA                        Indirect                                                                   GVC
                     Gross               interme-
Sector and                       in                       DVA                                                                      partici-
                    exports               diates                    Reflected    Foreign            Share   Domestic   Multiple
exporter                      direct                     exports                           Total                                   pation
                                       absorbed by                   DVA           VA              of VS1    content   counting
                               final                     to third                                                                 (vertical
                                           direct
                              goods                     countries                                                                   trade)
                                        importer
                              (2) a       (3) a           (4) a          (5)       (6)      (8)     (9)       (10)       (11)       (1)

Textiles
Western EU          34,819     19.7           37.6          14.1          16.9     11.8      100    30.9       88.2       28.7        42.7
China normal        34,804     45.4           21.9          15.9           0.5     16.3      100    16.4       83.7       16.8        32.7
USA                 15,052     13.9           31.9          10.5          31.8     11.9      100    42.3       88.1       43.7        54.3
Korea               12,987       7.7          27.0          33.2           0.8     31.3      100    34.0       68.7       32.1        65.3
Taiwan              12,651       5.4          22.2          38.1           0.4     34.0      100    38.4       66.0       34.4        72.4
China processing     9,595       6.9          10.5           6.8           0.0     75.8      100      6.9      24.3       75.8        82.6
India                9,394     42.9           25.6          16.0           0.2     15.2      100    16.2       84.8       15.4        31.4
Japan                7,672       2.3          25.2          41.0          10.9     20.6      100    51.9       79.4       31.5        72.5
EU Accession         7,659     33.2           27.2           6.3           0.8     32.5      100      7.1      67.5       33.3        39.6
Hong Kong            5,532     23.6               4.8       39.0           3.2     29.4      100    42.2       70.6       32.7        71.7
Wearing Apparel
China normal        32,985     87.8               0.0        0.0           0.0     12.1      100      0.0      87.9       12.1        12.1
Western EU          17,338     84.5               3.5        2.3           0.9      8.8      100      3.2      91.2        9.7        12.0
China processing    14,144     43.5               0.9        1.0           0.0     54.6      100      1.0      45.4       54.6        55.6
EU Accession        10,811     67.9               0.9        0.2           0.0     30.9      100      0.3      69.1       31.0        31.2
Hong Kong            9,624     30.7               2.2       26.3           1.3     39.5      100    27.6       60.5       40.8        67.1
India                6,122     83.5               0.6        0.2           0.0     15.8      100      0.2      84.2       15.8        16.0
Mexico processing    5,259     12.3               0.0        0.0           0.0     87.7      100      0.0      12.3       87.7        87.7
Vietnam              4,032     49.7               0.4        0.2           0.0     49.7      100      0.2      50.3       49.7        49.9
Indonesia            3,980     64.4               0.9        0.4           0.0     34.3      100      0.4      65.7       34.3        34.7
USA                  3,633     64.7               1.8        2.4          19.7     11.5      100    22.1       88.5       31.2        33.6
Leather Products
China normal        16,370     87.8               1.1        1.2           0.0     10.0      100      1.2      90.1       10.0        11.1
China processing    15,920     60.5               2.1        2.2           0.0     35.2      100      2.2      64.8       35.2        37.4
Western EU          15,446     57.4           17.3           8.1           6.9     10.3      100    15.0       89.7       17.2        25.3
Vietnam              5,398     48.3               1.0        0.3           0.0     50.3      100      0.3      49.7       50.3        50.6
EU Accession         4,078     63.4               6.3        1.7           0.2     28.5      100      1.8      71.5       28.7        30.3
Brazil               3,553     44.5           26.1          15.5           0.1     13.8      100    15.5       86.2       13.9        29.4
USA                  2,621     29.7           16.6           9.7          30.9     13.1      100    40.6       86.9       44.0        53.7
India                2,491     60.2           13.8           9.7           0.1     16.3      100      9.7      83.7       16.4        26.0
Indonesia            2,185     74.8               4.9        4.2           0.1     16.1      100      4.3      83.9       16.2        20.4
Thailand             1,780     49.4               4.6       11.9           0.1     34.1      100    12.0       65.9       34.2        46.1




                                                                    14
   Table A5 Decomposition of gross exports, selected sectors for the 10 largest exporters, 2004—
                                           Continued

                                                    Basic decomposition                           Connection with existing measures
                                         DVA in
                              DVA                        Indirect                                                                  GVC
                     Gross               interme-
Sector and                       in                       DVA                                                                     partici-
                    exports               diates                    Reflected   Foreign            Share   Domestic   Multiple
exporter                      direct                     exports                          Total                                   pation
                                       absorbed by                   DVA          VA              of VS1    content   counting
                               final                     to third                                                                (vertical
                                           direct
                              goods                     countries                                                                  trade)
                                        importer
                               (1)        (2) a           (3) a       (4) a       (5)      (6)     (8)       (9)        (10)       (11)

Wood Products
Canada              21,802     12.9           62.3           3.8          1.1     19.9      100      4.9      80.1       21.0        24.8
Western EU          21,083     27.1           46.5           8.0          7.0     11.5      100    14.9       88.5       18.5        26.5
EU Accession        15,072     32.3           37.8           6.0          0.5     23.4      100      6.5      76.6       23.9        29.9
China normal        11,936     43.3           39.1           8.8          0.3      8.4      100      9.1      91.6        8.7        17.5
USA                  8,630       9.9          49.2           7.7         21.8     11.5      100    29.5       88.5       33.3        41.0
China processing     7,080     17.6           10.1           2.3          0.0     70.0      100      2.3      30.0       70.0        72.3
Indonesia            5,734     21.0           50.7          16.0          0.2     12.1      100    16.2       87.9       12.3        28.3
Malaysia             5,529     17.3           44.7          13.3          0.1     24.6      100    13.4       75.4       24.7        38.0
Brazil               4,084     16.4           66.0           9.4          0.1      8.0      100      9.5      92.0        8.1        17.5
Mexico processing    3,549     52.1               8.2        1.0          0.0     38.7      100      1.0      61.3       38.7        39.7
Paper Products & Publishing
Western EU          34,830     18.0           53.5          12.3          8.5      7.7      100    20.8       92.3       16.2        28.5
USA                 22,573     18.7           48.5          10.9         13.5      8.4      100    24.4       91.7       21.9        32.8
Canada              19,186       7.1          63.0          10.0          1.1     18.8      100    11.1       81.2       19.9        29.9
EU Accession         5,529     20.0           45.7           8.9          0.8     24.7      100      9.7      75.4       25.4        34.3
EFTA                 4,385       9.5          63.9          11.3          0.7     14.7      100    12.0       85.4       15.4        26.7
Indonesia            3,921       7.2          43.2          23.6          0.3     25.6      100    23.9       74.4       25.9        49.5
Japan                3,832     10.3           48.7          28.7          3.7      8.7      100    32.4       91.4       12.4        41.1
Brazil               3,652       2.6          68.7          17.0          0.3     11.5      100    17.3       88.6       11.7        28.7
Korea                2,718       8.4          42.2          26.3          0.7     22.5      100    27.0       77.6       23.1        49.5
China processing     2,486       9.7              9.4        3.1          0.0     77.8      100      3.1      22.3       77.8        80.9
Petroleum & Coal Production
Western EU          21,150       0.0          31.3           7.0          4.3     57.4      100    11.3       42.6       61.7        68.7
USA                 16,761       0.0          33.7           8.6          5.0     52.7      100    13.6       47.4       57.6        66.3
Russia              12,619       0.0          70.3          22.1          0.5      7.0      100    22.7       93.0        7.6        29.7
Singapore            9,172       0.0          -0.1          -0.1          0.0    100.2      100     -0.1       -0.2     100.2      100.1
China normal         6,458       0.0          48.3          16.8          1.1     33.8      100    17.9       66.2       34.9        51.7
Korea                6,336       0.0          31.9          12.8          0.6     54.8      100    13.3       45.2       55.3        68.1
Canada               5,165       0.0          57.0          10.2          1.4     31.4      100    11.6       68.6       32.8        43.0
EU Accession         3,962       0.0          38.8          11.4          0.6     49.2      100    12.0       50.8       49.8        61.2
India                3,573       0.0          28.9          11.4          0.3     59.4      100    11.7       40.6       59.7        71.2
EFTA                 3,034       0.0          62.6          13.8          0.8     22.9      100    14.5       77.1       23.7        37.4


                                                                    15
   Table A5 Decomposition of gross exports, selected sectors for the 10 largest exporters, 2004—
                                           Continued

                                                     Basic decomposition                           Connection with existing measures
                                          DVA in
                               DVA                        Indirect                                                                  GVC
                      Gross               interme-
Sector and                        in                       DVA                                                                     partici-
                     exports               diates                    Reflected   Foreign            Share   Domestic   Multiple
exporter                       direct                     exports                          Total                                   pation
                                        absorbed by                   DVA          VA              of VS1    content   counting
                                final                     to third                                                                (vertical
                                            direct
                               goods                     countries                                                                  trade)
                                         importer
                                (1)        (2) a           (3) a       (4) a       (5)      (6)     (8)       (9)        (10)       (11)

Chemical, Rubber & Plastic Products
Western EU          226,573     25.3           39.6          14.4          9.0     11.7      100    23.5       88.4       20.7        35.1
USA                 145,203     13.2           41.9          15.9         14.6     14.5      100    30.5       85.6       29.0        44.9
Japan                69,500     10.3           38.9          31.8          3.6     15.5      100    35.3       84.6       19.0        50.8
EFTA                 41,337     21.7           30.7           9.7          0.4     37.6      100    10.1       62.5       38.0        47.6
Korea                30,847       4.0          31.6          26.7          0.7     37.0      100    27.4       63.0       37.7        64.4
Canada               29,018     12.9           46.0          10.9          1.4     28.9      100    12.3       71.1       30.2        41.2
Taiwan               28,696       8.4          20.3          25.6          0.3     45.5      100    25.8       54.5       45.8        71.4
China normal         28,340     22.7           36.4          18.6          1.4     20.9      100    20.0       79.2       22.3        40.9
Singapore            24,500       3.2          24.4          17.7          0.3     54.4      100    18.0       45.6       54.7        72.4
EU Accession         21,001     14.2           43.0          13.1          1.1     28.6      100    14.2       71.4       29.7        42.8
Mineral Products
Western EU           21,034     12.5           61.5           9.5          6.4     10.1      100    15.9       89.9       16.6        26.0
China normal          8,907     32.9           42.3          10.3          0.8     13.6      100    11.1       86.4       14.5        24.8
USA                   7,068       3.7          53.7          12.1         22.0      8.6      100    34.1       91.5       30.5        42.6
Japan                 6,256       3.2          53.6          31.1          3.6      8.5      100    34.7       91.5       12.1        43.2
EU Accession          4,628     16.4           52.4           6.5          0.6     24.1      100      7.1      75.9       24.7        31.2
Canada                2,282       0.6          72.0           7.3          1.3     18.9      100      8.5      81.1       20.2        27.4
Brazil                1,797       3.8          73.7          11.4          0.2     10.9      100    11.6       89.1       11.1        22.5
China processing      1,683     10.4               8.7        4.6          0.1     76.2      100      4.6      23.8       76.3        80.9
Thailand              1,548     14.6           42.8          12.2          0.2     30.3      100    12.4       69.8       30.4        42.6
Taiwan                1,526       5.8          43.5          22.3          0.3     28.1      100    22.6       71.9       28.4        50.7
Ferrous Metals
Western EU           30,940       0.0          51.2          21.3         13.7     13.8      100    35.1       86.2       27.5        48.9
Japan                20,203       0.0          43.6          38.3          3.9     14.2      100    42.3       85.8       18.1        56.5
Russia               15,843       0.0          53.8          32.4          0.9     12.9      100    33.3       87.1       13.8        46.2
USA                  10,327       0.0          41.8          17.8         27.8     12.6      100    45.6       87.4       40.4        58.2
China normal         10,185       0.0          48.0          31.8          3.3     16.9      100    35.1       83.1       20.2        52.0
Korea                 9,672       0.0          37.9          26.1          0.8     35.2      100    26.8       64.8       36.0        62.1
EU Accession          8,848       0.0          49.8          18.5          1.5     30.2      100    20.0       69.9       31.6        50.2
Taiwan                6,556       0.0          29.7          27.3          0.4     42.6      100    27.7       57.4       43.1        70.3
Brazil                6,523       0.0          59.1          26.7          0.4     13.9      100    27.1       86.2       14.2        40.9
South Africa          5,921       0.0          54.2          29.2          0.2     16.3      100    29.5       83.7       16.6        45.8


                                                                     16
   Table A5 Decomposition of gross exports, selected sectors for the 10 largest exporters, 2004—
                                           Continued

                                                     Basic decomposition                           Connection with existing measures
                                          DVA in
                               DVA                        Indirect                                                                  GVC
                      Gross               interme-
Sector and                        in                       DVA                                                                     partici-
                     exports               diates                    Reflected   Foreign            Share   Domestic   Multiple
exporter                       direct                     exports                          Total                                   pation
                                        absorbed by                   DVA          VA              of VS1    content   counting
                                final                     to third                                                                (vertical
                                            direct
                               goods                     countries                                                                  trade)
                                         importer
                                (1)        (2) a           (3) a       (4) a       (5)      (6)     (8)       (9)        (10)       (11)

Non-ferrous Metals
Western EU            20,457      1.4          41.6          25.4         15.3     16.3      100    40.7       83.7       31.6        57.0
EFTA                  19,549      0.0          36.6          17.8          0.6     45.1      100    18.3       54.9       45.7        63.4
Canada                16,990      0.0          47.2          18.3          1.9     32.6      100    20.2       67.4       34.5        52.8
USA                   16,283      0.3          32.7          27.7         21.7     17.7      100    49.3       82.3       39.4        67.0
Australia & NZ        15,551      0.0          43.5          42.7          1.0     12.7      100    43.7       87.3       13.8        56.5
Russia                15,419      0.0          55.9          31.9          0.6     11.6      100    32.5       88.4       12.2        44.1
South Africa           9,486      0.0          49.4          34.6          0.2     15.8      100    34.8       84.3       16.0        50.6
Japan                  8,612      0.0          25.4          42.5          4.9     27.1      100    47.4       72.9       32.0        74.6
Korea                  5,553      0.0          15.0          23.9          0.9     60.2      100    24.8       39.8       61.1        85.0
China normal           5,501      1.5          40.8          34.7          3.0     20.0      100    37.7       80.0       23.0        57.7
Transportation Equipment
USA                   63,850    41.8           28.4          10.7          4.9     14.2      100    15.6       85.8       19.1        29.8
Western EU            50,704    54.6           19.2           7.8          4.2     14.3      100    12.0       85.8       18.4        26.3
Japan                 16,881    60.3           17.0           7.0          0.6     15.2      100      7.5      84.8       15.8        22.7
Korea                 12,858    67.6               2.1        0.8          0.0     29.5      100      0.9      70.5       29.6        30.4
Canada                11,687    36.5           19.3           7.5          0.4     36.4      100      7.8      63.6       36.7        44.2
China processing       5,898    28.0               8.5        6.3          0.0     57.2      100      6.3      42.8       57.2        63.5
EU Accession           5,710    52.2           12.2           4.5          0.2     30.9      100      4.7      69.1       31.1        35.6
China normal           4,961    38.5           31.5          16.1          0.6     13.2      100    16.7       86.8       13.9        29.9
Brazil                 4,901    79.9               5.4        2.2          0.0     12.5      100      2.2      87.5       12.6        14.8
EFTA                   4,189    56.0           13.0           4.4          0.2     26.4      100      4.6      73.6       26.6        31.0
Machinery and Equipment
Western EU           309,383    52.7           21.8           7.9          5.4     12.4      100    13.2       87.7       17.7        25.6
USA                  183,179    51.1           20.7           8.8          8.8     10.6      100    17.6       89.4       19.4        28.2
Japan                162,999    52.2           19.6          15.0          1.7     11.6      100    16.7       88.5       13.2        28.2
China processing      54,400    25.9           13.3          12.1          0.4     48.3      100    12.5       51.7       48.7        60.8
EFTA                  47,748    40.2           14.4           5.2          0.2     40.1      100      5.3      59.9       40.2        45.4
China normal          44,087    39.0           30.4          14.3          1.2     15.1      100    15.5       84.9       16.3        30.6
Korea                 43,488    52.4           12.1           9.1          0.3     26.1      100      9.4      73.9       26.4        35.5
Taiwan                42,724    39.6           10.7           9.1          0.2     40.5      100      9.2      59.5       40.6        49.7
EU Accession          41,086    26.9           30.6           8.1          0.8     33.6      100      8.9      66.4       34.4        42.5
Mexico processing     34,979    10.5               8.8        3.0          0.1     77.7      100      3.1      22.3       77.7        80.8


                                                                     17
   Table A5 Decomposition of gross exports, selected sectors for the 10 largest exporters, 2004—
                                           Continued

                                                              Basic decomposition                                       Connection with existing measures
                                                   DVA in
                                     DVA                              Indirect                                                                                  GVC
                        Gross                      interme-
Sector and                              in                             DVA                                                                                     partici-
                       exports                      diates                       Reflected    Foreign                    Share        Domestic    Multiple
exporter                             direct                           exports                                Total                                             pation
                                                 absorbed by                      DVA           VA                      of VS1         content    counting
                                      final                           to third                                                                                (vertical
                                                     direct
                                     goods                           countries                                                                                  trade)
                                                  importer
                                      (1)           (2) a              (3) a       (4) a        (5)           (6)            (8)         (9)        (10)        (11)

Other Manufactures
Western EU              28,178         61.0             19.9              4.7          3.2       11.2          100            7.8         88.8       14.4         19.1
China processing        20,916         62.4                 4.0           1.4          0.0       32.3          100            1.4         67.7       32.3         33.7
USA                     16,796         57.9             17.1              5.4          5.2       14.4          100           10.6         85.6       19.6         25.0
China normal            14,326         86.3                 3.9           1.3          0.0          8.4        100            1.4         91.6         8.5         9.8
India                   14,220         26.7             35.5             13.8          0.3       23.8          100           14.0         76.2       24.1         37.8
Japan                    6,996         59.1             19.1              9.8          1.0       11.1          100           10.8         88.9       12.1         21.9
EFTA                     5,645         43.2             14.4              3.6          0.2       38.7          100            3.7         61.3       38.9         42.4
Thailand                 4,098         46.9             11.8              4.5          0.0       36.8          100            4.5         63.3       36.8         41.3
Taiwan                   3,194         52.6                 8.3           7.4          0.1       31.6          100            7.5         68.4       31.7         39.1
Malaysia                 2,854         49.3                 3.5           2.1          0.0       45.0          100            2.1         55.0       45.1         47.2

Note: Columns (1) through (11) are expressed as a share of total gross exports. Column numbering reflects table 2 in main
text.
a
  First order approximations



Table A6 Magnification of trade costs on final manufacturing goods exports from vertical
specialization, 2004 -- Descriptive Statistics for detailed sector level results

                                                                                                                        a
               Standard trade costs           Foreign       Trade cost for imported          Magnification factor                  Domestic      Effective    Magnifi-
                                              content               inputs                                                          content     tariff rate    cation
             Trans-   Tariff     Total         share        Trans- Tariff     Total          Trans-       Tariff     Total           share     (2)+(7)/(11)     ratio
                                                                                                                                                              (12)/(2)
             port                (1)+(2)                    port                 (5)+(6)     port
                (1)     (2)          (3)          (5)          (6)         (7)        (8)       (9)        (10)        (1)             (11)           (12)         (13)
  N            445     445          445          445          445        445          445      445         445        445              445             445          439
  MIN           0.0     0.0         0.0           3.0         0.1         0.0         0.2       0.0         0.0        0.0              9.2            0.0             1.1
  MAX          22.3    20.3        31.3          90.9         9.4        20.4      22.7      171.4         85.4      255.8             97.0          172.1       281.0
  MEAN          6.1     4.4        10.5          30.7         1.7         1.9         3.6       1.7         1.5        2.1             69.3           10.3             4.5
  STD           4.6     3.7         6.5          18.0         1.4         2.6         3.2       8.1         4.1       12.2             18.0           12.9         19.5




                                                                                 18
                                         Reference

Baldwin, Richard, 2008, “Managing the Noodle Bowl: The Fragility of East Asian
Regionalism”, The Singapore Economic Review 53(3):449–478.

Dean, Judith, Mary Lovely, and Jesse Mora. 2009. “Decomposing China-Japan-U.S. trade:
Vertical specialization, ownership, and organizational form.”Journal of Asian Economics 20(6):
596–610.

Koopman, Robert, Zhi Wang, and Shang-Jin Wei. 2008. “How Much Chinese Exports Is Really
Made in China—Assessing Foreign and Domestic Value-added in Gross Exports.” NBER
Working Paper 14109.

Koopman, Robert, Zhi Wang and Shang-Jin Wei. 2011. "How Much of China’s Exports is
Really Made in China? Computing Domestic Content in Exports When Processing Trade is
Pervasive." Paper presented at workshop “The Fragmentation of Global Production and Trade in
Value-Added — Developing New Measures of Cross Border Trade, World Bank, Washington
DC, June.

Maurer, Andreas and Christophe Degain. 2010. "Globalization and Trade Flows: What you see is
not what you get!" Staff Working Paper ERSD-2010-12, World Trade Organization.

Nag, Biswajit, Saikat Banerjee, and RittwikChatterjee. 2007. “Changing Features of the
Automobile Industry in Asia.” Working Paper Series No. 37, Asia-Pacific Research and Training
Network on Trade.




                                             19
