                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                THE IMPACT OF EDUCATION ON HEALTH KNOWLEDGE

                                        Duha Tore Altindag
                                         Colin Cannonier
                                         Naci H. Mocan

                                       Working Paper 16422
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w16422


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2010




We thank Michael Grossman, Joe Price, Jason Fletcher, Partha Deb, and the seminar participants of
the 2010 Western Economic Association Meetings in Portland, Oregon, and the Graduate Center of
CUNY for helpful discussions and suggestions. Two anonymous referees provided helpful comments.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Duha Tore Altindag, Colin Cannonier, and Naci H. Mocan. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Impact of Education on Health Knowledge
Duha Tore Altindag, Colin Cannonier, and Naci H. Mocan
NBER Working Paper No. 16422
September 2010
JEL No. I1,I12,I18,I21

                                            ABSTRACT

The theory on the demand for health suggests that schooling causes health because schooling increases
the efficiency of health production. Alternatively, the allocative efficiency hypothesis argues that
schooling alters the input mix chosen to produce health. This suggests that the more educated have
more knowledge about the health production function and they have more health knowledge. This
paper uses data from the 1997 and 2002 waves of the NLSY97 to conduct an investigation of the allocative
efficiency hypothesis by analyzing whether education improves health knowledge. The survey design
allows us to observe the increase in health knowledge of young adults after their level of schooling
is increased by differential and plausibly exogenous amounts. Using nine different questions measuring
health knowledge, we find weak evidence that an increase in education generates an improvement
in health knowledge for those who ultimately attend college. For those with high school as the terminal
degree, no relationship is found between education and health knowledge. These results imply that
the allocative efficiency hypothesis may not be the primary reason for why schooling impacts health
outcomes.


Duha Tore Altindag                                 Naci H. Mocan
Louisiana State University                         Department of Economics
2128 Patrick F. Taylor Hall                        Louisiana State University
Baton Rouge, LA, 70803                             2119 Patrick F. Taylor Hall
daltin2@tigers.lsu.edu                             Baton Rouge, LA 70803-6306
                                                   and NBER
Colin Cannonier                                    mocan@lsu.edu
Department of Economics
Louisiana State University
2124 Patrick F. Taylor Hall (CEBA)
Baton Rouge, LA 70803
USA
ccanno5@tigers.lsu.edu
I.        Introduction


          The seminal work of Grossman (1972a, 1972b) created the theoretical framework of a

human capital model for the demand for health, where health is both demanded and also

produced. The model posits that the stock of health capital enters the utility function as a

consumption good because better health increases utility. Health capital also determines the

amount of time that can be devoted to work in the market, and to the production of nonmarket

goods. Health capital depreciates over time, and gross investment in health can be produced by

a household production function that uses the person’s own time and such health inputs as

medical care, diet, and cigarette and alcohol consumption.

          The pure investment version of the Grossman model, where health does not provide

direct utility, generates unambiguous predictions. For example, as long as the marginal product

of health capital declines as the stock of health gets larger (which is reasonable because output

produced by health capital has a finite upper limit, such as 8,800 hours per year) schooling

should increase the quantity of health demanded (for the details of Grossman model, see

Grossman 2000). In Grossman’s model schooling causes health because schooling increases the

efficiency of health production. Numerous studies provided evidence for the causal impact of

schooling on health (Chou, Liu, Grossman and Joyce 2010, Conti, Heckman and Urzua 2010,

Lleras-Muney 2005, Currie and Moretti 2003, Berger and Leigh 1989).1 However, it has also

been suggested that schooling influences health mainly through its impact on allocative

efficiency. In this hypothesis, schooling alters the input mix chosen to produce health.

Specifically, it is presumed that the more educated choose a combination of inputs that produces




1
    Also see the papers cited in Chou, Liu, Grossman and Joyce (2010).
                                                     1
more output than does the input mix chosen by the less educated (see Rosenzweig and Schultz

1982 and papers discussed in Grossman 2006).

       A horse race between allocative efficiency and productive efficiency can be conducted by

estimating health production functions which include education and all potential health inputs.

Because it is difficult to measure all health inputs (i.e. health behavior) and also because health

inputs themselves are functions of education, estimation of such production functions is plagued

with empirical difficulties. An indirect method to determine the relative importance of allocative

versus productive efficiency involves estimating the relationship between schooling and health

inputs by controlling for the impact of health knowledge (Kenkel, 1991). If schooling improves

allocative efficiency by increasing health knowledge and thereby altering the choice of health

inputs, schooling should have little or no direct effect on health inputs in a model that controls

for health knowledge. However, Kenkel (1991) finds that even though part of the impact of

schooling on smoking and drinking alcohol is attributable to health knowledge, most of the

impact of schooling on these (negative) health inputs remains even after controlling for health

knowledge, suggesting that allocative efficiency is not a major factor. Price and Simon (2009)

find that during the three-month period after the publication of an article in the New England

Journal of Medicine about the risk of a vaginal birth after having a previous C-section birth

(VBAC), the incidence of VBAC dropped more significantly among the more educated mothers.

This finding suggests that more educated people absorb new information more quickly, which

may then change their behavior. Similarly, Aizer and Stroud (2010) report that more educated

mothers reduced their smoking after the release of the 1964 Surgeon General Report on smoking

and health while the less-educated did not. These findings support the allocative efficiency




                                                  2
hypothesis because they imply that education increases information about the true impact of the

inputs on health.

       Allocative efficiency hypothesis suggests that more educated individuals have more

information about the structure of the production function. As explained by Grossman (2008),

this implies that “...the more educated have more knowledge about the harmful effects of

smoking or about what constitutes an appropriate diet.” In this paper we conduct a direct

investigation of the allocative efficiency hypothesis by analyzing the relationship between

schooling and health knowledge. Using data from the 1997 and 2002 waves of the National

Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1997 cohort (NLSY97) we investigate whether education

improves health knowledge. It is plausible that more educated individuals have more health

knowledge not because of education itself, but because of other attributes that allow them to

acquire health knowledge and that these attributes are correlated with education. For example,

if wealthier and knowledgeable parents transmit their health knowledge to their children at home

and if children of such parents obtain more education, then the impact of the home environment

may be attributed to education if home environment is not adequately controlled for. In

empirical analyses we are able to adjust for the impact of household characteristics.

Furthermore, the survey design allows us to observe the increase in the health knowledge of

young adults after their level of schooling is increased at differential and plausibly exogenous

amounts. Specifically, two observationally identical young adults who have the same level of

education in the first wave (1997 wave) of the survey may have completed different levels of

schooling in the second wave (2002 wave) because the surveys are administrated in different

time periods. More specifically, the 1997 wave of the NLSY97 was administrated between

January 1997 and May 1998, and the 2002 survey was administered between November 2002



                                                 3
and July 2003. This means, for example, that a 9th grader in the 1997 wave could have been

interviewed 54 months later in the 2002 wave of the survey, while another 9th grader could have

been interviewed 78 months after the first survey. Given that the timing of the surveys is not

correlated with student or parent attributes, this design implies that the second student was

exposed to 20 additional months of schooling in comparison to the first student.2

        Using school attendance between the two surveys in Ordinary Least Squares (OLS)

regressions and using the distance between surveys as an instrument for attendance in

Instrumental Variables (IV) regressions, we find spotty evidence for the hypothesis that an

increase in the level of education generates an improvement in health knowledge among those

who ultimately attend college. The effect is even weaker for males. In the sample of individuals

where high school is the terminal degree, there is no discernible impact of education on health

knowledge. These results imply that the allocative efficiency hypothesis may not be the primary

reason for why schooling impacts health outcomes.


        Section II describes the empirical specification. Section III presents the data. Section IV

discusses the results and Section V is the conclusion.




II.     Empirical Specification


        Consider Equation (1) below, where Kit stands for the extent of the health knowledge of

the person i at time t, approximated by the probability of answering correctly various questions

about health production and disease prevention.

(1)             Kit=α + β Sit + XitΩ’ + εit ,
2
  The difference in exposure to schooling in this example is 20 months rather than 24 because there is no
schooling in Summer months. We provide evidence for the exogeneity of the timing of the survey to
observable household attributes in the data section.

                                                    4
where Sit stands for the schooling level of the individual i at time t, and Xit stands for a vector of

variables that are expected to influence the health knowledge of the person. There is no

reasonable reverse causality in this specification because the extent of an individual’s health

knowledge should have no impact on his/her level of schooling. On the other hand, the

estimated impact of schooling on health knowledge, represented by β, could be biased if the

empirical analysis fails to control for such factors as family income and parent education that

may influence both the level of schooling of the person and his/her health knowledge.

Furthermore, it could also be the case that unobservable personal and family characteristics,

which are part of the error term εit, may be correlated with schooling Sit. If εit consists of two

components, πit and μi, where πit is idiosyncratic white noise but Cov(Sit, μi) ≠ 0, the estimate of

β will be biased.

       We exploit the fact that the NLSY97 respondents answered the same health knowledge

questions both in the 1997 and 2002 waves. This allows us to investigate the link between the

change in education and the change in health knowledge between these two waves. Taking the

time-difference of Equation (1) between the two survey years differences out the person-specific,

time-invariant component μi, which generates

(2)            Δk Kit= β Δk Sit + Δk Xit Ω’ + Δk πit ,

where Δk stands for k-month difference. In Equation (2), current health knowledge is a function

of the change in the quantity of schooling over the last k months, as well as the change in

observable family attributes such as family income and household size. We estimate regressions

based on Equation (2).

       It is easy to show that under a distributed-lag representation, Equation (2) can be re-

written as



                                                   5
(3)             Kit= β Δk Sit + Δk Xit Ω’ + γ Kit-k +eit ,

where eit is the error term, which is uncorrelated with schooling. As an alternative specification,

we also estimate versions of Equation (3).

        Note that, as explained in the previous section, not each person is observed in exactly 5-

year intervals. In fact, the average time between the first and second interview is 68 months (the

shortest distance between the two interviews is 54 months, and the longest distance is 76

months). Therefore, the k-th difference in Equation (3) stands for different lengths for different

people. The distribution of the number of months between the two interviews is displayed in

Figure 1. The variation in the distance between the two interview dates translates into variation

in schooling respondents received between the first and second interviews. The average number

of months of school attendance between the surveys (Attendance) is 50.3

         In principle, a higher value of Attendance captures both the effect of schooling and the

effect of aging. Thus, age at the second interview can be added as a control variable to isolate

the impact of schooling. However, a variety of analyses, described in the Section on

Instrumental Variables demonstrate that aging, in the range that exists in this data set, has no

direct impact on health knowledge, or on other types of knowledge that are plausibly acquired in

school. Moreover, age was never significant in any regression estimated, and inclusion of age

did not alter other coefficients (reported in Appendix 2). Therefore, we do not control for age in

the regressions. As explained below, this allows us to estimate the models also using




3
  The number of months in school is smaller than the number of months between the interview dates
because the former does not include those months where the school is not in session, whereas the latter
does. However, in a handful of cases the number of months in school is greater than the number of
months between the interview dates because in these cases the corresponding students had dual
enrollments (e.g. simultaneous enrollment in high school and college), and we counted enrollment in each
month in each type of institution towards total school attendance.

                                                     6
instrumental variables, where school attendance is instrumented by the distance between

interviews.

        The correlation between household income (household size) in 1997 and the length of

time in months between the two survey waves is -0.01 (0.02). This confirms that distance

between the two surveys is exogenous to household attributes. Given that school attendance

between the two survey years is directly related to the time passed between these two survey

years, much of the variation in Attendance is due to the variation in time between interviews.

However, part of the variation in Attendance is due to college attendance. For example, school

attendance will differ between two students who have the same distance between the interviews

if one of them has a terminal high school degree, but the second one decided to go to college. To

isolate the impact of attendance, we followed the students until the survey year 2007 to identify

those who eventually went to college.4 Thus, we created a sample that consists of students who

attended college at some point in their lives until they were 24 years of age on average (in year

2007).5 We name this sample “College-bound students”. We also created a second sample that

consists of students whose terminal degrees are high school. This sample, which is called

“Eventual High School Graduates,” includes those students who graduated from high school, but

have not attended college as of 2007.6




4
 These include those respondents who were still in high school in the second survey (2002-2003), but
subsequently graduated and attended college. If schooling information was missing in 2007, we utilized
information reported in previous waves.
5
  This sample is similar in design to that used by Farrell and Fuchs (1982). They selected a group of
students with at least 12 years of education at age 17, who acquired additional schooling (college
education) until the age of 24. Farrell and Fuchs (1982) analyzed the impact of additional schooling
between the ages of 17 and 24 on the propensity to smoke.
6
 This includes students who were in high school during the second survey in 2002-03, graduated
subsequently, but have not enrolled in college as of 2007.

                                                    7
          III.   Data

          The main data set is constructed using information from the 1997 and 2002 waves of the

National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1997 cohort (NLSY97). The NLSY97 contains a

nationally representative sample of 8,984 youths who were aged 12 to 16 as of December 31st

1996. The respondents have been followed annually since the survey was initiated. In the first

year of the survey, biological and/or residential parents of the respondents were interviewed to

provide supplemental information about their education and their knowledge of health-related

issues.

          Key dependent variables that gauge the extent of individuals’ health knowledge, are

based on nine questions that were asked in both the 1997 and 2002 waves to the cohort born in

1983. These questions are listed in Appendix 1. Table 1 presents the dependent variables that

are created based on these nine health questions posed to the respondents in the College-bound

sample. The descriptive statistics for the sample of Eventual High School Graduates are

presented in the Appendix 2 Table 1. The variables take the value of one if the respondent

answered the questions correctly, and zero if the answers were incorrect. For example, the

respondents were asked if they believed that smoking one or more packs of cigarettes per day

increased the risk of getting heart disease (Smoking leads to Heart Disease). Based on the

Surgeon General’s report, the correct answer to this question is yes. For each question, we

referred to authoritative sources such as the American Heart Association, Surgeon General’s

Report, National Institute on Drug Abuse and American Liver Foundation to identify the correct

answer. For the question regarding the timing of pregnancy, the correct answer is option c

(about a week after the period begins), although we also considered both options c and d as




                                                  8
correct. The latter variable is titled Pregnancy Most Likely -2.7 As Table 1 reveals, some health

questions, such as the impact of smoking on heart disease and the link between drinking and

alcohol addiction have been answered correctly by most respondents. On the other hand, the

proportion of correct answers is low for some other questions such as the link between drinking

and heart disease. The proportion of correct responses is particularly low for pregnancy related

questions.

        The proportion of correct answers to the question about the relationship between drinking

and heart disease is markedly lower in the 2002 survey in comparison to the 1997 survey. It is

possible that such a decline in the rate of correct answers took place because some respondents

started drinking between the survey years, and because of cognitive dissonance they denied in

the second survey that drinking leads to heart disease. The NLSY97 contains a question about

alcohol consumption. Because the health knowledge question pertains to drinking at least five

drinks of alcohol once/twice a week, we identified individuals who consumed five or more

drinks for at least four days a month (heavy drinkers). If cognitive dissonance is a major factor,

we expect a strong correlation between the onset of heavy drinking and the propensity to change

the answers between the two survey waves. Of the 250 college-bound individuals who answered

correctly in the first wave but incorrectly in the second wave, 218 were not heavy drinkers in

either wave. Only 32 were not heavy drinkers in the first wave, but became heavy drinkers in the

second wave. In a more general context, we investigated the correlation between the change in

the knowledge question and the change in heavy drinking between the survey years by running a



7
  We did not use the question that asks whether smoking one or more packs of cigarettes per day
increases the risk of getting AIDS. This is because scientific evidence on the impact of smoking on faster
progression to AIDS among HIV-infected individuals is mixed (Coates et al. 1990, Nieman et al. 1993).
Furthermore, the question may have been misinterpreted as the impact of smoking on the risk of HIV
infection, which is different from progressions to AIDS, conditional on HIV.

                                                    9
regression where the dependent variable is the change in the correct response indicator to the

drinking-heart disease question and the independent variables consist of three dichotomous

indicators of whether the person was not a heavy drinker in either wave of the survey, whether

he/she was a heavy drinker in the first wave but not in the second wave, and whether the person

was not a heavy drinker in the first wave but became a heavy drinker in the second wave. None

of the dummy variables were statistically different from zero. This evidence suggests that there

is no systematic correlation between the change in the drinking pattern and the propensity to

answer this particular health question correctly.

          We created an index of health knowledge questions, which is the percentage of correct

answers to all nine questions.8 This index, which is listed in Table 1, may represent the overall

accuracy of health knowledge. The mean value of the index increases between the survey years,

demonstrating an improvement in overall health knowledge. The distribution of the index is

presented in Figures 2A and 2B for both waves.

          Although we have no evidence that the onset of heavy drinking between the two waves of

the survey is correlated with the change in answers related to drinking, we cannot completely

rule out this possibility. It is also possible that the amount of drinking specified in the questions

is not considered as heavy drinking by the respondents, but instead it is considered as moderate

drinking. If this is the case, given the information on the health benefits of moderate drinking

(Mukamal et al. 2003; Rimm et al. 1999) it is possible that the answers are noisy. Therefore, we

also created an index of health knowledge, which excludes all drinking-related questions. This

index, titled Index of Health Knowledge-Non Alcohol, consists of the four non-alcohol related

questions: smoking and heart disease, pill and pregnancy, condom and STD, and timing of



8
    We used Pregnancy most likely question as one of the nine questions.
                                                    10
pregnancy. Index of Health Knowledge-Alcohol stands for the index that consists of five alcohol

related questions.

        Table 2 provides the descriptive statistics of the explanatory variables in the sample of

individuals who eventually attended college. Schooling is measured using two different

variables. Highest Grade Completed refers to the highest grade completed at the time of the

survey. This variable may contain measurement error due to the fact that some respondents are

interviewed after the end of the school year. Consider two students as an example. If the first

student was interviewed in April of 1998 (when the school was in session) and the second one

was interviewed in June of 1998 (after the semester is over), the latter student will report a value

for “highest grade completed” which is one year larger than the former, although the difference

in the amount of schooling is only two months. Such measurement error would generate

attenuation bias in the estimated coefficient of Highest grade completed. To account for the

timing of the survey, we created an indicator variable (Aftersemester) which takes the value of

one if the individual was interviewed between June 1997 and May 1998 or between June and

July 2003. Note that two students who are interviewed in different months of the same

academic year would provide the same answer to the highest grade completed questions although

the amount of schooling they have received (in months) would be different.9 This second source

of measurement error in the Highest grade completed variable cannot be controlled for.

        As an alternative, and more accurate, measure of schooling we use Attendance, which is

the cumulative number of months the individual has attended any type of school (Kindergarten to

college) since the first interview in the 1997 wave.10 This variable is created by using monthly


9
  An example is two students who have been interviewed in September and April of the same academic
year.
10
   However, none of the individuals in our sample is in kindergarten or in primary school at the time of
the first interview.

                                                    11
 schooling status information available in the schooling event history of each wave of the NSLY

 between 1997 and 2002. Consequently, Attendance measures schooling with more precision

 than Highest grade completed.

         Five of the nine health knowledge questions were also posed to the parents of the

 respondents in the 1997 wave. These variables are also listed in Table 2. It is interesting to note

 that the percentage of correct answers is lower for parent answers.11 In some specifications, we

 control for parent’s health knowledge using these variables. Race, Hispanic ethnicity and gender

 indicators capture time-invariant characteristics of the respondents. They are included in Table 2

 to provide information about the sample, although such characteristics will not be used in

 empirical analyses as they drop out due to time-differencing.



IV.      Results


         Table 3A presents the results pertaining to the College-bound students sample. The

 coefficients are obtained from estimating models as depicted by Equation (2), and robust

 standard errors are in parentheses. The variable ΔkSit in Equation (2) measures the change in

 schooling between the two survey years. The primary measure of Sit is Attendance, which stands

 for the cumulative number of months the individual attended school since the first survey.12

 Thus, this variable identifies the number of months the respondent was in school between the

 two survey cycles.


 11
    Parents were asked five questions about the health impact of alcohol. The lower rate of accuracy of
 their responses to these questions may be a reflection of the fact that the parents were born in the 1950s
 and 1960s and grew up during a period where society’s attitudes towards alcohol consumption were more
 tolerant. It is possible that early impressions about the impact of alcohol consumption persisted over
 time.
 12
    In the 1997 wave of the survey, when this question was asked for the first time the possible answers are
 0 months or 1 month.

                                                     12
        In Table 3A schooling has an impact on health knowledge for the questions about the

association between drinking and arthritis (column 4), and the questions about pregnancy listed

in columns (7) to (10). An additional month of schooling increases the probability of answering

these health questions correctly by 0.3 to 0.9 percentage points. Independent variables that

measure the change in household income, household size, whether the respondent lives with at

least one biological parent and whether the respondent lives in an urban area are not significant

determinants of health knowledge. These variables may be noisy because they are constructed,

like other independent variables, by taking the difference in relevant values between the two

survey years. Transitory changes in 1997 or 2002, which may have temporarily altered the

values of these variables from their permanent levels, would create measurement error in these

variables. Thus, as an alternative measure we used the average values of these variables between

the years 1997 and 2002. The results, which are not reported in the interest of space, were very

similar to those reported in Table 3A.

       For completeness, we also report the results obtained from the model where the change in

schooling is measured by the change in Highest Grade Completed. The results, reported in

Table 3B, show that in this specification schooling has no impact on health knowledge with the

exception of the knowledge about the pill and the knowledge about the timing of pregnancy.

Each additional grade completed is associated with an increase in the probability of answering

the question on the pill (column 7) correctly by six percentage points, on the timing of pregnancy

(column 10) by about seven percentage points. A comparison of these magnitudes with those

reported in Table 3A shows that the effects associated with Highest grade completed are 7-11

times larger than those obtained from the models that employed Attendance. This is consistent

with the fact that a typical school year is about 9 months long.



                                                13
       Parents’ health knowledge may directly influence the health knowledge of their offspring

because parent health knowledge can be transmitted to the child at home. It is possible that such

transmission of knowledge from parent to the child is stronger in households where parent

supervision and parent-child contact is greater. If children from such households have better

school attendance records, then the effect of schooling will be overestimated in models that do

not control for parent health knowledge. However, as we argued earlier, because of the survey

design, the potential change in schooling between the two survey years is independent of

household attributes. Thus, controlling for parent health knowledge should not impact the

estimated schooling coefficients in our models. Tables 4A and 4B display the results of the

models where parent health knowledge is added as an additional control. This is a dichotomous

indicator which takes the value of one if the parent who was asked the health question answered

it correctly. As mentioned in the data section, only the five questions listed in Tables 4A and 4B

were posed to the parents. Therefore, we are able to estimate only five of the nine models in this

analysis.13 Table 4A uses Attendance as the measure of schooling while Table 4B employs

Highest grade completed.

       The extent of parents’ health knowledge has no systematic impact on the health

knowledge of the child. Furthermore, as expected, controlling for parent health knowledge does

not change the estimated impact of schooling on own health knowledge. For example, the

coefficient of Attendance is 0.006 in the model that explains the probability of a correct answer

for the link between drinking and arthritis in Table 4A (column 3); and it is also 0.006 in Table

3A (column 4), which is the same model with the exception of parent health knowledge



13
  Tables 4A and 4B employ the difference in household attributes. Using the average values of these
variables over the years that span the survey years produced almost identical results.


                                                  14
variable. The same equivalence is seen between the coefficients of Highest grade completed

reported in Tables 4B and 3B.

        To present the results in a more concise fashion, we created an index where the

proportion of correct answers to all health questions is calculated for each individual. The mean

(standard deviation) of this index is 0.684 (0.133) in the first wave, and 0.749 (0.131) in the

second wave, indicating that overall, there is an increase in the accuracy of the answers between

the two survey years. The distributions are displayed in Figures 2A and 2B. The change of the

index between the survey years is plotted against the change in school attendance for college

bound students in Figure 3.14 We also created two additional health index variables: one that

consist of the five alcohol-related health questions that were also posed to the parents (Index of

Health Knowledge-Alcohol), and another one that consists of non-alcohol related health

questions (Index of Health Knowledge-Non-alcohol). Descriptive statistics of these indexes are

displayed in Table 1.

        We run the models with these three health knowledge indexes as dependent variables.

The results are presented in Table 5. Column (1) displays the results where the overall health

index is the dependent variable. Columns (2) and (3) display the results where the index based

on alcohol related questions is the dependent variable. Because these particular questions were

also posed to the parents, we created the same index for the parent answers and included it as an

explanatory variable in the model reported in column (3). The results presented in column (4)

pertain to the health index with non-alcohol questions. In columns (1) to (4) schooling is

measured by Highest grade completed, and it is measured by Attendance in columns (5) to (8).

Schooling has no impact on the index based on alcohol-related health questions, and the


14
  The estimated slope is 0.002 (se=0.0007), suggesting that school attendance is positively related to an
increase in the health knowledge index.

                                                    15
inclusion or exclusion of parent health information does not alter this result. On the other hand,

the index based on non-alcohol questions is influenced by schooling, and the same is true for the

overall index. An additional year of schooling increases the health index by about 1.6

percentage points, or about 2.3 percent.

        We perform the same analyses using the high school graduate sample. As described

earlier, this sample consists of individuals who graduated from high school but have not attended

college until they are 24 years of age. Table 6A reports the results with Attendance as the

measure of schooling. This table is the counterpart to Table 3A. Table 6B is the counterpart to

3B where highest grade completed is the measure of schooling. In Table 6A no coefficient is

statistically significant with the exception of the smoking-heart disease question and the condom

question, and the latter has the wrong sign. In Table 6B only one education coefficient is

significant.

         An interesting aspect of the results obtained from the high school graduates sample is

that there is some evidence that the hours worked in the labor market has a positive impact on

the propensity to answer some health questions correctly. This result makes sense to the extent

that working for pay creates exposure to others and provides increased opportunities for

gathering health knowledge from other individuals. The impact, however, is modest. An

additional 1,000 hours worked between the two survey years increases the propensity for a

correct answer by 2-4 percentage points.    This would roughly translate into working for about

25 hours per week for two months each summer over the last five summers.

        Tables 6A and 6B show that education is not related to health knowledge in the sample of

high school graduates. In models that use Attendance, which is a more accurate measure of

education, half of the estimated education coefficients have negative signs, and with the



                                                16
exception of smoking and condom use (where the latter has the wrong sign), they are all

statistically insignificant. It should be pointed out that the sample size is small in these

regressions, about 280 observations.

       Tables 7A and 7B present the results from the models that include parent health

knowledge. As mentioned earlier, only the five questions listed in the table were posed to the

parents. As was the case with the sample of college-bound students, controlling for parent health

knowledge does not alter the estimated coefficients.

       The frequency distribution of the health index for the eventual high school graduates

sample in the two surveys is plotted in Figures 4A and 4B, and Figure 5 displays the change in

the index versus the change in attendance between the two surveys. Table 8 displays the results

obtained from the models that use the health index as the dependent variable. Consistent with

previous results, the estimated coefficient of education is statistically not different from zero.

This is true for the overall health index in column (1) as well as the indexes that consist of

alcohol-related questions and non-alcohol-related questions.

       To investigate the extent to which education acquired in high school has a different

impact on health knowledge than education obtained in college, we used the sample of college-

bound students and employed Attendance - High School and Attendance - College as two

separate variables. These variables decompose Attendance into two components. More

specifically, in Tables 9A and 9B Attendance-High School stands for the number of months the

students attended high school between the first and second interview waves, and Attendance-

College stands for the number of months of college attendance. As Table 9A demonstrates,

college education has an impact on the arthritis question, on the question about the pill and on

the question about the timing of pregnancy. High school attendance has a positive impact on the



                                                  17
probability of answering correctly the smoking-heart disease question, and the question on the

pill and the question on condom use. The results displayed in Table 9B show that both college

attendance and high school attendance have statistically significant impacts on the index of non-

alcohol related health knowledge and on the index of overall health knowledge. The coefficient

of college attendance is larger than the coefficient of high school attendance, although the

difference is not statistically significant in most cases.

        Instrumental Variables Regressions

        Although aging may be correlated with an increase in health knowledge, among the

young adults who make up the data set, aging is not related to knowledge. When we ran the

models displayed in Tables 3A to 9B with the inclusion of age, the coefficient of age was never

significant and the other coefficients remained intact. Some of these results are reported in

Appendix 2 Tables 3, 4, 5 and 6. We regressed each health knowledge measure used in the

paper on highest grade completed, age and the other control variables separately for the 1997 and

2002 samples. In nine of the 10 regressions in each sample, the coefficient of age was

insignificant. In the case of smoking-heart attack question the coefficient was significant at the

ten-percent level, but it was negative.

        As a third exercise, we regressed an indicator for whether the student’s grades were

mostly As and Bs in the 9th grade on the age of the student in months as of the end of the

academic year when he/she finished 9th grade (May). Age was not significant for either college-

bound individuals or eventual high school graduates. When we used a dependent variable which

takes the value of one if the student’s grades were mostly As, the results did not change. Finally,

an indicator variable for whether the student’s grades were mostly As or Bs in the 8th grade is

included as an additional control variable in the regressions to explain whether the student’s



                                                   18
grades were mostly As or Bs in the 9th grade. The coefficients of age remained insignificant for

both college bound students and eventual high school graduates.

       As a final check, we constructed a dichotomous variable that takes the value of one if the

individual gave the correct answer to the following question when asked in 2007: “Suppose you

had $100 in a savings account and the interest rate was 2 percent per year. After 5 years, how

much do you think you would have in the account if you left the money to grow: more than $102,

exactly $102, or less than $102?” In a regression of this indicator variable on highest grade

completed and age of the individual, the coefficient of age was insignificant. Excluding highest

grade completed from this regression increased the size of the coefficient of age, but did not alter

its insignificance. This body of evidence suggests that age has no direct impact on health

knowledge, school grades, or basic math knowledge.

       In this section we report instrumental variables regression results where Attendance is

instrumented by the distance between the two interviews in months. As demonstrated earlier in

the paper, the distance between two interviews is exogenous. Because Attendance is the number

of months the student attended school between the two interview waves, Attendance depends on

the distance between the two waves. Distance is also correlated with the age in the second wave,

but given the evidence that aging is not related to the change in knowledge, distance is a

candidate for a good instrument for Attendance.

       Tables 10 and 11 present the results for college-bound students where attendance is

instrumented by distance between interviews. As expected the first-stage has high explanatory

power with F-statistics around 82. Of the 10 health knowledge regressions reported in Table 10,

attendance is statistically significant in only one case. Table 11 shows that attendance does not




                                                19
impact alcohol-related health index, but it has a positive effect on the overall health index, which

seems to be driven by non-alcohol-related health index.

       Tables 12 and 13 present the results obtained from the instrumental variables regressions

using the sample of eventual high school graduates. Attendance is not statistically significant in

any of the health questions, and it is not significant in any of the health index regressions.



       Extensions

       Taking the difference in household attributes between the survey years may generate

noise if their values have been temporarily altered in 1997 and/or 2002 from the values that

would have been observed in the absence of these temporary shocks. As an alternative measure

we used the average values of these variables between the years 1997 and 2002. The results did

not change. When the models that employed attendance are re-estimated using linear and

quadratic terms of Attendance, no clear pattern emerged. Most coefficients were insignificant as

before. In some cases, the linear coefficients turned negative.

       We also estimated the specification depicted by Equation (3) using OLS. Selected

regressions are displayed in Appendix 2 Tables 7-10. The results are very similar to those

obtained from Equation (2), presented in the paper. Although the proportion of correct answers

is high in some cases, estimating these models with probit generated marginal effects which were

very similar to those obtained from linear probability models. The same result is obtained when

we estimated the alternative specification displayed in Equation (3) by instrumental variables

(see Appendix 2 Tables 11-14).

       To entertain the possibility that the impact of schooling on health knowledge differs

between males and females, we re-estimated the models by adding an interaction variable



                                                 20
between attendance and a dichotomous variable to indicate if the person is female. The results,

presented in Appendix 2 Tables 15 and 16, demonstrate that the impact of schooling is greater

for females, and in some of the alcohol-related questions, such as alcohol-addiction and alcohol-

liver damage, education has an impact on the health knowledge for females but not for males.



V.     Conclusion


       There exists a large body of empirical evidence pointing to a causal effect of education

on health (Conti, Heckman and Urzua 2010, Chou, Liu, Grossman and Joyce 2010, Lleras-

Muney 2005). However, the exact mechanism behind the impact of education on health is less

clear. Standard theoretical models of health capital, which trace back to Grossman (1972a)

predict productive efficiency of education where an increase in schooling improves the

efficiency of health production by raising the marginal products of inputs. More schooling could

also enable people to understand better the exact nature of a health production function. Thus, in

this “allocative efficiency” approach, education improves health knowledge, which in turn

translates into a better choice of health inputs.

       In this paper we perform a direct test of the allocative efficiency hypothesis where we

analyze the impact of education on health knowledge. Health knowledge is measured by the

probability of providing the correct answer to nine questions, ranging from the link between

drinking and heart disease to the most effective method to prevent a pregnancy. We use data

from the 1997 and 2002 waves of the NLSY97, and take advantage of the fact that the

respondents were asked the same health questions in both waves. Because the time difference

between the two survey years differs between participants, who were in the age range of 13 to 15




                                                    21
in the 1997 wave, participants differ in the amount of schooling they accumulated between the

two survey years.

       In the sample of individuals who eventually went to college, instrumental variables

regressions reveal that education has a statistically significant impact on only one of the nine

health knowledge questions. Education has a positive impact on the index of health knowledge,

which consists of the proportion of health questions that are answered correctly. It has a positive

impact on non-alcohol related health questions, but not on the index that consists of alcohol-

related health questions. These effects are weaker for males.

       The relationship between education and health knowledge is even weaker in a sample

that consists of individuals whose completed schooling is 12 years (those who graduated from

high school but have not attended college), where neither OLS nor IV regressions reveal a

significant impact of education on health knowledge. Thus, consistent with Kenkel (1991), the

results imply that allocative efficiency is not likely to be the main reason for why education

improves health.




                                                 22
                                      References
Aizer, Anna and Laura Stroud. 2010. “Education, Knowledge and the Evolution of Disparities
       in Health.” NBER Working Paper 15840.         http://papers.nber.org/papers/w15840
       (Accessed May 10, 2010).

Berger, Mark C. and J. Paul Leigh. 1989. “Schooling, Self-Selection, and Health.” Journal of
       Human Resources, 24:3, pp. 433-455.

Chou, Shin-Yi, Jin-Tan Liu, Michael Grossman, and Ted Joyce. 2010. "Parental Education and
      Child Health: Evidence from a Natural Experiment in Taiwan." American Economic
      Journal: Applied Economics, 2:1, pp. 33–61.

Coates RA, Farewell VT, Raboud I, et al. 1990. “Cofactors of progression to acquired
      immunodeficiency syndrome in a chart of male sexual contacts of men with human
      immunodeficiency virus disease.” American Journal of Epidemiology, volume 132, issue
      4, pp. 717-722

Conti, Gabriella, James Heckman, and Sergio Urzua. 2010. “The Education-Health Gradient.”
       American Economic Review, 100:2, pp. 234-38.

Currie, J. and E. Moretti. 2003. “Mother’s education and the intergenerational transmission of
        human capital: evidence from college openings.” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
        volume 118, pp. 1495-1532.

Farrell, Phillip and Victor R. Fuchs. 1982. “Schooling and Health: The Cigarette Connection.”
        Journal of Health Economics, Vol. 1, pp. 217-30.

Grossman, Michael. 1972a. “On the Concept of Health Capital and the Demand for Health.”
      Journal of Political Economy, 80:2, pp. 223-255.

Grossman, Michael. 1972b. The Demand for Health: A Theoretical and Empirical
      Investigation. New York: Columbia University Press for the National Bureau of
      Economic Research.

Grossman, Michael. 2008. “The Relationship between Health and Schooling” Eastern
      Economic Journal. 34; pp. 281-92.

Grossman, Michael. 2006. “Education and Non-Market Outcomes” in Handbook of Economics
      of Education, volume 1, edited by Eric Hanushek and Finis Welch. Amsterdam: Elsevier,
      pp. 577-633.
Grossman, Michael. 2000. “The Human Capital Model” in Handbook of Health Economics,
      volume 1A, edited by A.J. Culyer and J.P. Newhouse. Amsterdam: North-Holland, pp.
      347-408.

                                             23
Kenkel, D. 1991. “Health behavior, health knowledge, and schooling.” Journal of Political
      Economy, 99:2, pp. 287-305.

Lleras-Muney, Adriana. 2005. “The Relationship between Education and Adult Mortality in the
       United States.” Review of Economic Studies, volume 72, issue 1, pp. 189-221.

Mukamal, Kenneth J., Katherine M. Conigrave, Murray A. Mittleman, Carlos A. Camargo, Meir
     J. Stampfer, Walter C. Willett and Eric B. Rimm. 2003. “Roles of Drinking Pattern and
     Type of Alcohol Consumed in Coronary Heart Disease in Men.” The New England
     Journal of Medicine, Vol. 348, pp. 109-118.

Nieman R.B., J. Fleming, J.R. Harris and D.M. Mitchell. 1993. “The Effect of Cigarette
      Smoking on the Development of AIDS in HIV-1-seropositive Individuals.” AIDS, 7:5,
      pp. 705-710.

Price, Joseph and Kosali Simon. 2009. “Patient education and the impact of new medical
        research.” Journal of Health Economics, volume 28, issue 6, pp. 1166-1174.

Rimm, Eric B., Paige Williams, Kerry Fosher, Michael Criqui and Meir J. Stampfer. 1999.
      “Moderate Alcohol Intake and Lower Risk of Coronary Heart Disease: Meta-Analysis of
      Effects on Lipids and Haemostatic Factors.” British Medical Journal, 319:1, pp. 1523-
      1528.

Rosenzweig, Mark R., and T. Paul Schultz. 1982. “The Behavior of Mothers as Inputs to Child
      Health: The Determinants of Birth Weight, Gestation, and Rate of Fetal Growth” in
      Economic Aspects of Health edited by Victor R. Fuchs. Chicago: University of Chicago
      Press for the National Bureau of Economic Research, pp. 53–92.




                                            24
                                                 Table 1
                            Summary Statistics of Health Knowledge Questions
                               NLSY97 Sample for 1997 and 2002 Waves
                                      (College-Bound Students)
Variables                   Variable Definition                                                              Means
                                                                                                 Full        1997        2002
                                                                                                Sample      sample      sample
                                                                                               (N=1,969)   (N=1,003)   (N=966)
                                                            (1)                                   (2)         (3)         (4)
Outcome variables:
Smoking leads to heart      Correct response for whether smoking at least one pack of            0.938       0.938      0.938
disease                     cigarette per day increases the risk of heart disease, and equal
                            zero otherwise.

Drinking leads to heart     Correct response for whether having at least five drinks of          0.601       0.646      0.555
disease                     alcohols once/twice per week increases the risk of heart disease
                            and equal zero otherwise.

Drinking leads to liver     Correct response for whether having at least five drinks of          0.917       0.912      0.922
damage                      alcohols once/twice per week increases the risk of liver damage
                            and equal zero otherwise.

Drinking DOES NOT           Correct response for whether having at least five drinks of          0.778       0.742      0.815
lead to arthritis           alcohols once/twice per week DOES NOT increase the risk of
                            getting arthritis, and equal zero otherwise.

Drinking leads to alcohol   Correct response for whether having at least five drinks of          0.928       0.940      0.916
addiction                   alcohols once/twice per week increases the risk of alcohol
                            addiction, and equal zero otherwise

Drinking harms unborn       Correct response for whether having at least five drinks of          0.972       0.979      0.964
child                       alcohols once/twice per week increases the risk of harming an
                            unborn child, and equal zero otherwise

Pill prevents pregnancy     Correct response for whether birth control pill is the most          0.421       0.264      0.583
                            effective in preventing pregnancy, and equal zero otherwise

Condom prevents STD         Correct response for whether condom is the most effective in         0.772       0.639      0.910
                            preventing STDs, and equal zero otherwise

Pregnancy most likely       Correct response for whether pregnancy is most likely to occur       0.109       0.081      0.138
                            one week after the period begins, and equal zero otherwise

Pregnancy most likely-2     Correct response for whether pregnancy is most likely to occur       0.255       0.160      0.352
                            one week after the period begins or two weeks after the period
                            begins, and equal zero otherwise

Index of Health             The proportion of correct answers in response to health              0.716       0.684      0.749
Knowledge                   knowledge questions (standard errors in parentheses)                (0.136)     (0.133)    (0.131)

Index of Health             The proportion of correct answers in response to alcohol related     0.839       0.844      0.834
Knowledge - Alcohol         health knowledge questions (standard errors in parentheses)         (0.165)     (0.160)    (0.171)

Index of Health             The proportion of correct answers in response to non-alcohol         0.561       0.483      0.642
Knowledge – Non alcohol     related health knowledge questions (standard errors in              (0.216)     (0.212)    (0.188)
                            parentheses)


                                                                  25
                                               Table 2
                               Summary Statistics of Personal Attributes
                               NLSY97 Sample for 1997 and 2002 Waves
                                     (College-Bound Students)
                                                                                                 Mean         Mean         Mean
Variables                 Variable Definition                                                 (Std. Dev)   (Std. Dev)   (Std. Dev)
                                                                                                  Full        1997         2002
                                                                                               Sample        sample       sample
                                                                                              (N=1,969)    (N=1,003)     (N=966)
                                                        (1)                                       (2)          (3)          (4)
Highest grade completed   Years of schooling (Highest grade completed)                           9.577        6.900       12.356
                                                                                                (2.828)      (0.675)      (0.815)

Attendance                Months respondent attended high school or college since the first    27.804        0.978       55.657
                          wave                                                                (27.931)      (0.147)      (8.151)

Age                       Age in years                                                         16.140       13.366       19.021
                                                                                               (2.857)      (0.500)      (0.294)

Female                    Equals one if female, zero otherwise                                  0.524        0.542        0.542

Black                     Equals one if Black and equal zero otherwise                          0.238        0.239        0.238

Hispanic                  Equals one if Hispanic and equal zero otherwise                       0.177        0.177        0.177

Hours worked              Cumulative hours (in 000’s) worked from age 14 at employee-           1.219        0.004        2.485
                          type jobs                                                            (1.755)       (.062)      (1.778)

Household sizea           Number of individuals in respondent’s household                       4.197        4.513        3.869
                                                                                               (1.554)      (1.428)      (1.611)

Household incomea         Household income (in tens of thousands of US dollars) of              5.849        5.269        6.451
                          respondent                                                           (4.825)      (3.892)      (5.571)

Urbana                    Equals one if the respondent resides in an urban area, and equal      0.750        0.756        0.744
                          zero otherwise

Biological parent(s)a     Equals one if the respondent lives with at least one biological       0.872        0.962        0.777
                          parent, and equal zero otherwise

Household sizeb           Average number of people living in the respondent’s household                                   4.210
                          in the last five waves (1998-2002)                                                             (1.290)

Household incomeb         Average income (in tens of thousands of US dollars) of the                                      6.549
                          respondent’s household in the last five waves (1998-2002)                                      (5.349)

Urbanb                    Proportion of the times (waves) the respondent has resided in an                                0.762
                          urban area during the last five waves (1998-2002)                                              (0.400)

Biological parent(s)b     Proportion of the times (waves) the respondent has lived with at                                0.907
                          least one biological parent during the last five waves (1998-                                  (0.202)
                          2002)




                                                                 26
                                                     Table 2 (concluded)

                                 Summary Statistics of Personal Attributes
                                 NLSY97 Sample for 1997 and 2002 Waves
                                       (College-Bound Students)
Variables                   Variable Definition                                                                Means
                                                                                                   Full        1997        2002
                                                                                                  Sample      sample      sample
                                                                                                 (N=1,969)   (N=1,003)   (N=966)
                                                            (1)                                     (2)         (3)         (4)
Parent health knowledge -   Correct response for whether respondent’s parent thinks having                     0.618
Drinking leads to heart     at least five drinks of alcohols once/twice per week increases the
disease                     risk of getting heart disease, and equal zero otherwise.


Parent health knowledge -   Correct response for whether respondent’s parent thinks having                     0.784
Drinking leads to liver     at least five drinks of alcohols once/twice per week increases the
damage                      risk of liver damage and equal zero otherwise


Parent health knowledge -   Correct response for whether respondent’s parent thinks having                     0.589
Drinking DOES NOT           at least five drinks of alcohols once/twice per week DOES NOT
lead to arthritis           increase the risk of getting arthritis, and equal zero otherwise


Parent health knowledge -   Correct response for whether respondent’s parent thinks having                     0.775
Drinking leads to alcohol   at least five drinks of alcohol once/twice per week increases the
addiction                   risk of alcohol addiction and equal zero otherwise.


Parent health knowledge -   Correct response for whether respondent’s parent thinks having                     0.839
Drinking harms unborn       at least five drinks of alcohols once/twice per week increases the
child                       risk of harming an unborn child, and equal zero otherwise

Notes: Variables with missing values were converted to the mean value of each survey round. In some cases, the number of
observations varies because of missing information.




                                                                  27
                                                                      Table 3A
                                      The Impact of School Attendance on Health Knowledge: OLS Regressions
                                                             (College-Bound Students)
Variables                                  (1)            (2)            (3)           (4)            (5)            (6)            (7)            (8)            (9)           (10)
                                       Smoking        Drinking       Drinking       Drinking       Drinking      Drinking          Pill         Condom        Pregnancy      Pregnancy
                                       leads to       leads to       leads to        DOES           leads to     harms the       prevents       prevents         most           most
                                          heart         heart          liver       NOT lead         alcohol       unborn        pregnancy        STDs           likely        likely-2
                                        disease        disease       damage        to arthritis    addiction       child
Attendance                               0.002         -0.004         -0.000        0.006***         -0.001        0.000         0.009***       0.005**        0.003*         0.006**
                                        (0.001)       (0.003)        (0.002)         (0.002)        (0.001)       (0.001)         (0.003)       (0.002)        (0.002)        (0.003)
Hours worked                             0.000         -0.009         -0.006          0.004           0.004       -0.004           0.001         -0.004         -0.003        -0.020*
                                        (0.006)       (0.013)        (0.008)         (0.011)        (0.007)       (0.003)         (0.011)       (0.010)        (0.009)        (0.011)
Household incomea                        -0.000        -0.000         0.000           -0.000         -0.000       -0.000           0.000         0.000          0.000         0.000**
                                        (0.000)       (0.000)        (0.000)         (0.000)        (0.000)       (0.000)         (0.000)       (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.000)
Household sizea                           0.007       -0.028*          0.010          -0.007          0.003       -0.004          -0.013         -0.012         0.010          0.014
                                        (0.007)       (0.016)        (0.009)         (0.014)        (0.008)       (0.006)         (0.015)       (0.013)        (0.011)        (0.014)
Urbana                                   0.028         -0.077         -0.002          -0.027         0.041        -0.005           0.043        -0.103*         0.049          0.077
                                        (0.043)       (0.075)        (0.038)         (0.053)        (0.035)       (0.023)         (0.069)       (0.062)        (0.052)        (0.069)
Biological parent(s)a                    0.018          0.076         -0.032          -0.052          0.033       -0.006          -0.018          0.008         0.011          -0.033
                                        (0.027)       (0.058)        (0.031)         (0.049)        (0.030)       (0.022)         (0.053)       (0.045)        (0.036)        (0.053)
Observations                               958           958            958            958             958          958             951            953           949            949
R-square                                  0.02          0.02           0.03            0.02           0.02          0.01            0.02          0.01           0.01           0.03
       Notes: Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. Statistical levels of significance are: * indicates p<0.1, ** indicates p<0.05, *** indicates p<0.01. aHousehold
       characteristics are measured as the change between the two survey years.




                                                                                          28
                                                                    Table 3B
                                  The Impact of Highest Grade Completed on Health Knowledge: OLS Regressions
                                                            (College-Bound Students)
Variables                                   (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)            (7)            (8)            (9)           (10)
                                        Smoking        Drinking       Drinking        Drinking      Drinking       Drinking          Pill         Condom        Pregnancy       Pregnancy
                                        leads to       leads to       leads to         DOES          leads to      harms the       prevents       prevents         most            most
                                           heart         heart          liver        NOT lead        alcohol        unborn        pregnancy        STDs           likely         likely-2
                                         disease        disease       damage         to arthritis   addiction        child
Highest grade completed                   0.017         -0.019         -0.006           0.032         -0.008         0.007         0.062**         0.033          0.030          0.068**
                                         (0.012)       (0.030)        (0.018)          (0.023)       (0.014)        (0.008)        (0.027)        (0.023)        (0.020)         (0.028)
Aftersemester                             -0.003         0.031         -0.021            0.019         0.006         0.016           0.041         0.040           0.035          -0.006
                                         (0.026)       (0.054)        (0.028)          (0.045)       (0.026)        (0.016)        (0.050)        (0.043)        (0.034)         (0.050)
Hours worked                               0.000        -0.008         -0.006            0.001         0.004        -0.004          -0.003         -0.006         -0.004         -0.021*
                                         (0.006)       (0.013)        (0.008)          (0.011)       (0.007)        (0.003)        (0.011)        (0.011)        (0.009)         (0.011)
Household incomea                        -0.000         -0.000         0.000            -0.000        -0.000         0.000          0.000          0.000          0.000          0.000**
                                         (0.000)       (0.000)        (0.000)          (0.000)       (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.000)         (0.000)
Household sizea                           0.007        -0.028*          0.010           -0.008         0.003        -0.004          -0.013        -0.012          0.010           0.014
                                         (0.007)       (0.016)        (0.009)          (0.014)       (0.008)        (0.006)        (0.016)        (0.013)        (0.011)         (0.014)
Urbana                                    0.030         -0.083         -0.002           -0.018         0.040        -0.005          0.056         -0.097          0.054           0.085
                                         (0.044)       (0.075)        (0.038)          (0.053)       (0.036)        (0.023)        (0.070)        (0.063)        (0.051)         (0.070)
Biological parent(s) a                    0.018          0.069         -0.030           -0.043         0.034        -0.008          -0.009         0.012          0.012           -0.034
                                         (0.027)       (0.058)        (0.031)          (0.049)       (0.031)        (0.022)        (0.054)        (0.046)        (0.036)         (0.052)
Observations                                958           958            958              958           958           958             951           953             949            949
R-square                                   0.02          0.02           0.03             0.02          0.02           0.01           0.02           0.01           0.02            0.03
  Notes: Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. Statistical levels of significance are: * indicates p<0.1, ** indicates p<0.05, *** indicates p<0.01. aHousehold
  characteristics are measured as the change between the two survey years.




                                                                                           29
                                                   Table 4A
                            The Impact of School Attendance on Health Knowledge:
                               OLS Regressions with Parent Health Knowledge
                                           (College-Bound Students)
Variables                                           (1)                 (2)               (3)                (4)                (5)
                                                 Drinking           Drinking          Drinking            Drinking          Drinking
                                               leads to heart     leads to liver     DOES NOT              leads to         harms the
                                                  disease            damage            lead to             alcohol         unborn child
                                                                                       arthritis          addiction
Attendance                                         -0.004             0.000           0.006***              -0.000             0.000
                                                  (0.003)            (0.002)           (0.002)             (0.001)            (0.001)
Parent health knowledge in first survey            -0.011             -0.023          -0.085**              0.014              -0.113
                                                  (0.053)            (0.064)           (0.040)             (0.046)            (0.089)
Hours worked                                       -0.009            -0.006             0.004               0.004              -0.004
                                                  (0.013)            (0.008)           (0.011)             (0.007)            (0.003)
Household incomea                                  -0.000             0.000             -0.000              -0.000             0.000
                                                  (0.000)            (0.000)           (0.000)             (0.000)            (0.000)
Household sizea                                   -0.028*             0.010             -0.007              0.003              -0.005
                                                  (0.016)            (0.009)           (0.014)             (0.008)            (0.006)
Urbana                                             -0.078             0.000             -0.024              0.042              -0.005
                                                  (0.075)            (0.038)           (0.052)             (0.035)            (0.023)
Biological parent(s) a                             0.075              -0.032            -0.044              0.034              -0.005
                                                  (0.058)            (0.031)           (0.049)             (0.030)            (0.022)
Observations                                        958                958               958                 958                958
R-square                                            0.02               0.03              0.03                0.02               0.01
    Notes: Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. Statistical levels of significance are: * indicates p<0.1, ** indicates
    p<0.05, *** indicates p<0.01. aHousehold characteristics are measured as the change between the two survey years.




                                                                   30
                                                Table 4B
                    The Impact of Highest Grade Completed on Health Knowledge:
                          OLS Regressions with Parent Health Knowledge
                                      (College-Bound Students)
Variables                                           (1)                 (2)               (3)                (4)                (5)
                                                 Drinking           Drinking          Drinking            Drinking          Drinking
                                               leads to heart     leads to liver     DOES NOT              leads to         harms the
                                                  disease            damage            lead to             alcohol         unborn child
                                                                                       arthritis          addiction
Highest grade completed                            -0.019            -0.006             0.036               -0.008             0.007
                                                  (0.030)            (0.018)           (0.023)             (0.014)            (0.008)
Parent health knowledge in first survey            -0.010             -0.021          -0.086**              0.015              -0.113
                                                  (0.053)            (0.063)           (0.040)             (0.046)            (0.089)
Aftersemester                                      0.028              -0.015            0.022               0.012              0.018
                                                  (0.055)            (0.029)           (0.045)             (0.027)            (0.017)
Hours worked                                       -0.008            -0.006             0.002               0.004              -0.004
                                                  (0.013)            (0.008)           (0.011)             (0.007)            (0.003)
Household incomea                                  -0.000             0.000             -0.000              -0.000             0.000
                                                  (0.000)            (0.000)           (0.000)             (0.000)            (0.000)
Household sizea                                   -0.028*             0.010             -0.007              0.003              -0.004
                                                  (0.016)            (0.009)           (0.014)             (0.008)            (0.006)
Urbana                                             -0.083             0.000             -0.015              0.042              -0.005
                                                  (0.074)            (0.038)           (0.053)             (0.036)            (0.023)
Biological parent(s) a                             0.069              -0.030            -0.036              0.034              -0.006
                                                  (0.058)            (0.031)           (0.049)             (0.031)            (0.022)
Observations                                        958                958               958                 958                958
R-square                                            0.02               0.03              0.02                0.02               0.01
    Notes: Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. Statistical levels of significance are: * indicates p<0.1, ** indicates
    p<0.05, *** indicates p<0.01. aHousehold characteristics are measured as the change between the two survey years.




                                                                   31
                                                                   Table 5
                   The Impact of Highest Grade Completed and School Attendance on Health Knowledge Index: OLS Regressions
                                                          (College-Bound Students)
Variables                                            (1)                (2)                (3)                (4)                (5)               (6)                (7)         (8)
                                                 Index of           Index of           Index of           Index of           Index of           Index of          Index of      Index of
                                                  Health             Health             Health             Health             Health             Health            Health        Health
                                                Knowledge         Knowledge –        Knowledge –        Knowledge –         Knowledge         Knowledge –       Knowledge –   Knowledge –
                                                                    Alcohol            Alcohol          Non-alcohol                             Alcohol           Alcohol     Non-alcohol
Highest grade completed                           0.016**             0.001              0.001           0.035***
                                                  (0.007)            (0.009)            (0.009)            (0.011)
Attendance                                                                                                                   0.002***             0.000              0.000     0.005***
                                                                                                                              (0.001)            (0.001)            (0.001)     (0.001)
Parent health knowledge in first survey                                                   0.008                                                                      0.008
                                                                                        (0.047)                                                                     (0.047)
Aftersemester                                      0.020              0.010               0.013              0.032
                                                  (0.014)            (0.017)            (0.017)            (0.022)
Hours worked                                      -0.003              -0.003             -0.002             -0.003            -0.002              -0.002             -0.002      -0.001
                                                  (0.003)            (0.004)            (0.004)            (0.005)            (0.003)            (0.004)            (0.004)     (0.005)
Household incomea                                 -0.000              -0.000             -0.000             0.000             -0.000              -0.000             -0.000      0.000
                                                  (0.000)            (0.000)            (0.000)            (0.000)            (0.000)            (0.000)            (0.000)     (0.000)
Household sizea                                    -0.004             -0.005             -0.005             -0.002             -0.004             -0.005             -0.005      -0.002
                                                  (0.004)            (0.006)            (0.006)            (0.006)            (0.004)            (0.006)            (0.006)     (0.006)
Urbana                                            -0.003              -0.014             -0.013             0.011             -0.006              -0.014             -0.014      0.004
                                                  (0.020)            (0.023)            (0.023)            (0.031)            (0.020)            (0.023)            (0.023)     (0.030)
Biological parent(s) a                             0.005              0.004               0.004              0.007              0.003              0.004              0.004       0.003
                                                  (0.015)            (0.020)            (0.020)            (0.022)            (0.015)            (0.020)            (0.020)     (0.022)
Observations                                        958                958                 958                958                958                958                958         958
R-square                                            0.02               0.02               0.02               0.03               0.02               0.02               0.02        0.03
Notes: Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. Statistical levels of significance are: * indicates p<0.1, ** indicates p<0.05, *** indicates p<0.01. aHousehold
characteristics are measured as the change between the two survey years.




                                                                                                 32
                                                                         Table 6A
                                      The Impact of School Attendance on Health Knowledge: OLS Regressions
                                                        (Eventual High School Graduates)
Variables                                  (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)            (7)            (8)            (9)           (10)
                                        Smoking        Drinking       Drinking       Drinking      Drinking       Drinking          Pill         Condom        Pregnancy      Pregnancy
                                        leads to       leads to       leads to        DOES          leads to      harms the       prevents       prevents         most           most
                                           heart         heart          liver       NOT lead        alcohol        unborn        pregnancy        STDs           likely        likely-2
                                         disease        disease       damage        to arthritis   addiction         child
Attendance                              0.007**          0.001         -0.000          -0.003        -0.005         0.000            0.008      -0.011***         -0.003         -0.002
                                         (0.003)       (0.005)        (0.004)         (0.005)       (0.003)        (0.003)         (0.005)       (0.004)         (0.004)        (0.005)
Hours worked                            0.024**         0.038*          0.006       -0.051***        -0.004         0.003           0.026         -0.017         0.023*          0.022
                                         (0.010)       (0.022)        (0.013)         (0.019)       (0.013)        (0.010)         (0.020)       (0.015)         (0.013)        (0.018)
Household incomea                         -0.000         0.000          0.000          -0.000        -0.000         -0.000          -0.000        -0.000          -0.000         -0.000
                                         (0.000)       (0.000)        (0.000)         (0.000)       (0.000)        (0.000)         (0.000)       (0.000)         (0.000)        (0.000)
Household sizea                           -0.015         0.015         -0.014          0.009         -0.006         0.002           0.001         0.017           0.015          -0.004
                                         (0.014)       (0.028)        (0.015)         (0.022)       (0.016)        (0.015)         (0.027)       (0.019)         (0.018)        (0.023)
Urbana                                     0.032        -0.111         -0.076          -0.003        -0.033         -0.021          -0.016         0.011          -0.005         -0.027
                                         (0.074)       (0.128)        (0.067)         (0.081)       (0.064)        (0.052)         (0.115)       (0.063)         (0.088)        (0.106)
Biological parent(s)a                     0.055         -0.018         -0.006         0.131*         -0.078          0.035          -0.069        -0.111          0.003          -0.128
                                         (0.060)       (0.091)        (0.053)         (0.075)       (0.057)        (0.054)         (0.095)       (0.069)         (0.066)        (0.081)
Observations                                281           281            281            281           281             281             279           279            280            280
R-square                                   0.11          0.04           0.06            0.08          0.08           0.01            0.03          0.08            0.03           0.03
       Notes: Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. Statistical levels of significance are: * indicates p<0.1, ** indicates p<0.05, *** indicates p<0.01. aHousehold
       characteristics are measured as the change between the two survey years.




                                                                                           33
                                                                   Table 6B
                                 The Impact of Highest Grade Completed on Health Knowledge: OLS Regressions
                                                       (Eventual High School Graduates)
Variables                                  (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)           (5)            (6)            (7)            (8)            (9)            (10)
                                        Smoking        Drinking      Drinking       Drinking       Drinking      Drinking          Pill         Condom        Pregnancy     Pregnancy
                                        leads to       leads to      leads to        DOES           leads to     harms the       prevents       prevents         most          most
                                           heart         heart         liver       NOT lead         alcohol       unborn        pregnancy        STDs           likely       likely-2
                                         disease        disease      damage        to arthritis    addiction       child
Highest grade completed                   0.001          0.062        -0.008          0.016           0.008        0.025           0.016         -0.016         0.027           0.121**
                                         (0.043)       (0.061)       (0.043)         (0.054)        (0.036)       (0.035)         (0.063)       (0.043)        (0.047)          (0.054)
Aftersemester                             -0.008      -0.330***       -0.024          0.091          -0.038       -0.041         -0.210**        -0.084         -0.043          -0.177*
                                         (0.069)       (0.104)       (0.073)         (0.082)        (0.061)       (0.063)         (0.106)       (0.073)        (0.082)          (0.102)
Hours worked                               0.015       0.042**         0.006       -0.047***          0.003        0.004            0.019        -0.005        0.028**           0.032*
                                         (0.010)       (0.021)       (0.013)         (0.018)        (0.013)       (0.009)         (0.019)       (0.015)        (0.013)          (0.017)
Household incomea                        -0.000          0.000         0.000          -0.000         -0.000       -0.000          -0.000*        -0.000         -0.000           -0.000
                                         (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)         (0.000)        (0.000)       (0.000)         (0.000)       (0.000)        (0.000)          (0.000)
Household sizea                           -0.012         0.017        -0.015          0.010          -0.008        0.003           0.005         0.011          0.015            0.002
                                         (0.015)       (0.027)       (0.015)         (0.022)        (0.016)       (0.016)         (0.027)       (0.021)        (0.018)          (0.023)
Urbana                                     0.029        -0.107        -0.077          -0.000         -0.030       -0.019           -0.017        0.012          -0.002           -0.016
                                         (0.077)       (0.128)       (0.068)         (0.082)        (0.064)       (0.052)         (0.113)       (0.069)        (0.087)          (0.101)
Biological parent(s) a                    0.056         -0.002        -0.004         0.123*          -0.077        0.036           -0.057        -0.104         0.003            -0.130
                                         (0.062)       (0.089)       (0.054)         (0.074)        (0.058)       (0.055)         (0.096)       (0.071)        (0.067)          (0.082)
Observations                                281           281           281            281             281          281              279          279            280               280
R-square                                   0.09          0.07          0.06            0.08           0.07          0.01            0.04          0.06           0.03             0.05
  Notes: Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. Statistical levels of significance are: * indicates p<0.1, ** indicates p<0.05, *** indicates p<0.01. aHousehold
  characteristics are measured as the change between the two survey years.




                                                                                          34
                                             Table 7A
          The Impact of School Attendance on Health Knowledge: OLS Regressions with
                                   Parent Health Knowledge
                               (Eventual High School Graduates)
Variables                                           (1)                 (2)               (3)                (4)                (5)
                                                 Drinking           Drinking          Drinking            Drinking          Drinking
                                               leads to heart     leads to liver     DOES NOT              leads to         harms the
                                                  disease            damage            lead to             alcohol         unborn child
                                                                                       arthritis          addiction
Attendance                                         0.001             -0.000             -0.003              -0.005             0.000
                                                  (0.005)           (0.004)            (0.005)             (0.003)            (0.004)
Parent health knowledge in first survey           -0.041           -0.335***          -0.179**              0.085              0.090
                                                  (0.106)           (0.112)            (0.083)             (0.107)            (0.133)
Hours worked                                      0.039*             0.004            -0.048**              -0.004             0.004
                                                  (0.022)           (0.013)            (0.019)             (0.014)            (0.010)
Household incomea                                  0.000             0.000              -0.000              -0.000             -0.000
                                                  (0.000)           (0.000)            (0.000)             (0.000)            (0.000)
Household sizea                                    0.015             -0.012             0.016               -0.008             0.001
                                                  (0.029)           (0.015)            (0.023)             (0.015)            (0.015)
Urbana                                             -0.112            -0.056             -0.011              -0.028             -0.023
                                                  (0.130)           (0.067)            (0.080)             (0.063)            (0.052)
Biological parent(s) a                            -0.018             -0.038            0.131*               -0.073             0.036
                                                  (0.093)           (0.054)            (0.076)             (0.057)            (0.054)
Observations                                        281               281                281                 281                281
R-square                                            0.04              0.10               0.10                0.08               0.01
    Notes: Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. Statistical levels of significance are: * indicates p<0.1, ** indicates
    p<0.05, *** indicates p<0.01. aHousehold characteristics are measured as the change between the two survey years.




                                                                   35
                                             Table 7B
         The Impact of Highest Grade Completed on Health Knowledge: OLS Regressions
                                 with Parent Health Knowledge
                               (Eventual High School Graduates)
Variables                                          (1)                (2)               (3)               (4)               (5)
                                               Drinking           Drinking          Drinking           Drinking         Drinking
                                             leads to heart     leads to liver     DOES NOT             leads to        harms the
                                                disease            damage            lead to            alcohol        unborn child
                                                                                     arthritis         addiction
Highest grade completed                           0.060            -0.010             0.014              0.010             0.025
                                                 (0.061)           (0.044)           (0.055)            (0.036)           (0.035)
Parent health knowledge in first survey          -0.036          -0.341***          -0.191**             0.091             0.087
                                                 (0.104)          (0.111)            (0.083)            (0.108)           (0.133)
Aftersemester                                  -0.328***            -0.037            0.106              -0.038            -0.037
                                                 (0.105)          (0.073)            (0.085)            (0.062)           (0.063)
Hours worked                                    0.042**             0.004           -0.045**             0.003             0.005
                                                 (0.021)          (0.013)            (0.018)            (0.013)           (0.009)
Household incomea                                 0.000             0.000             -0.000             -0.000            -0.000
                                                 (0.000)           (0.000)           (0.000)            (0.000)           (0.000)
Household sizea                                   0.018             -0.013            0.016              -0.010            0.003
                                                 (0.027)          (0.015)            (0.022)            (0.015)           (0.016)
Urbana                                            -0.108           -0.056             -0.009             -0.026            -0.021
                                                 (0.130)          (0.068)            (0.080)            (0.064)           (0.052)
Biological parent(s) a                           -0.003            -0.035             0.123              -0.072            0.036
                                                 (0.090)           (0.055)           (0.075)            (0.057)           (0.055)
Observations                                       281               281               281                281               281
R-square                                           0.07              0.10              0.11               0.07              0.02
Notes: Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. Statistical levels of significance are: * indicates p<0.1, ** indicates
p<0.05, *** indicates p<0.01. aHousehold characteristics are measured as the change between the two survey years.




                                                                 36
                                                                  Table 8
                  The Impact of Highest Grade Completed and School Attendance on Health Knowledge Index: OLS Regressions
                                                     (Eventual High School Graduates)
Variables                                         (1)              (2)               (3)               (4)               (5)              (6)               (7)               (8)
                                              Index of          Index of          Index of         Index of          Index of          Index of          Index of         Index of
                                               Health            Health            Health           Health            Health            Health            Health           Health
                                             Knowledge        Knowledge –       Knowledge –      Knowledge –        Knowledge        Knowledge –       Knowledge –      Knowledge –
                                                                Alcohol           Alcohol        Non-alcohol                           Alcohol           Alcohol        Non-alcohol
Highest grade completed                         0.013             0.021             0.020            0.007
                                               (0.016)           (0.024)           (0.024)          (0.023)
Attendance                                                                                                             -0.001            -0.001            -0.001            0.000
                                                                                                                      (0.002)           (0.002)           (0.002)           (0.002)
Parent health knowledge in first survey                                             -0.089                                                                 -0.090
                                                                                   (0.095)                                                                (0.094)
Aftersemester                                  -0.075**          -0.068            -0.069*          -0.087**
                                                (0.031)          (0.042)           (0.042)           (0.041)
Hours worked                                     0.007            0.002              0.001          0.015**             0.005            -0.002            -0.002           0.014*
                                                (0.006)          (0.008)           (0.008)           (0.007)          (0.006)           (0.008)           (0.009)           (0.008)
Household incomea                               -0.000            -0.000            -0.000            -0.000           -0.000            -0.000            -0.000            -0.000
                                                (0.000)          (0.000)           (0.000)           (0.000)          (0.000)           (0.000)           (0.000)           (0.000)
Household sizea                                  0.003            0.001              0.002             0.004            0.003             0.001             0.002             0.004
                                                (0.007)          (0.010)           (0.010)           (0.010)          (0.007)           (0.010)           (0.010)           (0.009)
Urbana                                          -0.024            -0.047            -0.045            0.003            -0.025            -0.049            -0.047            0.003
                                                (0.035)          (0.048)           (0.048)           (0.041)          (0.036)           (0.048)           (0.048)           (0.042)
Biological parent(s) a                          -0.002            0.015              0.012            -0.024          -0.006             0.013              0.009            -0.029
                                                (0.026)          (0.035)           (0.035)           (0.034)          (0.026)           (0.035)           (0.035)           (0.034)
Observations                                      281              281                281               281              281               281               281               281
R-square                                          0.07             0.04              0.05              0.06             0.05              0.03              0.04              0.04
      Notes: Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. Statistical levels of significance are: * indicates p<0.1, ** indicates p<0.05, *** indicates p<0.01. aHousehold
      characteristics are measured as the change between the two survey years.




                                                                                           37
                                                                    Table 9A
                             The Impact of Differential School Attendance on Health Knowledge: OLS Regressions
                                                           (College Bound Students)
Variables                                   (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)            (5)           (6)            (7)           (8)            (9)          (10)
                                         Smoking       Drinking      Drinking       Drinking      Drinking      Drinking          Pill        Condom       Pregnancy      Pregnancy
                                         leads to      leads to      leads to        DOES          leads to     harms the       prevents      prevents        most           most
                                            heart        heart         liver       NOT lead        alcohol       unborn        pregnancy       STDs          likely        likely -2
                                          disease       disease      damage        to arthritis   addiction        child
Attendance – High school                 0.003**        -0.004        -0.000           0.004        -0.001       -0.001        0.007**        0.006**         -0.000         0.003
                                          (0.001)      (0.003)       (0.002)         (0.003)       (0.002)       (0.001)        (0.003)       (0.003)        (0.002)        (0.003)
Attendance – College                       0.001        -0.004        0.000         0.008***        0.000         0.001        0.011***         0.004       0.006***       0.009***
                                          (0.002)      (0.003)       (0.002)         (0.003)       (0.001)       (0.001)        (0.003)       (0.003)        (0.002)        (0.003)
Hours worked                                0.001       -0.009        -0.006          0.003          0.003        -0.005         -0.000        -0.003         -0.005        -0.021*
                                          (0.006)      (0.013)       (0.008)         (0.011)       (0.007)       (0.003)        (0.011)       (0.010)        (0.009)        (0.011)
Household incomea                          -0.000       -0.000        0.000           -0.000        -0.000       -0.000          0.000         0.000          0.000        0.000**
                                          (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.000)         (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)        (0.000)       (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.000)
Household sizea                             0.007      -0.028*        0.010           -0.007         0.003       -0.004         -0.013         -0.012         0.010          0.014
                                          (0.007)      (0.016)       (0.009)         (0.014)       (0.008)       (0.006)        (0.016)       (0.013)        (0.011)        (0.014)
Urbana                                     0.029        -0.078        -0.002          -0.029         0.040       -0.007          0.041         -0.102         0.045          0.074
                                          (0.043)      (0.075)       (0.038)         (0.053)       (0.035)       (0.023)        (0.069)       (0.063)        (0.052)        (0.069)
Biological parent(s)a                      0.016         0.076        -0.032          -0.050         0.034       -0.005         -0.016          0.007         0.014          -0.030
                                          (0.027)      (0.058)       (0.031)         (0.049)       (0.030)       (0.022)        (0.053)       (0.045)        (0.036)        (0.053)
High school= College (p-value)              0.169        0.929         0.849           0.209         0.435         0.057          0.266         0.423          0.009          0.116
Observations                                 958          958           958             958           958           958            951           953            949            949
R-square                                     0.02        0.02          0.03            0.02           0.02         0.01           0.03           0.01          0.02           0.03
   Notes: Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. Statistical levels of significance are: * indicates p<0.1, ** indicates p<0.05, *** indicates p<0.01. aHousehold
   characteristics are measured as the change between the two survey years.




                                                                                        38
                                             Table 9B
          The Impact of Differential School Attendance on Health Knowledge Index: OLS
                                            Regressions
                                     (College-Bound Students)
  Variables                                                  (1)                (2)               (3)                (4)
                                                         Index of           Index of           Index of          Index of
                                                          Health             Health             Health            Health
                                                        Knowledge         Knowledge –        Knowledge –       Knowledge –
                                                                            Alcohol            Alcohol         Non-alcohol
  Attendance – High school                                0.001*              -0.001             -0.001         0.004***
                                                          (0.001)            (0.001)            (0.001)           (0.001)
  Attendance – College                                   0.003***             0.001               0.001         0.005***
                                                          (0.001)            (0.001)            (0.001)           (0.001)
  Parent health knowledge in first survey                                                         0.009
                                                                                                (0.047)
  Hours worked                                              -0.002            -0.003             -0.003             -0.002
                                                           (0.003)           (0.004)            (0.004)            (0.005)
  Household incomea                                         -0.000            -0.000             -0.000             0.000
                                                           (0.000)           (0.000)            (0.000)            (0.000)
  Household sizea                                           -0.004            -0.005             -0.005             -0.002
                                                           (0.004)           (0.006)            (0.006)            (0.006)
  Urbana                                                    -0.007            -0.015             -0.015             0.003
                                                           (0.020)           (0.023)            (0.023)            (0.030)
  Biological parent(s) a                                    0.004             0.005               0.005              0.004
                                                           (0.015)           (0.020)            (0.020)            (0.022)
  High school= College (p-value)                             0.095             0.170              0.163              0.356
  Observations                                                958               958                958                958
  R-square                                                   0.02              0.02               0.02               0.03
Notes: Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. Statistical levels of significance are: * indicates p<0.1, ** indicates
p<0.05, *** indicates p<0.01. aHousehold characteristics are measured as the change between the two survey years




                                                               39
                                                                    Table 10
                            The Impact of School Attendance on Health Knowledge: Instrumental Variables Regressions
                                                           (College Bound Students)
Variables                                   (1)            (2)           (3)            (4)           (5)            (6)            (7)           (8)            (9)           (10)
                                         Smoking        Drinking      Drinking       Drinking      Drinking      Drinking          Pill        Condom        Pregnancy      Pregnancy
                                         leads to       leads to      leads to        DOES          leads to     harms the       prevents      prevents         most           most
                                            heart         heart         liver       NOT lead        alcohol       unborn        pregnancy       STDs           likely        likely-2
                                          disease        disease      damage        to arthritis   addiction        child
Attendance                                -0.004          0.002        0.000           0.012         -0.001        0.005        0.024***          0.010        0.008            0.008
                                          (0.004)       (0.009)       (0.004)         (0.008)       (0.004)       (0.003)        (0.009)        (0.007)       (0.006)         (0.008)
Hours worked                               -0.003        -0.006        -0.006           0.007         0.004        -0.001          0.009         -0.001        -0.000          -0.018
                                          (0.007)       (0.014)       (0.008)         (0.012)       (0.007)       (0.004)        (0.012)        (0.011)       (0.009)         (0.012)
Household incomea                          -0.000        -0.000         0.000          -0.000        -0.000       -0.000          0.000          0.000         0.000          0.000**
                                          (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)         (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.000)       (0.000)         (0.000)
Household sizea                             0.006       -0.027*         0.010          -0.006         0.003       -0.003         -0.010          -0.011        0.011           0.014
                                          (0.007)       (0.016)       (0.009)         (0.015)       (0.008)       (0.006)        (0.016)        (0.013)       (0.011)         (0.015)
Urbana                                     0.037         -0.087        -0.002          -0.037        0.042        -0.012          0.020         -0.112*        0.042           0.074
                                          (0.045)       (0.075)       (0.038)         (0.054)       (0.034)       (0.022)        (0.072)        (0.063)       (0.053)         (0.069)
Biological parent(s)a                      0.035          0.059        -0.033          -0.069         0.036       -0.019          -0.061         -0.006        -0.003          -0.040
                                          (0.028)       (0.063)       (0.033)         (0.053)       (0.032)       (0.027)        (0.056)        (0.049)       (0.038)         (0.055)
First stage (F-statistic)                 81.899         81.899        81.899         81.899         81.899       81.899         80.799          82.032       81.393           81.393
Observations                                 958           958           958             958           958           958            951            953          949              949
                                                                                                                                                                     a
  Notes: Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. Statistical levels of significance are: * indicates p<0.1, ** indicates p<0.05, *** indicates p<0.01.     Household
  characteristics are measured as the change between the two survey years. Instrument: Time between interviews between 1997 and 2002 interview waves.




                                                                                         40
                                         Table 11
  The Impact of School Attendance on Health Knowledge Index: Instrumental Variables
                                     Regressions
                                 (College Bound Students)
  Variables                                                     (1)                (2)                (3)               (4)
                                                            Index of           Index of           Index of          Index of
                                                             Health             Health             Health            Health
                                                           Knowledge         Knowledge –        Knowledge –       Knowledge –
                                                                               Alcohol            Alcohol         Non-alcohol
  Attendance                                                 0.006**             0.004               0.004          0.010**
                                                             (0.003)            (0.003)            (0.003)           (0.004)
  Parent Health knowledge in first survey                                                            0.002
                                                                                                   (0.046)
  Hours worked                                                 0.000             -0.000              0.000              0.001
                                                              (0.003)           (0.005)            (0.005)            (0.005)
  Household incomea                                            -0.000            -0.000             -0.000             0.000
                                                              (0.000)           (0.000)            (0.000)            (0.000)
  Household sizea                                              -0.003            -0.005             -0.005             -0.001
                                                              (0.004)           (0.006)            (0.006)            (0.006)
  Urbana                                                       -0.012            -0.019             -0.020             -0.004
                                                              (0.020)           (0.023)            (0.023)            (0.031)
  Biological parent(s) a                                       -0.008            -0.005             -0.007             -0.011
                                                              (0.016)           (0.022)            (0.022)            (0.024)
  First stage (F-statistic)                                   81.899            81.899             82.996             81.899
  R-square                                                      958               958                 958                958
Notes: Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. Statistical levels of significance are: * indicates p<0.1, ** indicates
p<0.05, *** indicates p<0.01. aHousehold characteristics are measured as the change between the two survey years. Instrument:
Time between interviews between 1997 and 2002 interview waves.




                                                                41
                                                                    Table 12
                            The Impact of School Attendance on Health Knowledge: Instrumental Variables Regressions
                                                       (Eventual High School Graduates)
Variables                                  (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)           (7)           (8)           (9)             (10)
                                       Smoking        Drinking      Drinking      Drinking      Drinking     Drinking         Pill        Condom       Pregnancy         Pregnancy
                                       leads to       leads to      leads to       DOES          leads to    harms the      prevents      prevents        most              most
                                          heart         heart         liver      NOT lead        alcohol      unborn       pregnancy       STDs          likely           likely-2
                                        disease        disease      damage       to arthritis   addiction      child
Attendance                              -0.000         -0.023        -0.006         0.028         0.002        0.004          0.006        -0.007         0.001            0.002
                                        (0.013)       (0.023)       (0.016)        (0.023)       (0.011)      (0.012)        (0.030)      (0.018)        (0.017)          (0.024)
Hours worked                              0.014         0.008        -0.001         -0.015         0.005       0.007          0.025        -0.012         0.028             0.028
                                        (0.018)       (0.036)       (0.022)        (0.034)       (0.021)      (0.017)        (0.041)      (0.027)        (0.023)          (0.032)
Household incomea                        0.000          0.000         0.000         -0.000         0.000      -0.000          -0.000       -0.000         -0.000           -0.000
                                        (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)        (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)        (0.000)      (0.000)        (0.000)          (0.000)
Household sizea                          -0.018         0.024        -0.010         -0.005        -0.013       0.008          0.006         0.019         0.008            -0.010
                                        (0.014)       (0.031)       (0.016)        (0.024)       (0.016)      (0.014)        (0.028)      (0.020)        (0.018)          (0.025)
Urbana                                   -0.001        -0.133        -0.070         0.029         -0.032       0.009          -0.012        0.020         -0.002           -0.021
                                        (0.072)       (0.134)       (0.071)        (0.094)       (0.063)      (0.045)        (0.119)      (0.067)        (0.092)          (0.111)
Biological parent(s)a                    0.034         -0.068        -0.042        0.149*        -0.094*       0.011          -0.074      -0.121*         0.034            -0.096
                                        (0.058)       (0.096)       (0.053)        (0.080)       (0.052)      (0.051)        (0.095)      (0.071)        (0.067)          (0.084)
First stage (F-statistic)               13.678         13.678        13.678        13.678         13.678      13.678         13.952        14.136        13.893           13.893
Observations                               266           266           266           266            266         266            264           264           265               265
                                                                                                                                                                     a
  Notes: Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. Statistical levels of significance are: * indicates p<0.1, ** indicates p<0.05, *** indicates p<0.01.   Household
  characteristics are measured as the change between the two survey years. Instrument: Time between interviews between 1997 and 2002 interview waves.




                                                                                      42
                                             Table 13
             The Impact of School Attendance on Health Knowledge Index: Instrumental
                                       Variable Regressions
                                (Eventual High School Graduates)
 Variables                                                      (1)                (2)               (3)                (4)
                                                            Index of           Index of           Index of          Index of
                                                             Health             Health             Health            Health
                                                           Knowledge         Knowledge –        Knowledge –       Knowledge –
                                                                               Alcohol            Alcohol         Non-alcohol
 Attendance                                                   0.001              0.001               0.001            0.001
                                                             (0.006)            (0.008)            (0.008)           (0.010)
 Parent Health knowledge in first survey                                                            -0.088
                                                                                                   (0.092)
 Hours worked                                                 0.007               0.001              0.000              0.015
                                                             (0.010)            (0.013)            (0.014)            (0.014)
 Household incomea                                            -0.000             0.000               0.000             -0.000
                                                             (0.000)            (0.000)            (0.000)            (0.000)
 Household sizea                                              0.002               0.001              0.002              0.003
                                                             (0.008)            (0.010)            (0.010)            (0.010)
 Urbana                                                       -0.021             -0.039             -0.039             -0.000
                                                             (0.036)            (0.048)            (0.048)            (0.044)
 Biological parent(s) a                                       -0.018             -0.009             -0.012             -0.031
                                                             (0.024)            (0.032)            (0.032)            (0.034)
 First stage (F-statistic)                                   13.678             13.678             13.110             13.678
 R-square                                                      266                 266                266                266
Notes: Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. Statistical levels of significance are: * indicates p<0.1, ** indicates
p<0.05, *** indicates p<0.01. aHousehold characteristics are measured as the change between the two survey years. Instrument:
Time between interviews between 1997 and 2002 interview waves.




                                                                43
                                  Figure 1
          Distribution of Number of Months between Interview Dates
(College Bound Students and Eventual High School Graduates Combined)



           .2
           .15
        Density
         .1.05
           0




                  54   56    58    60    62     64    66    68    70     72    74   76
                            Distance (months) between 1997 and 2002 interviews




                                                44
                                    Figure 2A
Distribution of the Index of Health Knowledge during 1997 Round of Interviews
                            (College-Bound Students)



           4
           3
        Density
          21
           0




                  0   .1       .2     .3      .4    .5     .6      .7     .8   .9   1
                           Index of health knowledge in 1997 interview round




                                    Figure 2B
Distribution of the Index of Health Knowledge during 2002 Round of Interviews
                            (College-Bound Students)
           4
           3
        Density
          21
           0




                  0   .1       .2     .3      .4    .5     .6      .7     .8   .9   1
                           Index of health knowledge in 2002 interview round




                                              45
                               Figure 3
The Change in the Health Knowledge Index versus Change in Attendance
                   between the Two Survey Waves
                      (College-Bound Students)



                           .8              .6
          Change in health knowledge index
       -.4    -.2     0      .2
                           -.6     .4




                                                0   10   20   30       40       50   60   70   80
                                                              Change in attendance




                                                                46
                                    Figure 4A
Distribution of the Index of Health Knowledge during 1997 Round of Interviews
                     (Eventual High School Graduates)



            4
            3
         Density
           21
            0




                   0   .1       .2     .3      .4    .5     .6      .7     .8   .9   1
                            Index of health knowledge in 1997 interview round




                                    Figure 4B
Distribution of the Index of Health Knowledge during 2002 Round of Interviews
                     (Eventual High School Graduates)
            4
            3
        Density
          2 1
            0




                   0   .1       .2     .3      .4    .5     .6      .7     .8   .9   1
                            Index of health knowledge in 2002 interview round




                                               47
                              Figure 5
The Change in the Health Knowledge Index versus Change in Attendance
                   between the Two Survey Waves
                (Eventual High School Graduates)



                           .8              .6
          Change in health knowledge index
       -.4    -.2     0      .2
                           -.6     .4




                                                0   10   20   30       40       50   60   70   80
                                                              Change in attendance




                                                                48
                                                  Appendix 1
            Correct Answers to NLSY 97 Health Knowledge Questions to Respondent
     1.   Does smoking one or more packs of cigarettes per day, INCREASE THE RISK (chance) of getting heart
          disease?
          Correct Answer: Yes
          Sources:
              • 1990 Surgeon General Report15
              • American Heart Association, http://www.americanheart.org/presenter.jhtml?identifier=4545
                   (Accessed December 30, 2009)

     2.   Does having 5 or more drinks of alcohol once or twice each week, INCREASE THE RISK (chance)
          of damaging the liver?
          Correct Answer: Yes
          Sources:
              • 1988 Surgeon General Report16. “Excessive use of alcohol is also associated with liver disease...”
              • American Liver Foundation, http://www.liverfoundation.org/education/info/alcohol/ (Accessed
                   December 30, 2009)

     3.   Does having 5 or more drinks of alcohol once or twice each week, INCREASE THE RISK (chance) of
          getting heart disease?
          Correct Answer: Yes
          Sources:
               • 1988 Surgeon General Report17
               • American Heart Association, http://www.americanheart.org/presenter.jhtml?identifier=4488
                   (Accessed     December      30,     2009);    Cardiovascular       Institute of the  South,
                   http://www.medhelp.org/general/alcohol.HTM (Accessed December 30, 2009)
     4.   Does having 5 or more drinks of alcohol once or twice each week, INCREASE THE RISK (chance) of
          getting arthritis?
          Correct Answer: No
          Sources:
               • Voight, L, et al. (1994) find that “Post menopausal women who averaged more than 14 alcoholic
                   drinks per week had a reduced risk of rheumatoid arthritis.” (p. 525) 18
               • Science Daily, http://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2007/06/070615110218.htm (Accessed
                   December 30, 2009)




15
   US Department of Health and Human Services. 1990. The Health Benefits of Smoking Cessation: A Report of the
Surgeon General. Rockville, MD: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service, Centers
for Disease Control, Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, Office on Smoking and Health.
http://profiles.nlm.nih.gov/NN/B/B/C/T/_/nnbbct.pdf (accessed on May 19, 2010)
16
   US Department of Health and Human Services. 1988. The Surgeon General’s Report on Nutrition and Health.
Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service, Centers for Disease
Control. http://profiles.nlm.nih.gov/NN/B/C/Q/G/_/nnbcqg.pdf (accessed on May 19, 2010)
17
   US Department of Health and Human Services. 1988. The Surgeon General’s Report on Nutrition and Health.
Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service, Centers for Disease
Control. http://profiles.nlm.nih.gov/NN/B/C/Q/G/_/nnbcqg.pdf (accessed on May 19, 2010)
18
   Voight, Lynda F, Thomas D.Koepsell, J. Lee Nelson, Carin E. Dugowson and Janet R. Daling. 1994. “Smoking,
Obesity, Alcohol Consumption, and the Risk of Rheumatoid Arthritis.” Epidemiology, volume 88, pp. 525-532.

                                                        49
     5.   Does having 5 or more drinks of alcohol once or twice each week, INCREASE THE RISK (chance) of
          becoming addicted to alcohol?
          Correct Answer: Yes.
           Sources:
              • 1988 Surgeon General Report19
              • American Heart Association, http://www.americanheart.org/presenter.jhtml?identifier=4488,
                   http://www.americanheart.org/presenter.jhtml?identifier=4422 (Accessed December 30, 2009)

     6.   Does having 5 or more drinks of alcohol once or twice each week, INCREASE THE RISK (chance) of
          harming an unborn child?
          Correct Answer: Yes
          Sources:
              • 1988 Surgeon General Report20
              • American Heart Association, http://www.americanheart.org/presenter.jhtml?identifier=3017032
                   (Accessed December 30, 2009)

     7.   Which of these same three methods is the most effective for preventing sexually transmitted diseases (STD)
          like AIDS or gonorrhea:
               a. Withdrawal
               b. Condom
               c. Birth Control Pill
          Correct Answer: Condom
          Source: American Pregnancy Association,
          http://www.americanpregnancy.org/preventingpregnancy/malecondom.html (Accessed December 30,
          2009)

     8.   Which of these three is the most effective for preventing pregnancy?
               a. Withdrawal
               b. Condom
               c. Birth Control Pill
           Correct Answer: Birth Control Pill
          Source: American Pregnancy Association,
          http://www.americanpregnancy.org/preventingpregnancy/birthcontrolpills.html (Accessed December 30,
          2009)

     9.   When during the female monthly cycle of menstrual periods is pregnancy most likely to occur?
               a. Right before the period begins
               b. During the period
               c. About a week after the period begins
               d. About two weeks after the period begins
               e. Anytime during the month, makes no difference
               f. Don't know
          Correct Answer: About a week after the period begins
          "...your fertility period would be from the 8th day of your cycle to the 21st day of your cycle."
          Source: American Pregnancy Association,
          http://www.americanpregnancy.org/preventingpregnancy/fertilityawarenessNFP.html (Accessed December
          30, 2009)



19
   US Department of Health and Human Services. 1988. The Surgeon General’s Report on Nutrition and Health.
Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service, Centers for Disease
Control. http://profiles.nlm.nih.gov/NN/B/C/Q/G/_/nnbcqg.pdf (accessed on May 19, 2010)
20
   US Department of Health and Human Services. 1988. The Surgeon General’s Report on Nutrition and Health.
Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service, Centers for Disease
Control. http://profiles.nlm.nih.gov/NN/B/C/Q/G/_/nnbcqg.pdf (accessed on May 19, 2010)

                                                         50
                                       Appendix 2 – Table 1
                          Summary Statistics of Health Knowledge Variables
                             NLSY97 Sample for 1997 and 2002 Waves
                                (Eventual High School Graduates)
Variables                 Variable Definition                                                                Means
                                                                                                    Full      1997      2002
                                                                                                   Sample    sample    sample
                                                                                                  (N=600)   (N=316)   (N=284)
                                                           (1)                                       (2)       (3)       (4)
Outcome variables:
Smoking leads to heart    Correct response for whether smoking at least one pack of                0.917     0.921     0.912
disease                   cigarette per day increases the risk of heart disease, and equal zero
                          otherwise.

Drink leads to heart      Correct response for whether having at least five drinks of alcohols     0.550     0.576     0.521
disease                   once/twice per week increases the risk of heart disease and equal
                          zero otherwise.

Drinking leads to liver   Correct response for whether having at least five drinks of alcohols     0.880     0.870     0.891
damage                    once/twice per week increases the risk of liver damage and equal
                          zero otherwise.

Drinking DOES NOT         Correct response for whether having at least five drinks of alcohols     0.727     0.693     0.764
lead to arthritis         once/twice per week DOES NOT increase the risk of getting
                          arthritis, and equal zero otherwise.

Drinking leads to         Correct response for whether having at least five drinks of alcohols     0.918     0.943     0.891
alcohol addiction         once/twice per week increases the risk of alcohol addiction, and
                          equal zero otherwise

Drinking harms unborn     Correct response for whether having at least five drinks of alcohols     0.938     0.956     0.919
child                     once/twice per week increases the risk of harming an unborn child,
                          and equal zero otherwise

Pill prevents pregnancy   Correct response for whether birth control pill is the most effective    0.348     0.273     0.431
                          in preventing pregnancy, and equal zero otherwise

Condom prevents STD       Correct response for whether condom is the most effective in             0.751     0.625     0.890
                          preventing STDs, and equal zero otherwise

Pregnancy most likely     Correct response for whether pregnancy is most likely to occur one       0.117     0.066     0.173
                          week after the period begins, and equal zero otherwise

Pregnancy most likely-2   Correct response for whether pregnancy is most likely to occur one       0.215     0.136     0.304
                          week after the period begins or two weeks after the period begins,
                          and equal zero otherwise

Index of Health           The proportion of correct answers in response to health knowledge        0.683     0.658     0.710
Knowledge                 questions (standard errors in parentheses)                              (0.146)   (0.141)   (0.146)

Index of Health           The proportion of correct answers in response to alcohol related         0.803     0.808     0.797
Knowledge - Alcohol       health knowledge questions (standard errors in parentheses)             (0.186)   (0.182)   (0.192)

Index of Health           The proportion of correct answers in response to non-alcohol             0.532     0.471     0.600
Knowledge – Non           related health knowledge questions (standard errors in parentheses)     (0.211)   (0.199)   (0.204)
alcohol


                                                                 51
                                        Appendix 2 - Table 2
                               Summary Statistics of Personal Attributes
                               NLSY97 Sample for 1997 and 2002 Waves
                                  (Eventual High School Graduates)
                                                                                                Mean         Mean         Mean
Variables                 Variable Definition                                                (Std. Dev)   (Std. Dev)   (Std. Dev)
                                                                                                 Full        1997         2002
                                                                                               Sample       sample       sample
                                                                                              (N=600)      (N=316)      (N=284)
                                                        (1)                                      (2)          (3)          (4)
Highest grade completed   Years of schooling (Highest grade completed)                          9.156        6.744       11.842
                                                                                               (2.631)      (0.813)      (0.420)

Attendance                Months respondent attended high school since the first wave         23.727        0.962       49.056
                                                                                             (24.642)      (0.191)      (7.920)

Age                       Age in years                                                        16.062       13.377       19.049
                                                                                              (2.868)      (0.517)      (0.322)

Female                    Equals one if female, zero otherwise                                 0.372        0.373        0.370

Black                     Equals one if Black and equal zero otherwise                         0.245        0.244        0.246

Hispanic                  Equals one if Hispanic and equal zero otherwise                      0.232        0.231        0.232

Hours worked              Cumulative hours (in 000’s) worked from age 14 at employee-          1.316        0.002        2.777
                          type jobs                                                           (1.960)      (0.024)      (2.015)

Household sizea           Number of individuals in respondent’s household                      4.378        4.617        4.113
                                                                                              (1.636)      (1.415)      (1.817)

Household incomea         Household income (in tens of thousands of US dollars) of             4.601        4.086        5.174
                          respondent                                                          (3.596)      (2.886)      (4.180)

Urbana                    Equals one if the respondent resides in an urban area, and equal     0.668        0.661        0.676
                          zero otherwise

Biological parent(s)a     Equals one if the respondent lives with at least one biological      0.808        0.921        0.683
                          parent, and equal zero otherwise

Household sizeb           Average number of people living in the respondent’s household                                  4.408
                          in the last five waves (1998-2002)                                                            (1.446)

Household incomeb         Average income (in tens of thousands of US dollars) of the                                     5.180
                          respondent’s household in the last five waves (1998-2002)                                     (4.133)

Urbanb                    Proportion of the times (waves) the respondent has resided in an                               0.667
                          urban area during the last five waves (1998-2002)                                             (0.434)

Biological parent(s)b     Proportion of the times (waves) the respondent has lived with at                               0.846
                          least one biological parent during the last five waves (1998-                                 (0.273)
                          2002)



                                                                 52
                                            Appendix 2 - Table 2 (concluded)

                    Summary Statistics for the NLSY97 Sample for 1997 and 2002 Waves
                                    (Eventual High School Graduates)
Variables                    Variable Definition                                                             Means
                                                                                                    Full      1997      2002
                                                                                                   Sample    sample    sample
                                                                                                  (N=600)   (N=284)   (N=600)
                                                             (1)                                     (2)       (3)       (4)
Parent health knowledge -    Correct response for whether respondent’s parent thinks having                  0.633
Drinking leads to heart      at least five drinks of alcohols once/twice per week increases the
disease                      risk of getting heart disease, and equal zero otherwise.


Parent health knowledge -    Correct response for whether respondent’s parent thinks having                  0.769
Drinking leads to liver      at least five drinks of alcohols once/twice per week increases the
damage                       risk of liver damage and equal zero otherwise


Parent health knowledge -    Correct response for whether respondent’s parent thinks having                  0.611
Drinking DOES NOT            at least five drinks of alcohols once/twice per week DOES NOT
lead to arthritis            increase the risk of getting arthritis, and equal zero otherwise


Parent health knowledge -    Correct response for whether respondent’s parent thinks having                  0.782
Drinking leads to alcohol    at least five drinks of alcohol once/twice per week increases the
addiction                    risk of alcohol addiction and equal zero otherwise.


Parent health knowledge -    Correct response for whether respondent’s parent thinks having                  0.832
Drinking harms unborn        at least five drinks of alcohols once/twice per week increases the
child                        risk of harming an unborn child, and equal zero otherwise

Notes: Variables with missing values were converted to the mean value of each survey round. In some cases, the number of
observations varies because of missing information.




                                                                   53
                                                             Appendix 2 - Table 3
                                The Impact of School Attendance on Health Knowledge: OLS Regressions with Age
                                                           (College-Bound Students)
Variables                                   (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)            (7)            (8)            (9)           (10)
                                        Smoking        Drinking       Drinking        Drinking      Drinking       Drinking          Pill         Condom        Pregnancy       Pregnancy
                                        leads to       leads to       leads to         DOES          leads to      harms the       prevents       prevents         most            most
                                          heart          heart          liver        NOT lead        alcohol        unborn        pregnancy        STDs           likely         likely-2
                                         disease        disease       damage         to arthritis   addiction         child
Attendance                                0.002         -0.004         -0.000         0.006***        -0.001         0.000        0.009***        0.005**        0.003*          0.006**
                                         (0.001)       (0.003)        (0.002)          (0.002)       (0.001)        (0.001)        (0.003)        (0.002)        (0.002)         (0.002)
Hours worked                              0.001         -0.009         -0.006           0.004          0.004         -0.004         0.001          -0.003         -0.003         -0.020*
                                         (0.006)       (0.013)        (0.008)          (0.011)       (0.007)        (0.003)        (0.011)        (0.010)        (0.009)         (0.011)
Age in second survey                     -0.037         -0.065         -0.035           -0.066        -0.018        -0.008          0.013          -0.089         0.055           0.030
                                         (0.029)       (0.068)        (0.043)          (0.049)       (0.024)        (0.020)        (0.065)        (0.059)        (0.052)         (0.069)
Household incomea                        -0.000         -0.000          0.000           -0.000        -0.000        -0.000          0.000          0.000          0.000          0.000**
                                         (0.000)       (0.000)        (0.000)          (0.000)       (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.000)         (0.000)
Household sizea                           0.007        -0.029*          0.010           -0.008         0.003        -0.005         -0.013          -0.013         0.011           0.014
                                         (0.007)       (0.016)        (0.009)          (0.014)       (0.008)        (0.005)        (0.016)        (0.013)        (0.011)         (0.015)
Urbana                                    0.028         -0.076         -0.001           -0.026         0.041        -0.005          0.043          -0.102         0.048           0.077
                                         (0.043)       (0.075)        (0.038)          (0.053)       (0.035)        (0.023)        (0.069)        (0.062)        (0.051)         (0.069)
Biological parent(s) a                    0.017          0.074         -0.033           -0.053         0.033        -0.006         -0.018           0.006         0.012           -0.033
                                         (0.027)       (0.058)        (0.031)          (0.049)       (0.030)        (0.022)        (0.053)        (0.045)        (0.036)         (0.052)
Observations                               958            958            958             958            958            958           951             953           949             949
R-square                                   0.02          0.02            0.03            0.02           0.02          0.01           0.02            0.02          0.02            0.03
  Notes: Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. Statistical levels of significance are: * indicates p<0.1, ** indicates p<0.05, *** indicates p<0.01. aHousehold
  characteristics are measured as the change between the two survey years.




                                                                                           54
                                    Appendix 2 - Table 4
     The Impact of School Attendance on Health Knowledge: OLS Regressions with Age
                                (College-Bound Students))
   Variables                                                   (1)                (2)                (3)                 (4)
                                                           Index of           Index of           Index of            Index of
                                                            Health             Health             Health              Health
                                                          Knowledge         Knowledge –        Knowledge –         Knowledge –
                                                                              Alcohol            Alcohol           Non-alcohol
   Attendance                                              0.002***             0.000               0.000           0.005***
                                                            (0.001)            (0.001)            (0.001)             (0.001)
   Parent health knowledge in first survey                                                          0.012
                                                                                                  (0.047)
   Hours worked                                              -0.002             -0.002             -0.002              -0.001
                                                            (0.003)            (0.004)            (0.004)             (0.005)
   Age in second survey                                     -0.028             -0.039*           -0.040*              -0.015
                                                            (0.019)            (0.020)            (0.020)             (0.031)
   Household incomea                                         -0.000             -0.000             -0.000              0.000
                                                            (0.000)            (0.000)            (0.000)             (0.000)
   Household sizea                                           -0.004             -0.006             -0.006              -0.003
                                                            (0.004)            (0.006)            (0.006)             (0.006)
   Urbana                                                    -0.005             -0.013             -0.013              0.004
                                                            (0.020)            (0.023)            (0.023)             (0.030)
   Biological parent(s) a                                    0.003              0.003               0.003               0.003
                                                            (0.015)            (0.020)            (0.020)             (0.022)
   Observations                                               958                958                 958                 958
   R-square                                                   0.02               0.02               0.02                0.03
Notes: Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. Statistical levels of significance are: * indicates p<0.1, ** indicates
p<0.05, *** indicates p<0.01. aHousehold characteristics are measured as the change between the two survey years.




                                                                 55
                                                            Appendix 2 - Table 5
                               The Impact of School Attendance on Health Knowledge: OLS Regressions with Age
                                                      (Eventual High School Graduates)
Variables                                  (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)           (7)            (8)           (9)          (10)
                                       Smoking        Drinking      Drinking      Drinking      Drinking      Drinking        Pill         Condom       Pregnancy     Pregnancy
                                       leads to       leads to      leads to       DOES          leads to     harms the     prevents       prevents        most          most
                                          heart         heart         liver      NOT lead        alcohol       unborn      pregnancy        STDs          likely       likely-2
                                        disease        disease      damage       to arthritis   addiction        child
Attendance                             0.008**          0.002         0.000         -0.003        -0.005        -0.000        0.007       -0.011***       -0.003        -0.002
                                        (0.003)       (0.005)       (0.004)        (0.005)       (0.003)       (0.004)       (0.005)       (0.004)       (0.004)       (0.005)
Hours worked                           0.023**          0.034         0.004      -0.050***        -0.005         0.006         0.030        -0.017         0.021         0.020
                                        (0.010)       (0.023)       (0.013)        (0.019)       (0.013)       (0.010)       (0.021)       (0.015)       (0.013)       (0.018)
Age in second survey                     0.025          0.134        0.097          -0.023        0.066        -0.115*       -0.134         0.012         0.062         0.056
                                        (0.060)       (0.125)       (0.083)        (0.118)       (0.073)       (0.060)       (0.120)       (0.097)       (0.099)       (0.142)
Household incomea                        -0.000         0.000         0.000         -0.000        -0.000        -0.000        -0.000        -0.000        -0.000        -0.000
                                        (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)        (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)
Household sizea                          -0.015         0.015        -0.014         0.009         -0.006        0.001         0.001         0.017          0.015        -0.004
                                        (0.014)       (0.028)       (0.015)        (0.023)       (0.016)       (0.015)       (0.027)       (0.019)       (0.018)       (0.023)
Urbana                                    0.030        -0.117        -0.081         -0.002        -0.036        -0.015        -0.009        0.010         -0.008        -0.029
                                        (0.074)       (0.128)       (0.068)        (0.081)       (0.063)       (0.052)       (0.116)       (0.063)       (0.089)       (0.106)
Biological parent(s) a                    0.056        -0.014        -0.003        0.130*         -0.076         0.032        -0.073        -0.110        0.005         -0.126
                                        (0.060)       (0.091)       (0.053)        (0.075)       (0.057)       (0.053)       (0.096)       (0.070)       (0.066)       (0.082)
Observations                               281           281           281           281           281            281           279          279            280           280
R-square                                   0.11          0.04          0.06          0.08          0.08          0.02          0.03          0.08           0.03         0.03
   Notes: Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. Statistical levels of significance are: * indicates p<0.1, ** indicates p<0.05, *** indicates p<0.01. aHousehold
   characteristics are measured as the change between the two survey years.




                                                                                      56
                                    Appendix 2 - Table 6
     The Impact of School Attendance on Health Knowledge: OLS Regressions with Age
                            (Eventual High School Graduates)
   Variables                                                   (1)                (2)                (3)                 (4)
                                                           Index of           Index of           Index of            Index of
                                                            Health             Health             Health              Health
                                                          Knowledge         Knowledge –        Knowledge –         Knowledge –
                                                                              Alcohol            Alcohol           Non-alcohol
   Attendance                                                -0.001             -0.001             -0.001              0.000
                                                            (0.002)            (0.002)            (0.002)             (0.002)
   Parent health knowledge in first survey                                                         -0.097
                                                                                                  (0.093)
   Hours worked                                              0.005               -0.002            -0.003             0.014*
                                                            (0.006)             (0.009)           (0.009)             (0.008)
   Age in second survey                                      0.014               0.032              0.039              -0.008
                                                            (0.027)             (0.036)           (0.038)             (0.043)
   Household incomea                                         -0.000              -0.000            -0.000              -0.000
                                                            (0.000)             (0.000)           (0.000)             (0.000)
   Household sizea                                           0.003               0.001              0.002               0.004
                                                            (0.007)             (0.010)           (0.010)             (0.009)
   Urbana                                                    -0.026              -0.050            -0.049              0.004
                                                            (0.036)             (0.048)           (0.048)             (0.042)
   Biological parent(s) a                                    -0.005              0.014              0.010              -0.030
                                                            (0.026)             (0.035)           (0.035)             (0.034)
   Observations                                               281                 281                281                 281
   R-square                                                   0.05                0.03               0.04               0.04
Notes: Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. Statistical levels of significance are: * indicates p<0.1, ** indicates
p<0.05, *** indicates p<0.01. aHousehold characteristics are measured as the change between the two survey years.




                                                                 57
                                                        Appendix 2 – Table 7
                   The Impact of School Attendance on Health Knowledge: OLS Regressions – Alternative Specification
                                                      (College-Bound Students)
Variables                                (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)            (6)           (7)           (8)           (9)          (10)
                                      Smoking       Drinking      Drinking      Drinking      Drinking      Drinking         Pill        Condom       Pregnancy     Pregnancy
                                       leads to      leads to      leads to      DOES          leads to     harms the      prevents      prevents        most          most
                                         heart         heart         liver     NOT lead        alcohol       unborn       pregnancy       STDs          likely       likely-2
                                       disease       disease       damage      to arthritis   addiction        child
Attendance                              0.002*        -0.001        0.001       0.005***        -0.001        0.000       0.006***         0.001         0.001         0.002
                                       (0.001)       (0.002)       (0.001)       (0.002)       (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.002)        (0.001)       (0.001)      (0.002)
Health Knowledge in first survey      0.136***      0.111***      0.094**       0.149***       0.113**         0.011      0.124***       0.065***      -0.077**       -0.005
                                       (0.052)       (0.034)       (0.040)       (0.032)       (0.053)       (0.056)       (0.035)        (0.021)       (0.031)      (0.042)
Hours worked                             0.002       -0.017*        -0.007       0.013*          0.002        -0.002        -0.005          0.007        -0.002       -0.013
                                       (0.004)       (0.009)       (0.005)       (0.007)       (0.005)       (0.003)       (0.009)        (0.005)       (0.007)      (0.009)
Household incomea                       -0.000        0.000         0.000         -0.000        -0.000        0.000        -0.000          0.000         0.000       0.000**
                                       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)        (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)
Household sizea                          0.009       -0.020*      0.015**          0.002         0.006        -0.003       -0.019         -0.008         0.008        0.015
                                       (0.006)       (0.011)       (0.006)       (0.010)       (0.006)       (0.004)       (0.012)        (0.007)       (0.008)      (0.011)
Urbana                                   0.005        0.012          0.004        -0.008         0.052        -0.005        -0.003         -0.023        0.040         0.031
                                       (0.028)       (0.055)       (0.023)       (0.032)       (0.035)       (0.023)       (0.054)        (0.033)       (0.039)      (0.055)
Biological parent(s) a                  -0.007        0.019       -0.051**        -0.024        -0.005        -0.017        -0.043         -0.012         0.013       -0.054
                                       (0.021)       (0.043)       (0.023)       (0.034)       (0.023)       (0.014)       (0.043)        (0.025)       (0.026)      (0.041)
Observations                              958           958           958           958           958           958          951             953           949          949
R-square                                  0.03         0.03          0.06           0.06         0.04          0.01          0.04            0.02          0.02         0.02
  Notes: Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. Statistical levels of significance are: * indicates p<0.1, ** indicates p<0.05, *** indicates p<0.01. aHousehold
  characteristics are measured as the change between the two survey years.




                                                                                     58
                                                          Appendix 2 - Table 8
         The Impact of Highest Grade Completed and School Attendance on Health Knowledge Index: OLS Regressions - Alternative
                                                             Specification
                                                       (College-Bound Students)
Variables                                         (1)              (2)               (3)               (4)               (5)              (6)               (7)               (8)
                                              Index of          Index of          Index of         Index of          Index of          Index of          Index of         Index of
                                               Health            Health            Health           Health            Health            Health            Health           Health
                                             Knowledge        Knowledge –       Knowledge –      Knowledge –        Knowledge        Knowledge –       Knowledge –      Knowledge –
                                                                Alcohol           Alcohol        Non-alcohol                           Alcohol           Alcohol        Non-alcohol
Highest grade completed                       0.016***            0.007             0.007         0.026***
                                               (0.005)           (0.007)           (0.007)          (0.008)
Attendance                                                                                                           0.002***            0.001             0.001           0.002***
                                                                                                                      (0.001)           (0.001)           (0.001)           (0.001)
Parent health knowledge in first survey                                             0.051                                                                  0.053
                                                                                   (0.035)                                                                (0.035)
Health knowledge in first survey              0.133***          0.150***          0.148***          0.091***         0.135***          0.152***          0.149***          0.092***
                                               (0.031)           (0.039)           (0.039)           (0.028)          (0.031)           (0.040)           (0.039)           (0.029)
Aftersemester                                    0.009             0.012             0.012             0.004
                                               (0.010)           (0.012)           (0.012)           (0.015)
Hours worked                                    -0.001            -0.002            -0.002            -0.000          -0.001            -0.002            -0.002             0.000
                                               (0.002)           (0.003)           (0.003)           (0.003)          (0.002)           (0.003)           (0.003)           (0.003)
Household incomea                               0.000             0.000              0.000             0.000            0.000             0.000             0.000             0.000
                                               (0.000)           (0.000)           (0.000)           (0.000)          (0.000)           (0.000)           (0.000)           (0.000)
Household sizea                                 -0.001            0.000              0.000            -0.002           -0.001            -0.000            -0.000            -0.002
                                               (0.003)           (0.004)           (0.004)           (0.004)          (0.003)           (0.004)           (0.004)           (0.004)
Urbana                                          0.009             0.011              0.010             0.007            0.007             0.010             0.009             0.004
                                               (0.014)           (0.018)           (0.018)           (0.020)          (0.014)           (0.018)           (0.018)           (0.020)
Biological parent(s) a                         -0.014             -0.014            -0.015            -0.014           -0.014            -0.014            -0.015            -0.013
                                               (0.011)           (0.015)           (0.015)           (0.016)          (0.011)           (0.015)           (0.015)           (0.016)
Observations                                      958               958               958               958              958               958               958               958
R-square                                         0.06              0.05               0.05             0.04             0.05              0.05              0.05              0.03
      Notes: Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. Statistical levels of significance are: * indicates p<0.1, ** indicates p<0.05, *** indicates p<0.01. aHousehold
      characteristics are measured as the change between the two survey years.




                                                                                           59
                                                       Appendix 2 – Table 9
               The Impact of School Attendance on Health Knowledge Index: OLS Regressions - Alternative Specification
                                                 (Eventual High School Graduates)
Variables                                  (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)            (7)            (8)            (9)           (10)
                                       Smoking         Drinking       Drinking       Drinking      Drinking       Drinking          Pill         Condom        Pregnancy      Pregnancy
                                        leads to       leads to       leads to        DOES          leads to      harms the       prevents       prevents         most           most
                                          heart          heart          liver       NOT lead        alcohol        unborn        pregnancy        STDs           likely        likely-2
                                        disease         disease       damage        to arthritis   addiction         child
Attendance                               0.004*         -0.003         -0.003          -0.001      -0.006**         0.001           0.005           0.002         -0.003         -0.005
                                        (0.002)        (0.004)        (0.003)         (0.003)       (0.003)        (0.003)        (0.004)         (0.002)        (0.003)        (0.004)
Health knowledge in first survey          0.146         -0.002          0.034        0.152**          0.048          0.186         -0.017        0.098**          -0.066         -0.088
                                        (0.095)        (0.062)        (0.062)         (0.060)       (0.089)        (0.122)        (0.068)         (0.042)        (0.077)        (0.077)
Hours worked                           0.027***          0.002         -0.002          -0.016        -0.000         0.011          0.006         0.023**           0.019          0.012
                                        (0.007)        (0.016)        (0.009)         (0.014)       (0.009)        (0.008)        (0.016)         (0.010)        (0.012)        (0.014)
Household incomea                        0.000           0.000         -0.000        -0.000**        -0.000        -0.000         -0.000*        -0.000**         -0.000         0.000
                                        (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.000)         (0.000)       (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.000)         (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.000)
Household sizea                          -0.008          0.021         -0.002          0.008         0.017          0.015          0.015            0.015          0.017         0.005
                                        (0.012)        (0.018)        (0.013)         (0.015)       (0.013)        (0.011)        (0.018)         (0.009)        (0.014)        (0.017)
Urbana                                    0.001         -0.019         -0.009           0.005        -0.012         -0.046         -0.069          -0.041         0.054          0.024
                                        (0.049)        (0.089)        (0.039)         (0.067)       (0.048)        (0.033)        (0.080)         (0.035)        (0.067)        (0.081)
Biological parent(s)a                    -0.011         -0.034         -0.054          -0.000      -0.077**          0.016         -0.072         -0.087*         -0.024       -0.140**
                                        (0.037)        (0.068)        (0.037)         (0.056)       (0.038)        (0.036)        (0.067)         (0.044)        (0.051)        (0.062)
Observations                               281            281            281             281           281            281            279             279            280            280
R-square                                   0.16           0.05           0.04            0.08         0.07           0.05           0.03             0.15           0.04          0.05
       Notes: Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. Statistical levels of significance are: * indicates p<0.1, ** indicates p<0.05, *** indicates p<0.01. aHousehold
       characteristics are measured as the change between the two survey years.




                                                                                           60
                                                  Appendix 2 - Table 10
   The Impact of Highest Grade Completed and School Attendance on Health Knowledge Index: OLS Regressions - Alternative
                                                       Specification
                                            (Eventual High School Graduates)
Variables                                            (1)               (2)                (3)                (4)                (5)                (6)                (7)               (8)
                                                 Index of           Index of          Index of           Index of           Index of           Index of           Index of            Index of
                                                  Health             Health            Health             Health             Health             Health             Health              Health
                                                Knowledge         Knowledge –       Knowledge –        Knowledge –         Knowledge         Knowledge –        Knowledge –         Knowledge –
                                                                    Alcohol           Alcohol          Non-alcohol                             Alcohol            Alcohol           Non-alcohol
Highest grade completed                            0.007              0.021             0.020              -0.006
                                                  (0.013)            (0.018)           (0.018)            (0.018)
Attendance                                                                                                                     -0.000             -0.002             -0.002            0.002
                                                                                                                              (0.001)            (0.002)            (0.002)           (0.002)
Parent health knowledge in first survey                                                  -0.003                                                                      -0.004
                                                                                        (0.071)                                                                     (0.070)
Health knowledge in first survey                 0.140**              0.043              0.039            0.135**             0.129*              0.038               0.034           0.121**
                                                  (0.070)            (0.073)            (0.074)            (0.058)            (0.074)            (0.076)            (0.076)           (0.058)
Aftersemester                                    -0.051**           -0.066**           -0.065**             -0.037
                                                  (0.021)            (0.028)            (0.028)            (0.029)
Hours worked                                      0.010**             0.005               0.005           0.017***           0.009**               0.000              0.001          0.020***
                                                  (0.004)            (0.006)            (0.006)            (0.006)            (0.004)            (0.005)            (0.006)           (0.006)
Household incomea                               -0.000***             -0.000             -0.000           -0.000**          -0.000***             -0.000             -0.000           -0.000*
                                                  (0.000)            (0.000)            (0.000)            (0.000)            (0.000)            (0.000)            (0.000)           (0.000)
Household sizea                                    0.010*             0.012               0.012              0.009            0.010*               0.012              0.012             0.009
                                                  (0.006)            (0.008)            (0.008)            (0.007)            (0.006)            (0.008)            (0.008)           (0.007)
Urbana                                             -0.018             -0.016             -0.016             -0.017            -0.018              -0.018             -0.018            -0.016
                                                  (0.020)            (0.029)            (0.029)            (0.030)            (0.021)            (0.029)            (0.029)           (0.030)
Biological parent(s) a                            -0.034*             -0.032             -0.032            -0.045*           -0.037**             -0.034             -0.034           -0.048*
                                                  (0.018)            (0.024)            (0.025)            (0.026)            (0.018)            (0.025)            (0.025)           (0.025)
Observations                                        281                281                 281                281               281                 281                281               281
R-square                                            0.15               0.08               0.08               0.12               0.13               0.07               0.07              0.12
      Notes: Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. Statistical levels of significance are: * indicates p<0.1, ** indicates p<0.05, *** indicates p<0.01. aHousehold
      characteristics are measured as the change between the two survey years.




                                                                                                61
                                                     Appendix 2 - Table 11
       The Impact of School Attendance on Health Knowledge: Instrumental Variables Regressions - Alternative Specification
                                                  (College-Bound Students)
Variables                                     (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)            (7)            (8)            (9)         (10)
                                          Smoking        Drinking       Drinking       Drinking       Drinking       Drinking         Pill         Condom        Pregnancy      Pregnancy
                                           leads to       leads to      leads to        DOES           leads to      harms the      prevents       prevents         most           most
                                             heart          heart         liver       NOT lead         alcohol        unborn       pregnancy        STDs           likely        likely-2
                                           disease        disease       damage        to arthritis    addiction         child
Attendance                                  0.001           0.009        -0.001          0.005          -0.002        0.004*          0.006         -0.002         0.008*         0.004
                                           (0.003)        (0.007)       (0.002)         (0.006)        (0.003)        (0.002)        (0.007)        (0.004)        (0.004)       (0.006)
Health knowledge in first survey          0.136***       0.102***       0.095**        0.149***        0.112**          0.013       0.124***       0.063***        -0.060*        -0.001
                                           (0.051)        (0.035)       (0.040)         (0.032)        (0.053)        (0.056)        (0.036)        (0.021)        (0.032)       (0.043)
Hours worked                                 0.002         -0.012       -0.008*         0.013*           0.001         0.000          -0.005         0.006           0.002        -0.012
                                           (0.005)        (0.010)       (0.005)         (0.007)        (0.005)        (0.003)        (0.010)        (0.006)        (0.007)       (0.009)
Household incomea                           -0.000          0.000         0.000          -0.000         -0.000         0.000         -0.000          0.000          0.000        0.000**
                                           (0.000)        (0.000)       (0.000)         (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.000)       (0.000)
Household sizea                              0.009         -0.018       0.015**           0.002          0.006         -0.002        -0.019         -0.009          0.010         0.015
                                           (0.006)        (0.012)       (0.006)         (0.010)        (0.006)        (0.005)        (0.012)        (0.007)        (0.008)       (0.011)
Urbana                                       0.007         -0.001         0.006          -0.009          0.055        -0.011         -0.003         -0.019          0.028         0.028
                                           (0.028)        (0.055)       (0.023)         (0.033)        (0.034)        (0.022)        (0.055)        (0.034)        (0.041)       (0.055)
Biological parent(s)a                       -0.005         -0.008       -0.047*          -0.024         -0.000         -0.027         -0.043         -0.006         -0.008        -0.059
                                           (0.021)        (0.047)       (0.024)         (0.038)        (0.025)        (0.018)        (0.046)        (0.028)        (0.027)       (0.043)
First stage (F-statistic)                   81.711         83.658        81.530         81.167          81.998        81.166         79.489         80.070         80.568         80.238
Observations                                  958            958           958             958            958            958           951            953             949          949
  Notes: Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. Statistical levels of significance are: * indicates p<0.1, ** indicates p<0.05, *** indicates p<0.01. aHousehold
  characteristics are measured as the change between the two survey years. Instrument: Time between interviews between 1997 and 2002 interview waves.




                                                                                            62
                                Appendix 2 – Table 12
  The Impact of School Attendance on Health Knowledge Index: Instrumental Variables
                        Regressions - Alternative Specification
                              (College-Bound Students)
  Variables                                                   (1)                (2)                (3)               (4)
                                                          Index of           Index of           Index of           Index of
                                                           Health             Health             Health             Health
                                                         Knowledge         Knowledge –        Knowledge –        Knowledge –
                                                                             Alcohol            Alcohol          Non-alcohol
  Attendance                                               0.003*              0.003              0.003              0.003
                                                           (0.002)            (0.002)            (0.002)            (0.003)
  Parent health knowledge in first survey                                                          0.050
                                                                                                 (0.035)
  Health knowledge in first survey                        0.140***           0.149***          0.146***            0.096***
                                                           (0.032)            (0.039)            (0.039)            (0.030)
  Hours worked                                              -0.000             -0.001             -0.001             0.001
                                                           (0.002)            (0.003)            (0.003)            (0.004)
  Household incomea                                         0.000              0.000               0.000              0.000
                                                           (0.000)            (0.000)            (0.000)            (0.000)
  Household sizea                                           -0.001             0.000               0.000             -0.002
                                                           (0.003)            (0.004)            (0.004)            (0.004)
  Urbana                                                    0.005              0.007               0.006              0.002
                                                           (0.014)            (0.018)            (0.018)            (0.020)
  Biological parent(s) a                                    -0.018             -0.020             -0.021             -0.016
                                                           (0.012)            (0.016)            (0.016)            (0.017)
  First stage (F-statistic)                                79.744             83.040             83.872             79.559
  Observations                                               958                958                 958                958
Notes: Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. Statistical levels of significance are: * indicates p<0.1, ** indicates
p<0.05, *** indicates p<0.01. aHousehold characteristics are measured as the change between the two survey years. Instrument:
Time between interviews between 1997 and 2002 interview waves.




                                                                63
                                                       Appendix 2 - Table 13
         The Impact of School Attendance on Health Knowledge: Instrumental Variables Regressions - Alternative Specification
                                                 (Eventual High School Graduates)
Variables                                       (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)            (7)            (8)            (9)           (10)
                                             Smoking        Drinking       Drinking       Drinking       Drinking      Drinking          Pill         Condom        Pregnancy       Pregnancy
                                             leads to        leads to      leads to        DOES           leads to     harms the       prevents       prevents         most            most
                                                heart          heart         liver       NOT lead         alcohol       unborn        pregnancy        STDs           likely         likely-2
                                              disease        disease       damage        to arthritis    addiction        child
Attendance                                     0.001        -0.043**        -0.001          0.007          -0.002        0.004           0.005          0.006          0.009          -0.005
                                              (0.008)        (0.020)       (0.010)         (0.017)        (0.008)       (0.010)         (0.019)        (0.012)        (0.015)        (0.018)
Health knowledge in first survey                0.094         -0.033         0.055        0.142**           0.040       0.245*           -0.005        0.091**         -0.064         -0.083
                                              (0.097)        (0.070)       (0.063)         (0.059)        (0.088)       (0.129)         (0.069)        (0.046)        (0.075)        (0.085)
Hours worked                                 0.024**          -0.047        -0.000          -0.005          0.004        0.014           0.006           0.028         0.033           0.013
                                              (0.012)        (0.029)       (0.016)         (0.023)        (0.014)       (0.015)         (0.026)        (0.018)        (0.021)        (0.025)
Household incomea                              0.000          -0.000         0.000        -0.000**          0.000       -0.000          -0.000*       -0.000**         0.000           0.000
                                              (0.000)        (0.000)       (0.000)         (0.000)        (0.000)       (0.000)         (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.000)
Household sizea                                -0.012          0.025        -0.003          0.003           0.007        0.017           0.017           0.015         0.010           0.001
                                              (0.011)        (0.023)       (0.013)         (0.015)        (0.011)       (0.012)         (0.019)        (0.010)        (0.015)        (0.018)
Urbana                                         -0.023         -0.075        -0.010          0.025          -0.033        -0.030          -0.065         -0.031         0.066           0.020
                                              (0.049)        (0.103)       (0.041)         (0.067)        (0.044)       (0.033)         (0.083)        (0.037)        (0.072)        (0.084)
Biological parent(s)a                          -0.015         -0.024        -0.055          0.030         -0.062*         0.016          -0.065       -0.093**         -0.007        -0.117*
                                              (0.033)        (0.089)       (0.039)         (0.056)        (0.037)       (0.037)         (0.068)        (0.047)        (0.053)        (0.063)
First stage (F-statistic)                     13.908          13.278        13.450         13.450          13.439       13.595           13.885         13.227        13.747          13.799
Observations                                     266            266           266            266             266           266            264             264           265             265
      Notes: Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. Statistical levels of significance are: * indicates p<0.1, ** indicates p<0.05, *** indicates p<0.01. aHousehold
      characteristics are measured as the change between the two survey years. Instrument: Time between interviews between 1997 and 2002 interview waves.

  .




                                                                                               64
                                   Appendix 2 - Table 14
     The Impact of School Attendance on Health Knowledge Index: Instrumental Variables
                           Regressions - Alternative Specification
                              (Eventual High School Graduates)
     Variables                                                (1)                (2)                (3)               (4)
                                                                          Models with School Attendance
                                                          Index of          Index of        Index of     Index of
                                                           Health            Health          Health       Health
                                                         Knowledge        Knowledge – Knowledge – Knowledge –
                                                                            Alcohol         Alcohol     Non-alcohol
     Attendance                                            -0.001            -0.008           -0.007       0.006
                                                           (0.005)           (0.006)         (0.006)      (0.007)
     Parent health knowledge in first survey                                                   0.013
                                                                                             (0.068)
     Health knowledge in first survey                       0.127             0.014            0.011     0.125**
                                                           (0.079)           (0.080)         (0.081)      (0.061)
     Hours worked                                           0.008             -0.006          -0.005     0.024**
                                                           (0.007)           (0.009)         (0.010)      (0.011)
     Household incomea                                    -0.000**            -0.000          -0.000       -0.000
                                                           (0.000)           (0.000)         (0.000)      (0.000)
     Household sizea                                        0.008             0.011            0.010        0.007
                                                           (0.006)           (0.009)         (0.009)      (0.008)
     Urbana                                                 -0.022            -0.027          -0.027       -0.015
                                                           (0.021)           (0.030)         (0.030)      (0.031)
     Biological parent(s) a                                -0.031*            -0.023          -0.022     -0.045*
                                                           (0.018)           (0.027)         (0.027)      (0.027)
     First stage (F-statistic)                             13.676            13.041          12.584       13.178
     Observations                                            266               266              266          266
Notes: Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. Statistical levels of significance are: * indicates p<0.1, ** indicates
p<0.05, *** indicates p<0.01. aHousehold characteristics are measured as the change between the two survey years. Instrument:
Time between interviews between 1997 and 2002 interview waves.

 .




                                                                65
                                                             Appendix 2 – Table 15
                          The Impact of School Attendance on Health Knowledge: OLS Regressions with Female Dummy

                                                                           A. College-Bound Students
  Variables                                     (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)              (5)           (6)           (7)             (8)            (9)           (10)
                                             Smoking        Drinking       Drinking       Drinking         Drinking      Drinking        Pill         Condom        Pregnancy      Pregnancy
                                             leads to       leads to       leads to        DOES             leads to     harms the     prevents       prevents         most           most
                                               heart          heart          liver       NOT lead           alcohol       unborn      pregnancy        STDs           likely        likely-2
                                              disease        disease       damage        to arthritis      addiction        child
  Attendance                                   0.002         -0.004         -0.000        0.006***           -0.001        -0.000      0.008***        0.005**         0.003         0.005*
                                              (0.001)       (0.003)        (0.002)         (0.002)          (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.003)        (0.002)        (0.002)        (0.002)
  Female*Attend                                0.000          0.001         0.001           0.000          0.001***       0.001**      0.002**          -0.000         0.000        0.002***
                                              (0.000)       (0.001)        (0.000)         (0.001)          (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.001)        (0.001)        (0.001)        (0.001)
  Test: Equal coefficients (p-value)           0.428          0.067          0.571          0.026             0.111         0.407        0.022           0.027         0.200          0.400
  Observations                                  958            958            958            958               958           958          951             953           949            949
  R-square                                      0.02           0.02          0.03            0.02             0.03          0.01          0.03           0.01           0.01           0.04

                                                                        B. Eventual High School Graduates
 Variables                                         (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)             (5)           (6)            (7)            (8)            (9)           (10)
                                               Smoking        Drinking       Drinking        Drinking        Drinking     Drinking          Pill         Condom        Pregnancy      Pregnancy
                                               leads to       leads to       leads to         DOES            leads to    harms the       prevents       prevents         most           most
                                                 heart          heart          liver        NOT lead          alcohol      unborn        pregnancy        STDs           likely        likely-2
                                                disease        disease       damage         to arthritis     addiction      child
Attendance                                     0.007**          0.001         -0.000           -0.003          -0.005       0.000          0.008        -0.011***         -0.003         -0.002
                                                (0.003)       (0.005)        (0.004)          (0.005)         (0.003)      (0.003)        (0.005)        (0.004)         (0.004)        (0.005)
Female*Attend                                    0.000          0.002        0.003**           0.000          0.002**       0.000         -0.002          -0.001          0.001          0.002
                                                (0.001)       (0.002)        (0.001)          (0.002)         (0.001)      (0.001)        (0.002)        (0.001)         (0.001)        (0.002)
Test: Equal coefficients (p-value)               0.020          0.800          0.438            0.558           0.037       0.987          0.069           0.019           0.279          0.441
Observations                                      281            281            281              281             281         281            279             279             280            280
R-square                                          0.11           0.04          0.08             0.08            0.09         0.01           0.04           0.08            0.04           0.03
 Notes: Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. Statistical levels of significance are: * indicates p<0.1, ** indicates p<0.05, *** indicates p<0.01. aHousehold characteristics
 are measured as the change between the two survey years. Additional controls are Hours worked, Household income, Household size and dummy variables for Urban and living with
 at least one biological parent.




                                                                                               66
                                                        Appendix 2 – Table 16
            The Impact of School Attendance on Health Knowledge: Instrumental Variables Regressions with Female Dummy

                                                                       A. College-Bound Students
Variables                                   (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)           (5)            (6)           (7)           (8)            (9)          (10)
                                        Smoking        Drinking      Drinking       Drinking      Drinking      Drinking         Pill        Condom        Pregnancy     Pregnancy
                                        leads to       leads to      leads to        DOES          leads to     harms the      prevents      prevents         most          most
                                          heart          heart         liver       NOT lead        alcohol       unborn       pregnancy       STDs           likely       likely-2
                                         disease        disease      damage        to arthritis   addiction        child
Attendance                               -0.004          0.002        -0.000          0.012         -0.002        0.004       0.024***         0.010         0.008          0.008
                                         (0.004)       (0.009)       (0.004)         (0.008)       (0.004)       (0.003)       (0.009)        (0.007)       (0.006)        (0.007)
Female*Attendance                         0.000         0.001*         0.000          0.000        0.001**       0.001**       0.002**         -0.001        0.000        0.002***
                                         (0.000)       (0.001)       (0.000)         (0.001)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.001)        (0.001)       (0.001)        (0.001)
First stage (F-statistic)                 42.65          42.65        42.65           42.65          42.65        42.65         41.90           42.73        42.30          42.30
Observations                               958            958           958            958            958           958          951             953          949            949



                                                                B. Eventual High School Graduates
Variables                                   (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)           (5)            (6)           (7)           (8)            (9)          (10)
                                        Smoking        Drinking      Drinking       Drinking      Drinking      Drinking         Pill        Condom        Pregnancy     Pregnancy
                                        leads to       leads to      leads to        DOES          leads to     harms the      prevents      prevents         most          most
                                          heart          heart         liver       NOT lead        alcohol       unborn       pregnancy       STDs           likely       likely-2
                                         disease        disease      damage        to arthritis   addiction       child
Attendance                               -0.000         -0.022        -0.003          0.030         0.005         0.005          0.004        -0.007         0.002          0.005
                                         (0.014)       (0.025)       (0.017)         (0.024)       (0.012)       (0.013)        (0.031)       (0.020)       (0.018)        (0.025)
Female*Attendance                         0.000          0.001        0.002*          0.002         0.002*        0.000          -0.002        0.000         0.001          0.002
                                         (0.001)       (0.002)       (0.001)         (0.002)       (0.001)       (0.001)        (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.002)        (0.002)
First stage (F-statistic)                  9.43           9.43         9.43            9.43          9.43          9.43           9.82         10.02          9.75           9.75
Observations                               266            266           266            266            266          266            264           264           265            265
   Notes: Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. Statistical levels of significance are: * indicates p<0.1, ** indicates p<0.05, *** indicates p<0.01. aHousehold
   characteristics are measured as the change between the two survey years. Instrument: Time between interviews between 1997 and 2002 interview waves and its interaction with
   the female dummy.




                                                                                        67
