                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   IMMIGRATION, OFFSHORING AND AMERICAN JOBS

                                      Gianmarco I.P. Ottaviano
                                           Giovanni Peri
                                          Greg C. Wright

                                        Working Paper 16439
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16439


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2010




This paper was written as part of the project "Mobility of People and Mobility of Firms" coordinated
by the Centro Studi Luca d’Agliano (LdA) and funded by the Fondazione CRT. We thank Giorgio
Barba-Navaretti, Rosario Crinò, Gordon Hanson, Rob Feenstra, Alan Manning, John McLaren and
participants in several seminars and conferences for useful comments and suggestions. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Gianmarco I.P. Ottaviano, Giovanni Peri, and Greg C. Wright. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Immigration, Offshoring and American Jobs
Gianmarco I.P. Ottaviano, Giovanni Peri, and Greg C. Wright
NBER Working Paper No. 16439
October 2010
JEL No. F22,F23,J24,J61

                                              ABSTRACT

How many "American jobs" have U.S.-born workers lost due to immigration and offshoring? Or, alternatively,
is it possible that immigration and offshoring, by promoting cost-savings and enhanced efficiency
in firms, have spurred the creation of jobs for U.S. natives? We consider a multi-sector version of
the Grossman and Rossi-Hansberg (2008) model with a continuum of tasks in each sector and we augment
it to include immigrants with heterogeneous productivity in tasks. We use this model to jointly analyze
the impact of a reduction in the costs of offshoring and of the costs of immigrating to the U.S. The
model predicts that while cheaper offshoring reduces the share of natives among less skilled workers,
cheaper immigration does not, but rather reduces the share of offshored jobs instead. Moreover, since
both phenomena have a positive "cost-savings" effect they may leave unaffected, or even increase,
total native employment of less skilled workers. Our model also predicts that offshoring will push
natives toward jobs that are more intensive in communication-interactive skills and away from those
that are manual and routine intensive. We test the predictions of the model on data for 58 U.S. manufacturing
industries over the period 2000-2007 and find evidence in favor of a positive productivity effect such
that immigration has a positive net effect on native employment while offshoring has no effect on
it. We also find some evidence that offshoring has pushed natives toward more communication-intensive
tasks while it has pushed immigrants away from them.


Gianmarco I.P. Ottaviano                              Greg C. Wright
University of Bologna                                 Department of Economics
Dip Scienze Economiche                                University of California, Davis
Strada Maggiore 45, 40125 Bologna                     One Shields Avenue
ITALY                                                 Davis, CA 95616
ottavian@economia.unibo.it                            gcwright@ucdavis.edu

Giovanni Peri
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
gperi@ucdavis.edu
1     Introduction

The relocation of jobs abroad by multinationals and increased labor market competition due to immigrant
workers are often credited with the demise of many manufacturing jobs once held by American citizens. While
it is certainly true that manufacturing production and employment, as a percentage of the total economy, have
declined over recent decades in the U.S., measuring the impact of globalization on jobs has been diﬃcult. The
reason is that, on the one hand, oﬀshoring some production processes or hiring immigrants to perform them
directly reduces the demand for native workers, while on the other hand the cost-savings of such restructuring of
production increases the productivity and size of firms and improves their competitiveness. As a consequence,
this process may indirectly increase the demand for native workers, if not exactly in the same tasks that were
oﬀshored and given to immigrant workers, then certainly in tasks that are complementary to them. Several
recent papers have emphasized the potential cost-savings eﬀect of oﬀshoring (Grossman and Rossi-Hansberg
2008, Harrison and McMillan 2008, Wright 2010) arguing that this eﬀect could oﬀset or even reverse the "direct
displacement eﬀect" on employment and thereby generate a non-negative eﬀect on the employment of less
educated native workers. Other papers (Peri and Sparber 2009, Peri 2009) have suggested that immigrants
may generate similar productivity-enhancing eﬀects by increasing the demand for less educated native workers,
especially in production tasks that are complementary to those performed by immigrants.
    This paper develops a model and presents empirical evidence with respect to 58 U.S. manufacturing industries
over the period 2000-2007, making progress on two important questions. First, how did the decrease in oﬀshoring
and immigration costs, accompanied by the higher share in jobs contested by oﬀshore and immigrant workers,
aﬀect the employment of native workers within the manufacturing sector? Second, what kinds of production
tasks suﬀered most from the competition created by oﬀshore and immigrant workers and what kinds of tasks
benefited? Our model features a manufacturing sector in which native, immigrant and oﬀshore workers compete
to perform a range of productive tasks in each manufacturing industry. Building on Grossman and Rossi-
Hansberg (2008) the model predicts that lower costs of oﬀshoring and immigration in an industry will increase,
respectively, the share of oﬀshore and immigrant workers in production in that industry. However, since those
workers perform their tasks at a lower cost for the firm, an increase in the share of "globalized" jobs also leads
to an expansion of the industry (productivity eﬀect), an increase in total employment in it and possibly even
an increase in the overall employment of native workers (though not their share within the industry). The
model, by arraying productive tasks from manual- and routine-intensive to cognitive- and non-routine-intensive
and postulating that the productivity of immigrants and the cost of oﬀshoring are, respectively, decreasing and
increasing along this spectrum, provides predictions on the range of tasks that will be performed by immigrants,
those that will be oﬀshored, and those that will be performed by natives. Moreover, the model makes predictions
regarding the impact on the "average task" (in the spectrum) performed by natives (and immigrants) and on


                                                        2
their level of employment when oﬀshoring and immigration costs decline.
   The model focuses on employment eﬀects. It assumes a manufacturing economy with many industries and
one factor (unskilled workers) that is mobile across industries and another (skilled workers, or knowledge, or
capital) that is fixed for each industry. In this way, all the testable eﬀects of oﬀshoring and immigration that
diﬀer across industries are translated into diﬀerential employment eﬀects (for natives) due to the fact that
since wages are equalized across industries the common eﬀect on wages cannot be estimated. In particular, the
model makes three main predictions with respect to employment and the average tasks performed by natives
and immigrants. First, in equilibrium each industry oﬀshores the "intermediate tasks" (in the manual-routine
to cognitive-non-routine spectrum), hires immigrants for the more manual-routine tasks, and hires natives for
the more cognitive-non-routine ones. As a result, a decrease in oﬀshoring costs increases the range of oﬀshored
tasks, reducing the share of tasks performed by natives and immigrants, pushing natives towards more cognitive-
intensive tasks and immigrants towards more manual-intensive tasks. Second, a decrease in immigration costs
increases the share of tasks performed by immigrants, reduces those that are oﬀshored by absorbing some of
the most manual-intensive tasks previously done oﬀshore, but has only a small or no eﬀect on the share of
employment (and the average task) of native workers. Immigrants, in other words, compete more with oﬀshore
workers than with native workers due to their more "extreme" specialization in manual jobs relative to natives,
who are concentrated in the communication-cognitive part of the spectrum. Thus, lower immigration costs lead
to substitution of immigrants for oﬀshore workers. Third, and most importantly, lower costs of oﬀshoring and
immigration produce cost-savings and, therefore, productivity-enhancing eﬀects for the industry. This increases
total labor demand, oﬀsetting either partially or totally the negative eﬀect on the labor share of natives so that
total native employment of less educated workers may be unaﬀected or may even expand as a consequence of
either of these forms of cost-savings.
   We test the predictions of the model using employment data from two diﬀerent sources. The American
Community Survey (ACS) data (2000-2007) allow us to measure the employment of natives and foreign-born in
manufacturing for each of 58 industries in the U.S. Next, the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) dataset on the
operations of U.S. multinationals allows us to measure employment in U.S. multinational aﬃliates abroad for the
same 58 industries over the same period. We then look at the impact of increased ease of oﬀshoring and ease of
immigration on each type of employment in an industry (immigrants, natives and oﬀshore workers). Motivated
by Feenstra and Hanson (1999) we define the "ease of oﬀshoring" as the share of intermediate inputs that is
imported, and we construct the measure by combining the initial oﬀshoring by a country in an industry with the
subsequent total growth in oﬀshoring in the country. This measure thus varies across industries and over time.
Following Card (2001) we measure "ease of immigration" as the constructed share of immigrants in an industry,
based on the composition of immigrant workers in the industry by nationality in 2000 and the subsequent growth



                                                        3
of each national group. The underlying assumption is that these two indicators vary, respectively, with the costs
of oﬀshoring (which varies across industries due to diﬀerences in industry specialization across countries) and
with the cost of immigration (which varies by country of origin and aﬀects industries unevenly according to
the initial distribution of immigrants). We find that an increase in the ease of oﬀshoring reduces the share of
both native and immigrant workers in total industry employment while an increase in the ease of immigration
reduces the share of oﬀshore workers with no impact on the share of native workers. However, looking at
employment levels (rather than shares) an increase in the ease of oﬀshoring does not have an eﬀect on the
employment of natives in a industry whereas an increase in the ease of immigration has a positive impact on it.
This is consistent with the existence of a positive productivity eﬀect due to immigration and oﬀshoring within
manufacturing industries. Finally, by matching occupation data from the ACS with the content of "manual",
"communication" and "cognitive" skills (and routine and non-routine activities) from the O*NET database we
can assess the response of the average task performed by native and immigrants workers (on a manual and
routine-cognitive and non-routine scale). Our final finding is that an increase in oﬀshoring pushes the average
task performed by natives toward higher cognitive and non-routine content and the average task of immigrants
toward more manual and routine content. In contrast, an increase in the share of immigrants has no eﬀect on
the average task performed by natives. The empirical results together imply that immigrant workers do not
compete much with natives since they specialize in manual tasks, so that an increase in immigrants is more
likely to reduce the range of oﬀshored tasks in a industry without aﬀecting the employment level and type of
tasks performed by natives. Oﬀshore workers, on the other hand, compete more directly with natives and so an
increase in oﬀshoring pushes natives toward more cognitive-intensive tasks. However, the positive productivity
eﬀect of oﬀshoring then eliminates any negative eﬀect on native employment. We check the robustness of these
results using diﬀerent definitions of tasks, adding controls and testing the assumption that cross- industry wages
do not vary systematically. An interesting qualification to our results is that both the eﬀects on employment and
on the average task are stronger when we restrict oﬀshoring to be primarily vertical (rather than horizontal),
which is the form best characterized by our model since we assume that firms oﬀshore production in order to
cut costs rather than to serve the foreign market.
   The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The next section describes the novel contributions of this
paper in the context of the existing literature. Section 3 presents the model and derives the main results
and predictions. Section 4 presents the data, describing sources and trends. Section 5 produces the empirical
evidence on the model’s predictions. Section 6 concludes the paper.




                                                        4
2     Literature Review

Several recent papers have analyzed the eﬀect of oﬀshoring on the demand for domestic labor and are relevant
to the present analysis. On the theoretical front, Grossman and Rossi-Hansberg (2008) provide a simple model
of trade in production tasks and, as mentioned, this model will serve as the framework for our paper. It is
worth mentioning that this theory owes much to previous work on trade in intermediates, including seminal
work by Jones and Kierzkowski (1990) and Feenstra and Hanson (1996), both of whom describe models in which
trade in intermediate goods has consequences for the demand for labor much like that described in Grossman
and Rossi-Hansberg (2008). Recent and relevant empirical work includes Crinò (2010), Harrison and McMillan
(2008), Hummels et al. (2010) and Wright (2010), each of whom have tested some of the implications of existing
theories with respect to the wage and employment eﬀects of oﬀshoring. Crinò (2010), which focuses on services
oﬀshoring, and Hummels et al. (2010), which focuses on Denmark, both find positive wage and employment
eﬀects of oﬀshoring for relatively skilled workers, especially those performing more complex production tasks,
but find that less skilled workers may suﬀer displacement. Wright (2010) finds a positive productivity eﬀect of
oﬀshoring for domestic firms but, on net, an aggregate decline in low-skill employment. Harrison and McMillan
(2008) find that a crucial distinction is between horizontal and vertical oﬀshoring (the first aimed at serving the
foreign destination market and the second aimed at producing goods that the multinational will then re-import),
with the first hurting and the second stimulating domestic employment.
    The present paper combines the above literature with the literature on the labor market eﬀects of immigrants
(e.g. Card 2001, Borjas 2003). We propose a common structure to think about these two phenomena (oﬀshoring
and immigration), both consequences of increased globalization. In particular, our model and empirical analysis
address two, previously unanswered questions. First, are oﬀshore workers primarily competing with natives
or with immigrants? And, conversely, is hiring immigrant workers an alternative to oﬀshoring jobs, or do
immigrants compete directly with natives? Second, is the opportunity to hire immigrants and move jobs oﬀshore
a way to increase productivity (by cutting costs) and hence expand production (and possibly total employment)
in an industry? We begin by extending the model from Grossman and Rossi-Hansberg (2008) which provides a
simple way to think of these two phenomena within a unified framework. While the immigration literature has
also analyzed the impact of immigrants on task allocation and productivity (e.g. Peri and Sparber 2009 and
Peri 2009), here we expand on these models by introducing a multi-sector environment and an open economy.
What we find is that the joint analysis of immigration and oﬀshoring provides novel insights. In particular,
the model predicts that when production tasks are arranged on a scale reflecting their relative complexity,
immigrants end up competing on the low-complexity margin with oﬀshore workers, while native workers are
assigned more complex tasks. As we demonstrate, this result has important and testable implications concerning
the consequences of immigration and oﬀshoring on native employment.


                                                        5
     The only other papers that we know of that tackle the analysis of immigration and oﬀshoring in a joint
framework are Olney (2009) and Barba-Navaretti, Bertola and Sembenelli (2008). The first paper assumes
that immigrants are identical to natives and that their variation across U.S. states and industries is exogenous.
Moreover, native workers are assumed to be immobile across states and industries so that increased immigration
or oﬀshoring manifests entirely through wages. We think our model and its derived empirical implementation
constitute a significant improvement on the reduced form approach of that study. The second paper presents a
model of immigration and oﬀshoring and tests its implications on firm-level data for Italy but does not look at
the skill-level of workers and tasks nor at industry-level employment eﬀects.



3       A Labor Market Model of Task Allocation

Consider a small open economy that is active in several perfectly competitive sectors, indexed s = 1, .., S. We
focus on one of these sectors and leave both the sector index s and the time dependence of variables t implicit
for ease of notation. We will make them explicit when we get to the empirics.
     The sector employs two primary factors, high skill workers (with employment level NH ) and low skill workers
(with employment level NL ), with the former being sector-specific. The sector is small enough not to aﬀect
the wage of low skill workers.1 Each worker is endowed with one unit of labor. High and low skill workers
are employed in the production of high skill intermediates (called ’H-tasks’) and low skill intermediates (called
’L-tasks’), which are then assembled in a high skill composite input (H) and a low skill composite input (L),
respectively. The two composite inputs are then transformed into final output (Y ) by the following Cobb-Douglas
production function
                                                     Y = ALα H 1−α                                                       (1)

where A is a technological parameter and α ∈ (0, 1). Since the economy is small, the price of final output pY is
set in the international market.
     Each composite input is produced by assembling a fixed measure (normalized to 1) of diﬀerentiated tasks
(indexed i ∈ [0, 1]). In particular, the low skill composite is assembled through the following CES technology

                                                    ⎡1          ⎤ σ−1
                                                                   σ
                                                     Z
                                                           σ−1
                                                L = ⎣ L (i) σ di⎦                                                        (2)
                                                        0


where L (i) is the input of task i and σ > 0 is the elasticity of substitution between tasks. An analogous
expression holds for the high skill composite.2
    1 SeeAppendix B for an extension of the model in which this assumption does not hold. There we show that, while with
an endogenous native wage immigration and oﬀshoring also have wage eﬀects, the corresponding employment eﬀects discussed in
Section 3.4 remain qualitatively the same.
   2 In Grossman and Rossi-Hansberg (2008) tasks are not substitutable. This corresponds to the limit case of σ = 0 where (2)




                                                             6
3.1     Production Choices

Each L-task can be managed in three modes: domestic production by native workers (D), domestic production
by immigrant workers (M ) and production abroad by oﬀshore workers (O). As we are focusing on a small sector
in a small open economy, the supplies of native, immigrant and oﬀshore workers to the sector are infinitely elastic
                          e and w∗ . We assume that firms can discriminate between natives and immigrants,
at corresponding wages w, w
                         e are not necessarily equal.3 If a foreign worker immigrates, she incurs a frictional
which implies that w and w
cost δ ≥ 1 in terms of foregone productivity. In other words, an immigrant endowed with one unit of labor
in her country of origin is able to provide only 1/δ units of labor in the country of destination. Accordingly,
the migration decision entails a choice between earning w∗ in the country of origin or w/δ
                                                                                       e in the country of
destination. Positive supply of both immigrant and oﬀshore workers then requires the indiﬀerence condition
e = w∗ δ.
w
    Low skill native, immigrant and oﬀshore workers are perfectly substitutable in L-tasks so that in equilibrium
any L-task will be performed by only one type of worker: the one that yields the lowest marginal cost.4 In
contrast, H-tasks are assumed to be prohibitively expensive to perform by immigrant and oﬀshore workers. The
underlying idea is that H-tasks require language and relational skills that foreign-born workers lack or find too
expensive to acquire.5
    L-tasks are defined so that they all require the same unit labor requirement aL when performed by native
workers. If task i is oﬀshored, its unit input requirement is βt(i)aL , with βt(i) ≥ 1 and t0 (i) ≥ 0 so that higher
i corresponds to higher oﬀshoring costs. We can think of the index i as capturing the complexity of the task.
Tasks with low i tend to be manual and routine while those with large i are non-manual and complex. The cost
of oﬀshoring the task (its "oﬀshorability") is positively associated with the index. The marginal productivity
of oﬀshore workers is equal to 1/ [βt(i)aL ] and varies across tasks depending on their oﬀshorability. A lower
value of the parameter β ≥ 1, which is common to all tasks, can be used to capture technological progress that
decreases the cost of oﬀshoring. Due to perfect substitutability among the three groups of low skilled workers,
becomes a Leontief production function.
   3 There is much empirical evidence that, for similar observable characteristics, immigrants are paid a lower wage than natives.

Using data from the 2000 Census, Antecol, Cobb-Clark and Trejo (2001), Butcher and DiNardo (2002) and Chiswick, Lee and
Miller (2005) all show that recent immigrants from non-English speaking countries earn on average 17 to 20% less than natives
with identical observable characteristics. Hendricks (2002) also shows that the immigrant-native wage diﬀerential, controlling for
observable characteristics, is highly correlated with the wage diﬀerential between the US and their country of origin. See, however,
Section 3.4 and Appendix B for a detailed discussion of how the predictions of the model would change were firms assumed to be
unable to discriminate between native and immigrants workers.
   4 If native, immigrant and oﬀshore workers were imperfectly substitutable, each task could be performed by ’teams’ consisting

of the three types of workers. Then, rather than full specialization of workers’ types in diﬀerent tasks, one would observe partial
specialization, with the shares of the three types in each task inversely related to the corresponding marginal costs. While in reality
several tasks are indeed performed by a combination of diﬀer types of workers, nonetheless the intuition behind the key results of
the model is better served by assuming perfect substitutability.
   5 We focus on the extreme case in which H-tasks can be performed only by native workers for parsimony. By simply inverting

the L and H indices, our results apply symmetrically to a situation in which L-tasks can be performed only by native workers
whereas H-tasks can be performed also by immigrant and oﬀshore workers. By analogy the analysis of these extreme cases can be
readily extended to the intermediate case in which immigrant and oﬀshore workers can perform both types of tasks.




                                                                  7
a task is oﬀshored rather than performed by natives whenever oﬀshoring is cheaper:


                                                  w ≥ w∗ βt(i)                                                (3)


Assuming w > w∗ βt(0) is necessary for at least some task to be oﬀshored.
   Additionally, when assigning tasks to immigrants firms face a task-specific cost τ (i) ≥ 1 implying that
immigrants’ marginal productivity in task i is 1/aL τ (i). We assume that τ 0 (i) ≥ 0 so that there is a negative
correlation between the complex-non routine intensity of a task and the productivity of an immigrant worker at
performing it. The underlying idea is that immigrants with low levels of education are better at manual-routine
tasks than at complex-communication tasks. We will come back to this issue in the empirics.
   A task is assigned to an immigrant rather than a native whenever it is cheaper to do so. This is the case
             e (i), which can be rewritten as
whenever w ≥ wτ


                                                  w ≥ w∗ δτ (i)                                               (4)


                                    e = w∗ δ. Assuming w > w∗ δτ (0) is necessary for at least some task to be
recalling the indiﬀerence condition w
assigned to immigrants.
   To conclude the comparisons between the diﬀerent production modes we need to state the condition under
which a task is oﬀshored rather than performed by immigrants. This is the case whenever oﬀshore workers are
more productive than immigrants:
                                                  βt(i) ≤ δτ (i)                                              (5)


3.2    Task Allocation

Conditions (3), (4) and (5) clearly suggest that the allocation of tasks among the three types of workers depends
on the wages (w and w∗ ), the sector-specific frictional cost parameters (β and δ), and the shapes of the task-
specific costs (t(i) and τ (i)). To avoid a tedious taxonomy of sub-cases, we characterize the equilibrium of the
model under a set of "working hypotheses" whose relevance will be discussed in the empirics. Nonetheless, as
the following arguments are general, they can be readily applied to alternative hypotheses.
   In particular, we assume that τ 0 (i) ≥ βt0 (i) so that as i increases the diﬃculty of assigning a task to
immigrants rises faster than the diﬃculty of oﬀshoring it. We further assume that δτ (0) < βt(0) so that the
first task is more diﬃcult to oﬀshore than to assign to immigrants. These two assumptions capture the idea that
assigning simple tasks to immigrants incurs a lower set-up cost than oﬀshoring them. However, as the variety
and complexity of tasks increases it is hard to find immigrants able to do them, whereas once set-up costs are
paid it is relatively easy to access the marginal oﬀshore worker.


                                                        8
   Denote native, immigrant and oﬀshore marginal costs as cD = waL , cM (i) = w∗ δτ (i)aL and cO (i) =
w∗ βt(i)aL , respectively. Then, our working hypotheses ensure that, when represented as a function of i, cM (i)
and cO (i) cross only once, with the former cutting the latter from below. Single crossing then implies that there
exists only one value of i such that cO (i) = cM (i) and (5) holds with equality. This value defines the "marginal
immigrant task" IMO such that
                                                  βt(IMO ) = δτ (IMO )                                        (6)

For all tasks i ≤ IMO it is cheaper to employ immigrants than oﬀshore workers (i.e. cM (i) < cO (i)). For all
tasks with i ≥ IMO employing immigrants is more expensive (i.e. cM (i) > cO (i)).
   Finally, for all three modes to be adopted for some tasks in equilibrium we assume that cO (IMO ) =
cM (IMO ) < cD < cM (1). This allows us to determine the "marginal oﬀshore task" IN O satisfying (3) with
equality:
                                                        w = w∗ βt(INO )                                       (7)

with βt(IN O ) ≥ 1.
   The allocation of tasks among the three groups of workers is portrayed in Figure 1, where the task index i is
measured along the horizontal axis and the production costs along the vertical axis. The flat line corresponds
to cD and the upward sloping curves correspond to cM (i) and cO (i), with the former starting from below but
steeper than the latter. Since each task employs only the type of workers yielding the lowest marginal cost,
tasks from 0 to IMO are assigned to immigrants, tasks from IMO to IN O are oﬀshored, and tasks from INO to
1 are assigned to natives.


3.3    Employment Levels and Shares

Given the above allocation of tasks, marginal cost pricing under perfect competition implies that tasks are
priced as follows                      ⎧
                                       ⎪
                                       ⎪ cM (i) = w∗ δτ (i)aL                0 ≤ i < IMO
                                       ⎪
                                       ⎪
                                       ⎨
                               p (i) =   cO (i) = w∗ βt(i)aL                 IMO ≤ i < IN O
                                       ⎪
                                       ⎪
                                       ⎪
                                       ⎪
                                       ⎩ cD = waL                            INO < i ≤ 1

Then, by (1) and (2), the demand for task i is

                                            ∙           ¸−σ
                                                p (i)                   1
                                                                     − 1−α           1
                                   L(i) =                     (PL )          (αpY A) 1−α H
                                                 PL




                                                                 9
                        cD , cM(i), cO(i)

                                                                                                           cM(i)=w *δτ(i)a L




                                                                                                           cO(i)=w *βt(i)a L




                                                                                                           cD=wa L




                                                                                                                          task index, i
                             0                            IMO                  INO                    1
                                        immigrant                 offshore               native
                                        workers                   workers                workers




                                     Figure 1: Unit Costs Over the Range of Tasks


where PL is the exact price index of the low skill composite, defined as

                         (Z                                            Z                                                              ) 1−σ
                                                                                                                                         1
                                  IMO                                        INO
                                                       ∗ 1−σ                                    ∗ 1−σ
               PL = aL                  [δτ (i)w ]              di +               [βt(i)w ]              di + (1 − IN O )w1−σ
                              0                                         IMO


Since i ∈ [0, 1], PL is also the average price (and average marginal cost) of low skill tasks. Using (7) we can
rewrite it as PL = waL Ω(IMO , IN O ) with

                                  (Z              ∙               ¸1−σ               Z          ∙              ¸1−σ                       ) 1−σ
                                                                                                                                             1
                                            IMO                                          IN O
                                                       δτ (i)                                         t(i)
             Ω(IMO , IN O ) =                                                di +                                     di + (1 − INO )             (8)
                                        0             βt(IN O )                          IMO        t(IN O )

This highlights the relationship between PL and the bundling parameter Ω in Grossman and Rossi-Hansberg
(2008), which we encompass as a limit case when σ goes to zero and δ goes to infinity–that is, when tasks are
not substitutable and migration is prohibitively expensive. It shows that changes in the migration cost δ and
the oﬀshoring cost β that decrease Ω(IMO , INO ) imply improved eﬃciency in low skill labor usage. This is the
source of the productivity eﬀects of migration and oﬀshoring discussed in Section 3.4.
   Taking into account the diﬀerent marginal productivity of the three groups of workers, the amount of labor




                                                                              10
demanded to perform task i is
                                                    ⎧
                                                    ⎪
                                                    ⎪ aL δτ (i)L(i)                 0 ≤ i < IMO
                                                    ⎪
                                                    ⎪
                                                    ⎨
                                            N (i) =   aL βt(i)L(i)                  IMO ≤ i < INO
                                                    ⎪
                                                    ⎪
                                                    ⎪
                                                    ⎪
                                                    ⎩ aL L(i)                       IN O < i ≤ 1


so that immigrant, oﬀshore and native employment levels are given by

                                                    Z   IMO            ¶1−σ        µ
                                                                    PM       1    − α
                                    NM      =                 N (i) di =     (PL ) 1−α B                                                 (9)
                                               0                    PL       w∗
                                              Z INO               µ    ¶1−σ
                                                               1 PO              − α
                                    NO      =       N (i) di = ∗            (PL ) 1−α B
                                               IMO             w    PL
                                              Z 1               µ    ¶1−σ
                                                              1 PD             − α
                                    ND      =      N (i) di =             (PL ) 1−α B
                                               INO            w PL

                           1
where B = (αpY A) 1−α H > 0 is a combination of parameters and exogenous variables and the exact price
indices of immigrant, oﬀshore and native tasks are given by

          (Z                             ) 1−σ
                                            1                         (Z                               ) 1−σ
                                                                                                          1
                 IMO                                                       IN O                                         ©               ª 1
                               ∗ 1−σ                                                       ∗ 1−σ
PM = aL                [δτ (i)w ]      di           , PO = aL                     [βt(i)w ]        di          , PD = aL (1 − INO ) w1−σ 1−σ
             0                                                             IMO
                                                                                                                                        (10)
   Note that NM is the number of immigrants employed whereas, due to the frictional migration cost, the
corresponding number of units of immigrant labor is NM /δ. Hence, sector employment is NL = NM +NO +ND .
The shares of the three groups of workers in sectoral employment are thus

                                                                             (PM )1−σ
                                       sM       =               1−σ               1−σ            1−σ                                    (11)
                                                        (PM )         + (PO )           + (PD )        (w∗ /w)
                                                                             (PO )1−σ
                                       sO       =               1−σ               1−σ            1−σ
                                                        (PM )         + (PO )           + (PD )        (w∗ /w)
                                                                                           1−σ
                                                                        (w∗ /w) (PD )
                                       sD       =
                                                        (PM )1−σ + (PO )1−σ + (PD )1−σ (w∗ /w)

While (6) and (7) identify the marginal tasks as cutoﬀs between tasks performed by diﬀerent groups of workers,
the distinction is not so stark in reality. For the empirical analysis, it is therefore also useful to characterize
the "average task" performed by each group. This is defined as the employment-weighted average across the




                                                                            11
corresponding i’s:

                                     R IMO            R IMO
                                      0
                                         iN (i) di          iτ (i)1−σ di
                            IM   =                 = R0IMO                                                   (12)
                                        NM                   τ (i)1−σ di
                                                        0
                                          R IN O                       R INO
                                           IMO
                                                 iN (i) di                     it(i)1−σ di
                            IO   = IMO +                   = IMO + RIMO   IN O
                                                 NO                             t(i)1−σ di
                                                                         IMO
                                          R1
                                                N (i) di    IN O + 1
                            ID   = IN O + INO             =
                                               ND                2


3.4    Comparative Statics

We are interested in how marginal and average tasks, as well as employment shares and levels, vary across the
three types of workers when oﬀshoring and migration costs change.
   From (6) and (7), our working hypotheses imply that marginal tasks exhibit the following properties:

                                             ∂INO          ∂IMO
                                                      < 0,      >0
                                              ∂β            ∂β
                                             ∂INO          ∂IMO
                                                      = 0,      <0
                                              ∂δ            ∂δ

These highlight the adjustments in employment occurring in terms of the number of tasks allocated to the three
groups of workers. They can be readily interpreted using Figure 1. For example, a reduction in oﬀshoring
costs (lower β) shifts cO (i) downward, thus increasing the number of oﬀshored tasks through a reduction in
both the number of tasks assigned to immigrants (∂IMO /∂β > 0) and the number of tasks assigned to natives
(∂IN O /∂β < 0). Analogously, a reduction in the migration costs (lower δ) shifts cM (i) downward, thus increasing
the number of tasks assigned to immigrants through a decrease in the number of oﬀshored tasks (higher IMO ).
Accordingly, given (12) we also have the following properties for average tasks:

                                              ∂ID          ∂IM
                                                      < 0,     >0                                            (13)
                                               ∂β           ∂β
                                              ∂IM          ∂IO
                                                      < 0,     <0
                                               ∂δ           ∂δ

These are driven by compositional changes due to adjustments both in the number of tasks allocated to the three
groups and in the employment shares of the diﬀerent tasks allocated to the three groups. Note that changes in
migration costs have no impact on the average native task (∂ID /∂δ = 0). The impact of oﬀshoring costs on the
average oﬀshore task (∂IO /∂β) is, instead, ambiguous. This is due to opposing adjustments in the allocation of
tasks given that when β falls some of the additional oﬀshore tasks have low i (i.e. IMO falls) while others have
high i (i.e. IN O rises).



                                                         12
   Looking at (11), the impacts of declining β and δ on employment shares are all unambiguous. By making
oﬀshore workers more productive and therefore reducing the price index of oﬀshore tasks relative to all tasks,
a lower oﬀshoring cost β reallocates tasks from immigrants and natives to oﬀshore workers. By reducing the
price index of immigrant tasks relative to all tasks, a lower migration cost δ moves tasks away from oﬀshore
and native workers toward immigrants:

                                         ∂sM           ∂sO      ∂sD
                                                  > 0,     < 0,     >0                                           (14)
                                          ∂β           ∂β       ∂β
                                         ∂sM           ∂sO      ∂sD
                                                  < 0,     > 0,     >0
                                          ∂δ            ∂δ       ∂δ

We call these the "relative productivity eﬀects" on low skill workers.
   Finally, turning to the impact of declining β and δ on employment levels, expressions (9) reveal an additional
eﬀect beyond the substitution among groups of workers in terms of employment shares. This is due to the fact
that lower β and δ ultimately cause a fall in the price index PL of the low skill composite because, as a whole,
low skill workers become more productive. We call this the "absolute productivity eﬀect" on low skill workers.
                                                  1
                                               − 1−α
Specifically, as is evidenced by the term (PL )        on the right hand side of (9), a fall in the price index of the
low skill composite has a positive impact on sectoral employment (through the absolute productivity eﬀect),
which is then distributed across groups depending on how the relative price indices PM /PL , PO /PL and PD /PL
vary (via the relative productivity eﬀect). Note that, given (PL )1−σ = (PM )1−σ + (PO )1−σ + (PD )1−σ , PL
cannot change when PM , PO and PD are all fixed. This is why we have chosen not to collect the PL terms in
(9), allowing us to disentangle the absolute and relative productivity eﬀects.
   The impact of declining β and δ on employment levels can be signed only when the absolute productivity
eﬀect and the relative productivity eﬀect go in the same direction. In particular, since ∂PL /∂β > 0 and
∂PL /∂δ > 0, we have
                                                  ∂NO      ∂NM
                                                      < 0,     <0
                                                   ∂β       ∂δ

while the signs of ∂NM /∂β, ∂ND /∂β, ∂NO /∂δ and ∂ND /∂δ are generally ambiguous. In other words, whether
the absolute productivity eﬀect is strong enough to oﬀset the relative productivity eﬀect for all groups of
workers is an empirical question that we will address in the next sections. Lower β and δ certainly raise sector
employment NL = NM + NO + ND , since only the absolute productivity eﬀect matters in this case.
   As a final comment, it is worth pointing out that firms’ ability to discriminate between natives and immigrants
is crucial for the productivity eﬀects of easier immigration to materialize. Indeed, when firms are able to
                                       e = w∗ δ so that any reduction in the migration cost δ allows them to
discriminate, they pay immigrant wages w
reduce their payments to immigrants. This generates a cost saving eﬀect both at the intensive margin of tasks
already assigned to immigrants and at the extensive margin of new tasks shifted from oﬀshore to immigrant


                                                          13
workers. If firms were, instead, unable to discriminate, immigrants would always be paid native wages w earning
rents w − w∗ δ. Thus, any reduction in δ would simply increase immigrants’ rents with no impact on firms’ costs.
The diﬀerence between falling costs of immigration with and without discrimination is that in the former case
they create rents for domestic firms whereas in the latter case they create rents for the immigrants. Note,
however, that our assumption of perfect discrimination is not crucial to generate the productivity eﬀect due
to immigration since even partial discrimination generates rents for the firm. See Appendix B for additional
details.



4     Data

In order to make the predictions of the model operational we need to provide an empirical definition and
empirical measures for three sets of variables. First, we need to measure the employment of less-skilled workers
in each industry-year, identifying separately native workers operating in the U.S. (D for domestic), immigrant
workers operating in the U.S. (M for migrants) and workers operating abroad for U.S. multinationals or sub-
contracting for them (O for oﬀshore). Second, we need a measure of the average intensity of production tasks
performed by less-skilled native workers (ID ), oﬀshore workers (IO ) and immigrant workers (IM ). Third, we
need to construct an index or a proxy for the oﬀshoring costs β and for the immigration costs δ by industry in
each year. It turns out that to produce these variables using a consistent and comparable industry classification
we need to merge data on multinational employment from the BEA, data on imports of intermediate goods from
Feenstra et al. (2002) and data on native- and foreign-born workers from the IPUMS samples of the Census and
the American Community Survey. The only years for which this merge can be done consistently and reliably
are the years 2000-2007, and we therefore use these as our sample. We will describe each set of variables and
their trends and summary statistics in the sections 4.1, 4.2 and 4.3 below. Section 5 then uses these variables
to test empirically the main predictions of the model.


4.1    Employment and Shares

The data on oﬀshore employment are obtained by adding up two groups of workers. We start with data on U.S.
Direct Investment Abroad from the BEA which collects data on the operations of U.S. parent companies and
their aﬃliates. From this dataset we obtain the total number of employees working in foreign aﬃliates of U.S.
parent companies, by industry of the U.S. parent. These are jobs directly generated abroad by multinationals.
However, of growing importance are jobs created as multinationals oﬀshore production tasks to foreign sub-
contractors that are unaﬃliated with the multinational, so-called arm’s length oﬀshoring (see Antras, 2003).
We would also like to include these oﬀshored jobs in the count of total oﬀshore employment but we do not have



                                                         14
a direct measure of them. Hence this second group of oﬀshored jobs is calculated as follows. Assuming that
a large part of the production output of these oﬀshored tasks is subsequently imported as intermediate inputs
by the U.S. parent company, we calculate the ratio of imports of intermediates by the U.S. parent coming from
aﬃliates and employment in those aﬃliates. We then scale the imports of the U.S. parent coming from non-
aﬃliates (data that are also available from the BEA) by this ratio to impute the employment in sub-contracting
companies. This procedure assumes that the labor content per unit of production of sub-contracted intermediate
inputs is the same as for production in U.S. aﬃliates in the same industry. Then we add the employment in
aﬃliates (first group) and the imputed oﬀshore employment (second group) to obtain total oﬀshore employment.
Adding the imputed employment increases oﬀshore employment by 60-80% in most industries, confirming the
importance of arm’s length oﬀshoring of production tasks.
   The employment of less-skilled native and immigrant workers in the U.S. is obtained from the American
Community Survey (ACS) and Census IPUMS samples (2000-2007)6 obtained from Ruggles et. al. (2008). We
added up all workers not living in group quarters who worked at least one week during the year and have a high
school diploma or less, weighting them by the sample weight assigned by the ACS in order to make the sample
nationally representative. We define as immigrants all foreign-born workers who were not a citizen at birth.
The relevant industry classification in the Census-ACS data 2000-2007 is the INDNAICS classification which
is based on the North American Industry Classification System (NAICS). Since the BEA industries are also
associated with unique 4-digit NAICS industries we are able to develop a straightforward concordance between
the two datasets. The 58 final industries on which we have data and their BEA codes are reported in Table A1
of the Appendix.
   The evolution of the share of immigrants and oﬀshore workers in total manufacturing employment and in
some selected industries is shown in Table A2 in the Appendix. Figures 1 and 2 report the distribution of those
shares in each year across the 58 industries and the connecting line shows their average over time. While during
the 2000-2007 period there has been only a modest increase in the overall share of immigrants and oﬀshore
employment in total manufacturing employment (the first increases from 12.8% to 14% and the second from
22.3% to 29.3%) diﬀerent industries have experienced very diﬀerent changes in their share of immigrants and
oﬀshore labor among workers. For instance, "Apparel and Textile Mills" has experienced the largest increase
among all industries in the share of immigrant workers (+7.6% of total employment) and at the same time
has experienced an almost identical and negative (-7%) change in oﬀshore employment. On the other hand,
"Plastic Products" has experienced a decline in the share of immigrant employment (-2.3%) and a large increase
(+16.8%) in oﬀshore employment. "Basic Chemicals" experienced the largest increase in oﬀshore employment as
  6 For year 2000 we use the 5% Census sample. For 2001 we use the 1-in-232 national random sample. For 2002, we use the
1-in-261 national random sample. For 2003 we use the 1-in-236 national random sample. For 2004 we use the 1-in-239 national
random sample. For 2005, 2006 and 2007 the 1-in-100 national random samples are used.




                                                            15
a percentage of total employment over this period (+30%) and "Other Transportation Equipment" experienced
the largest decline (-32%). The variation across industries, therefore, promises to be large enough to allow us to
identify the diﬀerential eﬀects of changes in the cost of immigration and oﬀshoring on employment, even over
a relatively short period. Table A3 in the appendix shows the percentages of native, immigrant and oﬀshore
employment as of 2007 for some representative industries spanning the range from very high to very low share
of native workers. What can be seen, and is very relevant for our analysis, is that all industries, to diﬀerent
extents, hire immigrants and oﬀshore production. Hence the joint analysis of these two processes can help us
gain a better understanding of the evolution of manufacturing employment.


4.2    Average Task Intensity

Our model assumes that the contribution of less educated workers to production can be represented in a
continuum of tasks that can be ranked from manual-non-complex to non-manual-complex. At the same time we
assume that this ranking is negatively correlated with oﬀshorability and with the productivity of immigrants
in performing tasks. Recent empirical studies (Becker, Ekholm and Muendler, 2007, Blinder, 2007, Ebenstein,
Harrison, McMillan, Phillips, 2009, Jensen and Kletzer, 2007, Levy and Murnane, 2006, Wright, 2010) have
also argued that jobs that are intensive in more routine and codifiable types of tasks and less intensive in tasks
requiring communication and cognitive interactions with other people are less costly to oﬀshore. Moreover, Peri
and Sparber (2009) have shown that due to their imperfect knowledge of language and local norms, immigrants
have a comparative advantage in manual-intensive and simple physical tasks and a comparative disadvantage
in communication-intensive and interactive tasks. Combining these two type of studies we rank the tasks ”i”
from 0 to 1 as progressively having a larger communication-interaction intensity and a lower manual and routine
content. Hence 0 is a task with the highest content of manual-routine skills to be performed and 1 is a task that
requires the highest content of interactive-cognitive skills to be performed. Our assumption is that the cost of
oﬀshoring tasks and the inverse productivity of immigrants in performing them are both positively correlated
with the index, so that they increase as the index progresses from 0 to 1.
   While the model identifies "marginal" tasks that establish a cut-oﬀ between production tasks performed
by one group (say immigrants) and another (say oﬀshore workers) the distinction between tasks performed by
diﬀerent groups is not so stark in reality. However, the predictions of the model regarding the impact of shifts
in the cost-curves on the average task index performed by each group are more continuous in nature and can
be empirically tested. Thus, the way in which we impute task performance in an industry is as follows. First,
we associate with each worker (native or immigrant) in industry s the intensity (standardized between 0 and 1)
of each one of five task-skill measures assigned to the worker’s occupation by the Bureau of Labor Statistics via
its O*NET database. As described in greater detail in the Appendix C we use the original O*NET variables to



                                                       16
construct the indices for proxying "cognitive", "communication", "interactive", "manual" and "routine" skills.
Those indices capture the intensity (between 0 and 1) of that skill as used in the productive activities performed
in the occupation. By associating with each individual the indices specific to her occupation (classified using
the Standard Occupation Classification (SOC)) we construct for each individual the index i =("cognitive"+
"communication"+ "interactive"-"manual"-"routine")/5+2/5, ranging between 0 and 1, which identifies on
that scale the position of the typical task supplied by the individual (occupation)7 . We then average the index
(weighted by hours worked) across all U.S.-born workers with a high school diploma or less in industry s and year
t to obtain IDst and across immigrant workers with a high school degree or less to obtain IMst . Our empirical
analysis will be based on the implications derived using these two indices. Hence the range 0 to 1 for the index i
spans a "task space" that goes from the most manual-routine intensive tasks to the most cognitive-non-routine
intensive ones. Because the BEA database does not contain the occupations of oﬀshore workers we are unable
to calculate IOst .
    Figures 3 and 4 show the range of variation across industries and the average values of the indices ID and IM .
The average value of the index is quite stable (much more so than the share of employment) which indicates
a slower change in the task-composition (occupational distribution) of natives and immigrants within each
industry. The value of the index, averaging across all manufacturing industries, is around 0.33 for immigrants
and 0.37 for natives. Moreover, averaging over the 7 years for each industry the complexity index is larger for
natives than for immigrants in all but one case. This confirms that natives perform tasks ranked higher by
this index. The standard deviation of the average native index across industries is around 0.025 and similarly
the standard deviation of the average immigrant index is about 0.026. Also, the variation in the growth of the
skill-index over the 7 years across industries is quite limited. For instance, the industry with the largest growth
in ID is "Semi-conductor and other electronic components", which experienced an increase in the index of 0.02,
while the largest decrease was -0.009, experienced by "Coating, Engraving and Heat-treating". Hence, over the
period considered (2000-2007) a change in the skill-index of 0.01 in an industry constitutes significant variation.
Also notice that, on average, the index for natives ID in the entire manufacturing sector increased by 0.003
while the index for immigrants IM decreased by 0.003. While this may be due to many factors, an increase in
oﬀshore employment (and in its range of tasks) in the model presented above would have exactly this eﬀect as
oﬀshored tasks would drive a wedge between those performed by natives (whose average index would grow) and
those performed by immigrants (whose index would decrease).
   7 We have also constructed the index using a subset of those variables, namely omitting, alternatively, "communication", "inter-

active" or "routine" measures. The empirical results are largely unchanged.




                                                                17
4.3     Imputed Oﬀshoring and Immigration

Driving the shifts in employment shares and average skill-indices are the changes in accessibility of oﬀshore
and immigrant workers. In particular, our model has a simple and parsimonious way of capturing changes in
the overall cost of oﬀshoring in an industry (β s ) and in the overall cost of immigration in an industry (δ s ).
As we do not observe industry-specific oﬀshoring and immigration costs, we construct a measure of imputed
oﬀshoring and imputed immigration that are likely to be driven by changes in those costs, and that also diﬀer
across industries. In particular, following Feenstra and Hanson (1999) we begin by constructing a measure of
oﬀshoring activity by imputing to each industry the share of imported intermediate inputs coming from other
industries that share the same 3-digit NAICS code8 . Thus, this measure varies according to the input-output
structure of each manufacturing industry and the diﬀerential degree of oﬀshoring of intermediate inputs. The
data on U.S. imports come from Feenstra et. al. (2002) and are then restricted according to their End-Use
classification to consist only of imports destined for use as production inputs.
    Next, in order to isolate the variation in this measure that is due only to exogenous variation in oﬀshoring
costs, we alter the oﬀshoring measure further. First, we first regress the oﬀshoring measure on country-time
and industry-time fixed eﬀects, and then discard the resulting industry-time coeﬃcients. The country-time
coeﬃcients are then used as the key variation in the new measure. The idea is that variation over time that
is specific to industries, and that is not due to factors originating abroad, is likely to be "contaminated" with
variation that is endogenous to employment and wages. Primarily we are concerned about U.S.-originating
industry-specific demand shocks that both increase employment and wages and simultaneously increase the
extent of oﬀshoring.
    For each country we then interact the variation over time in country-specific oﬀshoring with the level of
oﬀshoring across industries in a country in 2000. Summing over countries results in our final industry- and
time-varying oﬀshoring measure. Thus, the implicit identifying assumption is that U.S. oﬀshoring is driven
by country-specific oﬀshoring costs that aﬀect diﬀerent industries in diﬀerent ways depending on their initial
geographical distribution of oﬀshoring. These can be thought of as "push" factors that vary independently of
domestic U.S. demand shocks. We call this measure for industry s and year t "Imputed Oﬀshoringst ", and
because it depends negatively on oﬀshoring costs (β s ) we will sometimes refer to it as the "ease of oﬀshoring".
    For immigrants we use an analogous idea. We exploit the observation that foreigners from diﬀerent countries
have increased or decreased their relative presence in the U.S. according to changes in the cost of migrating from
their countries as well as with domestic conditions in their countries of origin. The diﬀerent initial presence of
immigrants from diﬀerent countries in an industry makes that industry more or less subject to those shifts in
    8 This is the narrow definition of oﬀshoring from Feenstra and Hanson (1999). As described in that paper this definition more

closely captures the idea that oﬀshoring occurs when a firm chooses to have inputs produced abroad that it could otherwise produce
itself.




                                                               18
cost- and push-factors. Hence we impute the population of each of 10 main groups of immigrants9 using the
initial share of workers in the industry combined with their total population growth in the U.S., assuming that
cross-country diﬀerences in immigration are solely driven by changes in cost- and push-factors. We calculate
the imputed immigration index by industry as the imputed share of foreign-born in total employment. We
call this measure for industry s and year t "Imputed Immigrationst ", and because it depends negatively on
immigration costs (δ s ) we will sometimes call it "ease of immigration". This index is similar to the constructed
shift-share instrument often used in studies of immigration in local labor markets (e.g., Card, 2001, Card and
DiNardo 2000, Peri and Sparber 2009), except that it exploits diﬀerences in the presence of immigrant groups
(from diﬀerent countries) across industries, rather than across localities. The changes in this index, which are
due solely to changes in the country-of-origin specific immigration costs, will diﬀer across industries due to the
weighting of each country-specific change by the initial cross-country distribution of workers in an industry.
Finally, we divide each index by its standard deviation across all observations so that the estimated coeﬃcients
can be easily compared.



5     Empirical Specifications and Results

The strategy in this section is to test the main empirical predictions of the model. In particular, we are interested
in estimating the impact of decreasing oﬀshoring and immigration costs, which should result in a larger amount
of production carried out by oﬀshore workers and foreigners within the U.S., on the employment and task
specialization of natives. As suggested by the model, we will exploit diﬀerences in costs across industries and
over time in order to identify the impact of reduced oﬀshoring and immigration costs on native and immigrant
employment as well as on native and immigrant task specialization.


5.1    Eﬀects on Employment Shares

Our empirical strategy is to first estimate the eﬀects of the ease of immigration and oﬀshoring on the share of
native, immigrant and oﬀshore employees among less educated workers. We then analyze the impact on the
employment levels of these groups and then on the task-specialization of natives and immigrants. Using the
same notation as developed in the model we first estimate the following three equations:


                sDst = φD    D                                                            D
                        s + φt + bDO (Imputed Oﬀshoringst )+bDI (Imputed Immigrationst )+εst                        (15)


               sMst = φM    M                                                            M
                       s + φt + bMO (Imputed Oﬀshoringst )+bMI (Imputed Immigrationst )+εst                         (16)
  9 The ten countries/regions of origin are: Mexico, Rest of Latin America, Canada-Australia-New Zealand, Western Europe,

Eastern Europe, China, India, Rest of Asia, Africa, Others.




                                                           19
                 sOst = φO    O                                                            O
                         s + φt + bOO (Imputed Oﬀshoringst )+bOI (Imputed Immigrationst )+εst                               (17)

   Equation (15) estimates the impact of the ease of oﬀshoring and immigration on native workers’ share
of less skilled employment. By including industry eﬀects we only exploit variation within a 4-digit NAICS
manufacturing industry (there are 58 of them) over time. We also control for common year-eﬀects. Hence, any
time-invariant diﬀerence in oﬀshoring across industries and any common trend in oﬀshoring over time will not
contribute to the identification of the eﬀect. Less skilled employment is calculated by adding the employment
of natives and foreign-born in the U.S. to the employment of foreign aﬃliates of U.S. companies plus imputed
employment of foreign sub-contractors of U.S. multinationals (arm’s length employment). At first we assume
that all oﬀshore employment is less skilled so that the total employment of less skilled workers in an industry
is the sum of native, immigrant and oﬀshore employment. Equation (16) estimates the eﬀect of the ease of
oﬀshoring and immigration on the immigrant share of less skilled employment, and equation (17) estimates the
eﬀect on oﬀshore employment as a share of less skilled employment. From section 3.4 the predictions of the
model are as follows: bDO < 0, bDI ≈ 0, bM O < 0, bMI > 0, bOO > 0 and bOI < 0. Table 1 reports the estimated
eﬀects on employment shares. Specifications 1 show the eﬀects of imputed immigration and oﬀshoring on the
share of native workers. Specifications 2 shows the eﬀects on the share of immigrants, and specifications 3 report
the eﬀects on the share of oﬀshore employment. The upper part of the table reports the estimated coeﬃcients
obtained using employment of less educated workers to calculate the shares. The lower part of the table uses
total employment to calculate shares10 . Since the model predicts no impact on the employment of more educated
workers the results presented in the lower part of the table should mirror those in the upper part. Moreover,
as we are not able to separate more and less skilled oﬀshore workers, the lower part of Table 1 provides a check
of the overall employment impact of oﬀshoring on native and immigrant workers when considering labor as one
unique factor of production. The method of estimation used is OLS with industry and time fixed eﬀects and
the reported standard errors are heteroskedasticity robust.
   The results are interesting and encouraging as all six predictions of the model are matched by the estimates
that, in turn, are very similar across specifications (using either less educated or all workers). Looking along
the first row we see that increased oﬀshoring in one industry implies a significant decline in the share of native
employment in that industry, a significant decline in the share of immigrant employment and a significant
increase in the share of oﬀshore employment. The sign of these three eﬀects is exactly as predicted in equations
(14) and all the estimates are significantly diﬀerent from 0. The intuition for such eﬀects is obtained by
considering a downward shift in the oﬀshoring curve in Figure 1. An increase in the share of oﬀshored jobs,
caused by falling oﬀshoring costs, takes place at the expense of both a lower share of immigrant and native
  1 0 In all the reported tables we use the definition of oﬀshore employment that includes the imputed oﬀshore employment from

non-aﬃliates as defined in section 4.1. We have run the same analysis using only employment in the aﬃliates as oﬀshore employment
and we obtain similar, but weaker, results.



                                                               20
employment (both margins are aﬀected). Also of quantitative interest is the fact that an increase in the ease
of oﬀshoring erodes a larger share of native employment relative to immigrant employment. In other words, it
is possible that over the seven years considered (2000-2007) the phases of production that were oﬀshored were
more in competition with native workers than with immigrant workers.
    On the other hand, focusing on the second row of Table 1, which reports the eﬀects of the ease of immigration
on employment shares, we observe that an increase in imputed immigration has no eﬀect on the share of
native employment whereas it reduces the share of oﬀshore employment and increases the share of immigrant
employment, both significantly. Again, this is as predicted by the model and the intuition for the results is
provided again by Figure 1. A downward shift in the immigration cost curve will increase the share of tasks
performed by immigrants and reduce the share of oﬀshored tasks. However, it will leave the share of native tasks
unchanged because those workers are performing tasks that are higher in the skill-index and not aﬀected by the
shifting margin of immigrant tasks11 . This is interesting since it may provide a new explanation for why a large
part of the labor literature (e.g., Card, 2001 or Ottaviano and Peri, 2008) does not find a significant negative
impact of immigrants on native employment: on the margin immigrants compete more with oﬀshore workers
than with natives. Conversely, if the share of immigrants were to decrease due to an increase in the cost of
immigration—for instance, due to more restrictive immigration laws—our results imply that the production tasks
relinquished by immigrants are more likely to be substituted by oﬀshore workers than by native workers. Such a
diﬀerential impact of oﬀshoring and immigration on the native share of employment confirms the intuition and
results of the model, which implies that oﬀshored tasks are predominantly in an intermediate position along the
task continuum, between those performed by natives and those performed by immigrants.
    The estimated coeﬃcients in the lower part of the table (third and fourth row) and their significance are
very similar to those in the first and second row. This confirms that most of the eﬀect of oﬀshoring takes place
through its impact on less skilled workers in the U.S. An increase in the ease of oﬀshoring reduces the share of
natives and immigrants in total employment by substituting for those workers via an increase in the share of
oﬀshore workers. On the other hand, an increase in the ease of immigration has only a negative impact on the
share of oﬀshore employment, leaving the native share unchanged.


5.2     Eﬀects on Employment Levels

A second important implication of the model is the existence of a "productivity eﬀect" from hiring immigrant
labor or oﬀshore workers. This arises from the infra-marginal cost-savings generated by their lower wages, from
which it follows that an increase in the ease of oﬀshoring or immigration will result in an increase in the overall
  1 1 While the relative productivity eﬀect of a decrease in the cost of oﬀshoring would also imply a decrease in the share of native

workers in employment (as predicted by the comparative statics in 14) this eﬀect is likely to be small. In the findings here there is
no narrowing of the task range performed by natives, suggesting that the eﬀect is certainly smaller than the negative eﬀect on the
share of immigrant workers.



                                                                 21
demand for less skilled labor. This positive overall eﬀect, combined with the eﬀect on shares described in the
previous section, implies a mitigated, null, or perhaps even a positive eﬀect of oﬀshoring on native employment
or a positive eﬀect of immigration on native employment, as demonstrated in section 3.4. Table 3 presents the
estimated coeﬃcients from the following 4 regressions:


             NDst = φD    D                                                            D
                     s + φt + BDO (Imputed Oﬀshoringst )+BDI (Imputed Immigrationst )+εst                 (18)


            NMst = φM    M                                                             M
                    s + φt + BM O (Imputed Oﬀshoringst )+BMI (Imputed Immigrationst )+εst                 (19)

              NOst = φO    O                                                            O
                      s + φt + BOO (Imputed Oﬀshoringst )+BOI (Imputed Immigrationst )+εst                (20)

              NLst = φL    L                                                            L
                      s + φt + BLO (Imputed Oﬀshoringst )+BLI (Imputed Immigrationst )+εst                (21)

   Following the notation used in section 3, NDst is the total employment of less skilled native workers in
industry s and year t, NMst is the employment of less skilled immigrant workers in industry s and year t and
NOst is the total oﬀshore employment in the industry-year. Finally, NLst = NDst + NMst + NOst is what we
call overall less skilled employment in the industry-year. Keep in mind that it includes jobs performed in the
U.S. by all firms and abroad by aﬃliates of U.S. parents and by subcontractors working for aﬃliates of U.S.
parents. From the results of section 3.4 we see that BLO and BLI are strongly related to the intensity of the
productivity eﬀect due to increased oﬀshoring and increased immigration, while the other eﬀects combine this
productivity eﬀect with the relative share eﬀects estimated in Table 1.
   The results presented in Table 2 are also very much in line with the predictions of the model. First, both
when considering the employment of less educated workers as well as the total employment impact (last column
of Table 2) we estimate a positive and significant productivity eﬀect of imputed immigration and oﬀshoring.
An increase of one standard deviation in the ease of oﬀshoring increases the total employment of less educated
workers by 2% and increases total employment by 1.53%. An increase in the ease of immigration of one standard
deviation increases employment of less educated workers by close to 1% and total employment by 1.25%. These
productivity eﬀects together with the eﬀects on shares imply that oﬀshoring has a null eﬀect on employment
of less educated natives, while immigration actually increases this employment by 1.2 to 1.3% (coeﬃcients in
the first column of Table 2). Moreover, while increased oﬀshoring has a negative eﬀect on employment of
less educated immigrants (-2.75% for one standard deviation, but only in the estimates that use less educated
workers), an increase in immigration does not aﬀect total oﬀshore employment (the productivity eﬀect cancels
out the negative share eﬀect). Lastly, increased ease of oﬀshoring and immigration significantly increase the
employment of oﬀshore workers and the employment of immigrants, respectively.
   Interestingly, the presence of such a productivity eﬀect due to immigration and oﬀshoring, as predicted by



                                                      22
our model, implies that even taken together these two forms of globalization of labor have not harmed native
employment in the manufacturing industries that have been most exposed to them. To the contrary, allowing
these industries to save on the tasks supplied by immigrants and oﬀshore workers has promoted an expansion of
these industries relative to others and has ultimately led to increased demand for native workers, relative to a
scenario in which all tasks were performed by natives. Using the estimates in Table 2 for all workers, we can also
gauge the magnitude of these eﬀects: an industry whose ease of oﬀshoring and ease of immigration increased by
2 standard deviations above the average (which would be a relatively large increase in globalization) would have
experienced employment growth of 2-3% above average growth over the 2000-2007 period. This is a significant
eﬀect, particularly if we keep in mind that manufacturing employment actually decreased over this period.


5.3    Eﬀects on Average Skill Intensity

Our model also carries predictions regarding the eﬀect of increased oﬀshoring and immigration on the average
task "index" performed by natives and immigrants. To make these predictions empirically operational we have
followed the lead of previous empirical studies (Blinder, 2007; Jensen and Kletzer, 2007; Peri and Sparber,
2009) that have indicated that tasks that intensively use cognitive-communication and non-routine skills are
harder to oﬀshore and, furthermore, that immigrants have a comparative disadvantage (lower productivity) in
performing them. Similarly, we follow the literature (Levy and Murnane, 2006; Becker, Ekholm and Muendler,
2007; Peri and Sparber, 2009) that indicates that jobs that are more intensive in routine and manual tasks are
easier to oﬀshore and immigrants have higher productivity in them. Hence, as described in section 4 above, we
construct the averages ID and IM for each industry and for domestic and immigrant workers separately. Thus,
the distribution of workers across tasks is based on the task-skill content of each occupation, as assessed by
O*NET, and on the distribution of workers across occupations within industries, as revealed in the American
Community Survey data. We then run the following regressions:


                                  IDst = φD    D                          D
                                          s + φt + dDO (ost )+dDI (mst )+εst                                 (22)


                                 IM st = φM    M                          M
                                          s + φt + dMO (ost )+dMI (mst )+εst                                 (23)

where the explanatory variables are the share of oﬀshore employment, ost , and the share of immigrant employ-
ment, mst , and the dependent variables are the average task indices. Both task indices and shares are calculated
for workers with a high school degree or less. We estimate the eﬀect on the average skill index, in Table 3, by
2SLS using the imputed oﬀshoring and immigration indices (described in section 4.3) as instruments for the
shares ost and mst . Empirically, then, we observe the average intensity of tasks used by workers in an industry
where we have ranked those tasks on a zero to one interval according to the index I, which increases as the


                                                       23
cognitive-non-routine intensity grows and decreases as the manual-routine intensity grows. As a result, if the
costs of oﬀshoring and the inverse productivity of immigrants are positively correlated with this index then the
predictions of the model can be tested using this index.
   Table 3 focuses only on the eﬀects on the summary indices ID and IM . We have also performed analysis of
the eﬀect on each index separately (communication, cognitive, manual, routine) obtaining results consistent with
those described below. However, sometimes the results using individual indices are not statistically significant.
Since the index is a latent variable, combining the information from the five variables described in section 4.2
may improve the fit with the theoretical model, hence the stronger significance of the results. The method
of estimation is 2SLS, using imputed oﬀshoring and immigration as an instrument for the share of oﬀshore
employment and for the share of immigrant employment. The first stage is only moderately strong, as the
F-test of the instruments is 8.75 for the share of oﬀshore employment and 10.79 for the share of immigrant
workers. The first column in Table 3 shows a positive eﬀect of oﬀshoring on the skill-index of natives but a
negative eﬀect of immigration on the skill-index of natives. Neither eﬀect, however, is significant. The second
column shows the opposite eﬀect with respect to the index of immigrants: increased oﬀshoring decreases the
average skill index of immigrants (-0.07) while an increase in immigration increases the average skill index of
immigrants (+0.20). This time the eﬀects are significant. In conformance with the model, an increase in the
share of oﬀshore employment has opposing eﬀects on the average index of natives (increased) and immigrants
(decreased). Oﬀshored jobs place a wedge in the skill-index between jobs performed by natives and those
performed by immigrants. In contrast, an increase in the ease of immigration has a positive eﬀect on the
average index of immigrants (pushing them to more complex tasks) and a negative and not significant eﬀect on
the index of natives. This is consistent with the model in which oﬀshore workers take the "intermediate" tasks
so that an increase in immigrant employment shares will increase the average skill index of immigrants, pushing
it closer to that of natives, but have no eﬀect on the average native skill index. The last column reports the
eﬀect of increased immigration and oﬀshoring on the diﬀerence in the average (native-immigrant) index. As
predicted by the model, and confirming the results in columns 1 and 2, a higher share of oﬀshore employment
increases the diﬀerence in the average native-immigrant skill index (ID − IM ). In contrast, an increase in the
share of immigrants is associated with a decrease in that index. Both eﬀects are significant and, once again,
in line with the idea that increased oﬀshoring will polarize the specialization of natives and immigrants, while
increased immigration will push the average immigrant task closer to that of natives.




                                                       24
5.4     Extensions and Checks

5.4.1   Horizontal versus Vertical Oﬀshoring

A recent study by Harrison and McMillan (2008) has emphasized that in order to correctly identify the eﬀects
of oﬀshore employment on domestic employment one needs to distinguish between horizontal and vertical oﬀ-
shoring. In particular, increased horizontal oﬀshoring, in which companies move production abroad to serve the
local market (and reduce or eliminate trade costs) hurts domestic jobs in their analysis. Combined with the
fact that horizontal oﬀshoring is not explicitly captured by our model, this suggests eﬀort should be made to
eliminate this eﬀect from our data. On the other hand, vertical oﬀshoring, in which companies transfer abroad
some stages of production and then re-import the intermediate goods, corresponds more closely to our model
of tasks oﬀshoring. This form of oﬀshoring is found to be beneficial to domestic employment by Harrison and
McMillan (2008).
   In our sample we are able to identify those industries for which re-exporting to the headquarters, as opposed
to generating purely local sales, is the more important activity for the aﬃliates. Using the BEA data we
calculate the aggregate value of exports from aﬃliates to headquarters as well as the total value of local sales
of aﬃliates. Then we consider as vertically integrated those industries that exhibit an import-to-local-sales
ratio larger than the median value for manufacturing (0.2). Table 4 reports the eﬀects of ease of immigration
and ease of oﬀshoring when we limit the sample to vertical oﬀshoring, as measured in this way. This reduces
the sample to 168 observations. The patterns identified in Table 4 reproduce the aggregate patterns from the
previous section, with some diﬀerences. First, for these industries the positive overall employment (productivity)
eﬀect of oﬀshoring (last column) is stronger than in Table 2 and stronger than for immigration. Second, this
strong overall productivity eﬀect produces a positive and significant (rather than a null) eﬀect of oﬀshoring on
native employment, a result that was not observed when considering all manufacturing industries. Third, the
eﬀects of increasing ease of immigration are smaller. The corresponding estimates for industries that practice
horizontal oﬀshoring, i.e. are defined by a low import-to-local-sales ratio (not reported) show instead a weak
(not significant) productivity eﬀect due to oﬀshoring and a small negative eﬀect (also not significant) on native
employment. Hence, and in accordance with our model, the productivity eﬀect seems to proceed from an
international segmentation of productive tasks motivated by the desire to lower production costs, as evidenced
by the results for the case of vertical (rather than horizontal) oﬀshoring.
   Finally, Table 5 shows the eﬀects on the average task indices for natives and immigrants when we split the
sample between industries that practice vertical or horizontal oﬀshoring. The estimates in the upper part of the
table, referring to industries engaged in vertical oﬀshoring, are similar to those of Table 3. There is, possibly,
an even larger eﬀect due to vertical oﬀshoring (relative to all oﬀshoring) in increasing the diﬀerence between
the average task index of natives and immigrants, while the eﬀect of increased ease of immigration is as before.


                                                        25
This confirms that vertically integrated firms tend to oﬀshore intermediate tasks, assigning to natives the most
complex tasks and to immigrants the most routine ones. In contrast, this pattern is not present across industries
that are engaged in horizontal oﬀshoring. These results confirm those of Harrison and McMillan (2008) while
also confirming that the mechanism described in our model is more akin to the process of vertical oﬀshoring.


5.4.2    Wage Eﬀects

Our model and empirical strategy have examined employment across industries in order to capture the produc-
tivity consequences of immigration and oﬀshoring. However, in the presence of imperfect mobility of workers,
or barriers to transferring skills from one industry to another, a portion of the industry-specific eﬀects of immi-
gration and oﬀshoring could be captured by wage (rather than employment) diﬀerentials. While the American
labor force is highly mobile geographically, as well as across industries, in the short run wages may not be
perfectly equalized.
   To address this issue we perform three checks, shown in Table 6. In that table we focus on the eﬀects on
native employment among less educated workers as the variable of interest. In specification (2) we estimate the
eﬀects of variation in the ease of oﬀshoring and the ease of immigration on native employment while controlling
for native wages (in the industry-year)12 . The data on wages by industry can be constructed from individual
data available from the IPUMS ACS 2000-2007 (Ruggles et al, 2008). While this regression should identify the
impact on employment, once we control for wage changes, wages are endogenous in the model and this may
induce bias in the estimates. Nevertheless the estimated coeﬃcients on native employment are very similar to
those obtained in the basic specification: they show a positive and significant eﬀect of ease of immigration,
and no eﬀect of ease of oﬀshoring, on native employment. An alternative method is to check directly whether
industry wages are aﬀected by oﬀshoring and immigration by running a specification like 18, except using the
average wage of less educated natives (rather than their employment) in the industry as the dependent variable.
This is what we do in specification (3). Finally, we can run regression 18 using as the dependent variable the
total labor income to less educated workers in the industry (the product of the average wage times employment)
and interpret the coeﬃcients as the eﬀects on total native labor demand. This is what we do in specification
(4). The results are quite clear and consistent. They show a positive eﬀect of ease of immigration on native
labor demand and no eﬀect of ease of oﬀshoring on it. The positive eﬀect of immigration is reflected in a
positive employment eﬀect and no wage eﬀect, while oﬀshoring has neither employment nor wage eﬀects on
natives. These results confirm that the assumption of inter-sector mobility of workers is reasonable and that
the cross-sector productivity eﬀects take the form of employment (rather than wage) diﬀerentials.
 1 2 Specification   (1) in Table 6 reports the reference estimates that are identical to those in Table 2 column 1.




                                                                    26
6     Conclusions

This paper analyzes the eﬀect of increased globalization, in the form of less-costly oﬀshoring and increased
immigration into the U.S. labor market, on employment in U.S. manufacturing. As mentioned in the introduction
there are very few attempts to combine analyses of immigration and oﬀshoring on labor markets. However,
analyzing each of these in isolation misses the possibility that hiring immigrants or oﬀshoring productive tasks,
rather than hiring a native worker, may be alternatives that are simultaneously available to firms. Here we
develop a simple extension to the model by Grossman and Rossi-Hansberg (2008) in order to analyze the
allocation of productive tasks (arrayed from the most manual and routine-intensive to the most cognitive and
non-routine intensive) between native, immigrant and oﬀshore workers. We test the predictions of the model on
U.S. data from 58 manufacturing industries over the years 2000-2007. The results are interesting and point to
an interpretation that is consistent with our model. First, less educated immigrants are employed in the more
manual-routine tasks and on average do not compete within the occupations in which the bulk of native workers
are employed, which tend to be more non-routine and cognitive intensive. In fact, immigrants compete more
with oﬀshore workers. This implies that increased immigration induces firms to move production from oﬀshore
workers to immigrants. At the same time, and as predicted by our model, immigration seems to generate cost-
savings for firms, and thus a corresponding increase in productivity, so that its aggregate eﬀect on the level of
low skilled native employment is positive.
    Similarly, we find that increased oﬀshoring reduces the share of native employment in an industry while, at
the same time, also stimulating overall industry employment via the productivity eﬀect such that oﬀshoring has
no aggregate impact on the level of native employment. Thus, in spite of the widely held belief that immigrants
and oﬀshoring are reducing the job opportunities of natives, we instead find that industries with a larger increase
in global exposure (through oﬀshoring and immigration) fared better than those with less exposure in terms
of native employment growth. One important qualification is that both the productivity eﬀect and the shift
of native workers towards more complex tasks are found to be stronger in those industries that are engaged
in vertical oﬀshoring rather than horizontal oﬀshoring. This corresponds to the structure of our model which
focuses on the international fragmentation of diﬀerent stages (tasks) of production by cost-minimizing, vertically
integrated firms.




                                                        27
References

Antecol, Heather, Deborah A. Cobb-Clark and Stephen J. Trejo, (2001). "Immigration Policy and the Skills
of Immigrants to Australia, Canada, and the United States," Claremont Colleges Working Papers 2001-26,
Claremont Colleges.

Antras, Pol (2003) "Firms, Contracts, and Trade Structure" Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 118 No. 4,
pp. 1375-1418

Barba Navaretti, Giorgio, Giuseppe Bertola and Alessandro Sembenelli (2008) "Oﬀshoring and Immigrant
Employment - Firm-Level Theory and Evidence" Centro Studi Luca d’Agliano Development Studies Working
Paper No. 245.

Becker, Sasha O., Ekholm, Karolina and Marc-Andreas Muendler (2009) "Oﬀshoring and the Onshore Compo-
sition of Tasks and Skills" EFIGE Working Paper.

Blinder, Alan (2007) "How Many U.S. Jobs Might Be Oﬀshorable?" CEPS Working Paper No. 142.

Borjas, George J. (2003) “The Labor Demand Curve is Downward Sloping: Reexamining the Impact of Immi-
gration on the Labor Market” Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXVIII (4), 1335-1374.

Butcher, Kristin F. and John DiNardo (2002) "The Immigrant and native-born wage distributions: Evidence
from United States censuses," Industrial and Labor Relations Review, ILR Review, ILR School, Cornell Univer-
sity, vol. 56(1), pages 97-121.

Card, David (2001) “Immigrant Inflows, Native Outflows, and the Local labor Market Impacts of Higher Im-
migration” Journal of Labor Economics, XIX (2001), 22-64.

Card, David & John DiNardo, (2000). "Do Immigrant Inflows Lead to Native Outflows?," American Economic
Review, American Economic Association, vol. 90(2), pages 360-367.

Chiswick Barry R., Yew Liang Lee and Paul W. Miller (2005) "Immigrant Earnings: A Longitudinal Analysis,"
Review of Income and Wealth, Blackwell Publishing, vol. 51(4), pages 485-503.

Crino’ Rosario (2010) "Service Oﬀshoring and White-Collar Employment" The Review of Economic Studies,
forthcoming (DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-937X.2009.00586.x).

Ebenstein, Avraham, Harrison, Ann, McMillan, Margaret and Shannon Phillips (2009) "Estimating the Impact
of Trade and Oﬀshoring on American Workers Using the Current Population Surveys", NBER Working Paper
No. 15107.



                                                    28
Feenstra, Robert, Romalis, John and Peter K. Schott (2002) "U.S. Imports, Exports and Tariﬀ Data" The
Center for International Data, UC Davis

Feenstra, Robert and Gordon Hanson (1996) "Foreign Investment, Outsourcing and Relative Wages" in R.C.
Feenstra, G.M. Grossman and D.A. Irwin, eds., The Political Economy of Trade Policy: Papers in Honor of
Jagdish Bhagwati, Cambride, MA: MIT Press

Feenstra, Robert and Gordon Hanson (1999) "The Impact of Outsourcing and High Technology Capital on
Wages: Estimates for the United States 1979-1990" Quarterly Journal of Economics.

Grossman, Gene and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg (2008) “Trading Tasks: A Simple Theory of Oﬀshoring.” American
Economic Review, 98 (5), pp. 1978-1997.

Harrison, Ann and Margaret McMillan (2008) "Oﬀshoring Jobs? Multinational and U.S. Manufacturing Em-
ployment" NBER Working Paper.

Hummels, David, Rasmus Jorgenson, Jackob Munch and Chong Xiang (2010) "Wage and Employment Eﬀects
of Outsourcing: Evidence from Danish Matched Worker-Firm Data" Manuscript, Purdue University, May 2010.

Jensen, Bradford J. and Lori Kletzer (2007) "Measuring Tradable Services and the Task Content of Oﬀshorable
Services Jobs" Manuscript, University of California, Santa Cruz.

Jones, Ronald W. and Henryk Kierzkowski (1990) "The Role of Services in Production and International Trade:
A Theoretical Framework" in R. Jones and A. Kruegers, eds., The Political Economy of International Trade:
Essays in Honor of Robert E. Baldwin, Oxford: Basil Blackwell

Levy, Frank and Richard J. Murnane (2006) "How Computerized Work and Globalization Shape Human Skill
Demands" First International Conference on Globalization and Learning Conference Volume.

Mataloni, Raymond J. and Daniel R. Yorgason (2002) "Operations of U.S. Multinational Companies" Survey
of Current Business March 2002, Bureau of Economic Analysis.

Olney William W. (2009) "“Oﬀshoring, Immigration, and the Native Wage Distribution” Manuscript, University
of Colorado, Boulder, Social Science Research Network (SSRN) Working Paper No. 1365288, September 2009.

Ottaviano Gianmarco I.P. and Giovanni Peri (2008) "Immigration and National Wages: Clarifying the Theory
and the Empirics” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper #14188, July 2008.

Peri, Giovanni (2009) "The Eﬀect of Immigration on Productivity: Evidence from U.S. states" NBER Working
Paper, November 2009.



                                                     29
Peri, Giovanni and Chad Sparber (2009) “Task Specialization, Immigration and Wages”, American Economic
Journal : Applied Economics, Vol 1:3.

Ruggles, Steven , Matthew Sobek, Trent Alexander, Catherine A. Fitch, Ronald Goeken, Patricia Kelly
Hall, Miriam King, and Chad Ronnander (2008). Integrated Public Use Microdata Series:                                               Version 3.0
[Machine-readable database]. Minneapolis, MN: Minnesota Population Center [producer and distributor], 2004.
http://www.ipums.org.

Wright, Greg C. (2010) "Revisiting the Employment Impact of Oﬀshoring", UC Davis Dissertation




A      Appendix: Endogenous Native Wages

In the main text we have assumed that each sector is not large enough to aﬀect the domestic wage w. Here we
discuss how w would react if such an assumption did not hold.
    Intuition is better served by focusing on the simple case of an economy with only two sectors indexed s = i, j.
In each sector immigrant, oﬀshore and native labor demands are given by expressions like (9) with corresponding
price indices like (10). The two sectors may diﬀer in terms of oﬀshoring and immigration costs, technological
parameters, demand parameters, goods prices, and specific factor endowments. As in the model in the main
text, goods prices psY are exogenously determined in international markets and foreign workers are in infinitely
elastic supply at foreign wage w∗ . Their utility maximizing decisions determine whether they are employed
as immigrants or oﬀshore workers in the two sectors, or in some other non-modeled occupation abroad. In
contrast to the model in the main text, native workers are now in fixed supply N D and their allocation between
sectors is determined, together with their wage w, by the clearing of the native labor market: the sum of the
                                                                     i    j
two sectors’ native labor demands has to equal native labor supply (ND + ND = N D ). The equilibrium native
                                                                                  i      j
wage then determines immigrant and oﬀshore employment levels in the two sectors, NM and NO , through the
corresponding labor demands as in (9).
    Specifically, given (9), (10) and (8), native labor demand in sector s can be rewritten as

                                   s            s                    s                           s
                     s −(1−α )                                                                       −1)(1−αs )−αs             s
               w = (ND )       (asL )−α (1 − IN
                                              s
                                                O)
                                                   1−α
                                                       [Ωs (IMO
                                                             s     s
                                                                , INO )](σ                                           (B s )1−α

                      1
with B s = (αpsY As ) 1−α H s and

                             (Z     s    ∙                  ¸1−σs          Z    s     ∙              ¸1−σs                     ) 1−σ
                                                                                                                                   1
                                                                                                                                     s
                                   IMO
                                              δ s τ s (i)                      IN O         ts (i)
          Ωs (IMO
               s     s
                  , INO )=                    s s                   di +                       s )
                                                                                                                        s
                                                                                                             di + (1 − INO )             .
                               0             β t (IN O )                    s
                                                                           IMO            ts (IN O




                                                                     30
                              w                                                       w




                                  NDji

                                                                               ND i

                         Oi                                                               Oj

                                             NDi                     ND j

                                                   ND i+ NDj = N D



                                         Figure 2: Endogenous wage determination


The equilibrium of the native labor market is represented in Figure 2. This depicts a standard box diagram in
which the horizontal dimension measures native labor supply N D , the vertical dimension measures the native
wage, and (log-linearized) labor demands in the two sectors are depicted as decreasing in the native wage from
their respective origins Oi and Oj . Accordingly, the equilibrium allocation of native workers between the two
sectors and the corresponding common wage are to be found at the crossing of the two labor demand schedules
where, by graphical construction, the native labor market clears. Figure 2 can be used to assess the eﬀects of
changes in migration and oﬀshoring costs on the wage of native workers as well as on their sectoral allocation.
For example, under our working assumptions, a fall in migration costs in sector i (lower δ i ) does not aﬀect
 i                  i                             i i      i
IN O and increases IMO . This leads to a fall in Ω (IMO , IN O ). What then happens in the figure depends on
        ¡      ¢                              ¡      ¢
whether σ i − 1 is larger or smaller than αi / 1 − αi , with the former measuring the substitutability of tasks
and the latter the importance of the task bundle for final production. When tasks are not easily substitutable
                                                                                           ¡       ¢      ¡      ¢
(small σ i ) and the task bundle contributes a lot to final production (large αi ), so that σ i − 1 < αi / 1 − αi ,
a lower Ωi (IMO
             i     i
                , INO ) shifts the labor demand schedule of sector i upwards increasing the wage of natives and
their employment in sector i. The opposite happens when tasks are easily substitutable (larger σ i ) and the task
                                                                        ¡       ¢      ¡       ¢
bundle does not contribute much to final production (small αi ), so that σ i − 1 > αi / 1 − αi .
   The eﬀect of lower oﬀshoring costs is, instead, more complex as a fall in β i not only decreases IMO
                                                                                                     i
                                                                                                        but
                i
also increases INO , thus reducing Ωi (IMO
                                        i     i
                                           , IN O ). However, additionally, the native labor demand schedule shifts

upward when tasks are not easily substitutable (small σ i ) and the task bundle contributes a lot to final production
(large αi ), and vice-versa. So, whether easier migration and easier oﬀshoring lead to higher employment and a


                                                            31
higher native wage is, in the end, an empirical question that depends on sectoral characteristics.



B        Appendix: No Discrimination between Natives and Immigrants

In the model presented in the main text, the productivity eﬀect due to easier immigration stems from the fact
that falling costs of immigration create rents for domestic firms cD − cM (i) = waL − w∗ δτ (i)aL per unit task
for i ∈ [0, IMO ], just as the productivity eﬀect due to easier oﬀshoring stems from the fact that falling costs of
oﬀshoring create rents for domestic firms cD − cO (i) = waL − w∗ βt(i)aL per unit task for i ∈ [IMO , INO ]. These
eﬀects arise because we have assumed that firms can discriminate between immigrants and natives since they
know the wage w∗ in the country where immigrants come from as well as their common migration cost δ.
    This ability to discriminate is crucial for the productivity eﬀect due to easier immigration to materialize.
The argument can be spelled out following Grossman and Rossi-Hansberg (2008). In discussing the diﬀerent
eﬀects of easier oﬀshoring and easier immigration, these authors assume, as we also do, that foreign workers can
stay in the foreign country and earn the wage w∗ or can move to the home country, at the cost of a fraction of
                                      e To avoid the existence of corner outcomes with no migration or infinite
their working time, and earn the wage w.
migration, they also assume that foreign workers are heterogeneous in terms of their moving costs. Specifically,
                                                       e when she moves to the home country. Without loss
a foreign worker z captures only a fraction 1/δμ(z) of w
of generality, foreign workers can be indexed in increasing order of moving costs so that μ0 (z) > 0. Moreover,
Grossman and Rossi-Hansberg (2008) assume that immigrants are as productive as natives and that domestic
firms are not able to discriminate between natives and immigrants nor between immigrants with diﬀerent moving
costs.
                                                                        e = w. They also imply that the marginal
    In terms of our notation, all these assumptions imply τ (i) = 1 and w
immigrant Z earns the same net income in both locations so that w = w∗ δμ(Z). This replaces our condition
e = w∗ δ in the main text and uniquely determines Z, which in turn determines the number of immigrants given
w
some distribution of foreign workers across moving costs.
    To sum up, when firms are unable to discriminate, native, immigrant and oﬀshore marginal costs become
cD = waL , cM (i) = w∗ δμ(Z)aL = waL and cO (i) = w∗ βt(i)aL , respectively. Accordingly, an inframarginal
immigrant z < Z earns rents w − w∗ δμ(z). This implies that as the common immigration cost δ falls, additional
rents are created at both the intensive and the extensive task margins. Accordingly, new immigrants enter the
home country (Z increases). More rents also accrue to the incumbent immigrants, but not to the home firms
whose profitability, therefore, does not change. "The diﬀerence between falling costs of oﬀshoring and falling
costs of immigration is that the former create rents for domestic firms ... whereas the latter create rents for the
immigrants" (Grossman and Rossi-Hansberg, 2008).
    In contrast, when firms can discriminate between natives and immigrants they fully appropriate the rents.

                                                        32
                             cM(i), cD, cO(i)

                                                                                   cM(i)=w * δτ(i)a L




                                                                                   cD=wa L




                                                                                                  i
                                  0                          IMN             1




                                                  Figure 3: Immigration rents


Ruling out oﬀshoring for simplicity, in our model the rents per unit task when cheaper immigrants are employed
instead of natives amount to
                                                 cD − cM (i) = waL − w∗ δτ (i)aL

so that total rents correspond to the striped area in Figure 3. Being entirely appropriated by firms, these rents


are the source of the productivity eﬀect due to immigration. Note that our assumption of perfect discrimination
is not crucial in order to generate a productivity eﬀect due to immigration–as long as there is any degree of
discrimination some rent is generated.



C      Appendix: Task Data

By merging occupation-specific task values with individuals across years, we are able to obtain these task-
intensity measures for natives and immigrants by education level in each state over time. The U.S. Department
of Labor’s O*NET abilities survey provides information on the characteristics of occupations. This dataset
assigns numerical values to describe the importance of 52 distinct employee abilities (skills) required by each
occupation13 as well as 40 distinct employee "Activities" (tasks). We then re-scale each skill and task variable
so that it equals the percentile score in 2000 (between 0 and 1) representing the relative importance of that
skill-task among all workers in 2000. For instance, an occupation with a score of 0.02 for a specific skill
 1 3 Classified   using the Standard Occupation Classification (SOC).


                                                                   33
indicates that only 2 percent of workers in the U.S. in 2000 were supplying that skill less intensively. We
then assign these O*NET percentile scores to individuals from 2000 to 2007 using the ACS variable occ1990,
which provides an occupational crosswalk over time. The indices "cognitive", "communication" and "manual"
are constructed by averaging the Ability variables. Specifically, "cognitive" includes 12 variables classified as
"Cognitive and Analytical", "communication" includes four variables capturing written and oral expression and
understanding, and "manual" includes 19 variables capturing dexterity, strength and coordination. Finally,
the variable "interactive" includes three activities that emphasize person-to-person interaction while "routine"
includes four activities that emphasize the importance of doing routine tasks.



D      Appendix: Construction of Oﬀshoring Cost Variable

We use an updated version of the oﬀshoring measure described in Feenstra and Hanson (1999), defined formally
for any industry k purchasing inputs j as:
                         S
                              (industry k purchases of good j) ( t o t a l d oimn teesrtm e d ia te im p o rts
                                                                                        ic inte rm e d ia te s
                                                                                                                 of good j
                                                                                                                 c o n su m p tio n o f j   )
                          j
                                                S
                                                   (industry k purchases of good j)
                                                        j



    Here, we need to separate imports of final goods from imports of intermediates in constructing the ratio in
the numerator. The data source for these imports and their classifications is Feenstra et al (2002). While the
measure itself is constructed at the 4-digit North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) level, within
these NAICS categories are more disaggregate Harmonized System (HS) categories, and these are associated
with end-use codes that characterize imports according to their final use. In short, these end-use codes are used
by the BEA in generating the National Income and Product Accounts, and here we use them to select only
goods intended for use as intermediates (see Wright, 2010 for more details).
    Next, domestic consumption of intermediates by industry is constructed as imports of intermediates minus
exports of intermediates (restricted in the same manner as imports) plus domestic shipments of intermediates.
This final value needs a brief explanation. Rather than use the total domestic shipments of industry j, we
instead apportioned those domestic shipments into various HS products by assuming that the share of domestic
shipments for each HS product within industry j equals the share of U.S. exports in that HS product and
industry. We then sum domestic shipments over just those HS products that are also intermediate inputs (as
defined by their end-use classification).
    The other component of the measure consists of industry input purchases, which are obtained from the
Materials Purchases tables in the1997, 2002 and 2007 Economic Censuses, with values in intervening years
obtained via interpolation between these. Finally, the 4-digit NAICS measure is merged to BEA industries
using a concordance created by the authors.


                                                                             34
E     Appendix: Construction of Oﬀshore Employment Variables

Our measures of oﬀshore employment draw from data on the employment and exports of aﬃliates of U.S.
multinational corporations (MNCs) from the BEA, U.S. Direct Investment Abroad: Operations of U.S. Parent
Companies and Their Foreign Aﬃliates, 2000-2007. According to Mataloni and Yorgason (2006), MNC output
in 1999 accounted for around half of manufacturing output and 63 percent of manufacturing exports. We also
restrict the sample further by using only majority-owned, non-bank MNC aﬃliates, however this restriction is
minor. The quality of this data has been investigated by Harrison and McMillan (2008) using inward FDI data
from Germany and Sweden, and while the authors find some discrepancies, these seem to be at least somewhat
explained by diﬀerences in the timing of reporting.
    Specifically, we collect information on multinational aﬃliate employment by industry and year (58 manu-
facturing industries over 2000-2007), imports from MNC aﬃliates to their parents by industry and year, and
imports from non-aﬃliates to U.S. MNCs by industry and year. Aﬃliate employment is also available separately
for "Managerial, professional, and technical employees" and "All other employees", which we use to distinguish
high- and low-skill aﬃliate workers.
    In order to calculate total oﬀshore employment due to U.S. MNC oﬀshoring, we begin with the actual
employment of multinational aﬃliates and the aggregate exports of those aﬃliates to the multinational parent
firm. We then take the ratio of aﬃliate employment to aﬃliate exports for each industry and year. This ratio
is then set aside as a scaling factor, or an export labor requirement, for each industry and year. Next, we
multiply U.S. parent firm imports from non-aﬃliates with respect to this scaling factor and the result is our
imputed arm’s length oﬀshore employment. This is then combined with the aﬃliate employment values. As
mentioned in the text above, this value assumes an equivalent labor requirement per unit of exports for aﬃliates
and non-aﬃliates.




                                                      35
                                                                         Table 1:
                                           Effects on the shares of natives, immigrants and offshore workers
                                                    58 manufacturing industries, 8 years: 2000-2007

  Dependent variable:           Percentage of US-nationals            Percentage of immigrants             Percentage of offshore employees
                                in industry employment                in employment                        in employment
  Explanatory variable:
                                                (1)                             (2)                                            (3)
                                                      Only less educated workers (High school degree or less)
  Imputed (gravity-                         -0.66**                               -0.23**                                   0.90**
  based) offshoring
                                             (0.20)                                (0.10)                                   (0.24)
  Imputed (shift-share)                       0.02                                0.34**                                    -0.36*
  immigration
                                             (0.21)                                (0.09)                                   (0.21)
                                                                              All Workers
  Imputed (gravity-                         -0.59**                               -0.16**                                   0.75**
  based) offshoring
                                             (0.21)                                (0.08)                                   (0.24)
  Imputed (shift-share)                       0.04                                0.30**                                     -0.30
  immigration
                                             (0.20)                                (0.08)                                   (0.20)

  Observations                                 464                                     464                                     464
  Industry fixed effects                       Yes                                     Yes                                     Yes


Note: The dependent variable in each regression is specified in the first row. The explanatory variables are specified in the first column. The method of
estimation is Ordinary Least Squares; Imputed offshoring is calculated as the predicted share of intermediate imported in the industry, using the Feenstra
and Hanson (1999) definition, and a gravity regression with country-specific offshoring costs. Imputed immigration is calculated using the initial employment
composition in each industry by country and overall population growth by nationality in the US. Both indices are divided by their standard deviation in the
sample so that a change in one unit of the explanatory variable corresponds to a change of one standard deviation. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard
errors are reported in parentheses. **=significant at the 5% level



                                                                                  36
                                                                    Table 2
                                    Effects on the employment of natives, immigrants and offshore workers
                                                 58 manufacturing industries, 8 years: 2000-2007


  Dependent variable:                  Total employment of         Total employment of             Total offshore             Total employment, native
                                        US-born (1/100 log        immigrants (1/100 log          employment (1/100          plus immigrants plus offshore
  Explanatory variable:                       points)                     points)                   log points)                   ( 1/100 log points)
                                                (1)                         (2)                          (3)                              (4)
                                                      Only less educated workers (High school degree or less)
  Imputed (gravity-based)                       -0.20               -2.75*                0.52**                                        2.03**
  offshoring                                   (0.74)               (1.50)                 (0.12)                                       (0.69)
  Imputed (shift-share)                        1.30**                1.11                   0.97                                        0.96*
  immigration                                  (0.58)               (0.90)                 (1.20)                                       (0.54)
                                                                           All Workers
  Imputed (gravity-based)                       0.43                 0.01                  5.22*                                        1.53**
  offshoring                                   (0.60)               (0.10)                 (1.27)                                       (0.57)
  Imputed (shift-share)                        1.17**               2.37**                  0.97                                        1.25**
  immigration                                  (0.53)               (0.76)                 (1.20)                                       (0.43)

  Observations                                   464                         464                          464                             464
  Industry fixed effects                         Yes                         Yes                          Yes                             Yes



Note: The dependent variable in each regression is specified in the first row. The explanatory variables are specified in the first column. The method of
estimation is Ordinary Least Squares; Imputed offshoring is calculated as the predicted share of intermediate imported in the industry, using the Feenstra
and Hanson (1999) definition, and a gravity regression with country-specific offshoring costs. Imputed immigration is calculated using initial employment
composition in an industry by country and overall population growth by nationality in the US. Both indices are divided by their standard deviation in the
sample so that a change in one unit of the explanatory variable corresponds to a change of one standard deviation. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard
errors are reported in parentheses. **=significant at the 5% level




                                                                              37
                                                        Table 3:
                              Effects on average task intensity of natives and immigrants.
                        2SLS estimates using imputed offshoring and immigration as IV for shares
                                    58 manufacturing industries, 8 years: 2000-2007.


    Dependent variable:                 Average Skill Index            Average Skill Index “IM”        Average Skill Index “I”
                                        “ID” for less educated         for less educated               difference between
                                        Natives                        Immigrants                      less educated
    Explanatory Variable:                                                                              (Natives- Immigrants)
    Share of Immigrants in                        -0.08                           0.20*                        -0.27**
    employment                                    (0.06)                          (0.10)                        (0.12)
    Share of Offshore                              0.03                          -0.07*                        0.10**
    employment                                    (0.02)                         (0.035)                        (0.04)
    Observations                                   464                             464                           464
    Industry Effects                                Yes                             Yes                          Yes
    Year effects                                    Yes                             Yes                          Yes


Note: The dependent variable in each column is the average (employment-weighted) skill index standardized between 0 and 100. In the first
column it is measured for less educated native workers and in column 2 for less educated immigrant workers. In Column 3 it is the difference
of the two. The index is constructed by averaging five indicators in order to produce a variable whose range of variation is one unit, that
increases with the intensity of cognitive-communication-routine type of tasks and decreases with the intensity of manual-routine tasks. The
explanatory variables are the share of immigrant and offshore low-skilled workers. The estimation method is 2SLS using the indices of
offshoring and of immigration as IV for the shares in employment. **=significant at the 5% level




                                                                  38
                                                                       Table 4
                                                Effects on employment: Vertical offshoring industries
                                       2SLS estimates using imputed offshoring and immigration as IV for shares

 Dependent variable:                   Employment of US-             Employment of             Offshore Employment             Employment Native plus
                                             Born                     Immigrants                                              Immigrants plus Offshore
 Explanatory variable:
                                                (1)                          (2)                          (3)                              (4)
                                                                                Effects on Shares
 Imputed (gravity-based)                     -0.88**                       -0.03                   0.23                                     0
 offshoring in non-OECD                       (0.31)                       (0.12)                 (0.25)
 countries
 Imputed (shift-share)                         0.52                       0.28**                        -0.02                               0
 immigration                                  (0.37)                      (0.10)                        (0.23)
                                                                                Effects on Levels
 Imputed (gravity-based)                      2.66**                       -2.77                        3.44*                           2.63**
 offshoring shoring in non-                   (0.82)                      (2.02)                        (1.80)                          (1.24)
 OECD countries
 Imputed (shift-share)                         0.90                         0.90                         1.90                           1.56**
 immigration                                  (0.80)                       (1.33)                       (1.22)                          (0.52)

 Observations                                   168                         168                          168                              168
 Industry fixed effects                         Yes                         Yes                          Yes                              Yes



Note: The dependent variable in the first two rows is the share of (respectively) US-born, immigrant and offshore workers among less educated in the
industry-year. The dependent variable in the third and fourth row is the logarithmic employment of the corresponding groups by industry-year. The
explanatory variables are specified in the first column. The method of estimation is Ordinary Least Squares; Imputed offshoring is calculated as the
predicted share of intermediate imported in the industry, using the Feenstra and Hanson (1999) definition, and a gravity regression with country-specific
offshoring costs. Imputed immigration is calculated using initial employment composition in an industry by country and overall population growth by
nationality in the US. Both indices are divided by their standard deviation in the sample so that a change in one unit of the explanatory variable corresponds
to a change of one standard deviation. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. **=significant at the 5% level



                                                                                   39
                                                               Table 5
                          Effects on average task intensity: Horizontal versus Vertical offshoring industries
                          2SLS estimates using imputed offshoring and imputed immigration as IV for shares

          Dependent variable:                   Average Skill Index             Average Skill Index “IM”
                                                                                                      Average Skill Index “I”
                                                “ID” for less educated          for less educated     difference between
                                                Natives                         Immigrants            less educated
          Explanatory Variable:                                                                       (Natives- Immigrants)
                                                              2SLS estimates, Vertical Offshoring Industries
          Share of Immigrants in                          -0.08                     0.20*                     -0.27**
          employment                                      (0.06)                    (0.10)                     (0.12)
          Share of Offshore                                0.03                    -0.08*                      0.11**
          employment                                      (0.02)                    (0.03)                     (0.04)
                                                              2SLS estimates, Horizontal Offshoring Industries
          Share of Immigrants in                          -0.08                     0.20*                     -0.27**
          employment                                      (0.06)                    (0.10)                     (0.12)
          Share of Offshore                                0.11                      0.19                       -0.08
          employment                                      (0.22)                    (0.58)                     (0.05)
          Industry fixed effects                            Yes                       Yes                        Yes
          Year fixed effects                                Yes                       Yes                        Yes


Note: Variables and Specification as in table 3. We separate the estimates of the effect of immigrants and offshoring in industries with high level of
import from affiliates relative to local sales of affiliates (Vertical offshoring), reported in the first and second row, from those with low level of
import from affiliates relative to local sales (Horizontal offshoring), reported in the third and fourth row. The index is constructed by averaging five
indicators in order to produce a variable whose range of variation is one unit, that increases with the intensity of cognitive-communication-routine
type of tasks and decreases with the intensity of manual-routine tasks. The explanatory variables are the share of immigrant and offshore low-
skilled workers. The estimation method is 2SLS using the indices of offshoring and of immigration as IV for the shares in employment.
**=significant at the 5% level




                                                                           40
                                                                   Table 6
                                                     Focus on the demand for native labor


    Dependent variable:            Total Employment of         Total Employment of               Average wages             Total Labor
                                   US Born (1/100 log          US Born (1/100 log                                          compensation of US
                                   points)                     points)                                                     born (1/100 log
                                                                                                                           points)
    Specification:                          Basic               Controlling for wage
                                             (1)                         (2)                            (3)                          (4)
    Imputed (gravity-                       -0.20                       0.21                          -0.01                         0.20
    based) offshoring                      (0.74)                      (0.78)                         (0.21)                       (0.80)
    Imputed (shift-share)                  1.30**                     1.29**                           0.01                        1.40**
    Immigration                            (0.58)                      (0.57)                         (0.20)                       (0.61)
    Observations                              464                         464                           464                          464
    Industry fixed effects                    Yes                         Yes                           Yes                          Yes
    Year fixed effects                        Yes                         Yes                           Yes                          Yes
    Other Controls                            NO                  Wages of natives                      No                           No


Note: The dependent variable in specifications (1) and (2) is employment of less educated US-born workers. In specification (3) it is the average wage
of less educated US born workers and in specification (4) it is the total compensation of less educated US-born workers (wages*employment). The
method of estimation is Ordinary Least Squares; Imputed offshoring is calculated as the predicted share of intermediate imported in the industry,
using the Feenstra and Hanson (1999) definition, and a gravity regression with country-specific offshoring costs. Imputed immigration is calculated
using initial employment composition in an industry by country and overall population growth by nationality in the US. Both indices are divided by
their standard deviation in the sample so that a change in one unit of the explanatory variable corresponds to a change of one standard deviation.
Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. **=significant at the 5% level




                                                                           41
                                                               Figure 1

Offshore workers as a share of total (US + offshore employment) in 58 manufacturing industries




                                            .8
     Off-shored employment as share of total
    0         .2      .4        .6




                                                 2000   2002      2004               2006   2008
                                                               Census year

                                                               Sector in Manufacturing
                                                               average




                                                                 42
                                            Figure 2
Immigrant workers as share of total (US + offshore employment) in 58 manufacturing industries




                                           .4
    Immigrant employment as share of total
           .1       .2   0    .3




                                                2000   2002      2004               2006   2008
                                                              Census year

                                                              Sector in Manufacturing
                                                              average




                                                                43
                                           Figure 3
             Average index for native workers with high school diploma or less (ID)
                                     58 industries, 8 years



.45
.4
.35
.3




      2000                 2002               2004                 2006               2008
                                           Census year

                                    Index, sector s, year t
                                    Average Skill Index, Manufacturing




                                              44
                                       Figure 4
        Average index for immigrant workers with high school diploma or less (IM)
                                 58 industries, 8 years




.45
.4
.35
.3
.25




      2000              2002               2004                2006                 2008
                                        Census year

                                 Index, Sector s, year t
                                 Average Skill index, Manufacturing




                                           45
                                                                                  Appendix
                                                                                        Table A1
BEA                                                             BEA                                                        BEA
Industry                                                        Industry                                                   Industry
Code       Description                                          Code       Description                                     Code       Description
1          Animal foods, Grain and oilseed milling              28         Paints, coatings, and adhesives                 54         Metalworking machinery
3          Sugar and confectionery products                     30         Plastics products                               55         Engines, turbines, and power transmission equipment
           Fruit and vegetable preserving and specialty
4          foods                                                31         Rubber products                                 57         Computers and peripheral equipment
5          Dairy products                                       32         Clay products and refractory                    58         Communications equipment, Audio and video equipment
                                                                                                                                      Semiconductors and other electronic components, Magnetic
6          Animal slaughtering and processing                   33         Glass and glass products                        60         and optical media
           Seafood product preparation and packaging and                   Cement and concrete products, Lime and
7          Other food products                                  34         gypsum products                                 61         Navigational, measuring, and other instruments
                                                                                                                                      Electric lighting equipment, Electrical equipment, Other
8          Bakeries and tortillas                               36         Other nonmetallic mineral products              64         electrical equipment and components
                                                                           Iron and steel mills and ferroalloys, Steel
10         Beverages                                            37         products from purchased steel                   65         Household appliances
                                                                           Alumina and aluminum production and
11         Tobacco products                                     39         processing                                      68         Motor vehicles, Motor vehicle parts
                                                                           Nonferrous metal (except aluminum)
12         Apparel and Textile mills                            40         production and processing                       71         Aerospace products and parts
13         Textile product mills                                41         Foundries                                       72         Railroad rolling stock
15         Leather and allied products                          42         Forging and stamping                            73         Ship and boat building
16         Wood products                                        43         Cutlery and hand-tools                          74         Other transportation equipment
                                                                           Architectural and structural metals, Boilers,
17         Pulp, paper, and paperboard mills                    44         tanks, and shipping containers                  75         Furniture and related products
                                                                           Hardware, Spring and wire products and
18         Converted paper products                             46         Other fabricated metal products                 76         Medical equipment and supplies
                                                                           Machine shops, turned products, and
19         Printing and related support activities              48         screws, nuts, and bolts                         77         Other miscellaneous manufacturing
           Basic chemicals and Other chemical products and                 Coating, engraving, heat treating, and allied
23         preparations                                         49         activities
24         Resins and synthetic rubber, fibers, and filaments   50         Other fabricated metal products
                                                                           Agriculture, construction, and mining
25         Pharmaceuticals and medicines                        51         machinery
           Soap, cleaning compounds, and toilet
26         preparations                                         52         Commercial and service industry machinery
                                                                           Ventilation, heating, air-conditioning, and
           Pesticides, fertilizers, and other agricultural                 commercial refrigeration equipment and
27         chemicals                                            53         Other general purpose machinery


                                                                                          46
                                                            Table A2
               Percentage of offshore and immigrant employment in total manufacturing, and selected industries within it



                                                 2000           2001          2002          2003           2004         2005         2006         2007
Percentage of                                    23.3           22.7          22.5          23.9           24.4         23.3         22.4         29.3
offshored employment in
Manufacturing
Percentage of immigrant employment               12.8           13.7          14.5          14.0           14.1         14.8         15.2         14.0
in Manufacturing
Percentage of immigrants (and                    27.1           28.5          33.6          31.5           30.1         30.6         31.6         34.7
offshored) in the industry with the              (14.4)         (13.8)        (10.6)        (9.2)          (13.9)       (12.1)       (13.1)       (7.5)
fastest growing immigrant share
Apparel and Textile Mills
Percentage of immigrants (and                    14.7           16.0          16.3          14.4           12.5         13.6         14.1         12.4
offshored) in the industry with the              (12.2)         (15.9)        (17.4)        (22.8)         (25.0)       (26.7)       (22.9)       (29.4)
slowest growing immigrant share
Plastics Products
Percentage of offshored (and                     18.3           22.1          19.5          19.3           18.3         31.1         33.0         48.5
immigrants) in the industry with the             (6.8)          (7.5)         (8.3)         (7.6)          (8.7)        (6.9)        (6.8)        (5.4)
fastest growing offshored share
Basic Chemicals
Percentage of offshored (and                     54.9           61.6          57.5          39.4           20.7         14.5         15.0         21.0
immigrants) in the industry with the             (4.8)          (6.9)         (5.5)         (6.5)          (4.0)        (9.0)        (7.6)        (8.1)
slowest growing offshored share
Other Transportation Equipment


Note: Immigrant, native and offshore employment are calculated as described in the text. These statistics include all workers in the computation of native and
immigrant employment.

                                                                               47
                                              Table A3
   Native, immigrant and offshore workers as share of employment in 2007: representative industries

 Immigrant         US-born          Offshore
 workers as       workers as       workers as                              Industry
percentage of    percentage of    percentage of
employment       employment       employment
                          Industries with highest share of US-born employment
     9                89                2          Ship and boat building
     9                87                4          Cement and concrete products, Lime and gypsum products
     9                 84               7          Wood products
     12                82               6          Hardware, Spring and wire products and Other fabricated
                                                   metal products
     5                 81               14         Pulp, paper, and paperboard mills
     9                 80               10         Dairy products
     13                80               7          Machine shops, turned products, and screws, nuts, and bolts
     7                 80               14         Iron and steel mills and ferroalloys, Steel products from
                                                   purchased steel
     11                79                10        Architectural and structural metals, Boilers, tanks, and
                                                   shipping containers
     13                78                9         Other nonmetallic mineral products
                        Industries with intermediate share of US-born employment
     5                 68                27        Agriculture, construction, and mining machinery
     12                68                20        Navigational, measuring, and other instruments
     9                 67                24        Glass and glass products
     17                65                18        Other miscellaneous manufacturing
     9                 65                26        Converted paper products
     11                63                26        average
     4                 62                34        Pesticides, fertilizers, and other agricultural chemicals
     20                62                18        Bakeries and tortillas
     8                 61                32        Railroad rolling stock
                           Industries with lowest share of US-born employment
     13                52                36        Communications equipment, Audio and video equipment
     5                 51               44         Household appliances
     15                51               34         Computers and peripheral equipment
     10                50               40         Pharmaceuticals and medicines
     16                49               35         Leather and allied products
     8                 45               48         Cutlery and hand tools
     12                43               45         Sugar and confectionery products
     18                43               39         Fruit and vegetable preserving and specialty foods
     5                 40               55         Other transportation equipment
     10                37               53         Soap, cleaning compounds, and toilet preparations
     4                 28               68         Beverages
     1                 19               80         Tobacco products



                                                 48
