                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                   FRIENDS IN HIGH PLACES

                                           Lauren Cohen
                                         Christopher Malloy

                                        Working Paper 16437
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16437


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2010




We would like to thank Dan Bergstresser, Ethan Cohen-Cole, Shawn Cole, Josh Coval, Bernard Dumas,
David Primo, Ben Esty, Fritz Foley, Ken Froot, Burton Hollifield, Victoria Ivashina, Jim Kau, Harold
Mulherin, Lukasz Pomorski, Keith Poole, Roberto Rigobon, Bill Schwert, Toby Stuart, Marco van
der Leij, Rick Wilson, and seminar participants at Arizona State University, Carnegie Mellon University,
Columbia University, DePaul University, University of Georgia, Harvard Business School, INSEAD,
Rice University, University of Texas at Dallas, University of Toronto, Jane Street Capital, the State
Street Global Markets Annual Research Retreat, and the Cambridge Conference on Financial Networks
for helpful comments. We also thank David Kim for excellent research assistance. We are grateful
for funding from the National Science Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Lauren Cohen and Christopher Malloy. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Friends in High Places
Lauren Cohen and Christopher Malloy
NBER Working Paper No. 16437
October 2010, Revised December 2010
JEL No. D85,G18,G3,G38,P16

                                              ABSTRACT

We demonstrate that personal connections amongst politicians have a significant impact on the voting
behavior of U.S. politicians. Networks based on alumni connections between politicians, as well as
common seat locations on the chamber floor, are consistent predictors of voting behavior. For the former,
we estimate sharp measures that control for common characteristics of the network, as well as heterogeneous
impacts of a common network characteristic across votes. For common seat locations, we identify
a set of plausibly exogenously assigned seats (Freshman Senators), and find a strong impact of seat
location networks on voting. We find that the effect of alumni networks is close to 60% of the size
of the effect of state-level considerations. The network effects we identify are stronger for more tightly
linked networks, and at times when votes are most valuable.


Lauren Cohen
Harvard Business School
Baker Library 273
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
lcohen@hbs.edu

Christopher Malloy
Harvard Business School
Baker Library 277
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
cmalloy@hbs.edu
         The passage or failure of any piece of legislation in the U.S. Congress depends ultimately
on the individual votes of the legislators. While many influences determine whether a legislator
votes in favor, or in opposition, of a bill, subtle influences can in some instances be quite powerful
determinants of voting behavior, and thus final vote outcomes. In this paper, we explore one
particular channel of influence, that of personal social networks. We add two insights into the rich
literature on legislator behavior. First, we show that our identified social networks can have quite
large real impacts on voting behavior, beyond those currently explored by the literature. Second,
our empirical strategy to isolate the impact of social networks exploits rich data comprising firms
(and employment) in a Congressmen’s home constituency, which allows us to incorporate market
information into measures of a bill’s importance. Specifically, important bills are defined at the
Senator-bill level, which offers a new way to classify the same bill as important or unimportant for
different sets of Senators. Ultimately, we believe both of these contributions lead to a richer
understanding of the drivers of legislator behavior.
         Exploiting the complete Congressional voting record over the past 20 years, we
demonstrate that social networks have a significant impact on the voting behavior of U.S.
politicians.    The primary network measure we exploit is based on the alumni networks of
Congressmen.        An advantage of our approach is that unlike many social networks,1 these
education networks are formed decades before the voting behavior we attempt to explain. Further,
we directly address the issue of causation by examining situations where the network mechanisms
are expected to be more utilized, while the characteristics of the network itself remain constant.
         Our first main result is that alumni networks influence Congressional voting behavior,
even after controlling for other well-known predictors of voting behavior. For example, the
percentage of Senators in one’s alumni network that vote in favor of a given bill is strongly related
to a Senator’s own likelihood of voting in favor of that bill. Further, the impact of school ties on
voting is monotonically increasing with the strength of network, is found in the House as well as
the Senate, and is robust to a variety of different specifications and controls. Importantly, we also
demonstrate that this alumni network effect is not driven by a particular school, Senator, ideology,
or time period.
1
  See Jackson (2005) for a review of network applications in economics, Williams (2009) for a review of network
applications in politics, and Fowler et. al (2009) for a discussion of the causality inference problems that arise when
studying typical political networks such as cosponsorship networks, which are formed endogenously during the
legislative process.


                                                          1
        A key feature of our analysis is that we can identify a causal link between network effects
and voting behavior by exploiting situations where the network mechanisms are likely to be more
utilized, while the characteristics of the network itself remain constant. To do so we focus on: i.)
votes that are "irrelevant" to those firms located in a Senator’s home state, and ii.) votes that are
close to passing (or failing to pass).
        The mechanism behind this approach is to alter the supply of, and demand for, votes within
a network while holding network characteristics constant. For example, supplying a vote when
the bill in question is irrelevant to one’s constituent firms is presumably not very costly.
Similarly, close votes are times when the marginal vote is very valuable, and hence demand to
influence peers is likely strongest. Thus, these are the exact times that members would be
expected to exert the most pressure on fellow network-connected Senators.
        Our strategy employs a unique bill classification approach that categorizes each bill over
the 1989-2008 period as being related to certain industries, depending upon the text of the bill.
We expect those bills that impact firms in the Senator’s home state to be the bills that the Senator
will have a vested interest in voting either for or against, regardless of network effects; conversely,
the remaining "irrelevant" votes for the Senator should be those for which her network should
have the most persuasive ability in affecting her behavior. We find exactly this pattern in the data.
The effect for irrelevant votes is nearly 100% larger. A similar dichotomy can be thought of with
respect to close votes, and for these votes we again find evidence consistent with Senators using
the network to actively influence voting behavior when the marginal value of votes is higher (and
again, evidence against a simple unobservable characteristic explanation). On these close votes,
the network influence on voting behavior is over twice as large. Finally, on votes that are both
irrelevant to the given senator and close, the impact of one’s network on voting is over 200%
larger than the unconditional effect.
        We also explicitly rule out an alternative explanation based on heterogeneous impacts of
our fixed network characteristic. For instance, it may be exactly when a vote is irrelevant to a
senator that her intrinsic preferences are more expressed; preferences which can be correlated
across the network. To address this possibility directly, for each vote we separate the senator’s
network into those who have a vested interest in the bill, and those to whom it is irrelevant. If the
heterogeneous impact of a network characteristic is driving the results, we should see a given
senator’s voting most correlated with those senators in her network to whom the bill is irrelevant.

                                                  2
By the same logic the senator’s vote should be less correlated to those who are voting due to a
separate vested interest (i.e., those senators who have many constituent firms impacted by the
given bill). The direct network influence channel works in the exact opposite direction: senators
who have a vested interest do the most to curry votes in their favor, while the senators with no
vested interest do little. Thus, if there is a direct channel of influence at work, the given senator’s
votes should follow more with these vested-interest senators. Running these tests yields strong
evidence for the direct network influence mechanism, and evidence against a heterogeneous
impact of some fixed network characteristic. In particular, the school effect we mention above is
entirely driven by the impact of those school connected votes for whom the vote is important;
votes by senators in the network who do not have a vested interest in the bill have no impact.
        To give an idea of the magnitude of the school network effect, we find that a one standard
deviation increase in the percentage of school connected senators with a vested interest in a bill
who vote in favor of a bill implies a 5 percentage point increase in the likelihood of a given
senator voting in favor of a bill (controlling for party influences, state influences, congress-session
effects, and a host of other controls). To put this into context, we compare it to the effect of state-
level considerations for the Senator. State-level considerations are arguably one of the largest
determinants of Senator behavior, as state constituents ultimately determine re-election outcomes.
We find that the alumni network effect is close to 60% of the size of the state-level effect,
indicating that network effects are significant in magnitude.
        Lastly, we show that an entirely distinct social network measure based on similar seat
locations on the Senate Chamber floor also predicts Senate voting behavior. We use data on
Senate Chamber seat mappings to test the idea that where a Senator sits in the Senate Chamber
may affect which particular Senators he comes in contact with on a daily basis, and hence the
opinions of those Senators seated close to him may influence his views on particular issues.2
Since assignment to seats in the Senate Chamber is based almost exclusively on seniority,
whereby senior Senators are given the first opportunity to select their desk, the practical impact of
this seating rule is that Senators of a similar cohort (based on when they were first elected to the
Senate) end up sitting close to each other. Thus the seating arrangements in the Senate may help

2
  See Patterson (1959) and Caldeira and Patterson (1987) for related evidence that seat distance impacts survey
measures of friendship in the Wisconsin and Iowa state legislatures, and Masket (2008) for evidence that seating
proximity between legislators affects voting in the California State Assembly.


                                                       3
to reinforce the relationships that Senators may already form among those other Senators who start
their careers at roughly the same times. We find that the votes of nearby Senators have a large and
significant impact on a given Senator’s voting behavior. However, as senior Senators may choose
over a wide range of available seats, this may result in some (potentially unobservable)
characteristic affecting both seat proximity to other Senators and common voting. In order to get
around this endogeneity issue, we examine solely the subset of newly-elected junior Senators for
whom seating choice is plausibly exogenous (since they can only choose among the last few
remaining seats), and find a similarly large effect.
        Our paper adds to a large literature that studies the factors that influence the behavior of
elected officials. In addition to political party and constituent interests (see, for example, Stigler
(1971), Peltzman (1985)), we demonstrate that personal connections are an important determinant
of politicians’ voting behavior.3 Importantly, we demonstrate that even after controlling for the
impact of political ideology (see Clinton, Jackman, and Rivers (2004), Kau and Rubin (1979,
1993), Lee, Moretti, and Butler (2004), McCarty, Poole and Rosenthal (1997), McCarty, Poole
and Rosenthal (2006), and Poole and Rosenthal (1985), (1997), (2007)), network ties influence
legislator behavior.4
        Our focus on alumni networks also adds to a growing body of work in the political science
literature that explores the impact of different types of social networks in Congress (see, for
example, Bogue and Marlaire (1975), Burkett and Skvoretz (2006), Caldeira and Patterson (1987),
Fowler (2006a, 2006b), Patterson (1959), Porter et. al (2005, 2006), Routt (1938), Young (1966),
and Williams (2009)). An advantage of our approach relative to many of these studies is that our
network measure is exogenous to the political process itself. Further, our network ties are formed
decades before the voting behavior we attempt to explain.
        Collectively, our findings provide evidence that a new form of personal connections,
namely those based on past educational links, have a significant impact on the voting behavior of
U.S. politicians. Further, the magnitude of this effect is economically significant. We believe our


3
  See also Hibbing and Marsh (1991), Stratmann (2000), Pande (2003), Chattopadhyay and Duflo (2004), and
Washington (2007) for evidence that personal characteristics such as service length, age, religion, race, gender, and
the presence of a daughter in one’s family can affect the behavior of elected officials.
4
  See also Levitt (1996), Ansolabehere et. al (2001), Synder and Groseclose (2000), Kalt and Zupan (1990), and Mian
et. al (2009) for various perspectives on separating out the impact of ideology versus party interests, constituent
interests, and special interests.


                                                         4
results imply important considerations for constituents regarding their legislators; specifically, the
size and scope of the networks to which legislators have access in order to curry favor for votes,
may prove quite important to their constituents (both individuals and firms).
           The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section I describes the data. Section
II presents the impact of alumni networks on Congressional voting behavior. Section III examines
times of increased network impact. Section IV provides a series of robustness checks. Section V
examines an alternative network in the U.S. political system.               Section VI discusses the
implications of our results, and Section VII concludes.


                                                        I. Data
           We use a variety of novel data sources to create the sample we use in this paper. First we
hand-collect the complete biographical record of all Senators and Representatives from the 101st
through 110th Congresses, using the Biographical Directory of the United States Congress
available online.5 From this website, and from the individual websites of the Congressmen, we
extract information on academic institutions attended, religious affiliations, birthdates, home
towns, and past work experience. We use this data to create the alumni connection and other
connection variables that we exploit in our analysis. We also merge this data with data on the
educational backgrounds of the senior management of corporations headquartered in the home
state of the Senators and Representatives in our database (see Cohen, Frazzini, and Malloy (2008,
2010) for details on the construction of this firm-level biographical data).
           Another key source of data that we collect is the complete legislative record of all Senators
and all Representatives on all bills from the 101st through 110th Congresses. We collect this from
the Library of Congress’ Thomas database. Each "Congress" is two years long, and is broken into
two one-year-long "Sessions." Therefore, 10 Congresses represents twenty years of Congressional
data from 1989-2008. We collect the result of each roll call vote for the twenty-year period in
each chamber of the Congress, and record the individual votes for every Congressman voting on
the bill (or abstaining). We chose to start with the raw bill data, rather than use alternate, publicly
available versions of the Congressional roll call data (see, for example, the Voteview website, as
well as McCarty, Poole and Rosenthal (1997), McCarty, Poole and Rosenthal (2006), Poole and


5
    See http://bioguide.Congress.gov/biosearch/biosearch.asp.


                                                           5
Rosenthal (1985), (1997), (2007), among many others), or the Political Institutions and Public
Choice (PIPC) House Roll Call Database (Aldrich, Brady, de Marchi, McDonald, Nyhan, Rohde,
and Tofias (2008)), because we specifically wanted to exploit the text of each piece of legislation
as described below.
        Specifically, in a number of our tests, we utilize the content of the bills being voted on. To
do so, we download the full text of all bills being voted on over our sample. We collect the full-
text data jointly from the websites of the Government Printing Office (GPO), and from the
Thomas database. We then parse and analyze the full bill text to classify each bill into its main
purpose. Specifically, for our tests, we attempt to assign each bill to one (or more) of the 49
industry classifications used in Fama and French (1997).6 To do this we first construct a set of
keywords for each industry. We then create an executable (shown in the Appendix Figure A1), in
which we input all bills and their corresponding full-text and assign bills to industries based on the
count of the number of times these keywords appear in a given bill. We only assign a bill to an
industry if the number of instances of a particular keyword exceeds a certain threshold of
frequency on a given bill relative to its overall frequency in the entire population of bills.7
Individual bills can be assigned to more than one industry; however, we use a conservative
assignment procedure such that our procedure only results in industry assignments of any kind for
less than 20% of all bills, and specifically only those bills where we can confidently gauge that an
industry is likely to be affected by the bill in question. Figure A1 presents an example of a
particular bill that was assigned only to the Fama-French industry #30: Petroleum and Natural
Gas, based on the relative frequency of pre-specified keywords in the bill that pertain to this
industry. Figure A1 displays the summary text at the top of the bill, which indicates that the bill
clearly pertains to the oil and gas industry. The data Appendix provides more details on our bill
assignment procedure. We have compared our bill categorizations to those used in other work
(see, for example, Aldrich, Brady, de Marchi, McDonald, Nyhan, Rohde, and Tofias (2008),
among others), but prefer our approach because it achieves our explicit goal of assigning each bill
to the specific firms that are potentially affected, rather than to the specific policy issues under

6
  The “Fama-French 49” industry definitions map specific 4-digit SIC (standard industry classification) codes to 49
different industry categories, and are publicly available online from:
http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/.
7
  We have experimented with various thresholds, and our results are not sensitive to the particular threshold we
employ. Please see the Appendix for more details on our bill classification procedure.


                                                        6
consideration.
        Lastly, for a series of tests we examine the seating proximity of Senators in the Senate
chamber.       We extract the historic Senate Chamber Maps from the Senate website
(www.Senate.gov) in order to identify the seat location of every Senator in each of the 101st-110th
Congresses. We then use these seat locations to construct our measures of Senate seat-based
networks, which we describe in detail in Section V.
        Our final sample covers the 20-year period of the 101st-110th Congresses. The unit of
observation in our analysis is the Congressman-vote level. For example, Senator Clinton’s vote of
"yea" in the 110th Congressional Session on Recorded Vote No. 2 (regarding Senate Joint
Resolution 9) is a single observation. For the Senate, our data consist of roughly 650,000 vote-
level observations made by 209 Senators over this twenty year period. Of the votes cast, over
65% are "yes" votes. Table A1 in the Appendix presents additional summary statistics for our
sample: Panel A presents these statistics for the Senate, while Panel B (for brevity) shows only the
main summary statistics for the House of Representatives. For example, each "PctSumYes*"
variable measures the percentage of the group in question that votes yes for a given bill, on
average. So, for instance, the average percentage of Senators from the same school as a Senator
that vote yes is 63.8%. These percentage measures are, not surprisingly, on average nearly
identical regardless of grouping, and roughly match the overall sample average percentage of yes
votes. The sum variables are measured similarly, but simply add the number of Senators that vote
yes on a given bill. For instance, the average number of total yes votes from a given Senator’s
party on an average bill is 31 (roughly half the sample average).
        Note that we have run all the tests in this paper using samples that consist only of final
passage votes (i.e., the final votes on each of the bills in our sample), as well as samples that
consist only of bills where we can ascertain that at least one industry is affected by the bill (and
hence that the bill is relevant to at least one Senator), and our results are unchanged. Thus our
results are not driven by multiple versions of the same bill, or by non-substantive and/or
procedural votes.8
        In the Appendix Table A2 we tabulate two specific characteristics, namely educational

8
  Note that this separation into final votes is very similar to Theriault (2006), which separates procedural and non-
procedural votes. Our final votes category matches closely to his “Substantive Votes” category. Please see the data
Appendix for more details on the subsamples we have analyzed.


                                                         7
background and religious affiliation, for the Senators in our sample. Panel A of Table A2
indicates that the 209 Senators in our sample earned 375 academic degrees that we could match
back to colleges and universities (Senators often have degrees from more than one academic
institution). The most connected university to the U.S. Senate is Harvard University, followed by
Yale, Virginia, Stanford, and Georgetown.9 In addition, a number of the Senators were Rhodes
Scholars, leading to a surprisingly high position of Oxford University on the connectedness list.
Panel B of Table A2 presents the religious affiliations of the U.S. Senate. Religious affiliation
was unavailable for 42 of the Senators, so we have a total of 167 with religious group information.
The most common religious affiliation is Roman Catholic, which accounts for nearly 25% of all
Senators, followed by Methodist, Presbyterian, Episcopalian, Jewish, and Baptist.


                      II. The Impact of Networks on Congressional Voting Behavior
           We now examine in more detail the voting behavior of U.S. politicians, and how this
behavior is affected by social networks. In order to test whether a politician’s network affects her
voting behavior, we need to define measures of possible groups that could influence her behavior.
The first network we focus on is the alumni network; we also examine seat location-based
networks in Section V. We use two main measures of the influence of this alumni network on a
politician’s voting, and construct equivalent measures for the two separate houses of Congress.


II.A The Impact of School Ties on Senate Voting
           Our first tests focus on the voting behavior of U.S. Senators. The first measure we employ
in our Senate tests is the sum of the Senators in the given Senator’s alumni network that vote in
favor of the bill being considered. The second measure we use is the percentage of Senators in the
given Senator’s alumni network that vote in favor of the bill. The idea behind both of these
measures is that they proxy for the amount of potential prodding the Senator could be receiving
from within this alumni social network to vote for the given bill. While both pick up a measure of
the intensity of the network’s interest in passing the given bill, the two measures address two
subtly different mechanisms by which the members of the network exert influence. The sum
measure exploits the idea that it is the absolute number of fellow Congressmen putting pressure on


9
    We demonstrate later in the paper (in Table IV) that our results are not driven by Harvard or any other single school.


                                                             8
a Congressman that has the biggest effect on voting. The percentage measure, in contrast, exploits
the idea that it is the fraction of the Senator’s social network putting pressure on her that more
accurately measures the extent of influence on the Senator’s voting. One benefit of the percentage
measure is that it abstracts from the size of network, while the sum measure is jointly measuring
the behavior of the network and the size of the network. To narrow the focus more on behavior,
we focus mainly on the percentage measure, however we also show results for both the percentage
and sum measures.
       Our primary test examines the impact of networks on the voting behavior of each Senator.
The main dependent variable we use is simply whether the given Senator voted yes (or no) on the
given bill. To control for other determinants of a Senator’s voting we construct a number of
control variables. The first is the sum (or percentage) of the Senator’s party voting in favor of the
given bill. For instance, if we are considering a Democrat, it would be the sum of all other
Democrats voting in favor of given bill, and equivalently for Republicans. The intuition behind
this measure is that it will control for anything that is party-agenda related at the very fine level of
the given vote on the specific bill in question. We also calculate the sum (percentage) of the other
Congressmen from the same state voting in favor of the bill. For the Senate, the two (sum and
percentage) are equal, as there is exactly one other delegate from any Senator’s state. However,
the House measures can vary, as there can be multiple delegates from a given state. The idea
behind this measure is that it will again control for anything that is important at a state-agenda
level for the given vote on the specific bill. In sum, to stress the granularity of these variables,
these are quite fine controls for the party- and state-level importance of the given vote for the
specific bill being voted upon. And finally, when constructing these measures for a particular
Congressman-vote observation we always remove the impact of each individual Congressman’s
own votes, such that these measures reflect only the behavior of other Congressmen who are from
the same school network, same party, or same state, as the Congressman in question.
       Lastly, we include a number of fixed effects in the specifications. First, we include a fixed
effect for the given Senator. This captures a Senator’s average propensity to vote yes on any given
bill, which could vary across Congressmen. We also include a fixed effect for Congress (as we
mention in Section I, our detailed voting and biographical data cover the 101st-110th Congresses).
As different Congresses often focus on quite different legislation (e.g., defense vs. healthcare vs.
fiscal policy, etc.), this is meant to capture anything specifically related to these different agendas

                                                   9
covered, and voted upon, across Congresses. Lastly, we also include in many specifications quite
fine fixed effects at the Congress-session-vote level. That is, these are fixed effects for the
specific vote on the specific bill, in the given Congress and session. These control for anything
special that might affect all Congressmen’s votes on the specific bill (e.g., deadline for approval).
We obviously cannot include both this fixed effect and the Congress fixed effect in the same
regression (as Congress is a linear combination of Congress-session-vote), so we use varying
specifications including either fixed effect. Lastly, we adjust all standard errors for clustering at
the Senator level to account for the fact that Senators may exhibit a tendency to vote in a similar
way on multiple roll-call votes.
         Table I presents the results of these voting behavior regressions. The observation-level is a
given Senator’s vote on the Senate roll-call (recorded) vote in question for the specific bill. Thus,
for a given roll-call Senate vote we average 97 observations, or recorded yea, nay, or abstain votes
(as there are occasionally a few Senator who miss a given vote). The dependent variable we focus
on is Yes, which is a categorical variable equal to 1 if the given Senator votes yes on the given
roll-call vote, and 0 otherwise. In this table we run regressions is a linear probability model;
however in Table IV we also run logit and probit specifications and show that these imply slightly
larger school effects in magnitude and significance. We prefer to use the linear framework as we
can include relatively granular fixed effects, better controlling for fixed variation on a number of
dimensions.10      In columns 1-3 of Table I we focus on the % measures of the independent
variables, and in columns 4-7 we show results for the sum measures. The variable of interest in
Column 1 is School Connected Votes, which is the percentage of the other Senators in the given
Senator’s alumni network who vote yes on the given bill. We also include controls for State Votes
and Party Votes, which represent the percentage of the Senator’s state and other party members
voting in favor of the bill, respectively.
         Column 1 indicates that the voting of other members of a Senator’s alumni network is
significantly related to the Senator’s own vote, even after controlling for general party voting, the
voting of the other Senator in one’s state, and both Congress and Senator fixed effects. In Column
2, we include these same controls, plus both Senator and the finest Congress-session-vote level
fixed effects, and find a similar result. The coefficient on School Connected Votes of 0.052

10
   See Greene et al. (2002) for a discussion of the statistical problems associated with the use of fixed effects in non-
linear regression frameworks.


                                                          10
(t=3.31) in Column 2 implies that controlling for the general voting on the given bill, the Senator’s
own tendency to approve legislation, the party’s views on the given bill, and the state-implied
importance level of the given bill, a one standard deviation increase in the percent of the Senator’s
network voting for the bill implies a roughly 2 percentage point increase in the Senator’s
likelihood to vote in favor of the bill. In Section III, we construct sharper measures of the direct
influence exerted through the network, and for this cleaner measure of direct influence, the
magnitude of the network effect more than doubles.


II.B House Results, Alternate Measures, and Variation in Strength of Network
       In this subsection, we first examine the impact of alumni networks on the voting behavior
of Representatives in the U.S. House of Representatives. The first measure we examine is again
School Connected Votes, here defined as the percentage of the other Representatives in the given
Representative’s alumni network voting yes for the given roll call vote on the given bill. We thus
replicate the specification from Columns 2 of Table I, but now using the voting behavior of
Representatives rather than Senators. In line with the Senate results, Column 3 of Table I
indicates that Representatives’ voting behavior is significantly related to the voting behavior of
Representatives in her alumni network. In Column 4, we then go on to examine an alternate
measure of alumni network influence. Specifically, we compute the sum of the Representatives in
a given Representative’s alumni network that vote in favor of the bill (as opposed to the
percentage). We come to the same conclusions about the strong impact of a Representative’s
alumni network on her voting behavior. Specifically, the coefficient of 0.004 (t=5.96) in Column
4 implies that a one standard deviation increase in the number of Representatives voting in favor
of a given bill in a given Representative’s alumni network, increases the likelihood of the
Representative voting in favor of the bill by over 2 percentage points.
       We also examine this alumni network measure using sums (as opposed to percentages) in
the Senate. The coefficient in Column 5 of Table I of 0.008 (t=3.44) implies that a one standard
deviation increase in the number of Senators in the given Senator’s alumni network voting in favor
of the bill increases the Senator’s likelihood of voting for the bill by 3.4 percentage points. This is
comparable, although somewhat larger in magnitude to both the effect in the House and the effect
in the Senate using the percentage measure. Thus the sum measures produce similar results in
magnitude and significance to the percentage network measure.

                                                  11
        In the last two columns of Table I we exploit variation in the strength of alumni network
links. If it is the alumni network impacting voting, then we’d expect that the stronger the network
connection, the more influence the network should have on a given Senator’s voting behavior.
Therefore, in Columns 6 and 7 we create two new measures of increasing connectedness. First,
Column 6 measures the effect on a Senator’s voting of those Senators that have not only gone to
the same school as the Senator, but also have the same degree from that school (e.g., both have
JDs from Yale). Even stronger, Column 7 measures the effect for networks of Senators that have
gone to the same school, received the same degree, and overlapped on campus at the same time
(e.g., both Harvard MBAs in 1965).11 Consistent with the alumni network having an influence on
voting, the impact of schools is monotonically increasing with the strength of network. From
Column 7, the impact of the most connected network measure is over twice as large (0.020
(t=2.49)) as the other two measures (0.010 and 0.008).12


               III. Times of Increased Network Impact: Close and Irrelevant Votes
        As noted earlier, a key feature of our analysis is that we can identify a causal link between
network effects and voting behavior by exploiting situations where the network mechanisms are
likely to be more utilized, while the characteristics of the network itself remain constant. We do
so in this section by focusing on: i.) votes that are "irrelevant" to those firms located in a Senator’s
home state, and ii.) votes that are close to passing (or failing to pass). The idea behind this
approach is that these are times when the supply of votes that can be swayed by peers is high
(irrelevant votes to some senators in the network), and the demand by peers to sway them is also
high (votes close to passing). Thus these are the exact times that members would be expected to
exert the most pressure on fellow network-connected Senators. We then further explore (in
Section III.A) a very strict test controlling for the possibility of heterogenous effects across votes
of the fixed characteristic of network.
        Our approach helps to explicitly rule out an alternative explanation for any within-
Congress alumni network findings that is based on a common characteristic of the network
causing voting behavior to be related, rather than the direct effect of the network itself causing
11
   The percentage of regression observations (out of 671,520 total Senators’ votes from Table A1) that have at least
one other Senator voting on the bill who is connected to the given Senator through either: (i) same school, (ii) same
school and degree, or (iii) same school, degree, and year, are 65.8%, 52.6%, and 37.3%, respectively.
12
   We find similar results when varying the strength of school ties in the House as well.


                                                         12
voting behavior to be related. For example, perhaps instead of Georgetown Senators using their
Georgetown network to curry the votes they need to pass a bill, it might be that Georgetown
Senators are related to each other in some unobservable way. This relation could come from
common experiences at Georgetown, but need not, and could be any common characteristic that
they share (correlated with both attending Georgetown, as opposed to another university). By
varying the times when network impact is likely to be strongest, we can directly evaluate this
alternative explanation. If our results are simply due to a common, unobserved characteristic, the
characteristic and its predicted impact on Georgetown Senators’ voting should impact all
Georgetown Senators in the same manner across votes (as it is, by definition, a common
characteristic across the network). However, if our effects are driven by Senators using their
alumni networks to curry votes to help pass a bill, we can identify the exact times, and the exact
Senators, within a given network, that will be impacted differentially from all other network
agents, in an ex-ante predictable way.
           To identify "irrelevant" votes for a Senator, we first use the bill classification system
explained in Section I to classify each bill as being related to certain industries, depending upon
the text of the bill. For the given bill, we then check whether any of the industries the bill
addresses have operations in each Senator’s state.13 Thus, for each bill and Senator, we classify
whether the bill is relevant for the given Senator by whether it covers industries that have
operations in the Senator’s state. In other words, we expect those bills addressing matters of
relevance to firms in the Senator’s state to be the bills that the Senator will have a vested interest
in voting either for or against. We then examine the complement of this set of bills for each
Senator. The complement of this set should represent those bills that the Senator has less of an
interest (on average) in voting in one direction or the other, since these bills are essentially
unrelated to any industries represented in his or her home state. Thus, it should be exactly these
"irrelevant," uninterested votes for the Senator on which her network should have the most
persuasive ability (relative to those bills in which the Senator herself has a direct interest).
           Similarly, for a second measure, we define all votes that are close to passing or failing.
Here, we use all votes that are within a close distance of 60 yeas. The reason we use a window
around 60 votes is that in modern-day Congress the practice of filibustering, or the credible threat


13
     Here we identify operations as any public firms domiciled in the state.


                                                             13
of filibustering, is enough to defeat votes that cannot meet the 60-vote threshold needed to avoid a
filibuster. We do not center our "close" measure around 50 votes, since votes with say 40 yea
votes would not need any filibustering, because the idea of a filibuster is to prevent a vote from
coming to the floor (i.e., to block a vote that was likely to pass), and votes with this magnitude of
support are almost never brought to the floor for a vote, given their unlikely chance of passage.
       The idea behind exploring close votes is that these are the exact votes where the marginal
value of a vote is especially high, so that Senators might be expected to utilize any mechanism of
influence to secure these votes. Thus, this may be a time of especially high exerted influence
through the network channel.       However, and most importantly, for both the close and the
irrelevant measures the underlying characteristics of the network remain constant, and thus a
common unobservable characteristic explanation predicts no change in network impact across
network agents.
       Table II presents the results of these tests. The dependent variable is again the vote of each
Senator, Yes. The first variable of interest is Close, measured three distinct ways, as a categorical
variable equal to 1 for those votes that are either (3%), (5%), or (7%) from 60% yeas, and 0
otherwise. We then interact this variable with School Connected Votes (SCV), measured as the
percentage of the other Senators in the given Senator’s alumni network voting yes for the given
vote on the given bill. This interaction term measures the increased impact of networks on voting
behavior for the Close votes. The next variable of interest is Irrelevant To Me, measured as a
categorical variable equal to 1 if the given bill does not address any industries (and hence firms)
domiciled in the Senator’s state, and 0 otherwise. The same controls from Table I are included in
every specification.   Finally, because the Close measure is identified at the vote level, and
identifies a subset of all votes, we cannot include Congress-session-vote fixed effects in these
regressions (as the close variable would be a linear combination of a subset of these fixed effects).
Therefore we instead include both Congress and Senator fixed effects in all regression
specifications, and continue to adjust standard errors for clustering at the Senator level.
       Columns 1-3 of Table II show the differing impact of alumni networks for close vs. non-
close votes. Columns 1 and 2 estimate separate regressions for each set of votes (close and non-
close), while Column 3 estimates a single specification with the interaction term of Close and
School Connected Votes (denoted Close*SCV in the table). All three give the same implication:
alumni networks exert significantly more influence over voting behavior when they are expected

                                                  14
to be more utilized, namely in close votes. From the interaction term in Column 3 (0.035
(t=3.28)), the effect of networks nearly doubles at times of close votes. Column 4 then confirms a
similar result using a slightly more moderate measure of Close ((5%) as opposed to (3%)).
Column 5 then does the same for the (7%) range. The differential impact of networks is still
significant for (7%), but is monotonically decreasing in point estimate from (3%) to (7%), as
we would predict given that these we are decreasing in the level of closeness of the overall vote,
and thus the marginal value of a given vote.
         Columns 6 and 7 examine the differing impact of networks on votes that are irrelevant vs.
relevant to the Senator who is voting. These columns indicate that networks have significantly
greater influence over voting behavior when the bills being voted on are not relevant to the given
Senator (again where relevance is defined as pertinent to industries represented in one’s home
state). Comparing the coefficients on School Connected Votes in Columns 6 and 7, the impact of
networks on voting behavior is almost twice as large when a vote is not relevant to the given
Senator.14
         Columns 8 of Table II refine these tests even further in an attempt to isolate the specific
times when network influence is strongest. For example, Column 8 combines these close and
irrelevant measures to examine the effect of school networks at times when the vote is both a close
vote and not pertinent to the Senator who is voting. The interaction term from Column 8 (0.060
(t=2.20)) implies that at these times, the network has an impact over 3 times larger than for all
other votes.


III.A Controlling explicitly for heterogeneous impacts of a fixed characteristic
         A remaining potential concern is that even though we show network impact is strongest
precisely when there is: i.) the most demand to sway votes, and ii.) the most willing supply, there
could still be a common characteristic that has varying impacts across votes. To be more specific,
it is not implausible that there could be heterogeneous effects of the static network characteristic



14
   These regressions only include votes on bills for which we can ascertain that at least one industry is affected by the
bill, and hence that the bill is relevant to at least one Senator. We have also run all of the tests in Columns 6-10 on all
bills, where we designate bills that we cannot confidently assign to at least one industry as being "irrelevant" to all
Senators, and the results are very similar to those presented here. We prefer the sample in which we can confidently
assign all bills to sets of industries.


                                                           15
across votes.15 Further, with respect to irrelevant votes, it may be exactly when a vote is otherwise
irrelevant to a senator that you observe her relying more on intrinsic preferences, which could be
correlated across the network, and thus the correlation with the mean network vote will be higher
in these cases (giving the results in Columns 6-8 of Table II).
        In order to explicitly rule out the possibility of a varying impact of a fixed characteristic,
we construct new measures in order to yield the sharpest estimate of the network impact on voting.
Specifically, we create a new variable called School Connected Votes Relevant (SCVR), which is
the percentage of school friends for whom the bill is a "relevant" bill (i.e., who have a firm in that
industry operating in their state) who vote yes on that bill. This variable is a subset of the School
Connected Votes (defined as the percentage of all school friends who vote yes on the given bill),
however a quite important one. The idea behind separating out these votes is that out of all the
school friends voting on the bill, these are those that have an active vested interest in obtaining a
certain outcome of the vote. For all other of the school friends, the vote is irrelevant, and thus they
have no interest in swaying votes.
        This is where the sharp contrast arises in predictions between the correlated characteristic
(with heterogeneous impacts), and direct impact of influencing votes through the network. If it
were simply an underlying, correlated network characteristic, this characteristic should be
expressed more prevalently by the group of senators in the network for whom the given vote is
irrelevant, as they have (on average) no other interests clouding their voting, and so their
expressed vote is a better measure of the correlated network characteristic on the given vote.
Thus, the vote of this group should be more correlated with the given senator’s vote, while the
corresponding vote of the SCVR (those school connected senators for whom the vote is relevant)
should be less related. In contrast, if it is the direct influence channel driving these results, then
the senator’s vote should be more correlated with the SCVR, as these are precisely the senators
that have an interest in currying votes in their favor. The senators with no vested interest in the
bill, by contrast, will have no reason to exert influence on the senator for the given bill.
        We perform exactly this test between the two potential explanations in Columns 9-11 of
Table II. In Column 9, we find that all of the school effect is indeed driven by the SCVR, School
Connected Votes Relevant. Including this measure in the regression, its coefficient is large and

15
  For instance, Snyder and Groseclose (2000) show that the impact of party on voting behavior (a fixed characteristic,
just as network is), varies over time and votes.


                                                         16
significant, while the coefficient on School Connected Votes (SCV), which now measures the
impact of those school connected votes for whom the given bill is irrelevant, is small and
insignificant.16 This evidence is in line with the predictions of the mechanism of direct influence
through the network, while it is the exact opposite of what is predicted by the mechanism of a
heterogeneous impact of a common characteristic.
         Columns 10 offers an even sharper test of the network influence channel. It replicates
Column 9, but solely on the sample of votes that are irrelevant to the senator who is voting. The
findings are similar to Column 9, with the point estimate on SCVR even slightly larger; again the
votes of all senators in the network for whom the vote is irrelevant has no reliable impact on the
given senator’s voting behavior.
         Column 11 then offers the sharpest test of the network influence channel by examining the
effect of school ties (and specifically, the votes within one’s network for whom the bill is relevant,
i.e. School Connected Votes Relevant (SCVR)) at times when the vote is both a close vote and not
pertinent to the Senator who is voting. These are times when demand to influence voting is high
(since the vote is close), willingness to supply the vote is high (since the vote is irrelevant to the
Senator who is voting), and where the school effect has been refined to capture solely the yes
votes of the network members for whom the bill is relevant. Column 11 indicates that these are
precisely the times when network influence is strongest: the interaction term in Column 11 (Close
& Irrelevant To Me * SCVR) is large and significant (.097, t=2.47), and the magnitude of this
coefficient implies that network effects at these times are over 6 times larger than for all other
votes.
         In fact, the estimate from Column 11 implies that controlling for the Senator’s own
tendency to approve legislation, the party’s views on the given bill, and the state-implied
importance level of the given bill, a one standard deviation increase in the percent of the Senator’s
network who have a vested interest in the bill and vote yes (SCVR) results in a roughly 5
percentage point increase in the Senator’s likelihood to vote yes. To gain a better sense of what
this magnitude means, consider it relative to the effect of state-level considerations. After the

16
   For brevity of exposition, (since we already use SCV in all previous specifications) we report the coefficients for
SCV and SCVR. We could have equivalently (containing the same information), explicitly split the network votes into
SCVR, and SCVnotR (i.e., School Connected Votes Not-Relevant). This leads to identical conclusions. For instance,
if we replicate Column 9 but explicitly splitting the network into the two components, the coefficient on SCVnotR is -
0.021 (t=-1.67), while that on SCVR is again large, positive, and significant, at .049 (t=2.16).


                                                         17
overall party agenda, this is arguably the largest determinant of what is expected to drive a
Congressman’s voting behavior.                Comparing to a one standard deviation in state-level
movement,17 the alumni network effect is roughly 57% the size of the state effect.
         In sum, these results on both close and irrelevant votes, as well as the impact of votes that
are especially relevant to the members of one’s network, strongly support school ties having an
influence on a Senator’s voting behavior though direct network effects. In contrast, these results
are inconsistent with the alumni network results we find simply capturing some common
characteristic.     Even more strictly, the sharp tests of Columns 9-11 are inconsistent with
heterogeneous impacts of a fixed characteristic driving our results, and provide the cleanest and
strongest evidence of the network being used a direct channel of influence.


           IV. Controlling for Ideology, Interactions with School Ties, and Robustness
         In Table III, we include a number of additional controls that have been shown to affect
voting in the economics and political science literatures. The first additional control variable we
include is how a given Senator votes with respect to other Senators that possess the same political
ideology as the Senator in question. We utilize the DW-Nominate measure of ideology, which is
widely used in studies of Congressional roll-call voting (see Clinton, Jackman, and Rivers (2004),
McCarty, Poole and Rosenthal (1997), McCarty, Poole and Rosenthal (2006), Poole and
Rosenthal (1985), (1997), (2007)). All legislators are given a dynamic DW-Nominate score,
which places them during each Congress into common space coordinates along two dimensions
based on their historical voting record; for example, one dimension can be interpreted as
"liberal/conservative" in the modern era.18               We take these two dimensions and split them
according to their medians and thereby create four quadrants. We label Senators that lie in the
same quadrant as having similar ideologies. We then use a variable that is equal to the percentage
of these ideologically like-minded Senators that vote in favor of the given bill, which we label
Ideology Votes.19

17
   While we realize that the state-level percentage measure for the Senate can only by 0 as 1, we still use the standard
deviation of the measure here in order to get a measure that is standardized and comparable to that of the school
network-level measure.
18
   The other dimension, which is less empirically important over our sample period, can be interpreted as the
Northern/Southern Democrat divide.
19
   We have experimented with a variety of other specifications for ideology, for example forming quintile (or decile)
groups based solely on the first DW-Nominate dimension, and our results are unchanged across these different


                                                          18
         We also include the voting of the Religious group to which the given Senator belongs.
From Table A2, there is large variation in religious affiliation, and the literature has shown some
evidence of this affecting voting patterns (Hibbing and Marsh (1987)). Religious affiliation is also
plausibly related to ideology, at least on certain issues. We create a measure called Religious
Votes, which is the percentage of those Senators of the same religious group as the given Senator
that vote in favor of the bill. Finally, we also explore the impact of votes by Senators who sit on
the same Senate Committee as the Senator in question, and construct a measure analogous to those
above called Same Committee Votes.
         Table III presents the regressions results including these control variables.          The
specifications are identical to those in Table I, with the dependent variable being the voting of a
given Senator on a given roll call vote (Yes), and controls included for Party Votes and State
Votes. Table III shows that the Ideology Votes variable is strongly related to a Senator’s voting
patterns across all specifications. Including the ideology variable has a modest effect on the
magnitude of the alumni network effect, but the network effect remains strong in significance and
magnitude even in the presence of this variable. Also note that including the ideology variable in
all the regressions in Table II, where we explore the impact of networks around close and
irrelevant votes, has no effect on these results. Meanwhile the Religious Votes variable is a
positive but insignificant predictor of voting behavior. Finally, Columns 3 and 4 show that the yes
votes of common committee members are negative predictors of yes votes, after controlling for
school connected votes, party votes, and state votes. This is explained by the fact that we are
controlling for party vote here already, and committees are typically organized with half the
members in one party and half in the other. The committee variable is thus (after controlling for
party vote) largely picking up the voting preferences of the opposing party, resulting in the
negative sign. Importantly, none of these control variables explain the influence of the alumni
networks on Senator voting behavior. We have also included additional controls for voting by
groups of similar age, Congressional cohort, gender, ethnicity, and geographic region (as
measured by Census region), and none of these additional control variables affect the results
reported here.
         Columns 7-9 of Table III explore interactions of the alumni effect with the control


specifications.


                                                19
variables designed to capture the impact of party, state, and ideological influences on voting.
Consistent with the finding in Mian et al (2009) that ideology helps to mitigate pressure from
outside groups, we find a smaller impact of the alumni network on voting when the intrinsic
interest in the vote is stronger. In fact, Columns 7-9 indicate that when an issue is important to
one’s party, one’s state, or one’s ideological peers, the school effect is significantly smaller (all
three interaction terms are negative, and significant). These results lend additional support to our
earlier findings that whenever a particular vote is inherently important to a Senator who is voting,
the impact of outside influence mechanisms (including school ties) on their voting is weaker.
       Next, in Table IV we explore a variety of different specifications designed as robustness
checks for our main findings.       In Columns 1 and 2 we run probit and logit regressions,
respectively, that include the same explanatory variables as those in Table I. Specifically, Column
1 is run as a probit regression, with the coefficient estimate shown being the implied marginal
effect of school ties on the probability of voting yes. Again we see that School Connected Votes is
a strong predictor of voting behavior in the Senate. To give an idea of magnitudes, for the probit
coefficient from Column 1 (0.095, t=3.65), a one standard deviation increase in the percent of the
Senator’s network voting for the bill implies a 3.71% increase in probability of voting yes for the
given Senator (compared with a 2% estimated effect from the OLS estimates from Table I).
Column 2 is run as a logit regression, and once again we see a large and significant effect of
alumni networks on voting.
       Next in Columns 3-5 we employ a Fama-MacBeth type framework, where the regression
specifications (with controls and fixed effects) are run at the level of each group indicated
separately. Then the coefficient estimates are averaged across the groups, with the standard errors
calculated as the standard error of the group coefficients. For example, in Column 3 we run the
regressions of the alumni network effect for each school separately; this approach effectively
mitigates the impact of any single school that may be driving our results, as the reported
coefficient is an equal-weighted average of the school effects across all schools in our sample.
Columns 4 and 5 perform a similar procedure, running the regressions separately for every Senator
and for every Congress-Session (i.e., year), respectively. The reported coefficients are then equal-
weighted average across Senators (Column 4) and across years (Column 5). These regressions
specifically rule out any particular (or a few) Senators or years from driving the results we find.
Columns 3-5 all indicate that running the regressions by school, by Senator, or by Congress-

                                                 20
Session has no effect on our main conclusions: the alumni network effect we document in this
paper is not driven by a particular school, or a particular Senator, nor is it concentrated in a
particular year.
         Column 6 of Table IV performs an OLS panel regression similar to the specifications in
Table I-II, but checks to see if the effect of ideology is also concentrated around times of increased
network impact (again defined as when a vote is both a close vote and not pertinent to the Senator
who is voting). The concern is that the marginal probability of any relevant regressor may be
bigger if the outcome of the dependent variable is uncertain; since close and irrelevant votes may
be more uncertain, the use of a linear probability model may simply pick up the change in the
marginal effect of the regressor. Although this concern is alleviated somewhat by the fact that our
results show up in a logit and probit framework,20 for completeness we also include in Column 6
the interaction of Ideology Votes and Close & Irrelevant To Me.
         The idea behind using Ideology Votes is that the control variable Ideology Votes is
designed to capture a shared common characteristic of particular Senators, and not a channel
through which influence is directed; hence we would not expect the effect of ideology to be
necessarily more pronounced around times when potential network use is thought to be greatest.
Column 6 indicates that the interaction term is small and insignificant, while the interaction of
School Connected Votes and Close & Irrelevant to Me remains large and significant (0.068,
t=2.34).21
         Lastly, we have also performed a variety of additional robustness checks that we do not
report here in order to conserve space. For instance, using the full-specification of the last column
of Table I (including Senator- and vote-level fixed effects), we also include school-level fixed
effects to control for the propensity of a given school (or any common characteristic correlated
with attendance at that school) to impact voting (on average) in a specific way. Including these
school fixed effects has nearly no impact on our direct measure of the network’s influence on a
given Senator’s voting for that particular bill. The coefficient on School Connected Votes on the



20
   We have specifically replicated Table II using probit and logit specifications, and as above, the results are in fact
slightly larger, and strongly significant. We choose the linear probability model so that we can control more finely for
a number of fixed effects that can impact voting behavior.
21
   We find similarly small and insignificant coefficients on the interaction terms of Close & Irrelevant to Me with
other control variables, such as Religious Votes, Party Votes, and State Votes.


                                                          21
given bill is 0.052 (t=3.31).22
         Taken as a whole, our results demonstrate that the impact of alumni networks on Senate
voting behavior: a) is robust to a variety of different specifications, b) is not driven by a particular
school, Senator, or time period, and c) is not simply measuring some common characteristic, but
rather reflects a channel of direct influence.


                                        V. Seat-Based Social Networks
         In this section we explore an additional type of social network that might plausibly affect
Congressional voting in the same manner as the school tie effects we document above. The
alternate measure we use is based on the idea that where a Senator sits in the Senate Chamber may
affect which particular Senators he comes in contact with on a daily basis. Hence, his location on
the Senate Chamber floor may help shape his social network, and thus the opinions of those
Senators seated close to him may influence his views on particular issues.
         Importantly, assignment to seats in the Senate Chamber is based almost exclusively on
seniority, whereby senior Senators are given the first opportunity to select their desk. Senators are
encouraged to choose seats close to the front as possible, and we have verified that distance from
the podium is in fact correlated highly with seniority.23 The practical impact of this seating rule is
that Senators of a similar cohort (based on when they were first elected to the Senate) end up
sitting close to each other. Thus the seating arrangements in the Senate help to reinforce the
relationships that Senators may already form among those other Senators who start their careers at
roughly the same times.24
         The Senate chamber is typically divided in half, with Republicans on the right-hand side,
and Democrats on the left-hand side (see Figure 1 for an example of what the Senate Chamber

22
   In addition, we have run all regressions on the sample of only measures (the final versions of the bills voted on in
the chamber), we have included total network size in all of these regressions, and we have included squared or cubed
versions of the control variables Party Votes, State Votes, and Ideology Votes (in order to test if the alumni effect is
simply capturing a non-linear effect of one of these control variables). In all cases, School Connected Votes remains
large and significant.
23
   There are a few exceptions to the general pattern of seniority-based seating. For example, the "Candy Seat" in the
back is a highly sought-after Senate desk, even despite its location near the back edge of the Republican seating area,
because it has historically been the job of the Senator who sits at this desk to stock it with candy; hence, the seat has
become a desirable seat for senior Senators over the years despite its distant location.
24
   Note that we have also constructed measures of cohort voting (both by age and by start-year in Congress), and the
close-seat variable we construct here subsumes the pure effect of cohort voting, suggested that seating arrangements
impact voting above and beyond any long-standing cohort effects.


                                                          22
map looked like in the 110th Congress, as well as a depiction of how we compute our distance
measures for one particular Senator). We compute distances between Senators based on the
simple idea that each Senator lies at the geographic epicenter of his own social circle. For
example, for a given Senator, those Senators directly next to him are assigned distances of 1, while
those immediately in front or in back of a Senator are given distances of 2 (note that the Senate
chamber slopes down, so there is a height distance between rows), as are Senators in the same row
but not immediately next to the Senator in question. From there, we simply count the number of
people one has to go through to get to the next person, and assign numbers that increase
accordingly; also, the distance between two people across a given aisle is considered to be an
increase of 4 in terms of distance. Figure 1 displays our generated seat distances from a particular
Senator, in this case the Senator seated in Seat #46. We construct similar seat distances for every
Senator in the chamber, for the each of the 101st-110th Congresses (Senators are re-seated each
Congress). This is made more difficult by the fact that for older Congresses (from the 106th
Congress back), the Chamber seating map is contained in scanned .pdf documents that are not
easily machine readable.     We thus use an additional OCR (Optical Character Recognition)
program on these documents, and then hand-check its results, to extract the Chamber seating for
these earlier Congressional sessions.
       Similar to our tests in Section II, which exploit school-based connections between
Senators, here we use the seat distances to define the social networks of each Senator. We
compute three measures of "closeness": for each Senator, CloseSeat4 Votes is a dummy variable
equal to 1 for all Senators with a distance of 4 or less according to our seat distance mapping
methodology who vote yes on the given bill; CloseSeat8 Votes is a similar variable equal to 1 for
all Senators with a distance of 8 or less; and CloseSeat16 Votes is a similar variable equal to 1 for
all Senators with a distance of 16 or less. To the extent that we find any impact of seat distance,
our prediction is that the voting behavior of those in the closer circle (CloseSeat4 Votes) should
have a larger impact on a Senator’s voting than the voting behavior of those in the wider circles
(CloseSeat8 and CloseSeat16 Votes).
       Panel A of Table V presents the results of regressions of individual Senate votes on the
votes of those Senators seated nearby. In all of these tests we control for the effect of school ties
documented in Sections II-IV, as well as the effects of party votes and state votes (as in Table I).
Our main variable of interest is CloseSeat4 Votes, the percentage of Senators within 4 seats of the

                                                 23
Senator in question who voted yes on the given bill. Column 1 indicates that this measure
strongly predicts the yes votes of individual Senators (=0.135, t=4.35). Further, the economic
magnitude of this effect is large: a one-standard deviation move in the CloseSeat4 Votes measure
increases the likelihood of voting yes by over 5 percentage points.
       Of course since Senators are allowed to choose their seats according to seniority, they may
simply choose to sit next to Senators with similar political views. In Column 2 we test the
importance of this endogenous seat choice explanation by replicating our results on a subset of
newly-elected Senators for whom seating choice is plausibly exogenous; since Freshman Senators
can only choose among the last few remaining seats, their seats as essentially randomly assigned.
Column 2 indicates that the effect of seating proximity on voting is large and significant for
Freshman Senators (coefficient on CloseSeat4 Votes=0.164, t=2.45), demonstrating that even for
those Senators who have little choice where to sit, the impact of Senators seated nearby on voting
behavior is still pronounced.
       Interestingly, and consistent with the hypothesis that seating proximity impacts voting
behavior, this effect is weaker as we widen our definition of closeness.         For example, the
magnitude of the coefficient on CloseSeat8 Votes is smaller than the coefficient on CloseSeat4
Votes, and the magnitude of the coefficient on CloseSeat16 Votes is even smaller (and
insignificant). When we include all three measures in a multiple regression, only CloseSeat4
Votes remains significant. Taken together, these results suggest that proximity to others, initiated
through rule-based seating assignments, can help to foster and strengthen the social ties between
Senators, and that these ties ultimately influence voting behavior.
       Finally in Panel B of Table V we perform a verification test of Freshman Senators not
having a choice of seating in the Chamber Floor; this is thus a test of the exogeneity of their
seating assignments. To do this we run a seating choice model for all Senators, and then again for
only Freshman Senators. The dependent variable in these tests is the distance (Distance) between
each Senator and every other Senator (excluding himself), where distance is measured in number
of seats as described above for our tests in Panel A. Larger values of the dependent variable
therefore mean that the Senators are seated further away from each other. The explanatory
variables we employ are Abs. Diff. in Seniority (equal to the absolute difference in years of
seniority between the two Senators), Same Party (equal to 1 if the two Senators are in the same
party, and 0 otherwise), Same State (equal to 1 if the two Senators hail from the same state, and 0

                                                 24
otherwise), and Same School (equal to 1 if the two Senators went to the same school, and 0
otherwise).
        Not surprisingly, given the layout of the Chamber and the seniority seating rules described
above, Column 1 of Panel B shows that Senators choose to sit closer to members whose seniority
is closer to their own (the coefficient on Abs. Diff. in Seniority is positive and significant).
Additionally, Senators choose to sit closer to members of the same party (the coefficient on Same
Party is negative and significant), which is again not surprising given the layout of the Senate
Chamber. Interestingly, there is no evidence that Senators choose to sit closer to the other Senator
from their home state, but we do find some evidence that Senators choose to sit closer to other
Senators within their alumni network (Same School is a significant negative predictor of seat
distance between any two Senators).
        We see a very different picture when we examine only the seating assignments of
Freshman Senators in Column 2 of Panel B. Consistent with these Freshman Senators having
little discretion over their seating locations, we find that the only predictor of seating distance for
these Senators is Same Party, which is hard-wired by the fact that Senators must sit on their
party’s side of the Chamber Floor. Same School and Abs. Diff. in Seniority are no longer
significant predictors of seat distance; the magnitude drops by 80% for Same School, and the sign
even flips for Abs. Diff. in Seniority. These results provide strong corroborating evidence that the
seating assignments of Freshman Senators are determined quite differently than those of all other
Senators, and are plausibly exogenous.25 This finding implies that the impact of seat distance on
voting for Freshman Senators that we document in Panel A should be interpreted as a direct,
causal effect of seat-based networks affecting voting.
        In summary, our results in this section demonstrate that the impact of social networks on
Congressional voting is not confined to one particular definition of social networks based on direct
school connections, but rather extends to an alternate measure based on common seating locations
in the Senate.


                                                 VI. Discussion
        Given the results in the paper, it merits stepping back to ask the larger question of what

25
  These results are unaffected by adding a series of additional control variables such as SameIdeology, SameReligion,
SameAge, SameEthinicity, and SameCensusRegion.


                                                         25
implications these patterns have for legislators, constituents (both firms and individuals), and
perhaps even some broader measures of welfare. First, in terms of legislators, we believe the
surprising, and important, aspect of these results is exactly how large of a factor networks are in
impacting legislator behavior.      What amplifies this importance is that the networks appear
particularly useful in currying votes on precisely those pieces of legislation that are most
important to the legislator. As mentioned earlier in the paper, the magnitudes of these network
effects are roughly 60% that of the state-level considerations, which outside of party and ideology
are perhaps the most important considerations of legislators. We believe the magnitude of these
network effects have not been fully appreciated in the literature, nor by legislators’ constituents, as
they simply have not been quantified in as systematic a fashion across the legislative process over
many decades.
        Second, in terms of constituents, first considering individuals, we believe voters would be
quite surprised to find exactly how large an effect these networks have on their elected officials’
voting behavior. Perhaps more importantly, they would likely be interested to know exactly how
helpful these networks can be in terms of currying the specific votes on which they (and thus their
legislator) have a large vested interest. The implication would then be that thinking about the
networks to which your elected official has access should potentially be a non-trivial aspect of any
voter’s decision, especially as these networks appear most useful precisely when the issue is most
welfare-increasing to you as a constituent.
        For firms, we provide strong, quantified evidence in Table A5 of the Appendix that
legislation (perhaps not surprisingly) has a large effect on firm fundamental values. Of course, the
evidence we provide is even an extreme lower bound, as we are simply measuring the aspects of
the legislation that the market is not correctly taking into account at the time of its passing; the full
impact, including anticipation, and announcement effects, are surely much larger.              Still, the
conclusion from this evidence is that anything that affects a piece of legislation’s probability of
passing (or being voted down) will be of large interest to firms, as their fundamental values are
very sensitive to a piece of legislation’s ultimate fate.
        Lastly, we can also consider the implications of our results for broader measures of
welfare. However, this issue is not straightforward. While it is certainly true that state level
constituents would benefit from their congressmen currying votes from their networks at times
that are most crucial, we need to also consider the impact on other states. Now, we provide

                                                   26
evidence that the members within the network that supply their votes are those who have the least
interest in the outcome of the votes. While this net transfer would seem positive within the
network, the net effects outside the network are harder to quantify. In other words, say that
Congress is voting on legislation to build plants in Massachusetts instead of in the neighboring
states New Hampshire or Rhode Island. The Massachusetts congressmen can use their networks,
say in California to vote in favor of the bill, and potentially pass it. While this is positive for
Massachusetts, and has nearly no impact on California, it obviously has a negative impact for the
constituents of New Hampshire and Rhode Island.           We would need to add up all of these
spillovers, some of which are quite subtle and difficult to quantify, in order to get a measure of the
total social welfare implications, and thus the net effects of these networks are unclear. On the
other hand, it appears that the networks provide one way for votes to have some notion of a
“market price,” (even if that is a constrained market to within-network), as votes are traded based
on private valuations within the network. If legislators are acting in constituents best interests, we
may want them to sell a vote on an issue that we do not care about for reciprocal votes on issues
that have large welfare implications for us. If the networks allow for these market trades to take
place is a less costly way, it may be a better state of the world than if no market at all (or a more
costly market) existed for these votes.


                                          VII. Conclusion
       In this paper we examine the impact of personal connections on the voting behavior of
U.S. politicians. Using a new, hand-collected database that constructs linkages between members
of the U.S. Congress, we demonstrate that social networks influence Congressional voting
behavior.
       The primary network measure we use is based on the alumni networks of Congressmen.
An advantage of these education-based networks is that they are formed decades before the voting
behavior we attempt to explain. We show that controlling for the general voting on the given bill,
the Senator’s own tendency to approve legislation, the party’s views on the given bill, the state-
implied importance of the given bill, and the Senator’s own ideological views, a Senator’s school
network has a large and significant impact on their voting behavior. Using our sharpest measure
of direct influence, a one-standard deviation increase in the percentage of a Senator’s interested
alumni network voting in favor of a bill implies a roughly 5 percentage point increase in the

                                                 27
Senator’s own likelihood of voting in favor of a bill. The magnitude of this effect is close to 60%
of the effect of state-level considerations.    Further, the impact of school ties on voting is
monotonically increasing with the strength of network, is found in the House as well as the Senate,
is not driven by a particular school, Congressman, or time period, and is robust to a variety of
different specifications and controls.
       A key aspect of our empirical strategy is that we can identify a causal link between
network influence and voting behavior by exploiting situations where the network mechanisms are
likely to be more utilized, while the characteristics of the network itself remain constant. We
demonstrate that the alumni network effect increases significantly at times when the network is
plausibly the most important, such as for close votes, for votes that are less important to the
Senator who is voting, and particularly for votes that are both close and irrelevant to the Senator
who is voting. We also decompose each Senator’s network into those who have a vested interest
in the bill, and those for whom it is irrelevant, and find that the entire school network effect is
driven by the influence of the interested network Senators. These tests help rule out the possibility
of heterogeneous effects of a static network characteristic driving our results. Taken together, our
analysis provides strong evidence in support of the alumni network being used as a direct channel
of influence. Additionally, we demonstrate that our results are not confined to this particular
network definition based on school connections, but also extend to a measure based on seat
locations in the Senate Chamber, where we have a plausibly exogenous network measure based on
Freshman Senator seat assignments.
       Collectively our findings illustrate the power that informal social networks can have on the
behavior of lawmakers, and underscore the need for a deeper understanding of the network forces
that shape individual behavior more generally. As legislators, individuals, and firms all have large
interests in the outcomes of the legislative process, our evidence provides important insights on
the ways agents can better utilize these documented network mechanisms.




                                                 28
References

Aldrich, John, Michael Brady, Scott de Marchi, Ian McDonald, Brendan Nyhan, David Rohde,
       and Michael Tofias, 2006, Party and constituency in the U.S. Senate, 1933-2004, in Why
       Not Parties?, Nathan W. Monroe, Jason M. Roberts, and David Rohde, eds., University of
       Chicago Press.

Ansolabehere, Stephen, James Snyder, and Charles Stewart, 2001, The effects of party and
       preference on Congressional roll-call voting,” Legislative Studies Quarterly, 26, 4, 533-
      572.

Bogue, Allan G. and Mark P. Marlaire, 1975, Of mess and men: The boardinghouse and
       Congressional Voting, 1821-1842, American Journal of Political Science 19, 207-230.

Burkett, Tracy and John Skvoretz. (2006). "Political Support Networks Among Senators: Stability
        and Change from 1973 to 1900." Working Paper.

Caldeira, Gregory A. and Samuel C. Patterson (1987). "Political Friendship in the Legislature."
        The Journal of Politics, Vol. 49, No. 4, pp. 953-975.

Chattopadhyay, Raghabendra and Esther Duflo (2004). “Women as Policy Makers: Evidence from
       a Randomized Experiment in India.” Econometrica, 72, 5, 1405- 1443.

Clinton, Joshua, Simon Jackman, and Douglas Rivers (2004), The statistical analysis of roll call
       voting: A unified approach, American Political Science Review 98, 1-16.

Cohen, Lauren, Andrea Frazzini, and Christopher Malloy, 2008, The small world of investing:
       Board connections and mutual fund returns, Journal of Political Economy 116, 951-979.

Cohen, Lauren, Andrea Frazzini, and Christopher Malloy, 2010, Sell-side school ties, Journal of
       Finance 65, 1409-1437.

Edwards, III, George C and Andrew Barrett. 2000. “Presidential Agenda Setting in Congress.”
      Polarized Politics: Congress and the President in a Partisan Era, eds. Jon R. Bond and
      Richard Fleisher. Washington, D.C.: CQ Press.

Edwards III, George C, Andrew Barrett, and Jeffrey Peake. 1997. “The Legislative Impact of
      Divided Government.” American Journal of Political Science 41:545-563.

Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1997, Industry costs of equity, Journal of Financial
      Economics 43, 153–193.

Fowler, J., 2006a, Connecting the Congress: A study of cosponsorship networks, Political
        Analysis 14, 456–487.
Fowler, J. 2006b, “Legislative Cosponsorship Networks in the U.S. House and Senate,”
       Social Networks 28, 454-465.

Fowler, J., Michael T. Heaney, David W. Nickerson, John F. Padgett, and Betsy Sinclair (2009).
        “Causality in Political Networks,” Working paper, University of California at San Diego.

Greene, W., C. Han, and P. Schmidt (2002). The bias of the fixed effects estimator in
      nonlinear models. New York University working paper.

Hibbing, John and David Marsh (1987). “Accounting for the Voting patterns of British MP’s on
      Free Votes.” Legislative Studies Quarterly, 12, 2, 275-297.

Jackson, Matthew O., 2005, The economics of social networks, in Richard Blundell, Whitney
       Newey, and Torsten Persson, (eds.) Proceedings of the 9th World Congress of the
       Econometric Society, Oxford University Press.

Kalt, Joseph P. and Mark A. Zupan, 1990. "The Apparent Ideological Behavior of Legislators:
        Testing for Principal-Agent Slack in Political Institutions," Journal of Law and
        Economics, Vol. 33, No. 1 (Apr.), pp. 103-131

Kau, J.B. and Rubin, P.H., 1979. "Self-interest, ideology, and logrolling in congressional voting."
       Journal of Law and Economics 22, 365.384.

Kau, J.B. and Rubin, P.H., 1993. "Ideology, voting and shirking." Public Choice 76, 151.172.

Lee, D., Moretti, E. and M. Butler 2004. "Do voters affect or elect policies? Evidence from the US
       House." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(3) pp. 807-859

Levitt, Steven (1996). “How Do Senators Vote? Disentangling the Role of Voter Preferences,
         Party Affiliation and Senator Ideology.” American Economic Review 86, 3, 425-441.

Masket, Seth E. (2008). "Where You Sit is Where You Stand: The Impact of Seating Proximity
       on Legislative Cue-Taking." Quarterly Journal of Political Science, 3: 301–311.

Mayhew, David R. (1991). Divided We Govern: Party Control, Lawmaking, and Investigations,
     1946-1990. New Haven: Yale University Press.

McCarty, Nolan M., Keith T. Poole, and Howard Rosenthal. 1997. Income Redistribution and the
      Realignment of American Politics, American Enterprise Institute Press.

McCarty, Nolan M., Keith T. Poole, and Howard Rosenthal. 2006. Polarized America: The
      Dance of Political Ideology and Unequal Riches, MIT Press.

Pande, Rohini (2003) “Can Mandated Political Representation Increase Policy Influence for
       Disadvantaged Minorities? Theory and Evidence from India.” American Economic
       Review, 93, 4, 1132-1151.
Patterson, Samuel C. 1959. "Patterns of Interpersonal Relations in a State Legislative Group: The
        Wisconsin Assembly." Public Opinion Quarterly 23(1): 101-109

Peltzman, Sam. 1985. "An Economic Interpretation of the History of Congressional Voting in the
       Twentieth Century." American Economic Review 75 (September), 656-75.

Poole, Keith T. and Howard Rosenthal. 1985. "A Spatial Model for Legislative Roll Call
        Analysis." American Journal of Political Science, 357.384.

Poole, Keith T. and Howard Rosenthal. 1996. "Are Legislators Ideologues or the Agents of
       Constituents? European Economic Review, 40: 707-717.

Poole, Keith T. and Howard Rosenthal. 1997. Congress: A Political-Economic History of Roll
        Call Voting. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Poole, Keith T. and Howard Rosenthal. 2007. Ideology and Congress. Piscataway, N.J.:
       Transaction Press.

Porter, Mason A, Peter J.Mucha, M.E.J. Newman, and Casey M. Warmbrand. 2005. "A Network
        Analysis of Committees in the U.S. House of Representatives." Proceedings of the
        National Academy of Sciences 102(20): 7057-7062.

Porter, Mason A, Peter J.Mucha, M.E.J. Newman, and A.J. Friend. 2006. "Community Structure
        in the United States House of Representatives." Complex Networks (forthcoming).

Rohde, David (1953-2004). Roll Call Voting Data for the United States House of Representatives,
       1953-2004. Compiled by the Political Institutions and Public Choice Program, Michigan
       State University, East Lansing, MI, 2004.

Routt, Garland C. 1938. "Interpersonal Relationships and the Legislative Process." The Annals of
       the American Academy of Political and Social Science, 195: 129-136.

Snyder, James (1992). “Artificial Extremism in Interest Group Ratings.” Legislative Studies
        Quarterly, 17, 3, 319-345.

Snyder, James and Tim Groseclose (2000). “Estimating Party Influence in Congressional Roll-
       Call Voting.” American Journal of Political Science, 44, 2, 193-211.

Soetevent, A. (2006). "Empirics of the Identification of Social Interactions: An Evaluation of the
       Approaches and their Results” Journal of Economic Survey, 193-228.

Stigler, G., 1971. "The theory of economic regulation." Bell Journal of Economics 2, 3.21.

Stratmann, Thomas (2000). “Congressional Voting over Legislative Careers: Shifting Positions
       and Changing Constraints.” American Political Science Review, 94, 3, 665-676.
Theriault, Sean M. (2006). “Procedural Polarization in the U.S. Congress,” Working Paper,
       University of Texas at Austin.

Washington, Ebonya (2008). "Female Socialization: How Daughters Affect Their Legislator
      Fathers’ Voting on Women’s Issues." American Economic Review, 98, 1, 311-332.

Williams, Blair S. (2009). “Social Networks in Congress.” Working Paper, United States Military
       Academy.

Young, James Sterling. 1966. Washington Community 1800-1828. New York: Columbia
      University Press.
                                           Table I: The Impact of School Ties on U.S. Congressional Voting Behavior

This table reports panel regressions of individual votes on the voting behavior of different Senate and House groupings. The dependent variable is equal to 1 if the Senator or
Representative voted "Yea," and zero otherwise. In Columns 1-2, School Connected Votes is the percentage of Senators from the same school as the Senator in question who voted yes on
the given bill. In Column 3, School Connected Votes is the percentage of Representatives from the same school as the Representative in question who voted yes on the given bill; in
Column 4, School Connected Votes is the sum of Representatives from the same school as the Representative in question who voted yes on the given bill; In Columns 5-7, School
Connected Votes is the sum of Senators from the same school as the Senator in question who voted yes on the given bill; School Connected Votes (School and Degree) is the sum of
Senators from the same school (and who received the same degree) as the Senator in question who voted yes on the given bill; and School Connected Votes (School, Degree, and Year) is
the sum of Senators from the same school (and who received the same degree and who were born within 3 years of each other) as the Senator in question who voted yes on the given bill.
State Votes is the percentage (in Columns 1-3), or sum (in Columns 4-7), of Senators (Representatives) from the same state as the Senator (Representative) in question who voted yes on
the given bill. Party Votes is the percentage (in Columns 1-3), or sum (in Columns 4-7), of Senators (Representatives) from the same party as the Senator (Representative) in question
who voted yes on the given bill. Congress fixed effects, Congress-Session-Vote (C-S-Vote) fixed effects, and Representative (or Senator)-fixed effects are included where indicated. All
standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the Senator (Representative) level, and t-stats using these clustered standard errors are included in parentheses below the coefficient estimates.
***Significant at 1%; **significant at 5%; *significant at 10%.


                                                                           Dependent Variable: Vote(Yes/No)
                                                           (1)                (2)                 (3)                (4)                (5)                 (6)                (7)
          Votes Sample                                   Senate             Senate              House              House              Senate             Senate              Senate
          Measure of Connections                           %                  %                  %                  Sum                Sum                Sum                 Sum

          School Connected                              0.045***           0.052***            0.019***           0.004***           0.008***
          Votes                                           [0.016]            [0.016]            [0.004]            [0.001]             [0.002]

          School Connected Votes                                                                                                                         0.010***
          (School and Degree)                                                                                                                             [0.004]

          School Connected Votes                                                                                                                                            0.020**
          (School, Degree, and Year)                                                                                                                                         [0.008]
                                                                 ***                ***                 ***                ***                ***                 ***
          State Votes                                   0.119              0.122               0.160              0.004              0.144               0.144              0.144***
                                                          [0.013]            [0.012]            [0.012]            [0.000]             [0.012]            [0.012]            [0.012]
                                                                 ***                ***                 ***                ***                ***                 ***
          Party Votes                                   0.926              0.945               0.995              0.005              0.018               0.018              0.018***
                                                          [0.022]            [0.024]            [0.001]            [0.000]             [0.000]            [0.000]            [0.000]


          Fixed Effects                                 Congress          C-S-Vote            C-S-Vote           C-S-Vote           C-S-Vote            C-S-Vote           C-S-Vote
          Fixed Effects                                 Senator             Senator              Rep                Rep               Senator            Senator            Senator
                       2
          Adjusted R                                      0.64               0.64                0.57               0.54               0.62                0.62               0.62
          No. of Obs.                                    425653             425653            3444036             3444036             651705             651705             651705
                                    Table II: The Impact of School Ties on Senate Voting Behavior: Close and Irrelevant Votes
      This table reports panel regressions of individual U.S. Senator votes on the voting behavior of other Senators. The dependent variable is equal to 1 if the Senator voted "Yea," and zero
      otherwise. The sample of votes examined is indicated in each column: i.) Close Votes are all votes that are functionally won or lost by (3) or (5) or (7) votes as indicated (described in
      Section III), ii.) Non-Close Votes are the complements to these votes, iii.) Relevant To Me are those votes where the given bill addresses an industry that has public firms operating in the
      voting Senator’s home state, iv.) Irrelevant To Me are those votes that don’t address any public firms operating in the given voting Senator’s home state, and v.) All include all votes in the
      sample. The independent variables of Close Votes, Irrelevant Votes, and Close & Irrelevant To Me, are defined as categorical variables equal to 1 if the given vote being considered
      corresponds to the respective classification (as described above in i-iv), and is equal to 0 for all other votes. Interaction terms are then constructed between these three categorical
      variables and School Connected Votes (SCV), which is the percentage of Senators from the same school as the Senator in question who voted yes on the given bill. School Connected
      Votes Relevant (SCVR) equals the percentage of Senators from the same school as the Senator in question and who find the bill in question to be Relevant to them, who voted yes on the
      given bill. The controls of Party Votes and State Votes are included in all regressions (as indicated) and are described in Table I. Both Senator fixed effects and Congress-Session (Cong-
      Sess) fixed effects are included where indicated. All standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the Senator level, and t-stats using these clustered standard errors are included in
      parentheses below the coefficient estimates. Significance levels are denoted by: *** for the 1%; ** for the 5%; and * for the 10% level.

                                                    (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)          (7)           (8)           (9)          (10)              (11)
Votes Sample:                                   Non-Close         Close           All            All             All         Relevant     Irrelevant       All           All       Irrelevant           All
                                                                                                                              To Me         To Me                                    To Me
Measure:                                           (3)            (3)           (3)           (5)           (7)                                      (5)                                          (5)

School Connected Votes (SCV)                     0.043***        0.068***       0.041**        0.040**         0.039**       0.029**       0.052**       0.026*        -0.014        -0.022         0.011
                                                  [0.016]         [0.021]        [0.016]        [0.016]        [0.016]        [0.015]      [0.026]       [0.014]       [0.024]       [0.046]       [0.032]
Close * SCV                                                                     0.035***       0.027***        0.021**
                                                                                 [0.011]        [0.010]        [0.010]
Close & IrrelevantToMe * SCV                                                                                                                             0.060**
                                                                                                                                                         [0.027]
School Connected Votes Relevant (SCVR)                                                                                                                                 0.044**      0.056**         0.016
                                                                                                                                                                       [0.021]       [0.025]       [0.032]

Close & IrrelevantToMe * SCVR                                                                                                                                                                      0.097***
                                                                                                                                                                                                   [0.039]

Close Votes                                                                     -0.019*         -0.013         -0.008
                                                                                 [0.011]        [0.010]        [0.010]
Close & IrrelevantToMe                                                                                                                                   -0.028                                    -0.033
                                                                                                                                                         [0.021]                                   [0.025]
Controls                                            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes               Yes
Fixed Effects                                    Cong-Sess      Cong-Sess      Cong-Sess      Cong-Sess       Cong-Sess     Cong-Sess     Cong-Sess     Cong-Sess    Cong-Sess     Cong-Sess      Cong-Sess
Fixed Effects                                     Senator        Senator         Senator        Senator        Senator        Senator      Senator       Senator       Senator       Senator       Senator
Adjusted R2                                        0.66            0.54           0.64           0.64           0.64           0.59          0.60         0.59          0.59          0.56              0.59
No. of Obs.                                       382894          42759          425653         425653         425653         54075         15559         49551         60557         8538          46823
                                  Table III: Controlling for the Impact of Ideology, plus Interactions With School Ties

This table reports panel regressions of individual Senate votes on the voting behavior of different Senate groupings. The dependent variable is equal to 1 if the Senator voted "Yea," and
zero otherwise. School Connected Votes (SCV) is the percentage of Senators from the same school as the Senator in question who voted yes on the given bill. Religious Votes is the
percentage of Senators of the same religious affiliation as the Senator in question who voted yes on the given bill. Ideology Votes (DW-Nominate) is the percentage of Senators in the
same DW-Nominate Ideology quadrant as the Senator in question who voted yes on the given bill. Same Committee Votes is the percentage of Senators on the same committee as the
Senator in question who voted yes on the given bill. The controls of Party Votes and State Votes are included in all regressions (as indicated) and are described in Table I. We also
include interactions of School Connected Votes (SCV) and the control variables Party Votes, State Votes, and Ideology Votes where indicated. Congress-Session-Vote (C-S-Vote) fixed
effects and Senator-fixed effects are included where indicated. All standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the Senator level, and t-stats using these clustered standard errors are
included in parentheses below the coefficient estimates. ***Significant at 1%; **significant at 5%; *significant at 10%.


                                                         (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)         (6)            (7)          (8)          (9)

               School Connected Votes (SCV)           0.051***      0.040***      0.053***       0.050***      0.038***    0.037***      0.074***     0.051***     0.074***
                                                        [0.017]      [0.013]       [0.017]        [0.018]       [0.013]     [0.014]       [0.016]      [0.014]       [0.015]

               Religious Votes                          0.041                                     0.035         0.022       0.013
                                                        [0.031]                                   [0.035]       [0.022]     [0.024]
               Ideology Votes                                       0.409***                                   0.397***    0.398***      0.407***     0.408***     0.441***
               (DW-Nominate)                                         [0.035]                                    [0.039]     [0.039]       [0.035]      [0.035]       [0.035]
                                                                                           ***            **                       ***
               Same Committee Votes                                              -0.337          -0.341                   -0.347
                                                                                   [0.070]        [0.080]                   [0.075]

               SCV * Party Votes                                                                                                         -0.064***
                                                                                                                                          [0.013]

               SCV * State Votes                                                                                                                     -0.023***
                                                                                                                                                       [0.007]

               SCV * Ideology Votes                                                                                                                                -0.063***
                                                                                                                                                                     [0.012]

               Controls                                  Yes          Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes
               Fixed Effects                          C-S-Vote     C-S-Vote      C-S-Vote        C-S-Vote      C-S-Vote   C-S-Vote       C-S-Vote    C-S-Vote      C-S-Vote
               Fixed Effects                           Senator      Senator       Senator        Senator       Senator     Senator       Senator      Senator       Senator
                            2
               Adjusted R                               0.64          0.65          0.63           0.64          0.65        0.66          0.65         0.65         0.65
               No. of Obs.                             351202       424991        384143         318745        350540      318314        424991       424991        424991
                                                         Table IV: Alternate School Ties Specifications
This table reports regressions of individual votes on the voting behavior of different Senate groupings. The dependent variable in all regressions is equal to 1 if the
Senator voted "Yea," and zero otherwise. Column 1 is run as a Probit regression, with the coefficient estimate shown being the implied marginal effect on the
probability of voting yes. Column 2 is run as a Logit regression. Columns 3-5, are run in a Fama-MacBeth type framework, where the regression specifications (with
controls and fixed effects) are run at the level of each group indicated separately. Then the coefficient estimates are averaged across the groups, with the standard errors
calculated as standard error of the group coefficients. Column 6 is an OLS Panel regression similar to the specifications in Table I-II. School Connected Votes is the
percentage of Senators from the same school as the Senator in question who voted yes on the given bill. Votes that are Close & Irrelevant to Me are defined as those
votes that are functionally won or lost by (5) votes, and that do not address any public firms operating in the given voting Senator’s home state. Controls for Party
Votes and State Votes are included in all regressions, and are described in Table I. Ideology Votes (DW-Nominate) is the percentage of Senators in the same DW-
Nominate Ideology quadrant as the Senator in question who voted yes on the given bill. Interactions between Close & Irrelevant to Me and School Connected Votes
and Ideology Votes are included in Column 6. Congress, Senator, and Congress-Session (Cong-Sess) fixed effects are included where indicated. All standard errors are
adjusted for clustering at the Senator level, and t-stats using these clustered standard errors are included in parentheses below the coefficient estimates. ***Significant
at 1%; **significant at 5%; *significant at 10%.

                                                                   Dependent Variable: Vote(Yes/No)
                                                                      (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)             (5)               (6)
                            Regression Specification                Probit      Logit     OLS by:     OLS by:        OLS by:              OLS
                                                                                          School      Senator     Congress-Session

                            School Connected Votes (SCV)           0.095***   0.544***    0.052***    0.073***         0.047***          0.015
                                                                    [0.026]    [0.149]     [0.016]     [0.023]          [0.004]          [0.012]

                            Close & IrrelevantToMe * SCV                                                                                0.068**
                                                                                                                                         [0.029]

                            Close & IrrelevantToMe * Ideology                                                                            0.006
                                                                                                                                         [0.034]

                            Ideology Votes                                                                                              0.350***
                                                                                                                                         [0.034]

                            Close & IrrelevantToMe                                                                                       -0.037
                                                                                                                                         [-0.029]


                            Controls                                 Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes              Yes              Yes
                            Fixed Effects                                                Congress    Congress          Senator         Cong-Sess
                            Fixed Effects                                                 Senator                                       Senator
                                       2
                            Adjusted R                               0.59       0.58                                                      0.60
                            No. of Obs.                             425653     425653       106         156               20             49480
                                                   Table V: Seat-Based Social Networks
Panel A reports panel regressions of individual Senate votes on the voting behavior of different Senate groupings based on seat location on the Senate
Chamber floor. The dependent variable is equal to 1 if the Senator voted "Yea," and zero otherwise. School Connected Votes is the percentage of
Senators from the same school as the Senator in question who voted yes on the given bill. As described in Section V, CloseSeat4 Votes is the
percentage of Senators who sit within 4 seats of the Senator in question who voted yes on the given bill, CloseSeat8 Votes is the percentage of
Senators who sit within 8 seats of the Senator in question who voted yes on the given bill; and CloseSeat16 Votes is the percentage of Senators who sit
within 16 seats of the Senator in question who voted yes on the given bill. The controls of Party Votes and State Votes are included in all regressions
(as indicated) and are described in Table I. Panel B reports panel regression of the seat distance (Distance) in number of seats between any two
senators’ seats on the Chamber floor and a host of explanatory variables. Distance is defined in Section V and depicted in Figure 1. Abs. Diff. in
Seniority is the absolute difference in years of seniority between the senator-pair in question. SameSchool is a dummy equal to one if the senator-pair
in question went to the same school, and zero otherwise. SameParty and SameState are defined analogously, but for party and state.

                                               Panel A: The Impact of Seating Proximity on Voting
                                            (1)              (2)                     (3)               (4)                (5)           (6)
          Dependent Variable:               Yes              Yes                     Yes               Yes                Yes           Yes
          Sample:                           (All Votes)      (Freshman               (All Votes)       (All Votes)        (All Votes)   (All Votes)
                                                             Votes Only)

          School Connected Votes            0.044***         0.029                   0.051***          0.052***           0.052***      0.052***
                                            [0.016]          [0.021]                 [0.008]           [0.008]            [0.008]       [0.015]
                                                    ***              ***                     ***
          CloseSeat4 Votes                  0.135            0.164                   0.137                                              0.107***
                                            [0.031]          [0.068]                 [0.015]                                            [0.030]

          CloseSeat8 Votes                                                                             0.117***                         0.073
                                                                                                       [0.023]                          [0.066]

          CloseSeat16 Votes                                                                                               0.061         -0.018
                                                                                                                          [0.055]       [-0.072]

          Controls                          Yes              Yes                     Yes               Yes                Yes           Yes
          Fixed Effects                     Cong-Sess        Cong-Sess               C-S-Vote          C-S-Vote           C-S-Vote      C-S-Vote
          Fixed Effects                     Senator          Senator                 Senator           Senator            Senator       Senator
                      2
          Adjusted R                        0.64             0.69                    0.64              0.64               0.64          0.64
          No. of Obs.                       424041           43323                   424041            424041             424041        424041


                            Panel B: Determinants of Seat Distance Between Any Two Senators on Chamber Floor
                          Dependent Variable:                        Distance                             Distance
                          Sample:                                  (All Senators)                  (Freshman Senators Only)

                          Same School                                  -1.090***                              -0.194
                                                                           [0.398]                             [0.581]

                          Abs. Diff in Seniority                        0.039***                              -0.008
                                                                           [0.014]                             [0.007]

                          Same Party                                   -14.830***                            -21.389***
                                                                           [0.408]                             [0.416]

                          Same State                                       0.090                               0.348
                                                                           [0.368]                             [0.659]

                          Adjusted R2                                      0.51                                  0.72
                          No. of Obs.                                   128106                                12744
Friends in High Places:
Supporting Information
       In this Appendix we describe in more detail the sample we use in the paper, as well as the
method and data cut-offs we use to: i.) classify bills into industries and ii.) assign bills as positive or
negative for the given industries to which it relates. We then provide evidence of independent
verification for these measures. We also describe additional variations in vote samples that we have
explored.   Lastly, we provide some supplementary analysis on the impact of social connections
between politicians and the senior management of firms located in a Senator’s home state, as opposed
to the within-Congress networks that we focus on in the paper.


A.1 Summary Statistics of Main Sample
       Table A1 presents summary statistics for the main sample we use in the paper. The unit of
observation in our analysis is the Congressman-vote level. Panel A contains data on the U.S. Senate,
while Panel B (for brevity) contains only the main summary statistics for the U.S. House of
Representatives. From Panel A of Table A1, we have roughly 650,000 vote-level observations for the
Senate made by 209 Senators over this twenty year period. Of the votes cast, over 65% are "yes"
votes. The remainder of Panel A shows additional summary statistics. Each "PctSumYes*" variable
measures the percentage of the group in question that votes yes for a given bill, on average. So, for
instance, the average percentage of Senators from the same school as a Senator that vote yes is 63.8%.
These percentage measures are, not surprisingly, on average nearly identical regardless of grouping,
and roughly match the overall sample average percentage of yes votes.             The sum variables are
measured similarly, but simply add the number of Senators that vote yes on a given bill. For instance,
the average number of total yes votes from a given Senator’s party on an average bill is 31 (roughly
half the sample average). Panel B shows similar measures for the House, although there are many
more observations stemming from the larger size of the chamber.
       Table A2 examines in more detail two specific characteristics of Congressmen, here focusing
on the Senate. The first is the main network measure we use in the paper, namely alumni networks.
We define everything at the degree level in Panel A. Thus, each of the 209 Senators that served in the
Senate over this period is included once in these tabulations, but Senators often have degrees from
more than one academic institution, hence the total number of degrees exceeds the total number of
Senators.   So, our 209 Senators earned 375 degrees that we could match back to colleges and
universities. We list in this table those universities that represent the largest number of degrees in the
U.S. Senate. The most connected university to the U.S. Senate is Harvard University, followed by
Yale, Virginia, Stanford, and Georgetown.        In addition, a number of the Senators were Rhodes
Scholars, leading to a surprisingly high position of Oxford University on the connectedness list. Panel
B contains the religious affiliations of the U.S. Senate. As can be seen, religious affiliation was
unavailable for 42 of the Senators, so we have a total of 167 with religious group information. The
most common religious affiliation is Roman Catholic, which accounts for nearly 25% of all Senators,
followed by Methodist, Presbyterian, Episcopalian, Jewish, and Baptist.


A.2 Industry Classification, Keywords, and Cut-offs
       As described in the data section, we first download the full text of all bills jointly from the
Government Printing Office (GPO) and Congress’s Thomas database. We then parse each bill’s entire
text, and use a list of matching words to classify each bill into the industries to which it applies. Table
A3 displays the words we use to classify into the Fama-French 49 industries, for three sample
industries. We are happy to provide the entire list upon request, for all 49 industries, but including
them in the appendix table yielded a 13 page table. Again, the Fama-French 49 industries are
somewhat analogous to the SIC 2 digit industry classification, with some improvements and
aggregations of similar SIC 2 sub-industry components. As Table A3 shows, we obviously attempt to
use a number of keywords to capture the bills relevance to a given industry. However, we balance this
by not choosing too many keywords to induce false positives. In the table, we include when a given
industry (or keyword) was removed, because it was capturing too many false positives in the industry
assignment process.
       To give a few examples, we remove the word “soda” from the “Candy and Soda” industry, as it
kept matching with “soda ash” and “soda mountain” from a number of bills, both having nothing to do
with the desired industry. As another example, for the “Personal Services Industry,” we initially
included the keyword “beauty shop.” Unfortunately, nearly all of the instances of this keyword in bills
refer to the “House Beauty Shop,” referencing a (debate about) and the eventual closing of this service
in one of the House of Representative buildings, and so we remove this keyword as well.
       Another important aspect of this table is that after deciding upon keyword roots, we then go
through each extension and conjugation that we see in the bills in order to determine which extensions
and conjugations reasonably refer to the given industry. So, for instance, for the “Utilities” industry,
we use the keyword root “utilit-.” While this matches correctly “utility” and “utilities,” it incorrectly
picks up “utilize” and “utilitarian,” which also appear in bills. We thus remove all of the final two
matches from the bill matched sample to Utilities through “utilit-.” We do this for every keyword root
in every industry to ensure that the given keyword root matches to the intended industry.
        The last element of the process is then choosing threshold frequencies for each keyword
appearing in a given bill relative to that keyword’s use across all bills, in order to classify a given bill
as referring to that keyword’s industry. We use two potential methods for this, the first is the absolute
count of the keyword, and the second is the ratio of that word to the entire number of words in the bill.
For instance, the word “electricity” has a frequency cut-off of 11 times, representing the 95th percentile
of that keyword’s distribution amongst bills. We have used cut-offs for both measures ranging from
the 75th-95th percentile, and the results in the paper are unaffected. All results reported in the paper are
for the middle of this range, 85th percentile, using the absolute number of keyword appearances.
        The outcome of this process is a match of relevant industries to each bill considered in
congress. We believe we have a quite conservative match process, but match fairly definitively 20%
of all bills to a relevant industry (or industries).


A.3 Bill Signing Procedure
        Although the tests in the main paper do not require us “sign” each bill as either positive or
negative for the assigned industry, some of the supplementary tests described below do require us to
sign each bill. To do this, we examine the voting record of the Senators who have an interest in each
of our assigned industries.26 We establish this by summing up the constituent firms located in each
Senator’s state (we have used market equity, sales, and number of firms, and they are highly correlated
and yield nearly identical results in terms of magnitude and significance). Then, for each state, we
rank all industries that reside in that state and define “important” industries for that state as those that
rank in the top 3 for that year. We assign these for each state in each congress, so again displaying the
entire table would be quite large. However, in Table A4 we include a subset of state-industry and
congress classifications (again, we are happy to provide the entire table upon request, but including
them all made this table over 17 pages). To give an example from the Table A4, in the state of New
York during the 110th Congress (2007-2008), the most important industries in the state were Banks,
Insurance, and Sales & Trading.
        Once the important industries for each state are established, we then map these to the voting

26
  An alternate approach to sign each bill for each industry would be to employ lobbying data, but we unfortunately were
not able to find bill-level lobbying data for each bill and lobbying organization over the past 20 years.
records of the Senators in each state. We then classify each bill that mentions the given industry as
positive or negative for the mentioned industry using the interested Senators’ votes. For instance,
consider bill S.3044 form the 110th Congress shown in the Appendix Figures A1 and A2. Figure A1
indicates that this particular bill that was assigned only to the Fama-French industry #30: Petroleum
and Natural Gas, based on the relative frequency of pre-specified keywords in the bill that pertain to
this industry. Figure A1 displays the summary text at the top of the bill, which indicates that the bill
clearly pertains to the oil and gas industry. Figure A2 then displays the executable program we created
to implement our signing procedure for the same bill depicted in Figure A1. The summary text
indicates that the goal of this bill was "to provide energy price relief and hold oil companies and other
entities accountable for their actions with regard to high energy prices, and for other purposes," so the
bill was likely to be perceived as negative for the oil and gas industry. The Petroleum and Natural Gas
Industry qualified as an important industry in 8 states (including TX and LA), so the total number of
“interested” votes in the bill was 16. Not surprisingly, even though this vote lined up largely along
party lines, none of the 6 Republican Senators who voted in favor of the bill were Senators who were
"tied" to this industry via constituent interests in their home state (all 8 industry-tied Republicans voted
against), and 1 of the 2 Democrats who voted against the bill was Mary Landrieu of Louisiana, a state
heavily represented by oil and gas interests (the other Democrat who voted against was Henry Reid
from Nevada, a consistent supporter of oil and gas companies); the 6 industry-tied Democrats who
voted in favor of the bill did so largely on party and ideological grounds (variables that we control for
in our tests).
        Using this procedure, we experiment with a number of different signing measures.                For
instance, one measure we use is called the absolute ratio ("Ratio" in Figure A2, i.e., the percentage of
industry-tied Senators who vote for the bill). We also use the relative ratio ("R/R" in Figure A2, i.e.,
the percentage of industry-tied Senators who vote for the bill divided by the percentage of all Senators
who vote for the bill), and the ratio difference ("R-R" in Figure A2, i.e., the percentage of industry-tied
Senators who vote for the bill minus the percentage of all Senators who vote for the bill). Our results
are not sensitive to the particular signing measure we employ. We have also explored within-party
signing measures that are computed identically to those above, except aggregated within each party
(since many votes are along party lines) and again the results are very similar. One last important note
about the “sign” measure is that in our tests below, we also remove the impact of each individual
Senator’s own votes when constructing these ratios for a particular Senator-vote observation, such that
these ratios reflect only the behavior of other Senators who are tied to the same industry.


A.3 External Validity of Industry Classification Strategy and Signing Measures
         We also obtain strong independent verification for our industry assignment and signing
procedures. The most compelling evidence supporting both is in Table A5 below. Here, we form
long-short calendar-time portfolios of all stocks that are in an industry that appeared in a bill that was
passed in the prior month, and that was signed as either positive or negative for that industry. To be
more specific, we long the stocks that are in an industry voted on in a signed positive bill for that
industry, and short those stocks that are in an industry voted on in a signed negative bill. The monthly
returns in Table A5 then represent the subsequent returns to those positive and negatively coded firms
using our industry assignment and signing procedures. The large and significant abnormal returns of
the long-short portfolio range from 69 to 84 basis points per month, or 8.3% to 10.1 percent annualized
(t=2.34 to t=2.92), depending on the risk-adjustment method used. This result suggests two important
things: First, that the market is somewhat slow to recognize the impact of legislation on firms (likely
because deciphering which firms will be affected, and how they will be affected, is difficult), but
ultimately does so in the expected direction.                  As mentioned in the text, we have examined
announcement returns as well, but we find that much of the return response occurs gradually over the
two to three months following the passage of a bill.27 Second, and more importantly, the result gives
strong evidence that bills have an economically important impact on firms, and that our procedures for
both i.) assigning bills to industries and, ii.) signing these bills, appear to capture those firms that are
impacted by the given bill, and the correct direction in which the firms are impacted. In other words,
the firms that we would expect to be affected by a given bill are in fact affected, and they are affected
in the precise direction we would expect (as evidenced by the strong return relation in Table A5).


A.4 Vote Subsamples
         All results that we report in the paper’s tables include all votes. However, it is important to
note that we have looked at a number of other subsets of votes as well, and that the results are robust
across all of these subsamples. First, looking only at final votes on bills that eventually are passed into

27
  We have additionally run this basic test using a variety of different specifications, e.g., over-weighting firms/industries
that are mentioned more often in a given bill, looking at longer “more important” bills, extending forward (and backward)
the horizon over which we measure returns, etc., and this result is robust to a variety of permutations.
law gives roughly identical results in terms of magnitude and significance.28 The reason we report
results for all votes in the paper is that we believe vote-trading within the social network may be going
on across many types of votes.
        Second, in Table IV in the paper we show a number of vote subsamples according to important
economic sub-classifications within our sample, and show that no single subsample drives our our
results. Specifically, we split our sample out separately for every school, every Senator, and every
Congress-Session. We then run our tests separately for every sub-set (for instance, in the school case,
we run our tests separately for every school that appears in our sample), and report average coefficients
across the subsets (along with the cross-sectional t-stat across all school estimates). Using this method
drastically reduces power, but equally weights across each subsample we consider (in the case of
Congress-Session, for example, we only have 20 estimates (20 years) enter into the average coefficient
estimate, and 20 observations entering into the standard error measurement). Thus if our results were
driven by a certain subsample, or a small set of subsamples, the equally-weighted average of the
coefficients across subsamples would look much different in magnitude than the pooled regressions
(and likely significance, given the then implied differences in estimates across subsamples), and so
these tests would yield different implications. From Table IV, we see that our school network effects
are remarkably consistent across all subsamples, using school, Senator, or Congress-Session. Again,
we are happy to provide the sub-sample estimates for every Senator, every school, and every
Congress-Session.
        Lastly, we have used variation in “important” bills to each Senator. We considered using
measures of important votes identified by Mayhew (1991) and updated on his website,29 and also
Edwards et al. (1997, 2000). These are certainly valid measures of important bills at the bill level.
However, we instead opt to use a measure of “important” bills defined at the Senator-bill level. In
other words, we allow the same bill to be important or unimportant for different sets of Senators. We
define “importance” quite flexibly throughout the paper, using important to the given Senator’s party,
state (through industries domiciled there), and ideology. We then interact these measures of important
bills for the given Senator (or use varying subsamples),30 and show how our estimated impacts vary.

28
   Note that this separation into measures is very similar to Theriault (2006), which separates procedural and non-
procedural votes. Our measures category matches closely to his “Substantive Votes” category.
29
   http://pantheon.yale.edu/~dmayhew/data3.html
30
   These two methods are obviously nearly equivalent, except that the subsample method allows all regression coefficients
to vary (be freely estimated) across subsamples, whereas the interaction method (including main effects) only allows the
Throughout the paper, we show that school networks do have quite a different impact across important
and unimportant votes to the given Senator (and also important and unimportant votes to other
Senators in the given Senator’s school network). We think these are important and strong validating
pieces of evidence. In sum, the subsample analyses we have done help to pin down and strengthen the
mechanism of school network influence.


A.4 Networks Between Politicians and Firms
        The main paper focuses exclusively on network connections between politicians, and how these
network connections affect voting behavior. In this supplementary analysis section, we extend this
idea and also consider networks between Congressmen and firms in the constituencies these politicians
represent. A nice aspect of this identification is that for the same Senator, and within the same state,
we can exploit variation in the level of connectedness of the Senator to his various constituent
industries.
        We measure connections in this section using alumni network connections. To do so, we use
the educational backgrounds of all of the senior officers (defined as CEO, CFO, and Chairman) of all
publicly traded firms, and then create links between each politician and the senior management of each
firm in his respective state. Then, we aggregate these links to the industry level to give measures of
network connectedness of each Senator to each industry that operates in his state. Using these links,
we are then able to measure how social network connectedness to a given industry affects the voting
behavior of a Senator.
        We examine these networks between politicians and firms in Table A6.                    The dependent
variable is Senator voting on a given bill, Yes. For this analysis, we must not only classify bills into
industries, but we also need a way to classify our bills into those that are positive or negative for the
given industry. Our classification mechanism for positive and negative bills is described above, and
relies on the voting behavior of Senators to whom the bill is particularly important, and the aggregation
of their votes (either positive or negative). Specifically, we define positive and negative bills using the
ratio difference ("R-R") measure described earlier; our results are not changed if we use the absolute
ratio, the relative ratio, or all three of these measures defined at the within-party level, instead. Using
this measure of the positive or negative nature of the bill for a given industry that is affected by the

intercept and interacted coefficient to vary. In Table II where we use both, you can see that the two methods (not
surprisingly) yield nearly identical results in our sample.
bill, we can then measure how the extent of network connectedness affects the Senator’s voting for
(against) a bill that is positive (negative) for the connected industry. We use a simple measure of
network connectedness based on the number of firms that are connected to the given Senator.
Specifically, we use the percentage of firms in a given industry that the given Senator is connected to
as a percentage of the total firms that the Senator is connected to in his given state.31 The intuition
behind this measure is that it attempts to capture the percentage of total influence through network
connections that the given industry has over the Senator. All of the control variables (including School
Connected Votes) from Table I are included, as well as an additional control variable called % Industry
in State Total (which is equal to the percentage of the total firms in the state that are from the given
industry). % Industry in State Total controls for the importance of a given industry, as a whole, in the
given Senator’s state. Fixed effects for Congress-session-vote and for Senator are included in all
regression specifications, and all standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the Senator level.
        The independent variable of interest is % Industry Firms School Connected. The coefficient on
% Industry Firms School Connected measures the influence of industry connectedness on Senator
voting behavior. Columns 1-3 (4-6) of Table A6 show that Senators are significantly more likely to
vote in favor of (against) a bill that is positive (negative) for an industry to which the Senator has
alumni network connections. This network effect increases in magnitude, as one would predict, for
bills that are especially positive or especially negative for a given industry, as defined by the top 25%
(or top 10%) most positive or bottom 25% (or bottom 10%) most negative. To get an idea of the
magnitude, the Column 3 coefficient of 0.171 (t=3.25) implies that a one-standard deviation increase in
the percentage of connectedness of an industry equates to a roughly 1.5% increase in the likelihood of
the Senator voting in favor of the positive industry bill. Similarly, the Column 6 coefficient of -0.139
(t=2.73) implies that a one-standard deviation increase in the percentage of connectedness of an
industry equates to a nearly 2% increase in the likelihood of the Senator voting against a bill that is
negative for the connected industry. These results provide additional, and independent, evidence of
social networks having an impact on political voting behavior, through a very different channel,
namely network connections with firms.



31
   We have also constructed analogous connection measures using the total market capitalization of connected firms in a
state (% Industry ME School Connected), or the total sales of connected firms in a state (% Industry Sales School
Connected), rather than using the total number of connected firms, and find similar results to those reported here.
                                     Table A1: Summary Statistics of Main Sample
  This table reports summary statistics for the sample. Yes is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the Senator or Representative voted "Yes" or
  "Yea" on a given vote. SumSameSchool is equal to the number of Senators (repreSenatives) who attended the same university as the
  Senator (repreSenative) in question, SumYesSameSchool is equal to the number of Senators (Representatives) who attended the same
  school as the Senator in question (Representative), and PctSumYesSameSchool is equal to (SumYesSameSchool/SumSameSchool).
  Analogous variables are computed for SameSchoolDegree (which requires common attendance at the same university and for the same
  degree), as well as similar variables for Party, State, Religion, Census Region, and Ideology (based on the DW-Nominate coordinates).
  CloseSeat4 is a measure of Senate Chamber Seat Distance from one Senator to another (see Table V), and Important Vote is equal to 1 if
  the given vote is important to that Senator (see Table II).



Panel A: Vote-Level Variables (Senate)                              101st-110th Congresses (1989-2008), Senators = 209
                                                                                                Standard             Nonmissing
                                                                  Mean        Median
                                                                                               Deviation            Observations
Yes                                                               0.653              1.00                0.476                     651,705
SumSameSchool                                                     3.952              1.00                5.937                     671,520
SumYesSameSchool                                                  2.528              1.00                4.258                     671,520
PctSumYesSameSchool                                               0.638              0.75                0.389                     441,746
SumSameSchoolDegree                                               2.074              1.00                3.275                     671,520
SumYesSameSchoolDegree                                            1.327              0.00                2.354                     671,520
PctSumYesSameSchoolDegree                                         0.639              0.75                0.393                     353,063
SumYesSameParty                                                  31.139             39.00               18.668                     671,520
PctSumYesSameParty                                                0.633              0.82                0.369                     668,438
SumYesSameState                                                   0.633              1.00                0.481                     671,520
PctSumYesSameState                                                0.634              1.00                0.482                     671,240
SumYesSameIdeology                                               16.365             17.00               10.675                     671,520
PctSumYesSameIdeology                                             0.633              0.81                0.370                     670,839
SumCloseSeat4                                                    10.616             11.00                2.850                     668,534
SumYesCloseSeat4                                                  6.745              7.00                4.546                     668,534
PctSumYesCloseSeat4                                               0.633              0.80                0.376                     668,534
SumYesCloseSeat8                                                 15.782             17.00                9.404                     668,534
PctSumYesCloseSeat8                                               0.633              0.78                0.353                     668,534
SumYesCloseSeat16                                                33.482             36.00               17.533                     668,534
PctSumYesCloseSeat16                                              0.634              0.72                0.318                     668,534
SumYesSameCensusRegion                                            6.743              6.00                3.955                     671,520
PctSumYesSameCensusRegion                                         0.634              0.67                0.289                     671,520
SumYesSameReligion                                                5.954              5.00                5.721                     671,520
PctSumYesSameReligion                                             0.634              0.67                0.302                     573,853
Measure                                                           0.256              0.00                0.437                     671,520
Important Vote                                                    0.080              0.00                0.271                     671,520

Panel B: Vote-Level Variables (House)                            101st-110th Congresses (1989-2008), Representatives = 816
                                                                                                Standard              Nonmissing
                                                                  Mean        Median
                                                                                               Deviation             Observations
Yes                                                               0.646              1.00                 0.478                  4,644,392
SumSameSchool                                                     5.429              3.00                 7.110                  4,935,687
SumYesSameSchool                                                  3.364              1.00                 5.070                  4,863,268
PctSumYesSameSchool                                               0.618              0.67                 0.352                  3,652,054
                 Table A2: Academic Institutions and Religions Represented in the U.S. Senate (101st-110th Congresses)

This table shows summary statistics of the academic institutions and religions that are most represented in the 101st-110th Congresses of the Senate. Each of the 209
Senators that served in the Senate over this period is included once in these tabulations, but Senators often have degrees from more than one academic institution,
hence the total number of degrees exceeds the total number of Senators. Religion information is unavailable for 42 of the 209 Senators.



                              Panel A: Schools Represented in the Senate                     Panel B: Religions Represented in the Senate
          Rank           Academic institution             # of degrees % of total Rank Religion                              # of Senators % of total
          1              Harvard University                     35           9.33     1      Roman Catholic                         38           22.75
          2              Yale University                        23           6.13     2      Methodist                              25           14.97
          3              University of Virginia                 10           2.67     3      Presbyterian                           22           13.17
          4T             Stanford University                     8           2.13     4      Episcopalian                           17           10.18
          4T             Georgetown University                  8            2.13     5T     Jewish                                 16            9.58
          6T             Oxford University                       7           1.87     5T     Baptist                                16            9.58
          6T             Vanderbilt University                   7           1.87     7      Lutheran                                7            4.19
          6T             University of Chicago                   7           1.87     8      Congregationalist                       6            3.59
          9T             Princeton University                    6           1.60     9      Mormon                                  5            2.99
          9T             University of Georgia                   6           1.60     10     United Church of Christ                 4            2.40
          9T             University of Alabama                   6           1.60
          9T             University of Mississippi               6           1.60
          9T             University of Minnesota                 6           1.60

          All Degrees                                          375            100     All                                          167            100
                       Table A3: Industry Assignment Keywords and Cut-offs

This table shows the keywords used in assigning the full text of each bill in our sample to the resultant industries
covered by the bill, along with the cut-offs for the percentile in the distribution of that keyword for the entire
sample. We assign the given industry to a bill if any one of its keywords is above the 85th percentile cut-off given in
the table. We choose a subset of the 49 industries (Fama-French Industry Classification) that we use, as the table
would otherwise be prohibitively long. We are happy to provide the entire table of keywords and cut-offs upon
request.

                                                                                Count
Fama-French Industry                                                                                      Count
                                           Keyword                       Greater Than / Equal
  # / Industry Name                                                                                      Percentile
                                                                                  To

                          agricultur-                                              12                        85
                          animal feed                                              7                         85
                          corn                                                     4                         85
1 – Agriculture           crop(s)                                                  14                        85
                          farm(s)(land)                                            11                        85
                          fishing                                                   8                        85
                          livestock                                                7                         85
                          wheat                                                    8                         85


                          air force                                                31                        85
                          Ammunition                                               15                        85
                          armed force(s)                                           10                        85
                          army                                                     13                        85
                          gun(s)(runners)(powder)                                   8                        85
26 – Defense              marine corps                                             30                        85
                          military                                                 11                        85
                          missile(s)                                               23                        85
                          national guard                                           30                        85
                          navy                                                     19                        85
                          ordnance                                                 7                         85
                          space vehicle(s)                                         3                         85
                          tanks                                                    9                         85
                          weapon(s)                                                15                        85


                          broker dealer(s)                                        3                          85
                          closed end                                              2                          85
                          commodity broker(s)                                     14                         85
                          financial services firm(s)                               2                         85
                          investment bank(s)                                       8                         85
                          investment firm(s)                                       2                         85
48 – Trading              investment management                                    6                         85
                          investment trust(s)                                     12                         85
                          mutual fund(s)                                          3                          85
                          reit(s)                                                 44                         85
                          broker-dealer(s)                              No Keyword Count Information Available
                          closed-end                                    No Keyword Count Information Available
                          security broker(s)                            Keyword removed : Only 2 bills with the
                                                                        keyword, and all appear in definition clauses
                          unit trust(s)                                 No Keyword Count Information Available
                                   Table A4: Industry Assignments by State

This table shows the 3 most important industries for each state at the beginning, midpoint, and endpoint of our
sample. “Importance” is measured by summing up the market equity of all publicly traded firms in each industry
residing in a state, and then ranking industries. We thus show below the three largest industries operating in each
given state over each Congress. We choose a subset of states and Congresses, as the table would otherwise be
prohibitively long. We are happy to provide the entire table of states, industries operating in those states, and most
important industries for each state and Congress upon request.


                                        Fama-French
                           State                             Industry Name          Congress
                                         Industry #
                           TX               30                    Oil                  101
                           TX               31                  Utilities              101
                           TX               32                  Telecom                101
                           TX               30                    Oil                  105
                           TX               32                  Telecom                105
                           TX               35                 Computers               105
                           TX               30                    Oil                  110
                           TX               31                  Utilities              110
                           TX               32                  Telecom                110

                           NY               45                    Banks                101
                           NY               46                  Insurance              101
                           NY               48                   Trading               101
                           NY               45                    Banks                105
                           NY               46                  Insurance              105
                           NY               48                   Trading               105
                           NY               45                    Banks                110
                           NY               46                  Insurance              110
                           NY               48                   Trading               110

                           CA               32                  Telecom                101
                           CA               35                 Computers               101
                           CA               43                    Retail               101
                           CA               35                 Computers               105
                           CA               36                  Software               105
                           CA               37            Electronic Equipment         105
                           CA               35                 Computers               110
                           CA               36                  Software               110
                           CA               37            Electronic Equipment         110
            Table A5: Industry Portfolio Returns after Positive/Negative Bill Passage

This table examines the stock returns of industries that are classified as affected by a given piece of legislation, after
that given piece of legislation passes, for the subset of bills that are passed by the Senate. We perform a calendar-
time portfolio approach as follows: for each final Senate vote on a bill that ultimately passes, we examine the stock
returns of affected firms following the passage of the bill. We form a “Long” portfolio that buys the firms in each
industry that we assign to a bill (weighted by market capitalization) where the “R-R” measure described in the
Appendix is positive, and a “Short” portfolio that sells the firms in each industry that we assign to a bill (weighted
by market capitalization) where the “R-R” measure is negative. Affected stocks do not enter the portfolio until the
month following the passage of a bill, and portfolios are rebalanced monthly. This table reports the average monthly
“Long-Short” portfolio return for a portfolio that goes buys the “Long” portfolio and sells the “Short” portfolio each
month. The “CAPM alpha” is a risk-adjusted return equal to the intercept from a time-series regression of the Long-
Short portfolio on the excess return on the value-weight market index (see Fama and French (1996). The “Fama-
French alpha” is a risk-adjusted return equal to the intercept from a time-series regression of the Long-Short
portfolio on the excess return on the value-weight market index, the return on the size (SMB) factor, and the return
on the value (HML) factor (see Fama and French (1996)). The “Carhart alpha” is a risk-adjusted return equal to the
intercept from a time-series regression of the Long-Short portfolio on the excess return on the value-weight market
index, the return on the size (SMB) factor, the return on the value (HML) factor, and the return on a prior-year
return momentum (MOM) factor (see Carhart (1997)). t-statistics are shown in parentheses, and 1%, 5%, and 10%
statistical significance are indicated with ***,**, and *, respectively.


                                                                  (Long-Short)
                                                                 Monthly Portfolio
                                                                     Return
                                   Average returns                    0.69
                                   Standard deviation                 3.64
                                   CAPM alpha                        0.69**
                                                                        (2.34)
                                   Fama-French alpha                  0.75***
                                                                        (2.66)
                                   Carhart alpha                      0.84***
                                                                        (2.92)
                           Table A6: The Impact of School Ties on Senate Voting Behavior: School Ties with Firms
This table reports panel regressions of individual Senate votes on school ties with firms. School Connected Votes is the percentage of Senators from the same school as the Senator
in question who voted yes on the given bill. As described in Section I, we assign each bill to the industries that are mentioned prominently in the bill, and we then construct measures
of how positive and negative each bill is for a particular assigned industry based on the votes of those Senators who have that industry as one of the important industries in their state.
Important industries for each Senator are defined as the top three industries in terms of annual sales that are headquartered in the home state of the Senator. % Industry Firms School
Connected is the percentage of firms in the assigned industries that are connected to their home Senator in the following way: either their CEO, CFO, or Chairman of the Board must
have attended the same school as the Senator in question. % Industry Sales School Connected and % Industry in State Total is the percentage of the total firms in the state that are
from the given industry. The dependent variable is equal to 1 if the Senator voted "Yea," and zero otherwise. The controls of Party Votes and State Votes are included in all
regressions (as indicated) and are described in Table I. Congress-Session-Vote (C-S-Vote) fixed effects, and Senator-fixed effects are included where indicated. All standard errors
are adjusted for clustering at the Congress level, and t-stats using these clustered standard errors are included in parentheses below the coefficient estimates. ***Significant at 1%;
**significant at 5%; *significant at 10%.

                                                                       Dependent Variable: Vote(Yes/No)
                                                               (1)             (2)                 (3)                 (4)              (5)                  (6)
              Votes Sample                                 Positive      VeryPositive       ExtremePositive        Negative       VeryNegative       ExtremeNegative
                                                           >Median          >75%                 >90%              <Median           <25%                 <10%

              School Connected Votes                        0.054***        0.059***             0.066***           0.044***         0.049***             0.059***
                                                             [0.019]         [0.020]              [0.019]            [0.015]           [0.017]              [0.017]

              % Industry Firms School Connected              0.029*         0.094***             0.171***           -0.027**         -0.070***            -0.139***
                                                             [0.016]         [0.026]              [0.053]            [0.011]           [0.024]              [0.051]


              % Industry in State Total                      0.035          -0.125**             -0.133             -0.101***        -0.142***            -0.247***
                                                             [0.028]         [0.051]              [0.131]            [0.026]           [0.049]              [0.100]

              Controls                                        Yes             Yes                  Yes                Yes               Yes                  Yes
              Fixed Effects                                C-S-Vote        C-S-Vote             C-S-Vote           C-S-Vote         C-S-Vote             C-S-Vote
              Fixed Effects                                 Senator         Senator              Senator            Senator           Senator              Senator
                           2
              Adjusted R                                      0.61            0.64                 0.70               0.70             0.69                 0.65
              No. of Obs.                                   118307          122085                23362              23331            23507                22648
