                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            HOW DO IMMIGRANTS SPEND TIME?:
                              THE PROCESS OF ASSIMILATION

                                        Daniel S. Hamermesh
                                          Stephen J. Trejo

                                        Working Paper 16430
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16430


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2010




We thank Jenna Kawalsky for inspiring our interest in this topic, and we are grateful for comments
from Sandra Black, George Borjas, Deborah Cobb-Clark, Jonathan Gershuny, David Jaeger, Jay Stewart,
and participants in seminars at several universities. We also thank Sarah Flood for help with the ATUS
data, Bob Gregory for aid in obtaining the Australian data, and Holly Monti for her research assistance.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Daniel S. Hamermesh and Stephen J. Trejo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
How Do Immigrants Spend Time?: The Process of Assimilation
Daniel S. Hamermesh and Stephen J. Trejo
NBER Working Paper No. 16430
October 2010
JEL No. J22,J61

                                               ABSTRACT

Using 2004-2008 data from the American Time Use Survey, we show that sharp differences between
the time use of immigrants and natives become noticeable when activities are distinguished by incidence
and intensity. We develop a theory of the process of assimilation—what immigrants do with their
time—based on the notion that assimilating activities entail fixed costs. The theory predicts that immigrants
will be less likely than natives to undertake such activities, but conditional on undertaking them, immigrants
will spend more time on them than natives. We identify several activities—purchasing, education
and market work—as requiring the most interaction with the native world, and these activities more
than others fit the theoretical predictions. Additional tests suggest that the costs of assimilating derive
from the costs of learning English and from some immigrants’ unfamiliarity with a high-income market
economy. A replication using the 1992 Australian Time Use Survey yields remarkably similar results.


Daniel S. Hamermesh
Department of Economics
University of Texas
Austin, TX 78712-1173
and IZA
and also NBER
hamermes@eco.utexas.edu

Stephen J. Trejo
University of Texas at Austin
Dept. of Economics
1 University Station C3100
Austin, TX 78712-0301
trejo@eco.utexas.edu
I. Introduction

          One online dictionary defines “assimilate” as “to absorb into the culture or mores of a

population or group.”1 This definition connotes a process, and the same source defines

“assimilation” as “an act, process or instance of assimilating”—presumably, being absorbed “into

… group.” In this study we focus on assimilation in light of this definition, studying what

immigrants do which might enable some of them to assimilate while others do not.

          Assimilation has hardly been neglected by economists. Indeed, in the past 40 years there

have been immense numbers of studies that have focused on assimilation. With the exception of

studies of labor supply, all of these have examined the outcomes of the process, not the process

itself.   Thus Chiswick’s (1978) classic cross-section analysis focused on wage changes

accompanying time spent in a new country, as did Borjas’ (1985) and (1995) analyses of artificial

cohorts. Other work (e.g., Antecol et al, 2006) has expanded the examination of the outcomes of

the process of assimilation to focus on both prices (wage rates) and quantities (employment

levels). We care about these outcomes—they are the indicators of immigrants’ well-being, and

they provide signals to potential immigrants (and also to potential emigrants); but they tell us

nothing about what immigrants are doing in the process of assimilation itself.

          In this study we step back from this black-box approach to assimilation and focus instead

on the process of assimilation—on what immigrants actually do.           We develop some facts

describing immigrant-native differences in the use of time; based on these facts, we derive an

economic theory of assimilation that has specific testable predictions about the behavior of

immigrants.     We test these predictions on a large recently created American data set, the

American Time Use Survey. After having examined their validity (or lack thereof), we then

attempt to infer what causes differences in the underlying parameters of the model.           This

examination leads to a discussion of the sources of heterogeneity in immigrants’ outcomes and to

1
 Merriam-Webster online dictionary, http://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary, searched February 4,
2010.
efforts that could be made to change the assimilation process that might improve outcomes.

Finally, we replicate these results on an older Australian data set.

        Although one recent unpublished study (Vargas and Chavez, 2009) has examined

immigrants’ time use, and another (Zaiceva and Zimmermann, 2010) examined time use by

ethnicity, our approach is novel for economists, focusing on assimilation as a process rather than

a set of outcomes. While new to economics, viewing assimilation this way has occupied

historians and others for a very long time.2 Handlin’s (1951) classic discussion dealt at least as

much with this as with outcomes—the “immigrant experience” is one of becoming rather than

being, and assimilation is viewed as a learning process:

        Working as they did in a new fashion and in a strange place, it took time to find a
        way around, to begin to learn the operations of the productive system of which
        they had become a part. (Handlin, p. 65)

II. Some Initial Impressions

        Since 2003 the U.S. has developed the largest data set in the world using time diaries

with its American Time Use Survey (ATUS), which is based on respondents from households

that had recently left the Current Population Survey (CPS) sample. We use data from 2004-2008,

containing diaries kept by nearly 65,000 individuals ages 15 and up, each for the one day prior to

the morning they completed the diary, with each diarist being the sole member of the household

asked to complete a diary (see Hamermesh et al, 2005). There are 55,949 natives in the sample

and 8,976 immigrants.        With the appropriate sampling weights (variably weighting the

respondents and the days for which they kept diaries) we obtain a complete picture of what the

representative American, immigrant or native, was doing on a representative day during these

five years.

        The ATUS does not allow us to answer all the interesting questions about the process of

assimilation as reflected in time use: Its restriction to one household member prevents us from


2
The role of learning and time use in assimilation has been recognized in song: Leonard Bernstein,
Candide, “I am so easily assimilated, …, It’s easy, it’s ever so easy! Do like the natives do.”


                                                                                                2
examining within-family behavior; and the restriction to one diary-day per person prohibits

considering differences in habitual behavior between immigrants and natives. The data set does,

however, provide a sufficiently large sample of immigrants and enough additional information

about them to enable us both to draw conclusions about immigrant-native differences and to

examine the underlying causes of any implied differences in the costs of assimilation.3

        The ATUS classifies activities into over 400 separate categories, of which the biggest

three, sleeping, paid employment and watching television, account for over 60 percent of all time

used in the U.S. Not surprisingly, most activities are not engaged in by most respondents: The

representative native averages 24.5 separate activities each day, as does the representative

immigrant. Clearly, this preponderance of zeroes means that we cannot concentrate on a small

set of primitive categories, since immigrant-native differences in participation in the activity

would be tiny; we must instead examine somewhat larger aggregates.                     We focus on ten

aggregates of activities: Purchasing, education, market work, care for others, eating/drinking,

household activities (household production), personal care, other leisure, socializing/television

watching, and organizational/civic/religious activities. For the first three of these aggregates, the

three that we examine in most detail, Appendix Table 1 lists the sub-aggregates (many of which

are themselves aggregated from the primitive categories) that comprise them, along with the

average amounts of time in the most common sub-aggregates..

        In creating these aggregates we recognize that the task of classification is essentially

arbitrary. For example, sleeping is clearly personal care; but is going to church a religious

activity or socializing? Should eating/drinking be a separate category, or is some of it more

properly included in work, as in a business lunch, or in socializing, as with a dinner with friends?


3
 While all the results reflect population-based sampling weights in the ATUS, one might be concerned
about unit non-response. It is true (Abraham et al, 2006) that in terms of observables this is not a problem
in the ATUS, but perhaps the sample is non-representative along non-observable dimensions. We obviously
cannot account for this potential difficulty; but, if it exists, one would think that those immigrants who,
other things equal, are less likely to have completed time diaries are those who are most different from
natives. That being the case, the results here will understate the true immigrant-native differences.


                                                                                                          3
In the end, as with the use of any accounting data, we are thrown back on the classification

choices made by the producers of the data.

         Consider the raw differences in patterns of time use between immigrants and natives. All

of the statistics (and the results throughout this study) use the 2006 sampling weights to create

estimates for the representative American on a representative day. The first row for each of the

ten categories in Table 1 presents the mean amount of time in the activity by the average

immigrant (native). Looking at these unconditional means suggests that there is no difference in

time spent in many activities by immigrants and natives. The mean amounts of time spent in

purchasing and education, for example, are nearly identical; and there appears to be no particular

pattern in the other differences.4

         In the second and third rows of each part of the table we present the fractions of sample

members engaged in the activity (its incidence) and the conditional means of time spent on it by

those who do engage in the activity (its intensity). Delving into these patterns reveals a richer

picture of immigrant-native differences.       Consider, for example the purchasing category:

Although the unconditional means are equal, immigrants are less likely to undertake the activity,

but their intensity in it exceeds that of natives. On the other hand, the unconditional mean time

spent in organizational activities is greater among natives, but that is entirely due to their greater

incidence of this activity—the intensities are the same. In these activities the distinctions are

clear, but even in others the table demonstrates the need to go beyond comparing unconditional

means.

III. Theoretical Motivation

         Noticing that one cannot describe immigrant-native differences in time use merely by

looking at the unconditional average time in particular activities, we construct a theory of

assimilation that highlights the incidence-intensity distinction. Assimilation is an investment

4
 The time diary method requires total times to exhaust the day—1440 minutes. Because a few categories
could not, however, be coded, the sums of these averages do not quite exhaust the total: Among
immigrants they total 1422 minutes, among natives 1419 minutes.


                                                                                                    4
process—the immigrant does things that natives do not need to do in order to learn more about

the new country and “fit in better” in the future. To capture this process parsimoniously, let there

be two time periods, t = 1 and 2, and two types of individuals, natives (N) and immigrants (F).

Some of the things that an immigrant does help him or her assimilate. Taking a course in

English, dealing with the transportation system, working outside the ethnic enclave, and shopping

in non-ethnic stores all increase the immigrant’s familiarity with the new society. Conversely,

other activities, particularly those that are performed at home, and those that involve dealing with

other immigrants with the same background, are not assimilating.

        With these considerations in mind, let there be two types of activity, assimilating

activities, a, and other activities, a fraction 1-a, together making up the total amount of time

available, set equal to 1 for convenience. Assimilating activities require overcoming the language

and cultural hurdles of getting out into the native world. Doing, so, however, generates the

benefit that the immigrant will be able to obtain more desirable outcomes more quickly—i.e.,

perform better, derive greater utility in the future.

        We can write the Foreigner’s maximization problem as:

(1)    Max {U(a1 , 1- a1) – CI(a1) + RF(a1)U(a2 , 1- a2)},

where 0 < U1(at , 1- at), U2(at , 1- at) < ∞ for 0 ≤ at ≤ 1; U11 , U22 < 0. R is the discount factor, 0 <

R < 1. The gain to engaging in the assimilating activity is increased utility in the future, with the

magnitude of the gain depending upon the function F, F(0)>0, F’>0, F”<0 . I(.) is an indicator

function equaling 1 if a1 > 0, 0 if a1 = 0; and each immigrant incurs the lumpy cost C of choosing

to overcome the hurdles (language, foreignness, etc.) of undertaking the assimilating activity.

        The parameter C varies across immigrants—some find it easier than others to leave the

comfort of their familiar culture and take part in activities that are foreign to them. We have

assumed that the costs of participating in the assimilating activity are independent of the amount

of the activity that is undertaken. We envision them as the costs overcoming the hurdle of

entering into the native world. This is probably a simplification—some of these costs no doubt


                                                                                                       5
are also variable, rising as the amount of the assimilating activity increases. Nonetheless, so long

as some part of the cost is fixed, the predictions of the model are valid; and the presence of

variable costs adds no other testable predictions.

          Maximization by the immigrant in Period 1 yields:

(2a)      U1(a*1, 1- a*1) - U2(a*1, 1- a*1) = -RF’(a*1)U(a2 , 1- a2) , if a*1 >0 , with a*1 > 0 if:

(2b)      [U(a*1, 1- a*1) - U(0, 1)] + R[F(a*1)-F(0)]U(a2 , 1- a2) > C .

       Now consider maximization by the native. We assume that the native’s costs of undertaking

the assimilating activity are identically zero—C ≡ 0, and that there are no gains to assimilation—

F(a1) ≡ 1 for all a1 ≥ 0. The native has, by definition, already assimilated. The utility-maximizing

choice of activity in Period 2 is identical for both natives and immigrants—all that differs,

assuming that U is the same for both, is the fillip to utility generated by the fact that F(a*1) <1 for

immigrants. Given the shape of U, the native will always undertake some of both the assimilating

activity and the other activity; and the right-hand side of (2a) is identically zero among natives

(because F’(a1) ≡ 0 for natives).

       We can thus focus on differences in outcomes in Period 1 between natives and immigrants.

Recognizing that C is a random variable, rewrite the equation describing the immigrant’s decision

about whether or not to undertake the assimilating activity as:

(2b’)     Pr{a*1>0} = Pr{C < [U(a*1, 1- a*1) - U(0, 1)] + R[F(a*1)-F(0)]U(a2 , 1- a2)},

and remember that this probability is identically one for natives. Comparing (2a) between

immigrants and natives, whatever the maximizing choice of a*1 is for natives, the presence of a

negative term on the right-side for immigrants means that, if they choose to undertake any of the

assimilating activity, the amount chosen will exceed that undertaken by natives.

          The model thus generates two major predictions:

1. The assimilating activity is less likely to be undertaken by immigrants than by natives. That is

more likely to be true if the costs of assimilation C are higher, the gains to assimilation, F(a1) –

F(0), are lower, and if the immigrant has a shorter horizon (lower R).


                                                                                                      6
2. Conditional on both engaging in the assimilating activity, the immigrant will choose a higher

a1* than the native.

        In addition to these two broad implications about immigrants in comparison to natives,

one can go further and proxy some of the parameters to consider how outcomes should change

with variation in immigrants’ characteristics. Thus we would expect:

3. Immigrants who have been in the new country longer will be more native-like. Their

probability of engaging in assimilating activities will approach that of natives, and, conditional on

engaging in these activities, the amount they undertake will approach that of natives (and be less

than that of more recent immigrants who choose to engage in the activities).

4. The same thing will be true for immigrants from countries that are more similar to the U.S.

than for immigrants from countries that are more “foreign”—for whom presumably the costs of

assimilation are greater.

5. Older immigrants, conditional on the time they have lived in the new country, will have a

lower probability of engaging in the assimilating activity, because for them Period 2 is shorter.

IV. Basic Results

        To move from the theory and its implications to empirical analysis, we first need to

consider what activities might be called “assimilating.” The process of assimilation involves

using one’s available time partly to invest in learning about the native culture, economy and

environment. We need to define which activities can appropriately be classified as assimilating.

We arbitrarily assume that the three activities—purchasing, education and market work—are to

be included in this list, while the other activities are not and can be called non-assimilating. In

the end, however, the best test of what is an assimilating activity is whether it is characterized by

the immigrant-native differences in behavior suggested by the theory.

        Obviously, we cannot tell for those activities that we believe to be assimilating whether

the time spent by an immigrant in the activity eases him/her into the native world. For example, a

work activity may take place in a sweatshop where the immigrant worker is surrounded by his/her


                                                                                                    7
fellow immigrants who speak the same language, and where s/he deals with a foreman in that

same language.     Alternatively, eating and drinking may occur in a workplace where the

immigrant is surrounded by natives. While the ATUS does identify the location of an activity

and the presence of others, these identifications are only provided for some of the activities; and it

is not possible to identify the immigrant status of any other people (except household members)

present when the respondent engages in the activity.

        While we could provide a quick informal test of the theory using the means in Table 1, a

consideration of the immigration literature and the descriptive statistics in Table 2 suggests this

would be misleading. In this sample, immigrants are significantly younger than natives. Perhaps

more important, while 23 percent of natives are under age 18 or over age 64, only 13 percent of

immigrants are. In addition, immigrants are much more likely than natives to be Hispanics, much

less likely to be African-American, and much more likely to be married. They have many more

children at home than do natives, and those children are disproportionately likely to be pre-

schoolers. Immigrants are much less likely than natives to have gone beyond high school, and

also more likely not to have completed high school; but they are more likely than natives to have

advanced degrees. All of these demographic differences are consistent with immigrant-native

differences shown in more familiar data sources, including the U.S. Census of Population (Kritz

and Gurak, 2005; Duncan and Trejo, 2009; Friedberg and Jaeger, 2009).

        These demographic differences make it essential that, in testing the theory and pointing

out immigrant-native differences in the incidence and conditional amounts of assimilating

activities, we account for as many of them as possible. Since the essential point of the theory is

that the central characteristic, immigrant status, will have opposite effects on incidence and

intensity, one’s initial instinct of estimating a tobit model (e.g., Stewart, 2009) on these time-use

data would lead one astray. Instead, the theory suggests using a double-hurdle model, of the type

proposed by Cragg (1971), which involves the joint estimation of a probit on the incidence and a

truncated regression on the intensity. We can test whether the impact of immigrant status on


                                                                                                    8
these two outcomes differs by constraining its effects to be the same and performing a likelihood-

ratio test.5

           We begin with Table 3, showing the determinants of the incidence of the particular

assimilating activities, and the aggregate of the three assimilating activities, based on probits

estimated over the entire sample of 64,925 ATUS respondents from 2004-2008. This table, and

all subsequent tables that show results describing incidence, list the effects of a one-unit increase

in the independent variable on the probability of the activity being undertaken. We then examine

the determinants of the intensity of time use in these activities, and then move to examine

incidence and intensity among the other activities.

           Before examining the predictions of the theory about the incidence of these activities,

consider the impacts of the control variables (which we present here, but in none of the

subsequent tables describing incidence). Among the most interesting results on the demographic

characteristics are: 1) Men are more likely than women to engage in the activities that we believe

may be assimilating, but only because they are much more likely than women to be working for

pay; 2) Those with young children are less likely to engage in these activities, both because they

are less likely to work and because they are less likely to be engaged in an educational activity; 3)

As has been shown for a number of countries for activities generally (Gronau and Hamermesh,

2008), there is a steady increase in the probability of engaging in each of these activities as the

respondent’s educational attainment is higher. Given the immigrant-native differences in the

means of these demographics and their role in determining the incidence of these activities, their

inclusion in these equations is especially important for inferring the directions and magnitudes of

immigrant-native differences among otherwise identical individuals.

           Participation in assimilating activities overall is statistically significantly lower among

immigrants, with a difference between them and natives of 1.5 percentage points (on a mean of

77 percent). This central result is driven by purchasing activities, which are far less likely to be

5
    This is easily accomplished in STATA using the routine “craggit” created by Burke (2009).


                                                                                                    9
undertaken by immigrants than by natives.6 Educational activities are marginally more likely to

be undertaken by immigrants, while rates of market work are essentially identical between the

two groups. Overall the results for the crucial variable, immigrant status, do suggest weakly that

the theory describes these activities.

         Table 4 presents tests of the second major prediction, namely that, conditional on

engaging in an activity, immigrants will spend more time on it. The sample sizes in these

truncated regressions vary from activity to activity because the number of participants varies

across activities. As with the discussion of incidence, we first turn to examining the impacts of

demographic differences (and present these only in this table). 1) African-Americans spend

conditionally less time in the activities that may be assimilating, mainly because they spend less

time in educational activities; 2) Men are more likely to spend time in these activities, entirely

because, conditional on working for pay, they spend more time in the market; 3) Similarly,

having more and especially younger children in the household reduces the amount of time in

assimilating activities among those who participate in them; 4) Finally, the amount of time in

these activities, conditional on engaging in them, rises steadily with educational attainment.

         Conditional on participating in the activity, immigrants spend more time on it in each of

the three categories. Moreover, the additional amount of time that immigrants spend in what we

have designated as assimilating activities is not small: 10.9 percent extra in purchasing, 9.7

percent extra in education, 4.0 percent extra in market work, and 5.7 percent extra in assimilating

activities in total (and hence 1.2 percent less time in other activities).

         For each activity the final row of Table 4 provides the t-statistic testing the cross-equation

constraint that the effects of immigrant status on incidence and intensity are the same (that we

could have combined the two in a standard tobit model rather than estimating separately the

probit and truncated regression for each activity). In each case the hypothesis of equality is

6
 This result is driven by purchasing of goods (see Appendix Table 1), which accounts for slightly more
than half of total time in this category. Immigrant-native differences in travel time, which are arguably less
likely to be assimilating, are much smaller.


                                                                                                          10
strongly rejected. In its predictions about the allocation of time conditional on choosing to

undertake a particular sub-aggregate of activities, time use in these activities is described fairly

well by the theory. Both statistically and in terms of the size of the effects, the data reject the

notion that immigrant-native differences in the incidence and intensity of these activities are the

same and, indeed, suggest the effects are in opposite and expected directions.7

        These results are only suggestive: Perhaps immigrant-native differences in incidence and

intensity in the other seven activities are also respectively negative and positive, and statistically

different from each other.       To examine this possibility, we estimate probits and truncated

regressions for each of these activities, with Table 5 presenting the estimates of the parameters

describing the impacts of immigrant status. The final column of the table presents these estimates

for the intensity in the aggregate of these seven activities, which we designate as “non-

assimilating,” (with the incidence estimates deleted since all sample members engage in at least

one of these activities). In six of the seven aggregates, either immigrants have both greater

(eating/drinking) or lesser (the three leisure categories) intensities and incidence than natives, or

one of the two effects is not significantly nonzero.            Only for household activities are the

differences in incidence and intensity between immigrants and natives negative and positive, and

statistically different, as they were for assimilating activities.

        One might be concerned that some of the “controls” are endogenous—that choices about

time use affect some of the variables that we have identified as demographic, particularly marital

status, age and number of children, and perhaps educational attainment. To examine this, we re-

estimated the models in Tables 3-5 holding constant only the age, gender and racial/ethnic

variables—the controls that are clearly not subject to choice. The results are nearly identical to

those presented in the tables. Another possibility is that the results differ by gender in more

subtle ways than is captured by inclusion of an indicator variable. To examine this possibility we

7
 The results look very similar when we re-estimate all equations separately for individuals younger or older
than 40 years of age. The impact of immigrant status is nearly identical regardless of the age of the
individual.


                                                                                                        11
re-estimated the models separately by gender. The immigrant-native differences in intensity and

incidence (or the absence thereof for some activities) are almost identical for both men and

women. Perhaps intra-household behavior leads to difference in immigrant-native differences by

gender, but there are no differences by gender in the average effects across households.8

         A possibly more serious problem is that immigrant status is not exogenous—people

choose to emigrate to the U.S. based on economic incentives (e.g., Borjas, 1987), for example,

comparing expected earnings and its variance in the home and potential receiving countries. One

would expect that incentives based on the costs of assimilating also affect their decisions. This

means that our results do not reflect what would be observed if one could randomly choose

members of the immigrant population. If, however, potential immigrants are rational, we would

expect that those who did migrate (and did not return back to their native countries) are those who

expected and found the costs of assimilation to be less than those facing the average potential

migrant. This would be true whatever the immigrant’s position in the earnings distributions of

the home and receiving countries. That being the case, our results underestimate the immigrant-

native differences that would be observed if actual immigrants were randomly selected from the

set of potential immigrants.

V. The Sources of Differences in Time Use

         Having demonstrated that immigrants and natives use time differently and in ways that

support a theory based on fixed costs of assimilation, we next explore some possible sources of

these fixed costs. What might make C higher for some immigrants than for others? One obvious

suspect is language knowledge, as there is substantial evidence (Chiswick and Miller, 1995;

Dustmann and Fabbri, 2003; Bleakley and Chin, 2004) that knowledge of English, or at least the

opportunity to learn English, affects such outcomes as immigrant-native differences in wages.


8
 Another possibility is that immigrant-native differences differ by marital status, but that possibility too is
not apparent in the data. Nor do the differences result from immigrants’ much greater concentration in
metropolitan areas: When rural residents are deleted, the results are nearly the same as in Tables 3-5,
except that the immigrant-native differences in Tables 3 and 4 are slightly more pronounced.


                                                                                                           12
Accordingly, we focus much of our attention on various measures of English-language facility

(although the ATUS does not contain information on this directly). We also consider another

measure indicating potential familiarity with a U.S.-style advanced market economy.

        The first measure that we use reflects the extent to which an immigrant has had time to

acculturate him/herself generally to the U.S., namely the number of years since immigration. To

create usefully sized cells we divide years since migration into the categories: Less than 6 years,

6-10 years, 11-20 years, and more than 20 years. As the top panel of Table 6 shows, each of

these cells contains large fractions of the U.S. immigrant population, although the overwhelming

majority of immigrants have been in the country more than 10 years.

        A native whose parents are immigrants may also bear substantial costs of assimilating,

although for many outcomes second-generation Americans look much more like higher-order

generation natives than like immigrants (Perlmann and Waldinger, 1997; Farley and Alba, 2002;

Card, 2005; Burda et al, 2008). To examine this additional aspect of assimilation we define

nativity variables for natives’ parents, including whether both parents are immigrants, the father

is foreign-born (and the mother is U.S.-born), or the mother is foreign-born (and the father is

U.S.-born). Table 6 shows that nearly 10 percent of natives have at least one immigrant parent,

with half of these being children of two immigrant parents and the other half having parents of

mixed nativity, with this last group split fairly evenly between children whose lone immigrant

parent is their father versus their mother.9

        In Table 7 we substitute the indicators of years since migration for immigrant status in

the probits describing the incidence of the assimilating activities and in the truncated regressions

of the intensities of the activities undertaken. We also add the indicators describing second-

generation Americans. Consider first the estimates of incidence. Except for education the probit

derivatives are largest and most negative for the most recent immigrant arrivals. Moreover, the


9
 Farley and Alba (2002) and Rumbaut (2004) report similar patterns with respect to the relative size and
composition of the second-generation population in the United States.


                                                                                                     13
effects diminish steadily in absolute size with years since migration for the aggregate of

assimilating activities (and for purchasing activities).

        The results for the intensities of activities are less consistent with the notion of

acculturation lowering these costs.      Except for purchasing activities, where the conditional

amounts undertaken decrease monotonically with years since migration, there are no obvious

distinctions between immigrants classified by years in the U.S. Overall, these estimates provide

some support for our emphasis on fixed costs in shaping the process of assimilation.

        Additional support is provided by the estimated impacts of second-generation status on

the incidence and conditional amounts of assimilating activities. Second-generation Americans

look nothing like immigrants. Indeed, if both parents were immigrants, the respondent is more

likely than other natives to engage in the activities that we have classified as assimilating,

although the conditional amounts they undertake do not differ from those of other natives who

participate in those activities. At least in terms of time use, these results suggest that the process

of assimilation is complete by the time the second-generation person reaches adulthood.

        As noted, a central aspect of the costs of acculturation is the cost of acquiring the native

language. First, adopting the categorization of Bleakley and Chin (2004), we divide immigrant

countries of origin into three mutually exclusive categories: 1) countries where English is the

primary spoken language; 2) countries where English is not the primary spoken language but it is

designated as an official language; and 3) all other countries, where English is neither the primary

spoken language nor an official language. The second panel of Table 6 presents the descriptive

statistics for these measures.     The overwhelming majority of U.S. immigrants come from

countries where English is neither a primary nor an official language. About one-eighth of U.S.

immigrants come from countries where English is an official language but not the primary spoken

language (with most of these immigrants originating in the Indian sub-continent or in the

Philippines), and another eighth of U.S. immigrants hail from English-speaking countries.




                                                                                                   14
        A second measure of language facility is more direct but is not exogenous to the

individual’s choices about assimilation: Was the household’s interview in the CPS conducted in

a foreign language (overwhelmingly in this sample, conducted in Spanish)?10               As Table 6

showed, about one-third of immigrants fall into this category. That large fraction raises concerns

that our results may be based solely on Mexican immigrants, a concern that is underscored by

results showing the sensitivity of some outcomes of assimilation to whether the immigrants are

Mexican or not (Farley and Alba, 2002; Duncan and Trejo, 2009). As only twenty percent of

immigrants in the ATUS are of Mexican origin, this concern may be misplaced.

        The upper half of Table 8 examines the impacts of the treatment of English in the

immigrant’s country of origin on the probability that s/he undertakes an assimilating activity and

on the conditional amount undertaken. The estimates suggest that the one-eighth of immigrants

who come from English-speaking countries look less like other immigrants and more like natives

in how they allocate time to the so-called assimilating activities. Patterns of time use are quite

different, however, among those immigrants who come from countries where English is only an

official language, and for the large majority of immigrants who from countries where English is

not even an official language. These latter two groups of immigrants show the predicted time use

patterns relative to natives, with lower incidences for assimilating activities and higher intensities.

The only surprise here is that, at least for the incidence of these activities, the negative effects are

greater for those from English-official countries than those from non-English-speaking countries.

        An alternative approach relies on the language in which the interview was conducted and

includes the additional indicator for Mexican immigrants. The results, presented in the bottom

half of Table 8, show that, conditional on their language ability, Mexican immigrants are no more

likely than immigrants generally to undertake a particular assimilating activity; and conditional

on that they do not perform any less of it.         Weak English, however, does matter:          Those


10
 The variable describes the person who completed the CPS interview, whose identity, and perhaps even
whose language facility may differ from that of the household’s ATUS respondent.


                                                                                                     15
immigrants whose CPS interview was not conducted in English are especially less likely to

engage in assimilating activities; but conditional on doing so, they spend more time at those

activities (again, with the exception being the few people involved in educational activities).

These results underscore again the role of language knowledge in lowering the fixed costs of

assimilation.11

        One might be concerned that Latin culture, which is correlated with immigrants’

language knowledge, is driving these results. To examine this possibility, we estimated the

equations in Tables 4 and 5 and the bottom half of Table 8 including only the sample of

Hispanics, both natives and immigrants. The results look very similar to those estimated over the

entire sample: Again, Hispanic immigrants as a group have a lower incidence of these activities

than native Hispanics, but, conditional on engaging in them, the intensity is greater. Moreover,

the immigrant-native differences are entirely due to differences in language knowledge.

        While language facility, or the possibility of it, appears to be a good proxy for the fixed

costs in our model, there are others. One argument is that, independent of language ability, the

fixed costs of participating in assimilating activities in the United States are lower for emigrants

from advanced, industrialized countries with market economies that are similar to the U.S.

economy: “How could this man, so recently removed from an altogether different life, explain to

himself the product system in which he was enmeshed?” (Handlin, 1951, pp. 78-79)

        As a proxy for this idea we obtained the recent per-capita real GDP in the home country

of each immigrant.12 The average GDP per capita in the immigrants’ home countries in 2008 was

$10,355 (standard deviation $14,200), with a range from $230 to $94,354. Adding this additional



11
  The conclusions do not change if we interact the proxies for English-language knowledge with the
individual’s educational attainment.
12
  For most of the countries of origin we use data for 2008 from the World Development Indicators of the
World Bank. For a few others for which these were unavailable in that database, we obtained the
information from the World Economic Outlook database of the IMF. GDP is converted to U.S. dollars
using the exchange rate against the dollar.



                                                                                                    16
proxy for the costs of assimilating to the equations in Table 8 produces the estimates shown in

Table 9. The inclusion of this index of development changes the estimates of the effect of

emigrating from an English-speaking country, since these are highly correlated, weakening the

negative impact of the latter on the probability of participating in assimilating activities and on

the conditional amount undertaken.           Nonetheless, the effects of GDP per capita itself are

consistent with our interpreting them as reflecting lower costs of assimilation: Immigrants from

countries with higher GDP look more like natives than other immigrants, both in terms of the

incidence of assimilating activities and their intensities.13

            A broad, albeit fairly weak proxy for these explanations is the extent to which other

immigrants are prevalent in the area where the immigrant resides. Restricting the sample to

metropolitan residents, we link the data to Census 2000 information on the fraction immigrant in

the metro area.14 Adding this measure to the estimates in Tables 3 and 4 does not alter the

conclusions that immigrants are less likely to engage in assimilating activities but that their

conditional mean time inputs into them exceed those of natives.

VI. A Replication for Australia

            The theory presented above is general, so it should be applicable beyond the parochial

confines of the United States. Few countries have large-scale time-diary data sets, and few of

those include a sufficiently large number of immigrants to make another test of the theory

feasible. Australia is one of those few, being substantially more a nation of immigrants than the

U.S.

            The Australian Time Use Survey of 1992 (ABS, 1993) included two days of time diaries

completed by nearly all of the almost 7000 individuals ages 15 or over included in the sample.

13
  Adding interactions of home-country GDP with the language categorizations adds nothing to these
equations—the effects are apparently independent. We also experimented with other proxies for cultural
differences, including dominant Christian-religion or Asian. These are so highly collinear with the
variables English-language background and home-country GDP per capita that we cannot draw inferences
about their possible independent effects.
14
     We thank Brian Duncan for having supplied his tabulations from the Census 2000.


                                                                                                   17
The diaries were recorded in five-minute intervals on two consecutive days, with the days evenly

distributed over the week. To make the analyses as similar to those for the U.S. as possible, we

created control variables identical to those included in the tables above—marital status; gender; a

quadratic in age; number of children and indicators of their age distribution; and educational

attainment.15 (Indicators for African-American and Hispanic are excluded for obvious reasons.)

The data set also includes an indicator of whether the respondent speaks a foreign language at

home, and we use that to examine the sources of any immigrant-native differences that we may

find.

        The survey recorded activities in 280 different categories. To make the test as similar to

that for the U.S. as possible, we aggregated these into the same ten sets of activities. Each of

these aggregates includes travel time pursuant to the basic activity (as in the U.S. data). The sets

of basic activities included in purchasing and market work are very similar to those in the ATUS.

Most of the others are too, although education/training activities encompass a somewhat different

set of basic uses of time. We do not claim that the aggregates are the same as in the U.S.—

differences in the surveys preclude that; but they are as close as we could make them.

        Immigrants account for 24 percent of the diary-days of the respondents in these data,

compared to 23 percent for all Australians counted in the 1991 Census of Population and

Housing.16 Despite the differences in the basic survey instruments, except for market work, the

average (unconditional) amounts of time spent in the activities that we have shown might be

viewed as assimilating look strikingly similar to the figures in Table 1: 44 (48) minutes in


15
  We exclude the few respondents over age 85 and thus outside the age range reported in the ATUS. Also,
household residents in the Australian data are recorded as children only if they are under age 15, and their
categorization by age differs slightly from that in the ATUS. Finally, the categories of educational
attainment necessarily differ from those in the United States. We include as low-educated respondents
those with secondary or lesser qualifications; as middle-educated those with trade qualifications or a
certificate or diploma; and as high-educated those with a bachelor’s degree or higher. We dropped the 5
percent of respondents who were still attending school.
16
 http://www.ausstats.abs.gov.au/ausstats/free.nsf/0/4C64DE2D65803F30CA2574BF00167A44/$File/2821
0_1991_230_Australia_in_Profile.pdf Table 1.1.



                                                                                                        18
purchasing activities by natives (immigrants); 29 (24) minutes in schooling/training; and 200

(196) minutes in market work. The fractions of the respondents in Australia engaging in what we

have classified as education/training are almost identical to those shown in Table 1.      What we

have classified as purchasing activities are more frequent in these data, but market work is less

frequent. Among immigrants, 35 percent of the respondents state that they speak a foreign

language at home, nearly identical to the fraction of immigrants in the ATUS with whom the

interview was conducted in a foreign language.

        To save space all the results for the three activities are presented in Table 10, which is

essentially a replication of Tables 3 and 4. Each probit is based on the entire sample of 12,998

diary-days for which all the data were available, and each truncated regression is based on all the

individuals who engaged in the activity. Because most respondents completed diaries on two

days, standard errors of all the estimated coefficients account for clustering of the observations.17

For each of the activities, the first column includes only the indicator for immigrant status, while

the second adds the foreign-language indicator. All the estimated equations also contain the

control variables discussed above.

        The results seem qualitatively identical to those for the United States. As in the U.S., the

conditional amounts of time spent in the assimilating activities are greater among immigrants

than natives. While the probability of engaging in education/training is higher among immigrants

than natives, the probability of purchasing or doing market work is lower—the same results that

we obtained in the ATUS. Even the ability of the models to fit the data is similar to what we saw

in Tables 3 and 4. Finally, as in the U.S. data, tests of the equality of the immigrant effects on

incidence and intensity reject the hypotheses.

        When we delve behind the basic results (examine the even-numbered columns in each

pair), the role of language in generating the outcomes is striking. (Remember that the effect of

17
  Among those who engaged in the same assimilating activity on both diary days, the within-person
correlations of the residuals are 0.21, 0.30 and 0.32 for purchasing, education/training and work
respectively.


                                                                                                  19
being an immigrant who speaks English at home is the coefficient on the immigrant indicator,

while that for an immigrant who speaks another language at home is the sum of the two

coefficients in the table.) The results suggest that all of the effects shown for immigrants in the

odd-numbered columns are mediated through language knowledge. Only those immigrants who

do not speak English at home engage in conditionally more of the assimilating activities than do

natives; other immigrants do not behave significantly differently from natives (conditional on

engaging in the activity). English-speaking immigrants are no different from natives in the

likelihood of engaging in these activities, while non-English speaking immigrants are

significantly less likely to be purchasing or engaging in market work, but significantly more

likely to be undertaking education/training.     As with the basic results, the results on the

importance of language corroborate the findings for the U.S.

        An additional check is provided by the estimates of the probits and truncated regressions

for the other seven categories of activities, presented in Table 11. For none of these seven do we

reject the hypothesis of equal effects of immigrant status on incidence and intensity and also

observe a negative effect on incidence and a positive effect on intensity with t-statistics above

one. These results thus differ from what we observed for both purchasing and market work in

Table 10 and look very much like what we saw in Table 5 for their American analogs.

VII. Conclusions and Implications for Heterogeneity

        Taking off from the immigrant-native differences in time use that we document here, we

have derived a theory of the process of assimilation based on the notion that it is costly to

assimilate—it involves leaving the previous culture and economic mind-set and acquiring ones

that match those of the new country more closely. These costs are a barrier to assimilation.

Some potential immigrants will not even emigrate, perceiving the barrier to be too great. Others

will emigrate, but will not cross that barrier and undertake the activities that natives do. Those

immigrants who do cross the barrier have an incentive to undertake more of the assimilating

activities than natives.


                                                                                                20
        Identifying a number of activities that one can view as leading to assimilation,

particularly education, shopping and market work, we use the 2004-2008 American Time Use

Survey to examine these predictions. They are strongly supported by the data, and immigrant-

native differences in other activities are not characterized by the same lower incidence and higher

intensity as these activities., Going behind these simple findings, we examine the sources of the

apparent costs of assimilation.    Various proxies for the ease of assimilating, including the

immigrant’s language background, suggest that language knowledge partly underlies the costs of

assimilation. That a higher GDP per capita in the home country, a proxy for the similarity of its

economy to the U.S., also leads immigrants to behave less differently from natives, suggests that

unfamiliarity with American-style economic life also underlies those costs.

        We also tested the theory on Australia in 1992, using data that have the advantage of

coming from a country that is nearly twice as immigrant-intensive as the U.S. While the survey

instrument defines activities slightly differently from the U.S. data, the Australian results look

very similar to those for the U.S.         Even the role of language knowledge in the costs of

assimilation is suggested by these data.

        We are not testing a theory of fixed costs. Rather, we show that it is consistent with

differences in time use in activities that might be viewed as assimilating, but not in others. It is

consistent with immigrant-native differences in behavior in both the U.S. and Australia; and the

differences in time use among immigrants are consistent with two reasonable determinants of the

fixed cost of assimilating, namely language background and familiarity with an advanced market

economy.

        Our view of the process of assimilation and the demonstration of its validity with time-

use data suggest a testable implication on the commonly-examined outcomes of the assimilation

process. The theory and results imply that some immigrants will assimilate well, while others

never will. While much of the research on assimilation outcomes has focused on the time path of

average immigrant-native differences, the heterogeneity implied here suggests that the cross-


                                                                                                 21
section variance of immigrants’ earnings and hours will exceed that of natives. This should be

true for immigrants as a group, but also for immigrants who are otherwise observably the same as

natives, since unobservables will leave some residual heterogeneity. The same implications could

be tested on such outcomes as wages/earnings, labor-force participation, and hours of work.

         In terms of policy, the results suggest that, if the goal is to assimilate immigrants into

their new country, the critical need is to encourage them to undertake assimilating activities—to

overcome the costs of assimilation. As we have shown, these costs involve familiarity with

language and economy, and no doubt other aspects of life as well.                  Requirements of and

subsidized immersion into the language and culture, perhaps like the Israeli ulpanim, are one

possibility.18




18
  The ulpan is designed to teach adult immigrants to Israel the basic language skills of conversation,
writing and comprehension. Most ulpanim also provide instruction in the fundamentals of Israeli culture,
history, and geography. The primary purpose of the ulpan is to help new citizens to be integrated as quickly
and as easily as possible into the social, cultural and economic life of their new country. (From Wikipedia,
Feburary 15, 2010)


                                                                                                        22
REFERENCES


Katharine Abraham, Aaron Maitland and Suzanne Bianchi, “Nonresponse in the American Time
        Use Survey,” Public Opinion Quarterly, 70 (2006): 676-703.

Australian Bureau of Statistics, Time Use Survey, Australia 1992. Canberra: ABS, 1993.

Heather Antecol, Peter Kuhn and Stephen Trejo, “Assimilation via Prices or Quantities? Sources
       of Immigrant Earnings Growth in Australia, Canada, and the United States,” Journal of
       Human Resources, 41 (Fall 2006): 821-840.

Hoyt Bleakley and Aimee Chin, “Language Skills and Earnings: Evidence from Childhood
      Immigrants,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 86 (May 2004): 481-496.

George Borjas, “Assimilation, Changes in Cohort Quality, and the Earnings of Immigrants,”
       Journal of Labor Economics, 3 (Oct. 1985): 463-489.

------------------, “Self-Selection and the Earnings of Immigrants,” American Economic Review, 77
          (Sept. 1987): 531-53.

------------------, “Assimilation and Changes in Cohort Quality Revisited: What Happened to
          Immigrant Earnings in the 1980s?,” Journal of Labor Economics, 13 (April 1995): 201-
          245.

Michael Burda, Daniel Hamermesh and Philippe Weil, “Total Work, Gender and Social Norms,”
       Unpublished paper, University of Texas at Austin, 2008.

William Burke, “Fitting and Interpreting Cragg’s Tobit Alternative Using STATA,” The STATA
       Journal, 9 (2009): 584-92.

David Card, “Is the New Immigration Really So Bad?” Economic Journal, 115 (November
       2005): F300-323.

Barry Chiswick, “The Effect of Americanization on the Earnings of Foreign-Born Men,” Journal
       of Political Economy, 86 (Oct. 1978): 897-921.

------------------ and Paul Miller, “The Endogeneity between Language and Earnings: International
          Analyses,” Journal of Labor Economics, 13 (April 1995): 246-288.

John Cragg, “Some Statistical Models for Limited Dependent Variables with Application to the
       Demand for Durable Goods,” Econometrica, 39 (Sept. 1971): 829-844.

Brian Duncan and Stephen Trejo, “Immigration and the United States Labour Market,” in John
       Higley and John Nieuwenhuysen, eds., Nations of Immigrants: Australia and the USA
       Compared. Cheltenham, United Kingdom: Edward Elgar Publishing, 2009, pp. 100-114.

Christian Dustmann and Francesca Fabbri, “Language Proficiency and Labour Market
        Performance of Immigrants in the UK,” Economic Journal, 113 (July 2003): 695-717.


                                                                                              23
Reynolds Farley and Richard Alba, “The New Second Generation in the United States,”
       International Migration Review, 36 (Fall 2002): 669-701.

Rachel Friedberg and David Jaeger, “The Economic Diversity of Immigration Across the United
       States,” IZA Discussion Paper No. 4555, 2009.

Reuben Gronau and Daniel Hamermesh, “The Demand for Variety: A Household Production
       Perspective,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 90 (August 2008): 562-572.

Daniel Hamermesh, Harley Frazis and Jay Stewart, “Data Watch: The American Time Use
       Survey,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 19 (2005): 221-232.

Oscar Handlin, The Uprooted. New York: Grosset & Dunlap, 1951.

Mary Kritz and Douglas Gurak, “Immigration and a Changing America,” in Reynolds Farley and
      John Haaga, eds., The American People: Census 2000. New York: Russell Sage
      Foundation, 2005, pp. 259-301.

Joel Perlmann and Roger Waldinger, “Second Generation Decline? Children of Immigrants, Past
        and Present—A Reconsideration,” International Migration Review, 31 (Winter 1997):
        893-921.

Ruben Rumbaut, “Ages, Life Stages, and Generational Cohorts: Decomposing the Immigrant
      First and Second Generations in the United States,” International Migration Review, 38
      (Fall 2004): 1160-1205.

Jay Stewart, “Tobit or Not Tobit,” IZA Discussion Paper No. 4588, November 2009.

Andres Vargas and Manuel Chavez, “Assimilation and Cohort Effects Beyond the Labor Market:
       Time Allocations of Hispanic Immigrants to the U.S.,” Unpublished paper, Texas Tech
       University, 2009.

Anzelika Zaiceva and Klaus Zimmermann “Do Ethnic Minorities “Stretch” Their Time?
       Evidence from the UK Time Use Survey,” IZA Discussion Paper No. 4910, April 2010.




                                                                                         24
Table 1. Descriptive Statistics on Time Use, Immigrants and Natives, ATUS 2004-
08, Mean, Incidence and Conditional Mean, and Standard Error of Mean*

                    Immigrants       Natives                       Immigrants     Natives
                                                  Household
Purchasing             47.41          47.67       activities         115.69       108.71
                       (0.88)         (0.35)                         (1.51)       (0.57)

 Yes?                  0.402          0.461         Yes?              0.718        0.766

 Minutes/day          117.89          103.48        Minutes/day      161.22       141.86
                      (1.50)          (0.58)                         (1.76)       (0.66)

Education              26.44          27.80       Personal care      576.85       560.32
                       (1.16)         (0.46)                         (1.49)       (0.61)

 Yes?                  0.079           0.086        Yes?              0.999        0.999

 Minutes/day          333.87          323.02        Minutes/day      576.95       560.48
                      (9.61)          (3.31)                         (1.48)       (0.61)

Work                  249.79          219.48      Other leisure       26.50       35.10
                      (3.00)          (1.16)                          (0.65)      (0.33)

 Yes?                  0.492           0.461        Yes?              0.355        0.434

 Minutes/day          507.70          475.31        Minutes/day        74.55      80.80
                       3.07)          (1.40)                          (1.47)      (0.65)

                                                  Socializing/
Care                   51.31          45.23        television        237.54       280.51
                       (1.07)         (0.41)                         (1.92)       (0.86)

 Yes?                  0.387           0.359        Yes?              0.936        0.956

 Minutes/day          132.64          125.82        Minutes/day      253.77       293.29
                      (2.08)          (0.83)                         (1.92)       (0.86)
                                                              Organizational/
Eating/drinking               73.98             74.25         civic/religious           16.66               19.72
                             (0.60)             (0.26)                                  (0.64)             (0.28)

  Yes?                        0.976             0.961           Yes?                    0.119              0.142

Minutes/day                  75.83              77.28          Minutes/day             139.56              139.04
                             (0.61)             (0.26)                                 (3.18)              (1.24)

N=                                 8976         55949

*All of the statistics here are weighted to reflect the behavior of a representative American on a representative
day using the variable wt06, based on the ATUS methodology for 2006.
Standard errors of means, here and in Table 2.
Table 2. Descriptive Statistics on Demographics, Immigrants and Natives, ATUS
2004-2008, Mean and Its Standard Error

                Immigrants       Natives



Age               40.62           44.56
                  (0.16)          (0.08)

Hispanic          0.539           0.065

Afr-American      0.077           0.124

Married           0.611           0.531

Male              0.501           0.481

No. Children      0.828           0.491
under 18          (0.01)          (0.01)

Kids 0 to 2?      0.161           0.084

Kids 3 to 5?      0.146           0.077

Kids 6 to 12?     0.246           0.141

Kids 13 to
17?               0.158           0.108

EDUC=12           0.241           0.313

EDUC 13-15        0.163           0.263

EDUC=16           0.150           0.170

EDUC>16           0.101           0.088
Table 3. Marginal Impacts of Immigrant Status and Other Variables on the Probability
 of Engaging in Activities, ATUS 2004-2008 (N=64925)*

                   Purchasing       Education         Work        Assimilating
Variable:

Immigrant             -0.0519         0.0082          0.0015      -0.0153
                     (0.0088)        (0.0039)        (0.0092)     (0.0072)

Age                   0.0031          -0.0117         0.0410       0.0047
                     (0.0009)        (0.0004)        (0.0011)     (0.0007)

Age squared/100       -0.0034         0.0096          -0.0526     -0.0107
                     (0.0009)        (0.0001)        (0.0012)     (0.0007)

Hispanic              0.0109          -0.0093         0.0150       0.0090
                     (0.0094)        (0.0031)        (0.0097)     (0.0072)

Afr-American          -0.0228         0.0029          -0.0501     -0.0497
                     (0.0082)        (0.0034)        (0.0086)     (0.0069)

Married               0.0017          -0.0011         -0.0101      0.0081
                     (0.0057)        (0.0028)        (0.0065)     (0.0049)

Male                  -0.0996         -0.0166         0.1248       0.0140
                     (0.0053)        (0.0022)        (0.0055)     (0.0043)

No. Children          0.0035          0.0039          -0.0117      0.0001
under 18             (0.0057)        (0.0023)        (0.0056)     (0.0049)

Kids 0 to 2?          -0.0003        -0.0390         -0.0502      -0.0561
                     (0.0094)        (0.0042)        (0.0095)     (0.0070)

Kids 3 to 5?          -0.0091        -0.0240         -0.0277      -0.0431
                     (0.0105)        (0.0026)        (0.0103)     (0.0099)

Kids 6 to 12?         0.0083          -0.0145         -0.0185     -0.0086
                     (0.0102)        (0.0037)        (0.0101)     (0.0088)
 Kids 13 to 17?               0.0199               0.0069              0.0042       0.0228
                             (0.0099)             (0.0047)            (0.0099)     (0.0081)

 EDUC=12                      0.0682               -0.0310             0.1209       0.0529
                             (0.0090)             (0.0026)            (0.0100)     (0.0064)

 EDUC 13-15                   0.1110               0.0041              0.1555       0.0999
                             (0.0091)             (0.0033)            (0.0100)     (0.0061)

 EDUC=16                      0.1424               0.0005              0.2133       0.1355
                             (0.0098)             (0.0037)            (0.0102)     (0.0055)


 EDUC>16                      0.1399               0.0413              0.2736       0.1532
                             (0.0111)             (0.0047)            (0.0107)     (0.0051)

 Pseudo-R2                    0.0180               0.2741              0.1333      0.0796


*Standard errors of the estimated coefficients here and in Tables 4, 5 and 7-11.
Table 4. Impacts of Immigrant Status and Other Variables on Time Spent, Conditional
 on Engaging in an Activity, ATUS 2004-2008



                       Purchasing       Education         Work         Assimilating
Variable:

Immigrant                11.449           31.492         19.319           22.113
                         (1.834)          (9.042)        (4.058)          (3.563)

Age                       0.200           -6.887         14.107           12.159
                         (0.187)          (1.492)        (0.564)          (0.388)

Age squared/100           0.217            3.540         -16.383         -17.077
                         (0.002)          (1.674)        (0.649)         (0.412)

Hispanic                 10.366            1.339         21.562            4.395
                         (1.932)          (8,484)        (4.406)          (3.780)

Afr-American              5.968           -13.540         5.870          -10.653
                         (1.761)          (8.639)        (4.145)         (3.555)

Married                   9.764           -5.754          5.381            -0.836
                         (1.304)         (10.378)        (3.066)          (2.704)

Male                     -19.235          -2.639          56.55           65.607
                         (1.092)          (5.906)        (2.524)          (2.184)

No. Children              -3.270          -19.588         -4.350           -7.474
under 18                 (1.281)         (10.378)        (2.873)          (2.592)

Kids 0 to 2?              5.202           4.534           0.911          -34.348
                         (2.104)         (15.900)        (4.803)         (4.238)

Kids 3 to 5?              2.813           -2.194         -0.327           -16.93
                         (2.441)         (20.583)        (5.341)          (4.899)
Kids 6 to 12?         -0.998     2.615    -11.723    -20.601
                     (2.373)   (18.925)   (5.196)    (4.765)

Kids 13 to 17?        4.234     46.104     5.752      4.925
                     (2.338)   (20.522)   (5.083)    (7.178)

EDUC=12               -2.413    -81.676   33.208     14.668
                     (1.847)   (11.149)   (4.589)    (3.679)

EDUC 13-15            -0.286   -36.546    21.346     25.156
                     (1.873)   (9.100)    (4.664)    (3.730)

EDUC=16               -6.608    -36.122   17.955     31.366
                     (2.047)   (13.012)   (4.943)    (4.107)


EDUC>16               -5.129    -56.96      7.284    43.516
                     (2.387)   (17.810)   (0.0107)   (4.808)

Adjusted-R2          0.0225    0.1511     0.0561     0.1095

N=                   30442      4195       25304     46730

t-test of equality
of immigrant
effects on
probability and
conditional
amount                6.09      3.37       5.69       4.85
 Table 5. Marginal Impacts of Immigrant Status on the Probability
  of Engaging in Activities and the Conditional Amounts, ATUS 2004-2008*

                                                  Eating/       Household         Personal
                                       Care      drinking       activities          care
 Outcome:

 Probability of
 engaging in the activity             -0.0718     0.0119           -0.0400        -0.00001
                                     (0.0088)    (0.0030)         (0.0081)        (0.0001)

 Conditional amount                    3.320       2.581          14.119           14.790
                                      (3.316)     (0.966)         (2.574)          (2.514)

 t-test of equality                    0.82        5.63             4.98            6.24

 N (in truncated
 regressions) =                       26,265      62,505           51,356          64,901

                                       Other    Socializing/   Organization/         Non-
                                      leisure    television    Civic/religious   assimilating

 Probability of
 engaging in the activity             -0.0581     -0.0156          -0.0105
                                     (0.0086)    (0.0042)         (0.0054)

 Conditional amount                   -6.885      -17.732         -7.660           -14.056
                                      (2.347)     (3.094)         (5.146)          (3.310)

 t-test of equality of
 immigrant effects on
 probability and
 conditional amount                    3.87        7.14             1.95

 N (in truncated
 regressions) =                       28,082      62,085           11,142          64,925

*Includes all the controls in Tables 3 and 4.




                                                                                       2
Table 6. Descriptive Statistics on Years Since Migration,
 Country of Origin and Generational Status

                                     Immigrants
                                      (N=8976)
                   Years in U.S. :
                         <6            0.190

                        6-10           0.167

                       11-20           0.282

                        >20            0.361

                  Source Country
                  Language:

                      English          0.113

                  English Official      0.129

                    Not-English        0.759

                  Interview Not-       0.364
                   English

                  Mexico               0.210

                                      Natives
                                     (N=55949)
                  Parents
                  Immigrants?

                        Both           0.051

                    Father only        0.025

                    Mother only        0.020
Table 7. Impacts of Years since Migration and Generational Status on the Probability and Conditional
 Amount of an Activity, ATUS 2004-2008*

                    Purchasing          Education          Work         Assimilating     Not-assimilating
Variable:
                                     Probability of the Activity (N=64925)
Immigrants
in U.S.:
<6 years              -0.0868           0.0263            -0.0300            -0.0351
                     (0.0175)          (0.0086)          (0.0187)            (0.0160)

6-10 years            -0.0500           0.0078           -0.0117             -0.0214
                     (0.0193)          (0.0080)          (0.0187)            (0.0152)

11-20 years           -0.0441           0.0103            0.0133             -0.0078
                     (0.0148)          (0.0069)          (0.0151)            (0.0120)

>20 years             -0.0269          -0.00002           0.0008              0.0062
                     (0.0121)          (0.0054)          (0.0131)            (0.0099)

Second generation
Both                  0.0361            0.0117           -0.0319              0.0403
                     (0.0142)          (0.0057)          (0.0156)            (0.0102)

Father only           0.0050            0.0131           -0.0071              0.0084
                     (0.0181)          (0.0098)          (0.0202)            (0.0135)

Mother only           0.0244            0.0188           -0.0314              0.0224
                     (0.0201)          (0.0098)          (0.0204)            (0.0149)

Pseudo-R2             0.0183            0.2751            0.1335             0.0802
                                                  Minutes          Conditional on the Activity

In U.S.:
<6 years                  20.232                 22.949              20.390                 18.099    -6.790
                          (3.864)               (14.013)             (7.947)                (6.980)   (6.495)

6-10 years                15.891                 38.552              16.904                 20.771    -13.898
                          (3.974)               (18.461)             (8.325)                (7.449)   (6.921)

11-20 years               10.370                 69.096              17.545                 31.546    -25.298
                          (3.124)               (15.169)             (6.517)                (5.911)   (5.518)

>20 years                  8.617                 -35.264             21.133                 16.877    -13.734
                          (2.648)               (24.345)             (6.070)                (5.329)   (4.826)
Parents
Immigrants:
Both                       7.822                 20.978              -4.385                 -1.947    -9.628
                          (2.746)               (12.023)             (7.323)                (5.663)   (5.169)


Father                     -4.385                -7.624               -0.112                -2.309    0.746
                          (3.737)              (19.0308)             (9.927)                (7.769)   (6.982)

Mother                     -3.747               -13.335              15.741                  0.469    -8.595
                          (4.039)               (18.676)             (9.927)                (8.279)   (7.728)

Adjusted-R2               0.0230                 0.1538              0.0560                 0.1095    0.1305

N=                         30442                  4195                25304                 46730     64924

*Here and in Tables 8 and 9 the same control variables as in Tables 3 and 4 are included.
Table 8. Impacts of English in Home Country on the Probability and Conditional
 Amount of an Activity, ATUS 2004-2008

                                                                                     Not-
                 Purchasing      Education       Work        Assimilating        assimilating
Variable:
                                Probability of the Activity (N=64925)

English            0.0033          0.0091        0.0004         0.0149
                  (0.0204)        (0.0095)      (0.0211)       (0.0151)

Official           -0.0800         0.0133        -0.0523         -0.0572
English           (0.0189)        (0.0091)      (0.0196)        (0.0185)

No English         -0.0560         0.0070        0.0149         -0.0122
                  (0.0103)        (0.0046)      (0.0108)        (0.0083)

Pseudo-R2          0.0181          0.2741       0.1335          0.0798

                                   Minutes      Conditional on the Activity

English             9.510          35.238        13.857         17.234             -20.760
                   (4.255)        (25.358)      (10.028)        (8.683)            (7.991)

Official           14.821          26.015       18.192          13.021              5.614
English            (4.281)        (20.698)      (9.107)         (8.143)            (7.475)

No English         11.129          32.225       20.626          25.222             -17.438
                   (2.153)        (10.385)      (4.706)         (4.136)            (3.846)

Adjusted-R2        0.0230          0.1507       0.0560          0.1095              .1305

N=                 30442           4195          25304           46730              64924




                                                                                      2
                          Probability of the Activity (N=37914)

Immigrant      -0.0272      0.0148        -0.0032         -0.0046
               (0.0124)    (0.0056)      (0.0128)        (0.0100)

Mexican         0.0124     -0.0044       -0.0217          -0.0135
immigrant      (0.0274)    (0.0089)      (0.0278)         (0.0225)

Interview      -0.0786     -0.0207        0.0564          -0.0307
 Not-English   (0.0200)    (0.0073)      (0.0209)         (0.0163)

Pseudo-R2      0.0188       0.2972        0.1329           0.083

                             Minutes     Conditional on the Activity

Immigrant       5.376       29.075        13.227          17.057       -13.323
               (2.512)     (12.800)       (5.568)         (4.945)      (4.600)


Mexican         2.068      -31.894        11.146          -4.726        8.971
mmigrant       (6.501)     (37.691)      (13.427)        (12.042)      (10.852)

Interview      19.030      -35.403        27.143          25.633       -10.064
 Not-English   (4.554)     (22.342)       (9.413)         (8.349)      (7.503)

Adjusted-R2    0.0230       0.1420        0.0572          0.1066       0.1314

N=              17617        2357          14924           27243        37913




                                                                          3
Table 9. Impacts of Home-Country GDP Per Capita on the Probability and Conditional
 Amount of an Activity, ATUS 2004-2008
                                                                                  Not-
               Purchasing      Education        Work          Assimilating    assimilating

Variable:                     Probability of the Activity (N=64925)

GDP/Capita       0.0153         -0.0016        -0.0099           0.0049
($10,000)       (0.0052)       (0.0021)       (0.0058)          (0.0043)

English          -0.0369        0.0139         0.0259            0.0025
                (0.0250)       (0.0123)       (0.0266)          (0.0192)

Official         -0.0890         0.0144        -0.0465          -0.0609
English         (0.0190)        (0.0094)      (0.0200)          (0.0189)

No English       -0.0727        -0.0087        0.0257           -0.0178
                (0.0121)       (0.0055)       (0.0127)          (0.0099)

Pseudo-R2        0.0183         0.2742         0.1336            0.0799

                                 Minutes     Conditional on the Activity

GDP/Capita        -1.269         5.799          -6.904            -8.654          6.724
($10,000)        (1.136)        (6.700)        (2.634)           (2.268)         (2.077)

English          13.139         48.889         31.129            40.271          -38.452
                 (5.354)       (29.862)       (11.997)          (10.574)         (9.680)

Official         15.678          28.314        21.878            18.025           1.454
English          (4.349)        (20.868)       (9.214)           (8.247)         (7.584)

No English       12.614         37.046         27.990            34.701          -24.912
                 (2.530)       (11.784)        (5.480)           (4.824)         (4.485)

Adjusted-R2      0.0225         0.1507          0.049            0.1098          0.1307

N=               30442           4195          25304             46730           64924




                                                                                     4
Table 10. Impacts of Immigrant Status and English-Language Knowledge Home-Country
on the Probability and Conditional Amount of an Activity, Australian Time Use Survey,
1992*

                                                                  Education/
                                  Purchasing                       Training               Work

                 Probability of the Activity ( NDAYS = 12,998; NPeople = 6618)

 Variable:

 Immigrant                       -0.0140 0.0170              0.0089 0.0011            -0.0320 -0.0025
                                (0.0114) (0.0128)          (0.0053) (0.0054)         (0.0129) (0.0146)

 Foreign                          -------- -0.0953          --------- 0.0257          --------- -0.0895
  language                        -------- (0.0175)         --------- (0.0093)        --------- (0.0191)

 Pseudo-R2                       0.0202 0.0221               0.2568     0.2588         0.1489 0.1506

                                              Minutes Conditional on the Activity

 Immigrant                         6.940 3.690              41.162       15.688          9.339 3.906
                                 (2.375) (2.651)          (21.215)      (22.966)       (8.183) (8.781)

 Foreign                         --------- 11.427           ---------    65.200        --------- 20.667
  language                       --------- (3.723)          ---------   (28.631)       --------- (13.446)

 Adjusted-R2                     0.0254 0.0266              0.1504      0.1576         0.0987 0.0992

 NDAYS                             6764                       1048                       5607

 N People                          4714                         703                      3580

 t-test of equality of
 immigrant effects on
 probability and
 conditional amount                 2.52                                  2.65                    1.38

*Also included in the equations are a vector of indicators of educational attainment, a quadratic in the
respondent’s age, gender, marital status, the number of children under age 15, and their distribution by age
category. Standard errors are clustered on the individuals.




                                                                                                          5
 Table 11. Impacts of Immigrant Status on the Probability and Conditional Amount of an Activity,
 Australian Time Use Survey, 1992, N Days =12,998

                                                    Eating/       Household        Personal
                                          Care     drinking       activities         care
 Outcome:

 Probability of
 engaging in the activity             -0.0149       -0.0031          -0.0064        0.0013
                                     (0.0128)      (0.0047)         (0.0080)       (0.0006)

 Conditional amount                    6.661         3.071           0.538          3.566
                                      (4.786)       (1.169)         (3.260)        (3.045)

 t-test of equality                       1.05       3.17             1.36           0.22

 N=                                       3,676     12,394           11,253         12,970



                                       Other      Socializing/   Organization/
                                      leisure      television    Civic/religious

 Probability of
 engaging in the activity             -0.0357       -0.0008          -0.0444
                                     (0.0095)      (0.0059)         (0.0096)

 Conditional amount                   -9.861        16.433           6.088
                                      (4.421)       (3.516)         (7.221)

 t-test of equality of
 immigrant effects on
 probability and
 conditional amount                       2.39       5.72             ----

 N=                                   10,068        12,080           3,013

*Includes all the controls in Table 10.




                                                                                              6
Appendix Table 1. Categorization of Time-Use Activities, ATUS 2004-2008

                       Type of Activity

      Purchasing         Education             Work                 Other
        (47.6)             (27.6)             (223.8)              (1120.3)

  Consumer goods       Attending class
  (23.9)               (16.6)             Working (203.2)   Care (46.1)
                       Homework and       Work-related      Eating and drinking
  Grocery shopping     research (8.7)     activities        (74.2)
                                          Other income-
                       Travel for         generating        Household activities
  Financial services   education          activities        (109.7)
                                          Job search and     Personal care
  Medical services                        interviewing      (562.7)
  Personal care
  services                                Travel for work   Other leisure (33.9)
                                                            Socializing and
  Household services                                        television (274.4)
  Home repair                                               Organizational/civic/
  services                                                  religious (19.3)
  Vehicle repair

  Government
  services
  Travel for
  purchasing (17.4)




                                                                                    7
