                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           MAKING SAVERS WINNERS:
                 AN OVERVIEW OF PRIZE-LINKED SAVINGS PRODUCTS

                                      Melissa Schettini Kearney
                                            Peter Tufano
                                          Jonathan Guryan
                                             Erik Hurst

                                        Working Paper 16433
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16433


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2010




The authors thank colleagues at the D2D Fund, Howell Jackson, Anna Lusardi, Olivia Mitchell and
Mike Orszag for beneficial discussions and for their help in conducting the research on which this
paper is based. The authors also thank Seth Freedman for his excellent research assistance. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Melissa Schettini Kearney, Peter Tufano, Jonathan Guryan, and Erik Hurst. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Making Savers Winners: An Overview of Prize-Linked Savings Products
Melissa Schettini Kearney, Peter Tufano, Jonathan Guryan, and Erik Hurst
NBER Working Paper No. 16433
October 2010
JEL No. G21,G28,H30,K3

                                             ABSTRACT

For over three centuries and throughout the globe, people have enthusiastically bought savings products
that incorporate lottery elements. In lieu of paying traditional interest to all investors proportional
to their balances, these Prize Linked Savings (PLS) accounts distribute periodic sizeable payments
to some investors using a lottery-like drawing where an investor’s chances of winning are proportional
to one’s account balances. This paper describes these products, provides examples of their use, argues
for their potential popularity in the United States —especially to low and moderate income non-savers—and
discusses the laws and regulations in the United States that largely prohibit their issuance.


Melissa Schettini Kearney                           Jonathan Guryan
Department of Economics                             Northwestern University
University of Maryland                              Institute for Policy Research
3105 Tydings Hall                                   2040 Sheridan Road
College Park, MD 20742                              Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER                                            and NBER
kearney@econ.umd.edu                                j-guryan@northwestern.edu

Peter Tufano                                        Erik Hurst
Harvard Business School                             Booth School of Business
Baker Library 359                                   University of Chicago
Soldiers Field                                      Harper Center
Boston, MA 02163                                    Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER                                            and NBER
ptufano@hbs.edu                                     erik.hurst@chicagobooth.edu
       Policy initiatives aimed at increasing household saving rates typically focus on things like

mandating saving, changing the choice architecture of saving decisions, providing financial

incentives, or embedding saving in a social network.1 In this chapter we review an alternative

policy option: Prize Linked Savings (PLS) accounts. This mechanism adds a lottery-like feature

to an otherwise standard saving account, creating an asset structure that might hold great appeal

to the target low-saver segment of the population. While PLS accounts would be innovative in

the United States, such accounts have already proven to be popular in other countries. In

addition, such accounts are potentially a more cost-effective way of promoting saving compared

to matching accounts or policies that use financial incentives to motivate saving behavior. The

primary obstacle to the widespread adoption and offering of PLS accounts in the United States is

the questionable legality of such products, which we discuss below.

       Prize Linked Savings (PLS) accounts differ from standard saving accounts in one specific

way. Instead of, or perhaps in addition to, offering a fixed interest return, PLS accounts offer a

stochastic return in that depositors periodically receive a chance to win a specified (and

potentially large) amount that is a function of deposit amounts. In this sense, this chance is

similar to a lottery ticket. The products are unlike a traditional lottery in that the principal is

returned to the investor, either at the maturity of the instrument or on demand. The random

component of the return on saving can take the form of in-kind prizes – as is commonly offered

by commercial banks in Latin America – or as a cash prize awarded to account holders as a part

of a regular drawing, as is the case with Britain’s Premium Bonds.

       There are two features of PLS accounts that would likely be attractive to potential savers.

First, they offer a skewed distribution of returns. Many potential investors desire some exposure




                                                1
to upside risk (i.e. a chance to be rich). Second, to the extent that they offer a lottery-like

component, PLS accounts potentially offer an element of entertainment or fun.

       We present three pieces of existing indirect evidence in support of the view that PLS

products would be popular among low- and moderate-income households in the United States.

First, the propensity of many low- and middle-income US families to gamble on state lotteries

indirectly suggests that a saving vehicle offering a low probability chance of a high payoff prize

would be an attractive asset, particularly among low- and middle- income investors. Second, PLS

assets are popular in several other countries and have been popular for over three centuries.

Third, two recent PLS demonstration experiments in the United States show promising initial

results in terms of consumer take-up. There is an important caveat to interpreting this evidence

on the popularity of PLS products: to date, there is no evidence on the fundamental issue of

whether these products increase total household saving. This remains an important question for

future research.2



The Appeal of PLS Accounts

       A consensus has emerged among academics and policy-makers that traditional vehicles

for increasing saving, including IRAs and 401(k)s, are not generally successful at raising saving

by individuals at the lower end of the wealth distribution. Recent initiatives such as the Saver’s

Credit and Individual Development Accounts, which use matching funds as an additional

enticement to save, are promising but require substantial government financial support (Tufano

and Schneider 2008).

       The promotion of prize-linked saving products takes seriously the idea that potential

savers place a high value on the chance to ‘win big’. We speculate that there is unmet consumer



                                                2
demand in America for saving products that offer the (remote) prospect of changing current

wealth status, rather than incrementally building wealth with certainty. If this speculation is

correct, then an otherwise standard investment vehicle offering a financial return in the form of a

chance to win a large prize, rather than a guaranteed modest return, would be an even more

effective way to motivate individuals to contribute current income to investment accounts than

schemes such as contribution matching. Furthermore, the lottery component of the PLS account

might have direct appeal beyond the chance to win large prizes. For those who consider playing

the lottery to be fun, a saving account with a lottery component may be more attractive than a

standard saving account with stable returns.

       The potential appeal of PLS accounts to U.S. households. A fundamental policy

question behind a prize-linked saving policy is whether observed preferences for uncertain

payoffs could be leveraged to encourage saving. Our conjecture that it could is based on two sets

of observations. The experience of lottery gambling in the United States demonstrates that there

is widespread demand for low-probability, high-prize gambling products, in particular among

low-income individuals and households. In the year 2008, 42 states and the District of Columbia

offered state lotteries, bringing in roughly $60 billion in sales or more than $540 per household

nationwide.3 In the same year, American households spent $430 per household on all dairy

products, and $444 on alcohol.4 We buy more lottery tickets than milk or beer.

       Lottery gambling is also popular among US low- and moderate-income households. The

1998 National Opinion Research Council (NORC) survey of gambling, the most recent

nationally-representative survey of gambling behavior in the United States, reveals three general

facts (Kearney 2005). First, lottery gambling extends across races, sexes, income, and education

groups. Second, with regard to race, black respondents spend nearly twice as much on lottery



                                                3
tickets as do white and Hispanic respondents, and the highest rates of participation and

expenditures are recorded among black male high school dropouts. Third, average annual lottery

spending in dollar terms is roughly equal across the lowest, middle, and highest income groups.

This implies that on average, low-income households spend a larger percentage of their wealth

on lottery tickets than other US households.5

       Much has been written about potential explanations for gambling among consumers. The

case of state lottery gambling is particularly interesting to consider because state lottery tickets

offer a negative expected return. On average, state lotteries offer a (negative) return of roughly

52 cents on the dollar (La Fleur 2001). Given such a large negative return, why do more than

half of American adults participate in lottery gambling? There are numerous possible

explanations. Many casual observers associate lottery gambling with misinformation or

confusion on the part of lottery gamblers. The choice to buy lottery tickets need not be a mistake,

however. Traditional economic consumer choice theory would permit such gambles among risk-

averse consumers, if these consumers received sufficient entertainment value from gambling or

utility from giving in this way to a charity, since most states use the money for education or other

public goods. Behavioral economists offer as a possible explanation that lottery gamblers

overweight the small probabilities associated with winning.

       Another possible explanation for lottery play, most relevant to this chapter, is that state

lotteries provide some low-wealth would-be investors with a rare asset offering some chance at

winning a life-altering amount of money. For those with few assets or who encounter other

barriers – either real or psychological – to engaging in the world of traditional financial markets,

a lottery ticket might fill the void of a ‘missing market’. If a low- to moderate-wealth individual




                                                 4
hopes to win a large payout – say, to purchase a car or make a down-payment on a house– this

might be the only vehicle at his disposal capable of remotely reaching that goal.

       The introduction of prize-linked savings products could provide an alternative to lottery

tickets that offers a higher (and certainly less negative) return on one’s ‘investment’. Survey

data corroborate this quasi-investment framing by some lottery players. A 2006 survey by the

Consumer Federation of America and the Financial Planning Association on a representative

sample of more than 1,000 U.S. adults found that ‘21% of Americans, and 38% of those with

incomes below $25,000, think that winning the lottery represents the most practical way for them

to accumulate several hundred thousand dollars’ (CFA 2006).

       The potential appeal of PLS products must also be understood in the context of

alternative products. Emergency savers who demand liquidity and no principal loss are usually

limited to some sort of low-yielding demand deposit. While theory might suggest that the power

of compound interest would provide strong motivations to save, for an emergency saver whose

uncertain horizon might be a few years or a few months, compounding does not offer compelling

reasons to save. To be concrete, in March 2010, the average American Money Market Account

(which has limitations on withdrawals) earned an APR of 0.82 percent.6         For an emergency

saver with a balance of $1500, the monthly interest earned would be $1.05, before the payment

of income taxes. These sums—smaller than most lottery tickets—provide small savers with

scant motivation to keep their money in the bank. A PLS structure allows one to forego these

small sums yet maintain liquidity and principal certainty, while offering a chance to win a large

amount of money or a durable good.

       In addition, in a series of experimental studies, Volpp et al. (2008a, b) have shown that in

specific settings, subjects can respond more strongly to stochastic incentives than to piece rates.



                                                5
The stochastic incentives they examine resemble the lottery portion of a PLS.              In one

experiment, subjects who were attempting to lose weight were eligible to be entered in a lottery,

if at a monthly weigh-in their weight met personal weight-loss goals. Those in the lottery-

incentive condition lost significantly more weight than subjects who had non-incentivized

monthly weigh-ins, and slightly more weight than subjects who faced non-lottery incentives

(though this latter difference was not statistically significant).

      The potential appeal of PLS accounts to U.S. issuers. Products come to market if they

are attractive to both buyers and sellers. There are a number of reasons why a PLS structure

would be popular to issuers. Here we highlight four reasons why prize-linked savings accounts

are relatively easy to design, operate, and market:

   1. Ease of Marketing: Unlike an indexed-linked structure, a PLS structure does not require

      the buyer to have knowledge of, or the seller to educate the buyer about, financial markets.

      To the contrary, the concept of lotteries is well understood.

   2. Ease of production: A financial institution offering a PLS product can invest the proceeds

      from PLS instruments into relatively simple investments, rather than employ a complex

      investment management strategy.

   3. Apparent transparency: One can create and maintain salient prizes (e.g., $100,000) by

      adjusting the odds over time as underlying investment returns or the size of the pool

      changes.

   4. Ease of providing liquidity: A prize-linked program provider can provide easy liquidity

      merely by denying those making withdrawals eligibility to win prizes.

        It may be worth pausing here to ask why prize-linked savings accounts are not

widespread, given the appeal both to potential savers and to issuers. One issue is that, though one



                                                   6
might think that all financial institutions would be eager to gather assets from all savers, real-

world experience demonstrates this is not true. For example, minimum mutual fund investment

amounts keep people with less than $2500 to $3000 from opening an account in many funds

(Schneider and Tufano 2007). In addition, as we discuss below, there are currently significant

legal and regulatory obstacles to PLS accounts in the U.S. Yet in places without such restrictions,

prize-linked savings accounts have been both widespread and quite popular.


International Evidence on the Appeal of PLS Accounts

       In this section we briefly review the historical evidence, broad international usage, and

data from two modern version of PLS in the United Kingdom and South Africa.

       A brief history. Prize-linked savings programs have existed since at least the 1694

‘Million Adventure’ in the United Kingdom (Murphy 2005). Initially proposed to cope with debt

from the Nine Years’ War (1689-97), the Million Adventure offered 100,000 tickets at £10

each.7 A small number, i.e., 2,500 of the tickets (2.5 percent), would win prizes from £10 per

year to £1,000 per year for 16 years. The Million Adventure was also a saving program, in that it

paid ticket holders a £1 per year until 1710, or a 6.15 percent annual return. While a single ticket

in the Million Adventure was out of reach of most citizens, tickets were also made available

through syndicates to those with small incomes. Thomas Neale, the ‘Groom Porter to their

Majesties’ who oversaw the program, commented on the success of the Million Adventure to

attract even small investors, ‘many Thousands who only have small sums, and cannot now bring

them into the Publick, [may now] engage themselves in this Fund’ (Murphy 2005, p. 231). The

Million Adventure is reported to have attracted tens of thousands of investors (of the five to six

million Britons at the time) making it an unprecedented large-scale financial saving tool.




                                                 7
       Since 1694, many similar programs that combine gambling and savings have sprung up

in many different countries all over the world. Levy-Ullmann, writing in 1896, surveyed PLS

activity at that time. He found that PLS, in the form of lottery bonds, ‘may be found in most of

the financial markets of Europe, and of nationalities, German, Austrian, Spanish, Greek, Italian,

Swedish and Swiss’ (Levy-Ullman 1896). Lottery bonds are still used in some countries, for

example Sweden.8

       Current examples. Table 1 lists examples of PLS products offered internationally by

various commercial banks and governments around the world.9 Guillen and Tschoegl (2002)

survey the history and institutional details of numerous international offerings. As described in

their survey piece, commercial banks have been offering prize-linked accounts throughout Latin

America since the 1990s. Banco Bilboa Vizcaya, a private bank in Latin America, launched a

lottery-linked product in Mexico (1996), Colombia (1997), Venezuela (1997), and Argentina

(1997). Since 1990, Spanish private banks have offered accounts with periodic lottery prizes.

Private financial institutions also market prize-linked savings products in Germany, Indonesia,

and Japan. In Germany, since 1952, savings banks have offered accounts where depositors can

allocate any new inflow into the account between saving in the bank (which offers a traditional

return) and purchases of lottery tickets from the regional association of saving banks. In 1986,

BRI in Indonesia, a financial institution that specializes in microfinance lending to the poor,

introduced accounts with stochastic interest rates between 0 and 1.25 percent per month

(Morduch 1999). In 1994 the Jonan Shinkin Bank in Japan introduced prize-linked one-year time

deposits, despite Ministry of Finance disapproval. These accounts attracted deposits worth about

$US 305 million into the bank in a matter of days, attracting an additional 13 banks to

immediately offer similar products (Guillen and Tschoegl 2002).



                                               8
       Many governments also offer some form of prize-linked savings products. Guillen and

Tschoegl (2002) report that since 1918 the Swedish government has offered bonds with coupon

payments determined by lottery; in recent years such bonds have accounted for approximately

eight percent of the Swedish government’s debt. Outside of Europe, government entities in

Kenya and Pakistan, among others, have also offered such products. Below, we discuss one long-

lived government program in the United Kingdom.

       United Kingdom Premium Bonds. Prime Minister Harold Macmillan announced the

invention of Premium Savings Bonds in April 1956, to encourage saving after World War II.

Despite criticism from both parties in the House of Commons and religious groups, sales

launched on November 1st, 1956 in Trafalgar Square with the byline ‘Savings with a Thrill!’

Macmillan reasoned that ‘[Premium Bonds] will appeal to those who are not attracted by the

rewards of interest, but do respond to the incentives of fortune’ (National Savings and

Investments 2006, pp. 1, 4). Consumer response proved him quite right with £5 million (near £84

million in 2005 pounds) purchased on the first day. In 1956 the top prize was £1,000 or about

£16,729.30 in 2005 pounds.10 The bonds continue to be popular and have been immortalized in

popular British culture, with one rocker’s lyrics thanking the computer that picks the winners,

‘Good old E.R.N.I.E; he coughed up a tenner on a Premium Bond win.’11

       The Premium Bond program is administered by National Savings and Investments

(NS&I), an Executive Agency of the Chancellor of the Exchequer. (NS&I is comparable to the

U.S. Department of Public Debt, which is part of the U.S. Treasury.) As described on the NS&I

website, ‘Instead of paying interest, bonds are entered into monthly prize drawings…. When

someone invests in Premium Bonds they are allocated a series of numbers, one for each £1

invested. The minimum purchase is £100 (or £50 when you buy by monthly standing order),



                                              9
which provides 100 Bond numbers and, therefore, 100 chances of winning a prize.’12 An

individual investor can hold up to £30,000 in Premium Bonds. The monthly drawings include the

chance at a £1 million jackpot prize as well as lower tier prizes ranging from £25 to £100,000.

Note that this structure of a jackpot prize plus lower tier offerings is similar to the common

structure of U.S. state lottery jackpot games. Each month’s prize fund is equal to one month’s

interest on the total value of all eligible bonds. The February 2010 annual prize fund interest rate

was 1.50 percent. The interest rate used to calculate the prize fund, the number of jackpots, the

share of prize fund allocated to each prize band, and the odds of winning are all variable. These

bonds can be purchased by UK residents over the age of 16 for themselves or for their children

or grandchildren. Premium bond winnings are exempt from UK Income Tax and Capital Gains

Tax.

       Official figures report that there are 23 million bondholders holding £26 billion worth of

Premium Bonds nationwide. The popularity of these bonds has soared in recent decades, with the

amount invested rising from £4 billion in 1994 to £40 billion in 2008.13 Tufano (2008) examines

aggregate predictors of per capita Premium Bond sales considering the prize rate, top prize, and

annual stock returns, among other aggregate series. The prize rate can be considered analogous

to a bond yield, capturing information about the number and size of various prizes. Tufano notes

that the prize rate has generally been lower than the rate paid on comparable government bonds,

which (assuming that investors know this) suggests that Premium Bond investors are willing to

forgo return to purchase this type of prize-linked instrument. His multivariate regression analysis

finds that annual net sales are positively correlated with the size of the largest prize offered, the

prize rate spread (prize rate less gilt rate), and annual stock returns. These correlated movements

potentially suggest that Premium Bonds offer both an investment value (since demand moves



                                                 10
positively with prize rate spread) as well as gambling consumption value (since demand

increases with the size of the largest prize, conditional on prize rate).14 The positive correlation

with annual stock returns might suggest that these are not considered substitute products or that

they are purchased by different sets of investors.

         The United Kingdom’s Family Resource Survey (FRS) provides information about who

is investing in Premium Bonds: the FRS 2004-2005 Annual Report tabulates information about

the percent of households with different types of saving accounts.15 Among two-adult

households without children (sample size of 9,178), 96 percent have any type of account; 30

percent have a Premium Bond account: and 26 percent have stock holdings; and 5 percent with

National Savings bonds. Among two-adult households with children (sample size of 5,714), 97

percent have any type of account; 19 percent have a Premium Bond account: 22 percent have

stock holdings; and one percent with a National Savings bond. Among one-adult families with

children (sample size of 2,050); 93 percent have any type of account; six percent have a

Premium Bond account: five percent have stock holdings, and one percent have National Savings

Bonds.

         Our tabulations of the 2004-2005 FRS data show that Premium Bonds are held by

households across the income distribution. Nineteen percent of families hold Premium bonds; the

figure is 27 percent among families headed by a married couple, and 12 percent among single-

headed families. Tabulations by income quintiles, reported in Table 2 below, reveal that the

likelihood of holding Premium Bonds increases with income, as is typical of investments more

generally. These bonds might thus be considered ‘normal’ goods. Still, low-income households

participate in this market, with nearly nine percent of households in the lowest income quintile

holding Premium Bonds and 12 percent in the second quintile. The general pattern of



                                                 11
participation by income group is maintained if we consider only households with any type of

account.

       We can get a sense of the relative appeal of Premium Bonds by income group, by

analyzing the fraction of that group that owns the product relative to the fraction owning the

most popular product for that group. For example, among households making £200 to 300

weekly, the most popular saving product is a society account, with 39 percent of households

holding this account. In this same income group, 18 percent hold premium bonds, so that the

fraction holding premium bonds scaled by the fraction holding the most common account type is

46 percent. Figure 1 below shows this scaled holding measure: it indicates that premium bonds’

relative appeal seems strongest among lower-income households, with some increase in relative

appeal among higher income households. The latter may reflect the fact that the bonds’ winnings

are exempt from taxation.

       First National Bank of South Africa’s Million a Month Account (MaMA). Next we

review another example of a Prize Linked Savings account: the South African bank First

National Bank’s Million a Month Account (MaMA). This provides a nice contrasting example to

the UK program described above for two reasons: first, the MaMA accounts constitute a

privately-run PLS program. Second, whereas the government-run UK Premium Bond program is

long-lived, the MaMA accounts were short-lived owing to legal and regulatory barriers.16

       First National Bank (FNB), one of the four largest retail banks in the South African

market, introduced its Million-a-Month-Account in 2005. The MaMA account was a no-fee

savings account which paid a nominal interest rate (0.25 percent) and rewarded savers with one

prize entry for every 100 rand invested.17 Prize drawings were held monthly and at each

drawing, 114 prizes were awarded ranging in value from 1 million rand to 1,000 rand. The



                                              12
product was structured as a 32-day notice account, a common South African account form akin

to a certificate of deposit in that the account holder had to give 32 days notice prior to

withdrawing her funds from the program.

       A bit of background on the South African financial services sector is useful in

understanding this product. The majority (56 percent) of black South Africans are unbanked

versus seven percent of white South Africans. Nearly three-quarters (72 percent) of low income

South Africans were unbanked. In 2003, banks and the government entered into the Financial

Sector Charter, in which banks committed to try to increase the fraction of low income banked

South Africans from 28 to 80 percent. Banks expanded distribution outlets, designed low-fee

small balance products, and created marketing campaigns to reach out to the unbanked.

       FNB executives had studied the UK Premium Bond experience and visited other

countries where PLS programs were in place.         While there were no PLS programs in South

Africa, they reasoned that a program of this sort would be successful in the country based on the

widespread popularity of gaming and the national lottery in the country:


       In 2003, the national lottery had 99% consumer awareness and 72% of the population
       regularly entered to win the lottery’s 20 to 30 million rand jackpot. In 2003, players
       purchased 3,772 million rand in tickets and the lottery board awarded 2,119 million rand
       in prizes to 31 million winners. Participation in the lottery was fairly evenly distributed
       across demographic groups, with little difference by education, race, income, gender, or
       education. Lower-income players spent less in absolute terms on the lottery than high
       income players, though they spent a larger proportion of income. Among those with less
       than 800 rand in disposable monthly income, monthly lottery expenditures averaged
       33.40 rand, about 8.5% of disposable income. Among those with more than 12,000 rand
       in monthly disposable income, lottery expenditures were much higher, at 126 rand, but as
       a percent of income much lower, at just 0.8%. (Cole, Collins, Schneider and Tufano
       2007, p. 7)


       The program ran from January 2005 through March 2008. During this time, the bank

used print and television advertising and in-branch promotion to sell the product. By March

                                               13
2008, FNB had opened over 1.1 million accounts and collected 1.4 billion rand in deposits.18

Executives report that about 12 percent of the accounts were to KYC (‘know your customer’)-

exempt accounts, a marker for the unbanked. They estimated that they opened accounts for 7.1

percent of all banked South Africans and brought 1.1 percent of the unbanked into the banking

system.

       The success of the system likely also brought about its ultimate closure, as the South

African Lottery Board sued to have the program closed as an illegal lottery. Though the program

no longer operates, the bank received ongoing benefits from the MaMA program. At the time

the program was shut by the government, FNB offered to return monies to savers or they could

elect to roll the funds into a more traditional 32-day notice account. Fourteen months after the

program was shuttered, the bank continued to maintain 53 percent of the accounts and 83 percent

of the balances.


Recent Prize Linked Savings (PLS) demonstration projects in the U.S.

       Credit unions have been on the forefront of launching prize-linked savings products in

the United States. Working with the non-profit Doorways to Dreams (D2D) Fund and other

partners, credit unions have implemented two demonstration projects designed to test the

feasibility and popularity of PLS accounts among low and moderate income populations.19

Centra Credit Union project in Indiana. In October 2006, with funding support from the

Filene Research Institute and Affinity Plus Federal Credit Union, D2D assisted the Indiana-based

Centra Credit Union in a launch of ‘Super Savings,’ a prize-based savings product. In order to

comply with relevant law (reviewed below), this product was structured as a sweepstakes with

‘no purchase required’. In January 2009, assisted by the D2D Fund, the Filene Research Institute,




                                               14
the Center for Financial Services Innovation, and the Michigan Credit Union League, eight credit

unions launched a PLS product called ‘Save to Win’.

       As part of the Centra Credit Union demonstration, a pre-pilot marketing survey was

administered to gauge potential consumer interest in a PLS product. This survey was completed

by 547 intercepted Wal-Mart customers in Clarksville, Indiana in November and December

2006. Clarksville is in Clark County, Indiana, which has a population of 103,569. According to

U.S. census figures, median household income in the county is $41,719 (compared to $48,451

nationally). The survey’s principal question was ‘Would you be interested in a savings account

that awarded chances to win prizes based on the amount of money you save? The account would

also have no fees, no minimum balance, and still earn interest.’ The survey sought to gauge local

interest in the product. While neither nationally representative nor random, the demographic

correlates of expressed interest are potentially revealing about who might take-up PLS products,

should they be offered in the United States.

       Among all respondents who completed the pre-pilot survey, 58 percent reported interest

in the described PLS product; 26 percent reported not being interested; and 16 percent responded

that they did not know. In multivariate analysis including traditional demographic information,

Tufano, Maynard and De Neve (2008) find that expressed preference was stronger among people

who claimed to not have regular savings plans, defined as those who either stated that they did

not save or merely saved if they happened to have money that they hadn’t spent that month.

Compared to individuals or households with a saving plan, a non-saver was 70 percent more

likely to show interest in the PLS product. PLS demand was also strongest with people with

almost no saving ($1 to $2000), relative to those with no savings whatsoever or those with more.

They also found that optimism, measured by the belief that one’s financial well-being will



                                               15
improve over the next five years, was a positive determinant of interest in PLS accounts. Finally,

survey participants reporting spending of $100 or more over in lottery games in the past six

months were twice as interested as others.

       In terms of consumer take-up, Centra opened over 1,300 Super Savings accounts and

amassed over $500,000 in deposits within three months of launch even with limited marketing.

This represented 1.3 percent of its member base in early 2007. Additionally, most customers

maintained their deposit balances in the product following the first three months of the launch.

As a small pilot run by a single credit union, Centra’s program prize offerings were quite small,

which likely limited its ultimate success.20 Additional experimental research is needed to

ascertain how the design of PLS products, including the size of the top prize, affects consumer

interest and take-up.21

       Save to Win demonstration project in Michigan. Another PLS demonstration project

was launched in 2009 in Michigan. The ‘Save to Win’ demonstration was run as a saving

promotion in eight participating credit unions in the state of Michigan from late January 2009 to

end December 2009. This demonstration was legally permissible under a unique provision in

Michigan law that permits credit unions in the state to offer ‘savings promotion raffles,’ with

only those who save eligible to win prizes (in contrast to a sweepstakes). The Save to Win project

enabled several credit unions to join forces in order to offer a prize-linked savings product with a

headline-grabbing $100,000 grand prize, in contrast to the small scale issue faced by the Centra

Credit Union experience described above.

       At any time during 2009, members of participating credit unions could open a qualifying

share certificate account to enter the saving raffle. This certificate was a 12-month time deposit

and required only $25 to open. Deposits were unlimited, but the number of entries in the raffle



                                                16
was capped at 10 per month. The amount of interest paid on these certificates varied by credit

union, but in 2009, ranged from one to 1.5 percent. Monthly prizes ranged in value from $15 to

$400, and the number of prizes varied by month. The grand prize of $100,000 was awarded in

early 2010. One withdrawal was allowed during the 12-month period, and standard certificate

early-withdrawal fees applied. However, unlike most CDs, savers could add money to their

certificates over time.

       In the 11 months in which Save to Win operated, the participating credit unions opened

11,600 accounts and generated over $8.6 million in deposits. To put this in context, the credit

unions are located in some of the more economically depressed parts of the Mid-West. In

locations such as Flint and Detroit, the demise of the auto industry has lead to high

unemployment and economic hardship. In terms of the rate of saving and the cost of delivery,

this compares favorably to other efforts to foster new savers and new saving, such as Individual

Development Account (IDA) matched saving programs.22

       Each Save to Win certificate holder was also invited to complete a voluntary survey when

he or she opened an account. By end December 2009, over half of certificate holders, some

6,027 credit union members, had completed this survey. Results show that certificates have been

opened among credit union members of all ages, income levels, and past saving behavior. In

particular, 56 percent of Save to Win certificate holders reported they had not saved money

regularly before opening the Save to Win account; 39 percent reported financial assets (excluding

home equity) of $5,000 or less; 59 percent reported spending money on the lottery in the last 6

months; and 68 percent reported household income of less than $60,000; and 44 percent reported

household income under $40,000.




                                               17
       The survey data from the Save to Win demonstration do not allow us to determine how

effective the program was in generating new savings. Nonetheless, the apparent appeal of the

PLS products offered in the Centra and Save to Win demonstrations, especially among people

who claimed to have no other regular savings plans, suggest that a PLS product holds appeal for

demographic groups that tend to have low levels of formal savings.

       Legal barriers to PLS programs in the United States.23 As defined by the National

Bank Act, there are three essential components of a lottery: (1) the offering of a prize, (2) the

awarding of the prize by chance, and (3) consideration (i.e., money or other thing of value

advanced in exchange for the opportunity to win the prize). If prize-linked savings programs are

deemed lotteries, they are shut down almost entirely. This legal prohibition arises from state

anti-lottery laws, as well as state and federal banking regulations. The former, state lottery laws,

prohibit private lotteries, in part to enable states to maintain a monopoly over these activities so

as not to jeopardize the funds raised by lottery programs. The latter set of laws, for example, the

National Bank Act, prohibit federally-chartered banks and thrifts (regulated by the Office of the

Comptroller of the Currency or Office of Thrift Supervision respectively) from participating in

lotteries to protect the safety and soundness of the banking system.24

       The two United States experiments cited above were able to exploit two legal loopholes.

The Centra offering was structured as a sweepstakes, not a lottery. People did not need to save

to enter but rather could mail in a card in lieu of saving. This explicit lack of ‘consideration’

supports a variety of bank promotions that use sweepstakes, such as JPMorgan Chase’s ‘Double

your Deposit’ promotion offered in early 2009, and the Maryland Saves’ ‘Roll in the Dough’

savings campaign offered in early 2010.25 Sweepstake solutions permit non-savers to win, add

operational complexity to the program, and tend to be used primarily for ad hoc marketing



                                                18
campaigns. The Save to Win program rests on a different and unique state law. Section 411 of

the Michigan Credit Union Act allows state-charted credit unions to employ ‘savings promotions

raffles’ defined as ‘raffle(s) conducted by a domestic credit union where the sole consideration

required for a chance of winning designated prizes is the deposit of at least a specified amount of

money in a savings account or other savings program offered by the domestic credit union.’26

Even if this carve-out were extended to other states, the ability to scale these programs is limited.

Credit union charters require that their membership be limited to a certain designated

populations, such as people affiliated with specific employers or organizations, or residing in

defined geographic areas. These limits tend to preclude scale economics, making the prize

structure less desirable to would-be participants. Running PLS through a consortium of credit

unions, as is the case with Save to Win, helps to generate a larger deposit base. However, there

would be inevitable coordination costs. In mid-2010, two additional states passed laws similar to

Michigan’s.

        State-run PLS programs? PLS products could be offered in the United States by the

federal government (a federal premium bond) or by state governments. Given the lack of federal

policy interest in the first option, we focus on state alternatives.

        Shut down in the late 19th century as a result of fraud, and later revived by the State of

New Hampshire in 1964, state lotteries have had a consistent mandate: to generate state revenue

(Coughlin, Garrett and Hernandez-Murillo 2006). But this lottery mandate may be at odds with

the limited revenue stream a state lottery-based PLS product is likely to produce. Beyond this

fact, in most cases lottery commissions are required to pay out in prizes a certain fraction of sales

proceeds. In a PLS program, if deposits or bond purchases were be counted as gross sales, it

would be impossible to pay out in prizes the mandated portion of sales and still guarantee



                                                  19
depositors that they will receive back their full principal investment. Only some of the earnings

from a PLS pool could be paid out, with the remainder available for the payment of expenses and

to deliver revenue to the state.

       A real example highlights other legal constraints on a state-run program. The state of

Maryland, in 1975 authorized a premium saving bond program modeled on the British Premium

Bond, to be administered by the state lottery agency. Principal investments would be guaranteed

and redeemable at any time, and bondholders would be eligible not for regular interest, but for

what Maryland officials called a ‘random interest award’ (Phillips 1975). The size of a person’s

investment would determine the number of entries in the drawing for a large monetary prize. Yet

after the initial feasibility study, legal opinion warned that it was in essence a ‘cloaked lottery’

and ‘would be subject to existing lottery laws.’       These included limitations on marketing,

accepting bond investments from anyone outside of Maryland, and using banks to sell the bonds.

Furthermore, the product would need to be sold through lottery agents who were used to

receiving a commission of roughly five percent on all lottery sales (Phillips 1975). In short, even

when defined as a lottery and run through the lottery-agency, other structural considerations

made the product not viable at that time.

       Even if PLS is a sensible economic structure, existing US laws and regulations would

likely need to be changed to permit issues, whether private or public. The South African MaMA

account provides reason to pause: when the product became popular, the South African Lottery

Board brought suit against the bank to cease the offering of this ‘illegal lottery,’ and the South

African Supreme Court ruled in the Boards’ favor. While the case has no direct precedent for

United States laws, the structure of the Court’s arguments shows how laws similar to those in the

United States could be applied to shut down a private PLS program.



                                                20
Conclusion: What we do and don’t know

       Though no formal evaluation of United States-based PLS exists, several lessons are

evident. First, the product has been offered for more than three centuries, continuously in some

jurisdictions for over five decades. From an operational point of view, this is a well-tested

product. Second, the product’s appeal is fairly widespread, and in particular it seems to be of

interest to those who might otherwise not be able to use (or be interested in using) more standard

products. Third, without a change in laws and regulations, adoption of this product will be fairly

limited.

       The good news-bad news of PLS underscores the importance of new and rigorous

research on this saving structure. One consideration we have not discussed thus far is what

effect, if any, the availability of prize-linked saving products might have on traditional lottery

demand. More fundamentally, the key question yet to be answered is whether the availability of

prize-linked saving would generate new savers and new saving, and if so by whom. Future

research should address this question. In order to answer the question of what impact PLS

products have on household saving behavior, researchers would need information on saving

outcomes for individuals who were given access to a PLS product and a comparable set of

individuals who were not. Ideally, this would be investigated through an experimental research

design, allowing researchers to determine whether it is the prize-linked nature of the product that

is driving take-up and saving, as opposed to, for example, associated marketing efforts. And

crucially for policy analysts, such a design, coupled with detailed data about individuals in both

groups, would allow investigators to determine whether new PLS accounts represent new saving




                                                21
at the individual or household level, and whether legal changes to allow wider adoption of PLS

products is consistent with good public policy.



Acknowledgements: Tufano thanks the HBS Division of Research for financial support, and

Andrea Ryan, Howell Jackson, Robert Keip and the staff of FNB Bank, the staff of Doorways to

Dreams Fund, and his Consumer Finance students for many helpful discussions on this topic. We

thank Seth Freedman and Kyung Park for their helpful research assistance.




                                                  22
References


Bankrate.com. Retrieved March 2010 from http://www.bankrate.com

Bureau of Labor Statistics from http://www.bls.gov/cex/2008/Standard/age.pdf

Cole, Shawn, Daryl Collins, Daniel Schneider, and Peter Tufano (2007). ‘First National Bank's

       Golden Opportunity.’ Harvard Business School Case 208-072.

Coughlin, Cletus C., Thomas A. Garrett, and R. Hernandez-Murillo (2006). ‘The Geography,

       Economics, and Politics of Lottery Adoption.’ Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review

       88 (3): 165-80.

Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. Retrieved March 16, 2010 from

       http://www.vodium.com/MediapodLibrary/index.asp?library=pn100472_fdic_advisoryco

       mmittee&SessionArgs=0A1U0100000100000101

Green, Rick, and Kristian Rydqvist (1997). ‘The Valuation of Non-Systematic Risks and the

       Pricing of Swedish Lottery Bonds.’ Review of Financial Studies 10: 447-79.

Guillen, Mauro, and Adrian Tschoegl (2002). ‘Banking on Gambling: Banks and Lottery-Linked

       Deposit Accounts.’ Journal of Financial Services Research 21(3): 219-31.

Consumer Federation of America (2006). How American's View Personal Wealth Versus How

       Planner's View This Wealth. Washington, DC: CFA.

       http://www.consumerfed.org/pdfs/financial_planners_study011006.pdf

Department of Works and Pensions (UK), “Family Resources Survey: United Kingdom, 2004-

       05. Retrieved March 16, 2010 from http://research.dwp.gov.uk/asd/frs/2004_05/index.asp

Jethro Tull, “Thick as a Brick” lyrics. Retrieved March 15, 2010 from http://www.collecting-

       tull.com/Albums/Lyrics/ThickAsABrick.html




                                              23
Kearney, Melissa (2002). ‘State Lotteries and Consumer Behavior.’ Journal of Public Economics

       89: 2269-99.

La Fleur, Teresa, and Bruce La Fleur (2001). La Fleur's 2001 World Lottery Almanac. Boyds,

       MD: TLF Publications, Inc.

Levy-Ullman, Henri (1896). ‘Lottery-Bonds in France and in the Principal Countries of Europe.’

       Harvard Law Review 9(6): 386-405.

Lobe, Sebastian, and Alexander Hölzl (2007). ‘Why Are British Premium Bonds So Successful?

       The Effect of Saving with a Thrill‘ Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=992794

Morduch, Jonathan (1999). ‘Between the State and the Market: Can Informal Insurance Patch the

       Safety Net?’ World Bank Research Observer 14(2): 187-207.

Murphy, Anne L (2005). ‘Lotteries in the 1690s: Investment or Gamble?’ Financial History

       Review, 12(2): 227-45.

National Savings and Investments (2006). ‘A Short History of Premium Bonds.” Pamphlet

       published October 2006.

North American Association of State and Provincial Lotteries. Retrieved March 16, 2010, from

       http://www.naspl.org/index.cfm?fuseaction=content&PageID=3&PageCategory=3

O’Donoghue, J, L Goulding, and G Allen (2004). ‘Consumer Price Inflation since 1750.’ UK

       Office for National Statistics, Economic Trends, 604: 38-46.

Phillips, Layn (1975). ‘The Premium Savings Bond: Respectable Revenue through Legalized

       Gambling.’ Tulsa Law Review 11(241).

Schneider, Daniel, and Peter Tufano (2007). ‘New Savings from Old Innovations: Asset

       Building for the Less Affluent.’ In Financing Low-Income Communities, edited by Julia

       Sass Rubin. New York: Russell Sage, 13-71.



                                              24
Schreiner, Mark, Margaret Clancy, and Michael Sherraden (2002). ‘Saving Performance in the

       American Dream Demonstration Project.’ St. Louis, MO: Center for Social Development,

       Washington University.

       http://csd.wustl.edu/Publications/Documents/ADDReport2002.pdf.

Tufano, Peter (2008). ‘Savings Whilst Gambling: An Empirical Analysis of U.K. Premium

       Bonds.’ American Economic Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 98(2): 321-26.

Tufano, Peter, Nick Maynard, and Jan-Emmanuel De Neve (2008). ‘Consumer Demand for

       Prize-Linked Savings: A Preliminary Analysis.’ Harvard Business School Working Paper

       08-061. http://www.hbs.edu/research/pdf/08-061.pdf.

Tufano, Peter, and Daniel Schneider (2008). ‘Using Financial Innovation to Support Savers:

       From Coercion to Excitement.’ In Insufficient Funds, edited by Rebecca Blank and

       Michael Barr. New York: Russell Sage, 149-190.

Volpp, Kevin G., Leslie John, K., Andrea B. Troxel, Laurie Norton, Jennifer Fassbender, and

       George Loewenstein (2008a). ‘Financial Incentive-Based Approaches for Weight Loss.’

       Journal of the American Medical Association, 300 (22): 2631-37.

Volpp, Kevin G., George Loewenstein, Andrea B. Troxel, Jalpa Doshi, Maureen Price, Mitchell

       Laskin, and Stephen E. Kimmel (2008b). ‘A Test of Financial Incentives to Improve

       Warfarin Adherence.‘ BMC Health Services Research 8:272.




                                              25
1
    See Tufano and Schneider (2008) for an overview of existing policies aimed at promoting savings

among low and moderate savers in the United States.
2
    This team of authors has attempted multiple projects designed to investigate whether prize-linked

savings products generate new and increased levels of saving, as opposed to shifting assets from other

vehicles. We have yet to implement a randomized design experiment, but we continue to seek research

opportunities.
3
    http://www.naspl.org/index.cfm?fuseaction=content&PageID=3&PageCategory=3 (accessed March 16,

2010).
4
    http://www.bls.gov/cex/2008/Standard/age.pdf.
5
    Among those in the lowest income third of the NORC data – defined by having household income of

less than $30,400 in 2005 dollars – reported annual lottery expenditures averaged $164. We can make an

imperfect comparison of lottery gambling and savings by low-income individuals by comparing these

numbers to the 1992, 1995, 1998, and 2001 waves of the Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF). Among

individuals in the SCF with less than a high school degree, median assets in savings and checking

accounts total $200 (in year 2005 dollars); likewise for median liquid assets. The SCF data suggest that

this amount is comparable to median liquid assets and median savings and checking assets, both

amounting to $200 for this income group.
6
    Bankrate.com (accessed March 2010).
7
    O’ Donaghue, Goulding, and Allen (2004) report a consistent inflation series from 1750 through 2003.

Using this period (and assuming no inflation prior to 1750), the ticket would have cost over £1400 in

2003 pounds.
8
    For an economic analysis of this program, see Green and Rydqvist 1997




                                                    26
9
    This table, taken from Cole, Collins, Schneider, and Tufano (2007), was collected through literature

reviews, web searches, and conversations with practitioners. It is unlikely to be complete, as some of

these programs are not widely advertised.
10
     http://www.nsandi.com/products/pb/premiumbondstory (accessed March 15, 2010)
11
     Jethro Tull, “Thick as a Brick” lyrics. http://www.collecting-

tull.com/Albums/Lyrics/ThickAsABrick.html (accessed March 15, 2010).
12
     Information available here: http://www.nsandi.com/products/pb/index.jsp (accessed on February 5,

2010). NS&I stands for National Savings and Investments, an Executive Agency of the Chancellor of the

Exchequer.
13
     Source: http://www.nsandi.com/products/pb/index.jsp (accessed on March 16, 2010).
14
     By way of comparison, Kearney’s (2005) analysis of demand for U.S. state lottery products, estimated

at the level of game and week, similarly finds that lottery sales are positively driven by expected return –

suggesting an investment motive and evaluation – as well as non-pecuniary characteristics, including the

nominal top prize, numbers of digits chosen, and age of the game.
15
     Department of Works and Pensions (UK), “Family Resources Survey: United Kingdom, 2004-05.

Available at http://research.dwp.gov.uk/asd/frs/2004_05/index.asp (accessed March 16, 2010).
16
     Much of this section is drawn from Cole, Collins, Schneider and Tufano 2007.
17
     The rand is the South African currency. At the time of writing, one rand was worth about 0.14 U.S.

dollars.
18
     Data on the program come from a public presentation by a senior FNB executive to the Prize Linked

Subcommittee of the FDIC Advisory Committee on Economic Inclusion (ComE-In), Washington DC,

July 30, 2009.

(http://www.vodium.com/MediapodLibrary/index.asp?library=pn100472_fdic_advisorycommittee&Sessi

onArgs=0A1U0100000100000101)




                                                       27
19
     Coauthor of this chapter Peter Tufano is Chairman and Co-founder of the D2D fund. The mission of

D2D is to expand access to financial services, especially asset building opportunities, for low-income

families by creating, testing and deploying innovative financial products and services.

20
     Both Tufano (2008) and Lobe and Holzl (2007) demonstrate that large prizes are strongly related to

sales of premium bonds.
21
     This is a feature that we have proposed testing in random design field experiments. As mentioned

above, we have yet to successful implement such an experimental design in the field. Guryan and

Kearney are currently developing a laboratory experiment to be conducted at the Experimental

Laboratory in the Department of Economics at the University of Maryland that would test this concept.
22
     For instance, over four years, 2,364 participants in the landmark American Dream Demonstration

(ADD) IDA program accumulated $1.25MM in savings (Schreiner, Clancy and Sherraden 2002).
23
     Andrea Ryan contributed to this section of this chapter. It draws upon work done by Angela Seensun

Kang , Anooshree C. Sinha and Howell Jackson of Harvard Law School, from the insights of Jackson and

Tufano’s students in their JD-MBA course on consumer finance, especially Daniel Preysman, and from

work done by D2D Fund and its legal advisors. Readers should not rely on this document for legal

advice, as the law in this area is quite complex.
24
     See 12 U.S.C. § 25a (2008).
25
     As described at the FDIC Advisory Committee on Economic Inclusion Meeting in July 2009.

http://www.vodium.com/MediapodLibrary/index.asp?library=pn100472_fdic_advisorycommittee&Sessio

nArgs=0A1U0100000100000101 (accessed March 16, 2010).
26
     See Mich. Comp. Laws § 490.411 (2008)




                                                     28
Figure 1. Breadth of Premium Bond Ownership, UK, 2005-2006
This figure shows the fraction of British households holding Premium Bonds as a function of
weekly household income. It also shows this share scaled by the most widely held asset account
(excluding transaction accounts) held by that income category. The data as taken from the U.K.
Department of Work and Pensions, Family Resources Survey 2005-2006 (Table 5.8). The survey
covers a sample of 28,029 British households.




                                             29
 Table 1: Prize-Linked Savings Products

                                                                                  Year                            Maximum Prize                                    Frequency Prize
Country         Name and Structure         Offering Institution                   Start      Total Balances (US$) (US$)                 Other Prizes               Drawings
                                                                                                                                                                        2
Brazil          HiperFundo account         Banco Bradesco                         2003       R$ 1.4 billion       Car                   electric appliances, DVDs, daily
                                                                                             (48.4 million US$)                         travel, gold bars
United Arab     Mashreq Millionaire        Mashreq Bank                           1995       n/a                  AED 1 million         apartments                 monthly, special draws
                                                                                                                             1
Emirates        certificates                                                                                      ($272,000)
                                                                                                                                                                                      2
Ireland         Prize Bonds           The Prize Bond Company Ltd.                 1956        €561.5 million      €150,000 monthly      weekly prize of €20,000   weekly/monthly
                                                                                                                             1
                                      (joint venture between An Post &                       ($701 million)       ($187,000)            5 prizes of €1,000
                                      FEXCO)                                                                                            10 prizes of €250
                                                                                                                                                                          2
Great Britain   Premium Savings Bonds National Savings and Investments            1956       £26.5 billion         2 prizes of          £50 to £100,000 prizes    monthly
                                                                                             ($47 billion)         £1,000,000 ($1.79
                                                                                                                            1
                                                                                                                   million)
Sweden          Swedish Lottery Bonds      Swedish National Debt Office           1918       SEK 40.9 billion      SEK 1 million        SEK 50                    annually
                                                                                                                               1
                                                                                             ($5.7 billion)        ($130,000)
                                                                                                                                                                              2
Pakistan        Prize Bonds                   State Bank of Pakistan, National    1972       PKR 170 billion       PKR 50,000,000       PKR 1000 to PKR           bi-monthly
                                              Savings Organization                           ($2.8 billion)        ($833,333)           20,000,000
                                                                                         3
Pakistan        crorepati (multi-millionaire) Habib Bank, Muslim Commercial       1998       PKR 47 billion (banks PKR 10 million       cash, motorcycles,        n/a
                maala-maal account            Bank, Bankers Equity, United Bank              combined) ($780        (190,000 US$)       televisions, computers
                CarAmad account                                                              million)                                   and electronic gadgets
                ZarAmad account
                                                                                                                                                                          2
Germany         Gewinnsparen account          Gewinnsparverein e.V.               1952       €6 million (approx)   €100,000             cars                      monthly
                                              (and local branches)                           ($7.5 million)        ($125,000)           cash prizes from 4€ to
                                                                                                                                        10,000€
                                                                                         4
Turkey          Lottery-linked accounts    Demirbank                              1950       n/a                   cash prizes          gold, apartments, and     n/a
                                           (now HSBC)                                                                                   household items
                                                                                                                                                                          2
Kenya           Premium Bond               Kenya Post Office Savings Bank         1978       $560,000 (1998)       n/a                  n/a                       monthly
                                                                                             (approx)
                                                                                                                                                                                  2
Indonesia       BritAma account            Bank Rakyat Indonesia                  2002       Rp 14.46 Trillion     Rp. 1 billion      5 prizes of Rp. 250 million semi-annually
                                                                                             ($152.6 million)      ($10,900)          10 prizes of Rp.100 million
                                                                                                                                      50 prizes of Rp. 50million
                                                                                                                                      500 prizes of Rp.10million
Spain           "el libretón" account      Banco Bilbao Vizcaya Argentaria        1996       n/a                   100 cars (2004)    cars, trips, encyclopedias, n/a
                                           (BBVA)                                                                                     and cash
Mexico          "el libretón" account      Bancomer BBVA                          1996       $178 million (1998)   Car (daily)        19,000DVDs                  daily and monthly
Argentina       "el libretón" account      BBVA Banco Frances                     1997       $233 million (1998)   car                30 prizes of $1,000         weekly
Argentina       prize-linked savings       Santander Rio                          1997       n/a                   $220,000 (monthly) $20,000 (daily)             daily and monthly
Denmark         Lottery bonds              Danmarks National Bank                 1972       DKK 200 million       n/a                n/a                         semi-annually
                                                                                             (approx)

                                                                                               30
                                                                                Year                          Maximum Prize                                  Frequency Prize
Country       Name and Structure          Offering Institution                  Start    Total Balances (US$) (US$)               Other Prizes               Drawings
                                                                                         ($34 million)
                                                                                                                                                                                      2
Oman          Mandoos Savings Account Oman International Bank                   1992     RO 570 million       RO 135,000          20 prizes of RO 20,000     monthly, special draws
                                                                                         (approx)             ($54,000)           Mercedes cars
                                                                                         ($280 million)

                                                                                                                                                                     2
New Zealand Bonus Bonds                   ANZ Banking Group                     1970     n/a                 $1,000,000             $100,000 / $50,000 /     monthly
                                                                                                                        1
                                          (Ministry of Finance and Post Office)                              ($650,000)             $5,000 / $500 / $100
                                          Savings Bank until 1990)                                                                  / $50 / $20
Sri Lanka     Ridee Rekha certificates    National Savings Bank                 1997     n/a                 Rs. 2 Million or a car 4000 prizes of Rs. 1,000 quarterly
                                                                                                             ($20,000)              5000 prizes of Rs. 500                       2
India         Premium Prize Bonds         Reserve Bank of India                 1963     n/a                 n/a                    n/a                      twice every 5 years

 Sources: Cole, Collins, Schneider and Tufano (2007), Exhibit 8. Jan-Emmanuel de Neve and Emily Ekins assisted in the preparation of this table.

 Notes:
 1 The following prize-linked savings schemes post prize money as tax-exempt: United Arab Emirates, Ireland, Great Britain, Sweden, New Zealand.
 2 Minimum holding periods vary between schemes: Brazil (7 days), Ireland (3 months), Great Britain (none), Pakistan (1 month), Germany (1 month), Kenya (3 months), Indonesia
 (none), Oman (1 month), New Zealand (1 month), Sri Lanka (1 year), India (5 years).
 3 Private prize-linked saving programs in Pakistan were halted in 2001 after an adverse court ruling.
 4 Prize-linked savings at Turkey's Demirbank were stopped in 1960.




                                                                                           31
Table 2: Percent of Families holding U.K. Premium Bonds by Income Quintiles

                                                       With Accounts (%)
Income
Quintiles     All Families   Married   Single          All Families        Married     Single
1             8.8            21.1      6.6             10.4                22.8        8.0
2             13.2           24.3      10.6            14.4                25.1        11.9
3             18.1           24.4      10.6            19.0                25.1        11.5
4             23.4           26.9      13.0            24.0                27.4        13.9
5             31.1           36.3      19.4            31.7                37.0        20.0

N             33,182         16,005    17,177          30,992              15,464      15,528

Notes: Families with accounts are defined as those who hold at least one type of account or investment. Income quintiles represent quintiles of
total family income. The quintiles are calculated separately over samples of all families, married couples, and single adults. Tabulations are
weighted to be representative of the UK population.
Source: United Kingdom’s Family Resource Survey (FRS), Department of Works and Pensions (UK), 2004-5, see text.




                                                                      32
