                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  ESTIMATING THE CONTINUOUS TIME
              CONSUMPTION BASED ASSET PRICING MODEL




                       Sanford J. Grossman

                          Angelo Melino

                        Robert J. Shiller



                      Working Paper No. 1643




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                            June 1985




The research reported here is part of the NBEP's research program
in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                           NBER WORKING PAPER #1643
                                           June 1985




                   Estimating the Continuous Time
                Consumption Based Asset Pricing Model


                               ABS TRACT




        The consumption based asset pricing model predicts that excess

yields are determined in a fairly simple way by the market's degree of

relative risk aversion and by the pattern of covariances between per

capita consumption growth and asset returns. Estimation and testing

is complicated by the fact that the model's predictions relate to the

instantaneous flow of consumption and point—in—time asset values, but

only data on the integral or unit average of the consumption flow is

available. In our paper, we show how to estimate the parameters of

interest consistently from the available data by maximum likelihood.

We estimate the market's degree of relative risk aversion and the

instantaneous covariances of asset yields and consumption using six

different data sets. We also test the model's overidentifying

restrictions.




Sanford J. Grossman       Angelo Melino             Robert J. Shiller
Department of Economics   Department of Economics   Cowles Foundation for
Dickinson Hall            University of Toronto       Research in Economics
Princeton University      150 St. George Street     Yale University
Princeton, N.J. 08544     Toronto, Canada M5S lAl   Box 2125 Yale Station
(609) 452—4035            (416) 978—6541            New Haven CT 06520
                                                    (203) 432—4134
I.     JrodLtction
        In this paper, we provide an          empirical test of the continuous

time intertemporal capital asset pricing model, first proposed
by    Merton[1971].         The model as clarified by Breederi[1979] implies
that    an asset     will    be   priced so that the expected return required
will increase with its covariability             with per capita consumption
growth.       Previous tests of this theory (e.g. Grossman—ShillerEl9BOJ,

Harsen—SincUetorE19833) have examined discrete time versions
a-F   the   model under the assumption that the timing interval of

the    model matches exactly the sampling interval for available
data on per capita consumption. That is, if we have data on
quarter 1 y consumpt i on,         then the time period is assumed to   be

1—quarter     of a    year.       We show that if the true model is a   continuous
time   model,   and time averaged data (such as quarterly consumption)
is used to test      then substantial biases may be introduced
                       it,

unless the estimation procedure is corrected to take account
of the effects of time averaging. We provide a procedure for
obtainiri consistent estimates with time averaged data. We
then estimate and test the model using data on per capita
consumption     and the       cumulated   real returns to holding portfolios
o-f stocks, bonds, and short—term paper.
II     The Model
       It   is useful    to review the Merton model. Our discussion
follows     closely the exposition of its generalization in
Grossman—Shiller[1982J.              In a discrete time model, each consumer
is assumed to maximize a time—additive utility function over

a single consumption good
                             T / h
           (2.1)       U
                             .j =0


where T is his time horizon. c(t) is consumption at time t and

      is the discount •factor between utility at time t arid t+h.

For the purposes of this paper, we assume that the period utility
functior, is o-f the constant relative risk aversion (or isoelastic)

-f or ir



           (2.2>       Lt(C)         c'/(1—Pi)
           Let v (t) denote the value o-f asset i at time t including

any accrued cash disbursements (such as dividends or coupons)
earned between t—h and t. Assume that asset i is freely tradeable.
A standard argument shows that

           (2.3)      Etu' (c (t+h> )v (t+h) =        u   Cc (t) )v1 Ct)



where the expectation is conditioned on all the information
possessed by the trader at time t. Using (2.2> arid iterating
(2.3)      , we can write
           (2.4>     Et(c(7)) vi(T) =
                        c(t)  v(t)
                                                 (l)t          for 7       = t+h.t+2h,...

I-f we take the limit to continuous time and apply Ito's Lemma,
we obtain
           (2.5)     Etdv1      + 1*A(A+1)*Var(dc)    —
                                                          A*Etdc +         lndt
                                     2            c              c

                                                          =
                                                              A*Cov(dc,dv)
                                                                       c     v
where Var and Coy denote the variance and covariance operators.
           Note that (2.5) holds for an individual. Under various
assumptions about heterogeneity of information and wealth. (2.5)
can be aqregated over individuals so that       c   can be interpreted
as per capita cortsumption and A is replaced by a particular
weighted averaqe of the individual consumer's A (see
Grossmart—ShillerEl982)). Clearly (2.5) holds for all tradeable
assets.   If   is    defined as the excess rate of return of asset
i over say short—term paper, then (2.5) can be used for these
two assets to yield
     (2.6)     ER A*Cov(R,dc/c)
     The aggregate    parameter of relative r i sk aversi or, can be
computed by (2.6) given data or mean excess returns and the
covariances between excess returns and per capita consumption
growth. Table I provides some estimates of A based on the
descriptive statistics from Table 7. The various data sets
and variable definitions are described more fully in Section
III. At this point, we simply wish to draw attention to one
of the important empirical anomalies associated with the model
and the potential role for- time averaging as an explanation.

The table shows that the mean excess return on stocks is associated
with a relatively small covariance with consumption changes.

Therefore this can be justified only by an implausibly high
estimate of the risk aversion parameter. Similiar conclusions
are reached by examining the excess returns on bonds.
    One explanation for this is based on the idea that a time
averaged variable is smoother than the same point sampled variable.
In particular, if the true model holds in continuous time then
the instantaneous rates of change in consumption can be more
                                                 4

var-i     ahi e (and also covari able with returns) than is               the   averaue
consumption chariqe across years or quarters.


Art emp1e
    To understand this e-ffect, consider the following very
simple process for v, the value of asset i in excess of asset
1, and consumption:
     (2.7a)  dc =               pdt + d€
           (2..7b)      dv = J1dt + d'ri
where                are correlated Brownian motions with Cov(d€,d)Thdt.
Let E(t) and           (t)    be the time averaged values of c(t) and

v(t) ,i.e..,
                     E(t) =   T1j c(t+s)ds                 =   T'f v(t+s)ds -
We    will show that

           (2.8> Cov(E,) EE(E(t)—E(t—T))((t)—(t—T))] — pT.LT
                                 — —, i'"rO••
                                 — _l._)I


If    we normalize T=1, then the covariance of time averaged

consurnptions changes and price changes is 2/3 of the instantaneous
value       o Roughly speaking,             this would     lead us to overestimate
A    by
To understand (2.8)            just note        that

           (2.9) E(t) — E(t—T) =                pds + T'14_T d€(7)ds
                                       = pT     + T1f4+ST dE(7)ds

                                                +    T1f45 dE(7)ds
                                       =   pT + T'ft_T         (T—t+s)d€(s)
                                                +    Tl4±T (t+T_s)d(s)
                                         5

A similiar expression may be          derived for (t)—(t—T). Hence,
       (2.10> E[(E(t)—E(t—T))((t)—(t—-T))]
                    =pTu1T +   T2E[4_T(T—t+s>2d€d                +

Equation (2.8) is easily derived from the last expression.
        The purpose of this example is to give the reader a relatively
simple view of the effect of time averaging in generatinq a
stochastic      process which is " smoother"         than     the instantaneous
process. This suggests the possibility that assets appear to
have a low risk (i.e. low covariaruce with consumption changes)
because measured consumption changes are less van able than
instantaneous      consumpti on changes. Since it             i s the coven ance
with   instantaneous consumption changes that                 is the relevant
measure    of an assets risk, this leads us to overestimate A.
In our simple example, A is overestimated by SOY.. As we shall
see below, for certain processes, the bias can be arbitrarily
large.
Multivariate Model
     In our empirical work, we postulate a slightly more complicated
stochastic process for consumption and asset values. Define
Y(t) according to
                                in    c(t)    —
                                                  kc — gt        —     C(t)
       (2.11)        Y(t) =    in    v1 (t)       k1 — g1t
                                                                 =    V1 (t)
                                                                               1

                               In v(t) —          k, — g.t            V9(t)
                               In    v-.(t) —
                                                  k3 —   gt           V-.(t)

       We assume that Y(t) satisfies the stochastic differential

equation
       (2.12)       dY = BYdt + Eh/'2dZ
                                             6

where B and 2.. are (4x4) matrices and Z(t) is a vector o-f standard
independent Wiener processes.                    is assumed         to be     symmetric

and positive definite. Without any loss of Qenerality,
can be taken to be I ower              tn anqul ar   with positive diagonal

elements. Let a denote the vector of nontrivial parameters

in   —'4   1,—s




           Switching to logarithms and applying Ito's Lemma we can
rewrite (2.5) in terms of the V(t) process as

           (2.13)           EEdVj(t) —    *dC(t))       +          —
                                                                        *g    +   lnS)dt
                  +   1/2*P2*Var(dC) — *Cov(dC.dV) + 1/2*Var(dV) = 0.
If   this is to hold at all points in time in m.s.. then

           (2.14)           EtEdV(t) —    *dC(t))       =   C).

The reason is that, according to our assumptions, the remaining
terms in the expression are not functions of information. Since
the model is homogeneous, the only way this sum can be constant

is if it is zero.
           Therefore (2.5) imposes the following restrictions on our

nodel

           (2.lSa)           J1B = 0
           (2.15b)                 —     + 1/2*J1L3         +     lru   = 0       i=1,2,3

where                  e)    and         is the vector with unity in component

i and zero elsewhere.
           Suppose that the process Y(t) is sampled at regular intervals.
It is straightforward (see BergstromEl984)) to show that the

point sampled process has the representation
           (2.16)           Y(t) = ØY(t—1) +     u(t)
                                                7

where      = eB, the matrix            exponential     of B, and u(t) is the random

variable 4_           et5l2dZs.                     Let 7(t) denote the time average
of the Y(t) process, i.e. V(t)=4_1 Y(s)ds. Upon integrating
both sides of (2.16) we obtain
        (2.17)          7(t) = ØV(t—1) + (t)

where (t) is the random variable 4_1x_1                      eB)dZs>dl.
        Let + and q denote two 'smooth" real—valued functions and

(s) a univariate Wiener process. Using the definition of the
Ito integral, the following two results can be established:
        (2.18)          f f(t)Ef         g(s)d(s))dt =      JE4f(t)dt](s)d(s)
        (2.19)          ECftf(s)d(s)]Efq(7)d(7)J =                    Jf(s)g(s)ds
                                                where M      Et1,t2]fl[t-.,t4J
and where the equality is understood in the mean square sense.

Applying (2.18) element by element and other standard properties
of the Ito integral allow us to write
        (2.20)    [(t)   =   4:4' e                 d'rdZ(s + il-.iil    ed7dZs.
Define            E   (t)(t—'r) and F(r,w)              eB'ZeB'W. Applying (2.19)
and standard change of               variable   rules, we obtain
        (2.21a)          fl() 444 F(r,w)drdwds +               fJJ F(r,w)drdwds
        (2.21b)              =   x4i F(r,w)drdwds
        (2.21c)              =   0     'r2.

We conclude that '7(t) is a vector ARFIA(1,1)                 process.    PhillipsEl97B]
and BergstromCl984] develop similiar results although the latter
only considers the case where B is invertible. We can therefore
write

        (2.22)         7t = ?(t—1)            + €(t) + E€(t—1)
                                                B

where the innovations             €(t)       have mean zero and    covariance matrix
S.    and e is     a matrix with spectral radius not exceedinq unity.

          Define y(t)     (In c(t) in v1(t)               in v2(t) in v.(t))'.
and let        t) be its unit averaQe.              Eq (2.22) can be rewritten


          (2.23)        (t)   =          +       + s(t—1) + €(t) + $€(t—1)
where         = (IS)k+Øq. '( = (I—ø)g,              and t =        (t+s)ds.    The
restrictions        (2.15) are      easily shown to imply 3i1 =            J(I—ø)
=    0.    In particular, it also follows that the vector k cannot

be identified uniquely. Je                   therefore   impose the identification

restriction k1 = A*kc in our estimation.                         tedious arqument
also shows that

          (2.24) (J—J) ((t)—(t—1)) =                  3i3jO +          (J—J)€(t)
                                                                   +

so that the time averaaed excess returns on asset i over j follows
an M(1) process with coefficient .268.
          To gain further intuition about the possible consequences
of time averaqing suppose B =                  diag()1,?2,?,X4).        Then it can
be shown that :>(,j) =              h(,2)Z(i,i)            ,   where
                    =   ()E1             +           —
                                                         2*(?+7)(1_eM3>
                     + (1 + e>(1 —                       + (1 + e)(1 —        e)/X)
and equal to the obvious limits as                       or X goes to 0.       Our

simple example corresponds to the case h(0,0)                     = 2/3.      If the

process were stationary around trend, the elgenvalues of B would
have negative real parts. Sampling a few values, we see that
h(—. 1,—. 1) =      .60, h(—.5,—.5) = .45, h(—1,—1) = .28, and h goes
                                       9
to zero as         arid      both go to minus infinity. The bias in
the estimate of A using time averaged data and (2.5) car therefore
be arbitrarily larqei


III    DATA ANALYSIS



Data   Description
       The data are fully described in an appendix to this paper
which is available from the authors. Here we shall give only
a broad description of the data to indicate how they were assembled
and to show that they correspond as much as possible to the
concepts represented in the model above.

       Six separate data sets were prepared, each intended to
represent a series of observations on the four—element vector

.     The data sets differ in sample period, sources and assumptions
about taxation. Table 2 summarizes the important differences.
       Data sets ore and two are long historical annual         time   series
beginning in the year l89O These data sets are based on those
used in Grossman and Shiller[1981] and described also in
ShillerEl9B2J           Data sets three through six are quarterly time
series. Data sets three an.d four          begin in the   second quarter
of   1953.   Data sets five and six        begin in the second quarter
of 1947. The use of annual and quarterly time series was dictated


   more relevant comparison might be the ratio of A that would
be obtained using time averaged data to that using point sampled
data. Although details differ, it is easily shown that this
ratio also can be arbitrarily large.
                                  1 0


by the existinQ consumption data. Long time series data or
consLtmption are available only on an annual basis. Quarterly

consumption data are available only for the post—war period.

Monthly consumption data are available startinQ in l99. We
did   not use   those data here because of some concern as to the
accuracy   of   the monthly data and because of the somewhat shorter

sample period that such data would impose.

       In all data sets, the first element o-f 9    is   the log of

real per capita seasonally—adjusted consumption on nondurables
and services. For years beginning with 1929 these data are
from the National Income and Product Accounts of the United
States. Earlier data are the Kuznets—Kendrick series. Since
the published consumption series are total consumption over
the period, the first element of 9      departs   somewhat from that
hypothesized in the paper: it is the log of the integral rather
than the integral of the 1og Note that we use a physical
measure of consumption directly and do not deflate nominal
consumption by a price index that is averaged over the year,
which would have introduced another departure from the assumptions
of our model.

       In all data sets the second element of 9     is   a measure of
the interval averaged log cumulated real return on corporate

stocks,   the third element is   a measure of the interval averaged

log   cumulated real return on short debt and the fourth element

Some Monte Carlo simulations indicate that the biases introduced
by using the log of the average instead of the average of the
log are extremely small, at least for our data
                                  11.

i s a measure of the interval averaged log cumul ated real return
or long—term bonds. The even—numbered data sets are based on
after—tax returns. In constructing these series, the (after—tax
in even—numbered cases) nominal returns were first computed
on a monthly basis. At that point, a choice had to be made
whether to use the consumption deflator to convert nominal returns
to real returns or to use one of the monthly price indices for
this purpose. The consumption deflator has the advantace that
it corresponds to the measure of consumption that is supposed
to enter the utility function. The monthly price indices have
the advantage that we can use them to produce a monthly real
series,     so that our interval average will correspond more closely
to the integral of the log of the real     portfolio value as
represented in our model. It was decided to use the consumption
deflator for data sets one through four and the monthly consumer
price index for data sets five and six. ThUS, for example,
the   second through fourth elements o-f the     vector in data
set two were constructed by first producing monthly series
representing the cumulated after—tax nominal returns of the
assets. Each series represented the nominal value of the portfolio
of   an individual who reinvests all after—tax income from the
asset in the same asset.- The average for the year of the log
of   the   monthly portfolio values was used to construct an annual

series. Finally, the log of the consumption deflator was subtracted

Let (l+rjm) denote the monthly after—tax nominal return on asset
i, and let ViL denote the cumulated after—tax return in month L.
We set VIL =       (l+rj)(l+r2)"(1+rL).
                                    12

from each series to convert to a real series. With data set
five, the first step in the construction of       the   second through
fourth    elements of       was essentially the same. We first produced
a monthly series of cumulated returns of the assets. However,
jr data set five, this monthly series was subsequently deflated

by dividing by the consumer price index, and a quarterly series
was    produced as the average for the three months of the quarter
o-f   the ion o-F this   monthly real series.

        With data sets five and six another adjustment was also
made    before the average log cumulated real   portfolio value was
entered       into the vector . In constructing the series, there
was greatconcern that the data be aligned properly. The
Ibbotson—Sinquefiel d returns data for each month are measured
from    the   end of the preceding month to the end of the current
month.     This provides   four point sampled observations on the
log cumulated real portfolio for each quarter. These were connected
by    straight lines and the integral under the   straight line
interpolation       was used to estimate the corresponding component
of .
        For data sets one and two, the return on corporate stocks
is computed from the Standard and Poors Composite Stock Price
Index and associated dividend series. The return on short—term
debt is computed from the prime commercial paper rate and the
reEurn on long—term debt is computed using the Macaulay railroad
bond yield data for the first part of the sample and the Moody
Aaa bond yield average for the years after l93.
                                     13

        For   data sets three and four,     allreturn data come from
series    on the CITIESE data library.        Stock returns are aqain
computed usinq the monthly Standard and Poor's Composite Stock
Price    Index, while the     return on short debt is taken from the
return   on three—month treasury bills and the return on long
debt    is based on   yields of twenty—year treasury notes.
       For    data sets   five and six,   return   data   come from Ibbotson
andSinquefieid[1982]. The stock return series is their series
common stocks, total returns; the short debt series is their
series   U.S. Treasury bills, total returns the lona debt return
series is their series loriq—term corporate bonds, total returns.
     For after—tax series, the assumed marginal income tax rate
for 1918 to 1980 was that implicit in the spread between municipal
and corporate bond yields.. Before 1918, the marginal income
tax   rate was set to zero. Since         the Ibbotson and Sinquefield
data do not allow a decomposition of returns into capital gains
and  income components, it was assumed for data set six that
all returns were taxed each month as income. For data sets
two and four, however, capital gains were assumed taxed each
month at a long—term capital gains rate. For the years l94
to 1978, the effective rate on long—term capital gains was one—half
the marginal income tax rate. For earlier years, the effective
rate on long—term capital gains was computed from the marginal
income tax rate using tax rate data in Seltzer[l951J.
                                         14

Frel iminarie


        Be-foreconsidering formal estimation and testing, it is
useful    to review some of the broad features o-f the six data
sets which our model must eXplain. Some descriptive statistics
are provided in Table 3.

        For all six data sets, we observe that stock portfolios

gave the highest average real return, approximately 6 p.8. on
a pre—tax basis or 47. a-f ter—tax.           Short—term paper vi el   ds averaged

about    27. p.a. on a      pre—tax       longest historical
                                      basis over   our

sample, but. the average yield fell to about zero in the post-
war period. After—tax real returns to holding short—term paper
have    beers   slightly negative. Long—term bonds, by contrast,
have averaged          essentially a zero real return over the last       century,
on both a       pre—   and after—tax basis. During the post—war period,
however, pre—tax returns have been              slightly negative. On an
after—tax       basis •   bondhol ders have seen the real value of their
portfolios shrink by over 27. p.a.

       According to the consumption based asset pricing model,
these persistent differences in average yields must be accounted

for by the insurance provided by the different portfolios against
events which impinge adversely on consumption. Useful evidence
about this hypothesis is obtained by looking at the covariance
structure of measured portfolio yields and changes in consumption.
Some caution is necessary since the model 's predictions pertain

to the covari ance structure of the instantaneous returns and
                                   15

our data    are constructed from di-ffererices of unit averaged values.

However, if BQ.       the   latter can provide a reliable guide to
the sign and order of magnitude of the instantaneous covariance
matrix.

      Several empirical regularities emerge. As measured by
the variance, the change in consumption is the smoothest series,

followed closely by    the yield   on short—term paper. Long—term
bond yields have been fairly stable over our longest sample,
whereas the variance of returns to holding        a portf ol i o   of stocks
has been several orders of magnitude larger. In the post—war
period, real returns to holding long—term bonds have been much
more volatile with a variance almost as large as the return
to holding common stocks.

      Of more interest are the covariarce properties. According
to our model, it is not the variance but the covariance with

consumption that is the relevant measure of a portfolio's risk.
We find, uniformly across the six data sets, that stock yields
have the largest covariance with changes in consumption, followed

by short—term paper yields and then yields on long—term bonds.
£ualitatively, this is exactly what the model requires given
the ordering of the average yields. It indicates that the basic
idea that insurance against adverse movements in consumption
can account for observed yield differentials has some empirical

promi se.

     Evidence of potential      difficulties is   provided by the
autocovariance   structure of    excess returns   on bonds and stocks
                                        16

over short—term paper. Given our assumptions about the
probabilistic structure o-f consumption arid portfolio values
arid the -form o-f preferences, we expect the point sampled difference
in   vi ci ds between any two portfol i os to he serially uncorrel ated.
As equation (2.24) shows, the           time averaged difference in yields
shoul d have an MA ( 1) component with coefficient about .268.
This particular prediction is independent of the mean or covariance
of returns or the deree of relative risk aversion.
        Table 3 shows that      it is   important to take into account

the consequences, of time averaging. The Box—Ljung statistics
clearly indicate that the excess yields            that   are constructed
from our data are not white noise. The adjusted excess returns
referred to in Table 3 are filtered to remove the time dependence
that    is induced      by unit averaging. Judging from the Box—Ljung
statistics,       the   adjusted excess returns are indeed less serially
correlated    .     Nonetheless, the autocorrelations of the adjusted
excess returns to stocks remain statistically significant from
zero in four of the six data sets.


Some Econometric Issues


        It is demonstrated above that the vector of time averaged
observations       has a representation of the form
(3.1)             (t) = Y0(u) +              + Ø(c)(t—l)   +   €(t)   +   $()€(t—l)
where the disturbances €(t) are distributed independently
and identically as MVN(O,S(o)).              In our application, we can
                                   17
set                      ,a) , where   B1 denotes the    first   row of
the B matrix.

        Linear Gaussian processes have been studied extensively

by econornetricians arid statisticians. Nonetheless, there are
several features of our model which put it outside of the standard

assumptions    in the literature used to prove laws of large numbers
or central    limit theorems. First, the model contains a time
trend    so that sample autocovariances of the exogenous variabLes,
i.e.  T1LXtXt_ where X. = (1 t), do riot converge to well
defined limits. Secondly, the model imposes restrictions not

only across the autoregressive and moving average matrices,
but across these and the contemporaneous covariance matrix as
well. Finally, our model imposes the restriction that B be
of rank one, so that Ø() will have three eiaenvalues on the
unit    circle. To   our knowledge, there are no laws     of large       numbers
or central limit theorems that cover all three of these features.
Application of the standard large sample procedures to estimate
and test our model must be     considered   tentative.

        Although all the features of our model have      not   been treated
together in the literature, we can use available results to
form a reasonable guess about the sampling properties of the
approximate (conditional) maximum likelihood estimator described
below. For example, it appears that a law of        large      numbers
which would allow for all three of the features noted above
would   be a modest extension of the literature. Hannan et al. El980]
provide a law of large numbers for vector ARMAX models allowing
                                         18

for    very general restrictions and, in particular, dependence
across    the covari ance      matrix   of innovati oris    and   the other parameters
of the model. Their assumptions about the error process are
clearly satisfied by our model, but they rule out time trends
as regressors and require all roots of the autoregressive polynomial

to be outside the unit circle.                In the absence of complicated

restrictions or unit roots, the assumption that sample covariances

convergE to well         defined limits       can be   replaced by the weaker
Grenander conditions (see HannanEl97l J) which do allow for time

trends as regressors. Similarly, in the absence of time trends
and other restrictions, strong laws of large numbers can be
established even i-f the autoregressive process is explosive.

Individually, therefore, each o-f             the     three features of the model

highlighted above         is   not an impediment to establishing a law

o-f   large   numbers.

        It is   well   known that unrestricted estimates o-f           0 will
not be asymptotically normal if               there   are unit roots in the

autoregressive polynomial. A case for a central limit theorem
can be made only if the estimation procedure exploits the prior

knowledge       o-f the structure of 0. Our restrictions imply that
      is a co—integrated process (see Granger—Engletl9B2J>. These
processes have had a long history in                  applied empirical research
under   the   name of "error—correction" models. However, only
recently has there been any serious investigation o-f the sampling

properties of the MLE or its approxirnants. Available theorems
do not allow for a time trend or moving average terms but these
                                   19

complications   do not appear to   present any conceptual difficulties.
The main result is that the inteqrating       factor4 is estimated
consistently by ML with a sampling error that       is o(T'2).
The ML   estimators   for the remaininq parameters are consistent
and asymptotically normal with a covariance matrix that is estimated
consistently by the usual formula. In our model, the integrating
-factor is just B1. ,   appropriately   scaled. Since we are never
concerned with testing restrictions on the components of B1

the rapid convergence of the estimated integrating factor does
not appear to present a problem.

       We will proceed formally as if the standard large sample
procedures for in-fererice are valid under the maintained hypothesis
that   B is of rank one. s the preceding di scussi on makes
clear, however, some scepticism is in order.

Estimation Strategy

       Several strategies for the estimation of models with M
errors have been proposed.5 In the time domain, it is natural
to consider the maximum likelihood estimator, or one of its
various approximants.
       Put e(l)O and -For any admissable o define e(t)
recursively   according to

4A nonstochastic vector c such that c't is stationary is called
an integrating factor. In our application, it is any normalized
basis vector for the row space o-f 1—0.
See Osborne (1977) for a survey of the unconstrained case.
                                               20

(3.2)             e(t) =   (t)       —    iç)(LY.) —      — Ø(i(t—1)     —   E(c.)e(t—l).
        Following Wilson (1973), we choose as our estimator

the adrnissable vector                   which maximizes the approximate

(conditional) ion likelihood function


        L(c)         (T—i) lnIS(cv)j —              1   tr S(cM

                                     T
                   where M           L e(t)e(t)'.
                                 t=2

Since 0        bets unit roots, we have little choice but to condition

on the first observation (1).. The assumption that e(l)0.
by contrast, is made solely out of convenience.                         If B=0, the
spectral radius of         E)    is about .268, so the sampling               distribution
o-F        will    not be very sensitive to this assumption about

the initial innovation. Putting e(1)=0 does simplify the
computations somewhat.               In particular, analytic derivatives

can be easily and quickly computed using the method of adjoints
and a straightforward application of the chain rule..

        Several    features     of       La('.) make the evaluation of        cl.a



challenging..       As with     any model with MA errors,             it is not possible
to    reduce the data through sufficient statistics and we have
to    deal with a likelihood function that is not guaranteed to
be globally       concave. Our model poses                 several   difficulties in
addition       to these standard ones. For example, it is not possible
to concentrate out the covariance matrix, since S is functionally
related to the regression parameters of (3.1). Also, some effort
is required to evaluate (Ø(.>,S(.),$(ci). Details are provided
                                                21

in MelinoEl985J, so we will give only a brief overview here.
Define    the   matrices

                     00                                              F6H
     (3.4) C 0 —B—B L
                   o o ol
                                 1
                                                         e           0 F.-)GH-,
                                                                                         K
                 o
                             )
                                            i                        0 0 F-              G—
                                                                                         F
                                                                                    —
                         L            C)    B J                      C)   C)   C)              -




Put C =   —C    and denote the blocks of eC by                            '             etc.       it can
be shown that
                     =                          —              —
     (3.5)               F4K1 +      KjF4           K11
                     = H163 + K1F1              +
                                                    F1Kj.
It is also useful to note that 0                         F4        Although the expressions
appear to be unappetiinq, they are straightforward to implement
given an algorithm for computing the matrix exponential. We
used a routine based on a diagonal Fade approximation that has

very nice numerical properties.6

    Solving for (S.E3) given                                 turned out to be much easier
than conjectured by Bergstromtl9B4j. WilsonEl972J provides
a general algorithm for factoring the autocovariance function
of a multivariate MA process. We adapted his suggestion to
our special case and applied Newtons method to find the matrix
E with spectral radius no greater than unity which is a root
of the polynomial

     (3.7)                   0 + (ft1e              =   0.
     Given an initial guess, E3(0), this leads to the iterative
scheme


6We would like to thank Dr. R.C. Ward of the Union Carbide Laboratory
in Oak Ridge for kindly providing us with this code.
                                   ,, ,-

      (.8)      (fl+l)[fl>_ç1*- (n)]       — E(n)fl1E3'(n+1> =   n)fl1E3'   (ri>.


This scheme exhibits quadratic convergence and turns out to
be quite fast. On average, less than three iterations were
required to find E3 given (fl-).fl1). In fact, we found that this
scheme rarely required more than 5 iterations. Siven E, it
is straightforward to solve for S Using S         —     -

      Evaluation   of La(cY.) and its analytic derivatives is fairly

quick and easy.     The main   difficulty in computing ca turned
out to be the extraordinary large number of iterations required
to refine its location.



Par ameter Esti mates

      Table 4 presents the estimated parameters o-f the constrained

model for each o-f the the six data sets.7 The estimates obtained
using be-fore— and our constructed after—tax yields are remarkably

sirniliar, but there are considerable differences in the estimates

across the three different sample periods.

      Consider first the estimates of L, the covariarce matrix
of the instantaneous innovations. Once again, correlations
are displayed above the diagonal, and the lower triangular elements
are covariances. The estimates of from the quarterly data
sets are all similiar. However, there are some sharp contrasts

7Estimates were obtained using the GQOPT3 package provided by
Professor Ouandt o-f Princeton University. Various algorithms
were required to refine the location of      The reported standard
errors, however, are always calculated by inverting the matrix
o-f second   derivatives evaluated at the optimum. The Hessian
was computed using symmetrical numerical differences of analytic
-first derivatives.
                                     -7


with   the estimates from the annual samples which cast doubt
on our assumption that L has been constant over time. Consumption
innovations appear to have had a much smaller variance in the
post—war   period, as   have   had the innovations to the value      of
short—term paper.    By contrast, the innovations to stock market
Values have been slightly smoother, and those for long—term
bonds are roughly comparable. The covariances of the innovations
to portfolio values with consumpti on have the same ranki rig in
all six data sets, but they are much smaller in thepost—war
period.
       ll six data sets yield small estimates o-f B1. the first
                                                              ,



row o-F the B matrix. This indicates that the change in consumption
has only a very small predictable component, aside from trend.
The trend in consumption is estimated to be about 3% p.a. using
the two long historical samples, about 2.5% using data sets
three and four, and about 1.6% pa. using data sets five and
six.    The corresponding point estimates for         indicate,
respectively,   a substantial preference for present consumption,
a substantial preference for      future   consumption, and indifference.
These apparent differences can't be taken too seriously since
the estimated standard errors indicate substantial uncertainty.
       The differences in the    estimated   parameters o-f    relative
risk aversion are extremely interesting. Using our two longest
historical samples, we obtain estimates of A of just over 20.
This is too large to be plausible. Nonetheless, as anticipated,
                                  24
accountinc -for unit averaQiriq   of consumption results in a

substantial     reduction.8
     Data sets -five and six produce a very plausible estimate
of A of just over 2. Ey contrast, data sets three and four
produce an estimate of A over 150! The difference of the parameter
estimates    obtained using these   very simiuiar post—war quarterly
data   sets is very large,    and some clarification is in order.
       The estimates of A presented in Table 1 are derived from

restrictions     which relate the unconditional means to the covariances
of consumption changes and portfolio returns. However, the
model provides us with further sources of information about
A.. Equation (2.14) tells us that the predictable change in
the    value o-f any portfolio is equal to a   multiple of   the predictable
change in consumption, up to a constant. Since the multiple

is just the parameter of relative risk aversion, this gives
us another estimate a-f A based on the conditional information

in the sample. The maximum       likelihood estimator is usefully
viewed as suitably pooling the disparate estimates based on
conditional and unconditional information..

        It turned out that the predictable change in consumption

around    its   mean using the lagged information in data sets 1—4

was essentially zero. As a result, the maximum likelihood estimate
of A closely reflects the estimates in Table 1 adjusted for

unit averaging..      In data sets 5 and 6, however, the predictable

8For data set 1, we also estimated the model as if the data was
actually point sampled. tie obtained an estimate A = 27.24,
with a standard error of about 11.2.
                                     .- .

chariqe in consumption about its mean, while still small, was
larqe enouqh to provide a fairly accurate estimate of .               The
maximum likelihood estimate reported for these data sets reflects
the conditional irforrratior in the sample.9

     Our model imposes restrictions or the time averaged

representation of .        In turn, the time averaged representation
imposes additional structure on the parameters of the ARM(1,1)
representation. Table 5 contains the lo likelihoods, denoted
L1, L,, arid L- respectively, for the fully restricted time averaged
estimates (Model 1) ,     the   unconstrained time averaged estimates
(Model 2), and the unconstrained ARMA(1,1> estimates (Model 3).

For the reasons discussed above, Models 2 and 3 were estimated
under the maintained hypothesis that B is of rank one and 0
is the sum of the identity and a rank one matrix. For completeness,
the log likelihoods for the totally unconstrained time averaged

and ARM(1,1) models, L and L respectively, are also reported.
     The tests of the overidentifying restrictions imposed by
the model are rejected with very high confidence when compared
against either Model 2 or Model 3.          Curiously,    data sets three
and four which produced the least plausible parameter estimates,


9lmposing only the restrictions implied by (2.14), we obtained
for the six data sets:

     A       =    663.54   949.86    439.67        983.73    2.07   2.60
   (s.e. )       (370.56) (370.56) (    * )    (     *    ) (0.92) (1.21)

Because the Hessian was singular, we are unable to provide standard
errors for the estimates from data sets three and four.
     Hansen—Singleton[1983] also report a very sharp difference
in the estimate of A depending upon whether or not conditioning
information is used. (See their Table 5)
                                   26
provide the weakest    evi. derce agai nst   the oven deriti fyi nq
restrictions. Finally      a comparison of L2and L- indicates
that there is some di-fficulty in accounting for the autocovariances
o-f   by time averaqing a first order process.


Why    is the model rejected?

       There are strona a priori reasons for linking consumption
and portfolio choices. Moreover, the sample means and cova—
riances of portfolio yields and changes in consumption lend
quaiitatve support to the notion of assets being priced in
accordance with the insurance they afford against adverse movements
in consumptort. Yet the various goodness of fit tests reported
above as well as the implausibly high estimates of relative
risk   aversion from data sets one through four appear to constitute
an overwhelming rejection of the model. What should we conclude?
       A response that cannot be dismissed is that the assumed
distribution of the goodness o-f     fit tests is simply misleading.
As we noted above, we cannot rely on the standard central limit
theorems to establish the asymptotic distribution. Moreover,
even if the large sample results obtain, as we conjecture, there
is no guarantee that the asymptotic distribution provides a
close approximation for samples of the size we have examined.
Unfortunately, establishing the small sample distribution either
analytically or by Monte Carlo methods is infeasible. We choose
                                  27
to take the     evidence against the model seriously and to focus
attention on the specific sources of predictive failure.

        One is naturally led to examine more closely the various
auxiliary assumptions that are  being tested joi riti y alongside
the hypothesis that agents behave as described by (2.3). The
two most obvious are the stochastic process assumed to descri be
the evolution o-f consumption and portfolio values and the specific
form o-f pr€ferences. We will concentrat.e on the       former.

        The stochastic differential equation (2.12) imposes many
overidentifying restrictions. One o-f       them   is that the   time

averaged vector has an RMA(pq) representation with pq=1.
To test this, the autoc:orrelatioris of the prediction errors
from Model 3 were calculated. Box—Liung tests did not indicate
any need for considering a higher order process.
     lthoucih the evidence suggests that an ARMA(1,1) representation
for '   is   a reasonable approximation, there are problems in accepting
the restrictions that time averaging a first—order process imposes
on this representation. Fhillips(1978) shows that if BO then
ØI+B and E3.26B(I+(B—XBZ1)/4). Our unconstrained F<MPi(1 , 1)
estimates of      suggest that B is indeed small. There is little
difficulty in accepting the restrictions which a small B matrix
and time averaging impose on .         However, this combination imposes
a great deal o-f structure on E3 which is at odds with the data.

Fr all six data sets, we found that both the constrained and
unconstrained time averaged models produced estimates of E3.2681.
The unconstrained ARMc(1,1) estimates of E3 differed from .2681
                                    28

in   LE-veral respects.     The most noticeable discrepancy was that
the unrestricted estimate of the row of the moving averaqe matrix

pErtainin to the consumpton equation was essentially zero.
in all six dat.a sets. In fact, in data sets 1—2 and 5—6, the
MA coef-ficierit for the innovation in consumption was more than

two standard deviations below .268. Failure to explain the

MA component       o-F consumption in arid of itself would lead to rejecti on
of   the model    at the 5/. level for these data sets.

        One possible explanation    for the apparent absence of a

moving average component in the consumption equation is measurement
error. Suppose the unit average o-f consumption is measured
with an      error that is serially uncorrelated and independent
of the true consumption process. I-f the flow-of consumption
is truly a random walk, the measured consumption series will
be an ARMA(1.1) process but with an       MA coe-f-ficiènt less than

.268.        If one half of the variance of the change in measured

consumption      is due to measurement error, the MA coefficient
would    be predicted to fall to just     .127.

        As   pointed out earlier, our model predicts that the excess
returns of stocks and bonds over the yield on short—term paper
should be unpredictable. The time averaged excess returns should
therefore have an MA(1) structure with a coefficient of about
.268. These overidentifying predictions can be tested regardless
of the quality of the consumption data by simply regressing
the adjusted excess returns on various information sets. Moreover,
there is no problem in justifying the standard procedures to
                                    29
test these orthoqonality restrictions. The results ar-c reported
in Table 6. The likelihood ratio test statisticq X, and the
R            of the nudi vi dual rearessi ons is also reported.
      -for each        i


The individual F are remarkably hih and the orthoqonality
restrictions are rejected with very high confidence. Since
yield data that are point sampled are readily available, we
also tested these restrictions using the monthly point sampled
yields corresponding to data sets 1—6. Because a monthly price
index was not available for our longest samples, we used the
log cumulated     nominal   returns, vt. in the information set.
These results are reported in the lower half of Table 6. Although
the individual R2 are much lower, as we would expect, the rejection
a-f the orthogonality restrictions is even more pronounced.
These results are very similiar to those reported in Hansen
and Sinaleton[1983J.

       One explanation for this predictive failure is simply that
the   covariance matrix c-f   the instantaneous innovations is not
constant but is state       dependent. This seems   extremely   plausible
and could also account for the noted differences in the estimates
of Z -from different sample periods. However, taking account

c-f state dependent variances would make estimation and testing

o-f the model practically impossible. Because our model imposes
restrictions across the drift and diffusion parameters, making

the latter state dependent would force us to abandon the linear
constant coefficient model of the drift as well. We would be
led   to the more general stochastic process that solves
                                         30

     (3.9)     dy =   B(t,y)dt   +   1(t,y)dZ.
        The restrictions across the drift and diffusion effectively

rule out       any 0+ the convenient functional forms -for   B() arid

         and   the solution of the likelihood for even the point
sampled process is difficult to implement. Computing the likelihood
-function for the unit        averaged   process that solves (3.9) seems

unimaginable,         with current technology.

IV   Conclusions


     The notion of insurance against events which impinge unfavourably
on consumption choices can be used to rationalize, at least

qualitatively, the systematic differences in average yields
a-fforded      by portfolios of stocks, bonds, and short—term paper.
The sample means and covariances of portfolio returns and per

capita consumption growth indicate that the quantitative dif-ferences

in averace yields can be rationalized only by implausibly high
aversion to risk. Taking account of the fact that measured

consumption is unit averaged substantially reduces the degree
of relative risk aversion required to rationalize the data.
         Nonetheless, there remains considerable evidence that
casts doubt on this view o-F the world.           In particular, it is

difficult to reconcile the importance of unit averaging of the
consumption flow with the fact that the measured logarithm of

detrended real per capita consumption has essentially no moving
average component. lso, although the model allows the average
                              31

return on different portfolios to diverge due to different insurance
characteristics, the particular    specification that   we examined
requires that expected excess returns should be time invariant.

This orthogoriality property is forcefully rejected by the data.
Addressing these particular predictive failures while taking
account of unit averaging constitutes a formidable challenge
for future research.
                                                 Table   1


                        Estimates of A Using Unconditional Means and Covariances


    Data Set                                                             Cov(R' dc/c)
                      ER         Cov(R' dc/c)       A5        ER                          AB


1   Annual            .039           .0229          13.76     -.013         -.O8O       159.10

3    Quarterly        .012           .049          139.13     -.005         -.0l3       376.41

5    Quarterly        .012           .062          198.56     -.002         -.060       398.17


             excess return on stocks over short term paper.


             excess return on bonds over short term paper.
                                                            Table 2



                                            Important Differences Across Data Sets



   (1)                 (2)                (3)                   (4)                    (5)                    (6)
)ata Set             Sample           Price Index         Marginal Tax          Capital Gains          Averaging Method
                                                             Rate                 Taxed As


   1                knnual      Consumption Deflator           0                       0                      1


   2                Annual      Consumption Deflator         Munic                                            1
                                                                              Long--Term Gain

   3                Quarterly   Consumption Deflator           0                       0                      1


   4                Quarterly   Consumption Deflator         Munic                                            1
                                                                              Long—Term Gain

   5                Quarterly   CPI                            0                       0                      2

   6                Quarterly   CPI                          Munic            Income                          2




Notes:     Column (3): To convert nominal returns to real returns, we used either the consumption deflator for non—
           durables and services or the consumer price index.
           Column (4): A 0 indicates pretax returns. Munic indicates that the marginal personal income tax rate
           implicit in the spread between municipal and corporate bond yields was used to construct after—tax returns.
           Column (6): Averaging method 1 takes the log monthly cumulated returns, forms a simple average for the
           period and subtracts the log price index. Averaging method 2 takes log monthly cumulated returns,
           subtracts the monthly log price index and computes the integral of the linear interpolation of the end
           of month values.
                                                                    Table 3

                                                    Some Descriptive            Statistics
                                                                                                  Box-Ljung Statistic to Lag:
                    Variable   Mean        Correlation/Covariance'                       Mean
                                                                    .




                                       -
                                                                                                 — 6            12      18       24

Data Set 1           Mnc       .032        .0225   .289    -.142        -.128             .039   11.17     22.59*    32.27*   4303**
1890-1981
                                                                                     R
92                             .058        .0225   .029     .099         .286            -.013   29.97** 48.07** 55 l1** 59.27**
                     Alnv1                                                           R
Observations
                               .019    -.040       .094     .0231        .692             .039    9.10     19.45     30.01*   42.68*
                     Amy2                                                            R
                               .0260   —.048       .0237    .0229        .0256 t         -.013   13.48*    25.03*    30.90*   35.69
                     Amy3                                                            R
Data Set   2         Alnc      .032        .0225   .261    -.185        -.160             .035   13.02*    25.01*    36.72*   47.67**
1890-1980
                                                                                     R
91                             .048        .0221   .026     .159         .318            -.011   26.28** 44.22** 48.91** 54.10**
                     Amy1                                                            R
Observations
                               .013    -.053       .o2i      Q233        .780    t        .035   11.58     23.50*    36.69** 50.l1**
                     Amy2                                                            R
                               .0218   -.059       .0238    .0233        .0254 t         -.011   11.21     22.31*    26.48    31.50
                     Amy3                                                            R
Data Set 3           Ainc      .0248       .027    .273     .020        -.067             .012   24.84**   31   .52** 54.91** 62.76**
1953: 3—1 983  :1
                                                                                     R
119                            .015        .088    .0238    .077         .216                    10.16     25.80*    28.70    34.28
                     Amy1                                                            R
Observations
                               .0224       .0655   .026     .O29         .247    t        .012    7.93     15.66     31.10    37.91
                     Amy2                                                            R
                                       -.o13       .O51     .O51         .0215 f                  4.42     15.50     17.15    21.78
                     Amy3                                                            R
                                                             Table   3   (continued)



                                                                           1      Van-             Box—hung Statistic to     Lag:
                  Variable       Mean        Correlation/Covariance               able3   Mean    ——
                                                                                                    6        12       18       24
                                         -
Data Set 4        Ainc           .0251       .028    .282     .247       -.042             .013   22.l3** 28.66** 50.82** 56.77**
1953:3-1980:'
                                                                                      R
110                              .011        .080    .0229    .311        .142                    10.25   14.17    19.42    27.55
                  Mnv1                                                                R
Observations
                                             .057    .073     .O19        .348    1        .013    7.44   14.30    29.28*   3439
                  Amy2
                                         -.O67       .O23     .O45        .O88    1                8.15   10.30    13.45    22.94
                  Amy3                                                                R
Data Set 5        Ainc           .0243       .O37    .266     .224        .041             .015   27.24** 34.88** 80.04** 88.38**
                                                                                      R
1947 :2-1981:'
                                 .015        .095    .O35     .140        .241                    l9.71** 23.29*   27.62    37.08*
139               Amy1                                                                R
Observations                 -   .0l6        .O41O   .061     .O54        .344    t        .015    8.03   14.67    42.66** 50.62**
                  Amy2                                                                R
                                             .080    .046     .081        .02i0                   10.33   12.15    15.12    24.51
                  Amy3
Data Set 6         Ainc          .0244       .037    .263     .242        .033             .012   27.81** 35.38** 77.86** 85.16**
1947 :2_i 980:L
                                                                                      R
135                              .0293       .073    .0221    .287        .279                    19.47** 24.17*   31.34*   42.06*
Observations
                   Amy1                                                               R
                                 .0230       .01l    .O310    .O59        .487    t        .012    8.83   15.24    41.86** 48.80**
                   Amy2                                                               R
                             .o254           .o5o    .o       .093        .062 t          .0224 14.35*    16.58    21.08
                   Amy3                                                               R                                     133.00

        mCorrelations are displayed above the diagonal.

        2   Denotes significant at 5% level.
          **Denotes significant at 1% level.

           tDenotes adjusted to remove the effects of time averaging.
                                                                 Table 4

                                          Estimates for the Fully Constrained Model1


                                                   A         S
       Data Set                 K        g                                               B1                                        E2



1    (1890-1981)                 .12      .03    21.23      .79                  .080    -.02l                   .0240     .225      -.004      -.008

                               (.06)    (.01)    (9.51)    (.37)      (.0223)   (.098) (.0214) (.0231)           .0231     .047         .202     .374

                                                                                                                           .0226        .0235     744
                                                                                                             -   .050      .0275        .0240    .0286




2   (1890-1980)                  .14      .03    21.40      .77                  .0211   -.0i7                   .0240     .214      -.003      -.008

                               (.07)    (.01)    (9.86)    (.39)      (.0230)   (.0212) (.0214) (.0233)          .0228     .041         .223     .378
                                                                                                             —.o13         .0227        .0235    .790
                                                                                                             -   .045      .0267        .0241     Q277


              -                                                                                                  .041      .234         .282    -.046
3   (1953:3       1983:1)      -4.61     .026    154.47    1.27       .o2s       .042     .021       -.026
                                                                                                                           .0252        .199     .176
                               (6.99)   (.022)    (3.39)   (.15)      (.o16) (.013) (.031) (.035)
                                                                                                                 .0   83   .0   66      .0 21    .220

                                                                                                             -.O14          fl3         fl447    .0221

4             -   1980:4)        .14      .025   185.38    1.23        -.021     .042         .049   -.097       .042      .228         .334    -.068
    (1953:3
                               (1.60)    (.og)   (29.85)   (.20)       (.O12) (.016) (.077) (.040)               .091      .0238        .220     .049
                                                                                                              .o82         .05l         .014
                                                                                                                                                 .392
                                                                                                             -.o16         .O311        .042     .0 13


5             —   1981         -.23       .024    2.12     1.01       —.039      .0228                Q245       .057      .224         .111     .003
    (1947:2              :4)

                                (.71)    (.07)     (.98)   (.024)      (.027)   (.0216) (.0293) (.0236)          .0l2      .0249        .155     .328
                                                                                                                 .O6O      .079         .052     .155

                                                                                                                 .0687     .042         .O9l     .0215
                                                              Table   4   (continued)



          Data Set                                     A          S
                                     K        9                                                  B1                               E2



6                  -                 .39     .0236
         (1947:2       1980:4)                        2.69      1.01         -.032       .0232               .0212         .057    .194   .130   -.024
                                    (.80)   (.092)   (1.34)     (.026)       (.022)     (.0221)       (.0279)(.0251)       .O79    .0229 .213     .168
                                                                                                                           .070    .o8l           .393
                                                                                                                       -   .o52    .026 .080      .083

    1.    Figures      in   parentheses are the estimated standard errors.

    2.    Correlations are displayed above the diagonal.
                                                Table 5
                                        Goodness of Fit Tests



                                                                       •   Test of     Test of       Test of
               Li          L2           L2           L3           L3       Model lvs   Model   lvs   Model 2vs
Data Set     (NP=18)     (NP=25)      (NP=34)      (NP4i)       (NP50)     Model 2     Model   3     Model 3



   1         822.95      838.34       849.33       865.79       877.57      30.78        85.68        54.90



   2         832.53      845.04       856.74       871.85       885.13      25.02        78.64        53.62



   3         1794.79    1803.07      1835.54      1823.07       1852.67     16.56        56.56        40.00



   4        1724.42     1746.34      1755.34      1755.68       1776.96     43.84        62.52        18.68



   5        2044.57     2056.02      2073.78      2098.20       2123.08     22.90       107.26        84.36




   6        2064.79     2078.36      2102.61      2119.85       2141.57     27.14       110.12        82.98




                                                                           2os(7)      205(23)       x2.os6)
                                                                            =14.07       =35.17         26.30
   NP denotes the number of free parameters.

                                                                           x2.ol       x2.0l23       x2.0106)
                                                                            =18.48       =41.64       =32.00
                                                                       Table 6
                                                     Predictability of Excess Returns
I.    Adjusted Excess Returns (Time Averaged Data)

                   Information Set =          1, (t-l),        £
                                         {                         }
                                         (10 restrictions)

       DataSet                I                                                                        A
                                                         R                                                     z
                                                                                    R
           1                 91                           .17                       29               43.00    7.38
           2                 90                           .17                       .27              39.33    6.56
           3                118                           .26                       .18                       9.99
           4                109                           .22                       .16              44.66    7.75
           5                138                           .18                       .13              42.75    7.32
           6                134                           .18                       .16              45.15    7.86



II.   Monthly Returns (Point Sampled Data)

                   Information Set   =
                                         {      lnv?,t_i           1nv1          1nv,_1 ,
                                                                                            t   }

                                         (8   restrictions)


      DataSet                 I                                                                        A       z
                                                         R                         R
          1                1102                          .20                       .20              419.88   76.70
          2                1090                          .21                       .21              439.28   80.37
          3                 355                          .16                       .13              121.04   20.23
          4                 328                          .15                       .13              121.90   20.39
          5                 418                          .05                       .04               62.80   9.22
          6                 406                          .06                       .04               76.67   11.84

Notes:         I    number of observations.
                    R2   for the excess return on stocks equation.
               R
                         for the excess return on bonds equation.

               A    Likelihood    ratio test statistics
               z    (-q)/v' where q             is    the number of restrictions under test.
                                  -7 n


Re-frences
BerqstrornqA..R. 'Continuous   Time Stochastic Models and Issues
     of    AqgreQation Over Time,' in Z. Briliches and M. Intriligator
        (eds) Handbook of Ecor,ometrics,Amsterdam:North—Holland, (19B4)

Breeden,D.T. 'Ar Irterternporal Asset Pricing Model with Stochastic

        Consumption and Investment Opportunities, '   Journal of Financial
        Economics, 7(1979) :265—296

Granqer,C.W.J. and RE. Engle 'Dynamic Model Specification with
        Equilibrium Constraints: Co—integration and Error Correction,'

        Department of Economics WP.#85—18, University of     California,
        San   Dieqo, revised May 1985
Grossman,S.J. and R.J. Shiller 'Preliminary Results on the
        Determinants of Stock Market Variability,' unpublished
        mimeo, June 1980
    —'Or the Determinants of Stock Market Variability, ' American

        Economic Review, 7(1981):222—227
    —   'Consumption Correlatedness and Risk Measurement in Economies
        with Non—traded Assets and Heterogeneous Information,'
        Journal of Financial Economics,10(1982): 195—210

Hannan,E.J. Multiple Time Series, New York:Wiley,1970
Hannan,E..J., W.,T.M. Dunsmuir and M. Deistler 'Estimation of

        Vector AR'MAX Models,' Journal of Multivariate Analysis,

        10(198W :275—295
Hansen,L.P. and K.J.      Singleton   'Stochastic Consumption,Risk
        Aversion, and the Temporal Behaviour of Asset Returns,
        Journal of Political Economy, 91(1983):249—265
                                  33

Ibbotsori,R.,G. and   R.A. Sinquefield Stocks, Bonds, Bills and
     Inflation:The Past. and the FLiture,

     Charlottesville: Financial Analysts Research Foundation,1982
Melino,A. 'Estimation of Unit Averaqed Diffusion Processes,'

     Department of Economics—Institute for Policy Analysis

     WP. #8502, University of Toronto, March 1985
Merton,R.C. 'Optimum Consumption and Portfolio Rules in a Continuous
     Time Mode1' Journal of Economic Theory. 3(1971):373—413
Osborne,D.R. 'Exact arid Approximate Maximum Likelihood Estimators
     for Vector Moving Average Frocesses, '       Journal of the Royal
     Statistical Society, Series B, 39(1977):114—118
Phillips,P..C.,B.. 'The Treatment of Flow Data in the Estimation
     of Continuous Time Systems, '     in   Bergstrom et.al (eds),
     Stability and Inflation, New York:Wiley, 1978
Seltzer,LH. The Nature and Tax Treatment of Capital Gains and
     Losses, New York:National Bureau of Economic Research,1951

Shiller,R.J 'Consumption, Asset Markets and Macroeconomic

     Fluctuations,' Carnegie—Rochester Conference Series, 17(1982)
4ilson,S.T. 'The Factorization of Matricial Spectral Densities,'
     SIAM Journal of Applied Mathematics, 23(1972):420—426
    — 'The Estimation of Parameters in Multivariate Time Series

    Models,' Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B,
     35(1973):7é1—B5
