NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SUBJECTIVE WELL-BEING, INCOME, ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND GROWTH
Daniel W. Sacks
Betsey Stevenson
Justin Wolfers
Working Paper 16441
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16441

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2010

The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Daniel W. Sacks, Betsey Stevenson, and Justin Wolfers. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Subjective Well-Being, Income, Economic Development and Growth
Daniel W. Sacks, Betsey Stevenson, and Justin Wolfers
NBER Working Paper No. 16441
October 2010
JEL No. I31,I32,O11
ABSTRACT
We explore the relationships between subjective well-being and income, as seen across individuals
within a given country, between countries in a given year, and as a country grows through time. We
show that richer individuals in a given country are more satisfied with their lives than are poorer individuals,
and establish that this relationship is similar in most countries around the world. Turning to the relationship
between countries, we show that average life satisfaction is higher in countries with greater GDP per
capita. The magnitude of the satisfaction-income gradient is roughly the same whether we compare
individuals or countries, suggesting that absolute income plays an important role in influencing wellbeing. Finally, studying changes in satisfaction over time, we find that as countries experience economic
growth, their citizens’ life satisfaction typically grows, and that those countries experiencing more
rapid economic growth also tend to experience more rapid growth in life satisfaction. These results
together suggest that measured subjective well-being grows hand in hand with material living standards.

Daniel W. Sacks
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
dansacks@wharton.upenn.edu
Betsey Stevenson
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
1454 Steinberg - Dietrich Hall
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
betseys@wharton.upenn.edu

Justin Wolfers
Business and Public Policy Department
7KHWharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk
Room 1456 Steinberg-Deitrich Hall
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6372
and NBER
jwolfers@wharton.upenn.edu

I.

Introduction
Does economic growth improve the human lot? 1 Using several datasets which collectively

cover 140 countries and represent nearly all of the world’s population, we study the relationship
between subjective well-being and income, identifying three stylized facts. First, we show that
within a given country, richer individuals report higher levels of life satisfaction. Second, we
show that richer countries on average have higher levels of life satisfaction. Third, analyzing the
time series of countries that we observe repeatedly, we show that as countries grow, their citizens
report higher levels of satisfaction. Importantly, we show that the magnitude of the relationship
between satisfaction and income is roughly the same across all three comparisons, which
suggests that absolute income plays a large role in determining subjective well-being.
These results overturn the conventional wisdom that there is no relationship between
growth and subjective well-being. In a series of influential papers, Easterlin (1973, 1995, 2005a,
2005b) has argued that economists’ emphasis on growth is misguided, because he finds no
statistically significant evidence of a link between a country’s GDP and the subjective well-being
of its citizens. This is despite the fact that Easterlin and others (e.g. Layard 1980) have found
that richer individuals in a given country report higher levels of well-being. Researchers have
reconciled these discordant findings, together called the Easterlin Paradox, by positing that wellbeing is determined by relative, rather than absolute, income. By this view, individuals want
only to keep up with the Joneses. If true, the Easterlin Paradox suggests that focusing on
economic growth is futile; when everyone grows richer, no one becomes happier. A related
concern, voiced for example by Di Tella and MacCulloch (2010) is that subjective well-being

1

This paper revisits—and hopefully clarifies and simplifies—many of the findings originally described in Stevenson
and Wolfers (2008)

1

adapts to circumstance. If correct, this argument implies that long run growth makes people no
better off because their aspirations and expectations grow with their income. A third concern is
that, even if well-being rises with income for the very poor, individuals eventually reach a
satiation point, above which further income has no effect on well-being (Layard 2005). Yet in
this paper, we present evidence that well-being rises with absolute income, period. This
evidence suggests that relative income, adaptation and satiation are of only secondary
importance.
Subjective well-being is multifaceted; it includes both how happy individuals are at a
point in time and how satisfied they are with their lives as a whole (Diener 2006). In section II
we briefly discuss relevant background information on the measurement of subjective wellbeing. Throughout this paper, we focus on life satisfaction, which is the variable that is both
most often measured, and that has been the focus of much of the existing literature (even as
economists have often referred to these satisfaction questions as measuring “happiness.”)
Although life satisfaction is the focus of this paper, we consider a variety of alternative measures
of subjective well-being and show that they also rise with income.
In section III we demonstrate that richer individuals are more satisfied with their lives,
and that this finding holds across 140 countries, and several datasets. Across each of these
countries, the relationship between income and satisfaction is remarkably similar. Our graphical
analysis suggests that subjective well being rises with the log of income. This functional form
implies that a 20 percent rise in income has the same impact on well-being, regardless of the
initial level of income: going from $500 to $600 of income per year yields the same impact on
well-being as going from $50,000 to $60,000. This specification is appealing on theoretical
grounds because a standard assumption in economics is that the marginal impact of a dollar of

2

income is diminishing. Indeed, estimating well-being as a function of log income fits the data
much better than the simple linear function of income emphasized by previous authors, and this
hold whether we are making comparisons across individuals, across countries, or over time. All
of our formal analyses therefore involve the log of income rather than its level, although we
present scatter plots and non-parametric fitted values to allow the reader to assess the functional
form for herself.
In section IV, we turn to the cross country evidence. Using larger data sets than previous
authors have examined, we find an economically and statistically significant relationship
between average levels of satisfaction in a country and the log of GDP per capita. The data also
show no evidence of a satiation point: the same linear-log satisfaction-income gradient we
observe for poor and middle-income countries holds equally well for rich countries; it does not
flatten at high income.
Whereas Easterlin (1974) had argued that the relationship between well-being and
income seen within countries was stronger than the relationship seen between countries, and that
this provided evidence for the importance of relative income, our evidence undermines the
empirical foundation for this claim. Instead, we show that the relationship between income and
well-being is similar both within and between countries, thereby suggesting that absolute income
plays a strong role in determining well-being, and relative income is a less important influence
than had been previously believed.
In section V we turn to the time series evidence. While the within- and between- country
comparisons cast doubt on the Easterlin Paradox, they do not by themselves tell us whether
economic growth in fact translates into gains in subjective well-being. This question has
challenged researchers for some time because of a lack of consistent time series data on

3

subjective well-being. We analyze the time series movements in subjective well-being using two
sources of comparable repeated cross-national cross-sections. Each data sets spans over two
decades and covers dozens of countries.
In analyzing the time series data we can subject the relative income hypothesis to a test: if
notions of a good life change as the income of one’s fellow citizens grow, then we should see
only a modest relationship between growth in satisfaction and growth in average income, relative
to our point-in-time estimates. We present economically and statistically significant evidence of
a positive relationship between economic growth and rising satisfaction over time, although
limited data mean that these estimates are less precise than are those from the within- or
between- country regressions. The magnitude of the estimated gradient between satisfaction and
income in the time series is similar to the magnitude of the within- and between-country
gradients. These results suggest that raising the income of all does indeed raise the well-being of
all.
Finally, in section VI we turn to alternative measures of subjective well-being, showing
that they too rise with a country’s income. We find that happiness is positively related to per
capita GDP across a sample of 69 countries. We then show that additional, affect-specific
measures of subjective well-being, such as whether an individual felt enjoyment or love, or did
not feel pain, are all higher in countries with higher per capita GDP. Our finding that subjective
well-being rises with income is therefore not confined to an unusual data set or a particular
indicator of subjective well-being.
Taken together, these new stylized facts suggest that subjective well-being, however
measured, rises with income. Other recent papers have noted this as well. Deaton (2008) finds
that individuals in richer countries have both higher levels of subjective well-being and better

4

health. Stevenson and Wolfers (2008), performing an analysis parallel to this one–albeit using
slightly different methods2–report similar findings to those described here, and discuss in detail
why previous researchers failed to identify the strong link between subjective well-being and
income.

II.

Background on Subjective Well-Being
Subjective well-being has many facets. Some surveys, such as the World Values Survey, ask

respondents about their life satisfaction, asking, “All things considered, how satisfied are you
with your life these days?” The Gallup World Poll includes a variant of this question in which
respondents were shown a picture and told “Here is a ladder representing the ‘ladder of life.’
Let’s suppose the top of the ladder represents the best possible life for you; and the bottom, the
worst possible life for you. On which step [between 0 and 10] of the ladder do you feel you
personally stand at the present time?” This question, which we refer to as the satisfaction ladder,
is a form of Cantril’s “Self-Anchoring Striving Scale” (Cantril 1965). Other surveys ask about
happiness directly (“Taking all things together, how would you say things are these days—would
you say you’re very happy, fairly happy, or not too happy?”). Gallup also asks a battery of more
specific questions, ranging from “Were you proud of something you did yesterday” to “Did you
experience a lot of pain yesterday?” Whereas the satisfaction question invites subjects to assess
the entirety of their well-being, the more-specific questions hone in on affect; they measure
feelings rather than assessments (Diener 2006). In this paper, we will largely focus on lifesatisfaction, although in section VI we turn to examining the relationship between income and
particular components of well-being.
2

Compared with that earlier study, some of the results in this paper differ because we consider a simpler and more
transparent scaling of subjective well-being, and we use some more recent data from the Gallup World Poll.

5

We focus on satisfaction rather than other measures of subjective well-being, such as
happiness, for two reasons. First, we would like to use as many data sets as possible to assess the
relationship between subjective well-being and income, and life satisfaction and the satisfaction
ladder are more commonly measured than any other measure. Second, the previous literature
documenting the Easterlin Paradox (including Easterlin 1974, 1995, 2005a, 2005b, 2009) has
largely focused on life satisfaction questions (even as researchers have tended to label these
analyses of “happiness”). Thus we focus our attention on analyzing similar questions for direct
comparability with the previous literature. However, we assess the income-happiness link in
detail in section VI along with other more affective measures of well-being and the results are
similar to the income-satisfaction link.
Subjective well-being data are useful only if the questions succeed in measuring what
they intend to measure. Economists have traditionally been skeptical of subjective data because
they lack any objective anchor and because some types of subjective data, such as contingent
valuations, suffer from severe biases (e.g. Diamond and Hausman 1994). These objections apply
to subjective-well being data, but a variety of evidence points to a robust correlation between
answers to subject-well being questions and alternative measures of personal well-being. For
example, self-reported well-being is correlated with physical measures such as heart rate and
electrical activity in the brain as well as sociability and a propensity to laugh and smile (Diener
1984). Self-reported well-being is also correlated with independently ascertained friends’ reports
and with health and sleep quality (Diener, Lucas and Scollon 2006; Kahneman and Krueger
2006). Measures of subjective well-being also tend to be relatively stable over time and they
have a high test-retest correlation (Diener and Tov 2007). If people answered subjective wellbeing questions without rhyme or reason, we would not see these correlations across questions

6

and people and over time. Individual subjective well-being data therefore likely are anchored by
actual well-being.
Subjective well-being data lack a natural scale and are reported differently across data
sets. For example happiness questions often ask respondents to choose a level of happiness from
“very happy” to “very unhappy”, with one or two nominal values in between. Life satisfaction
can be measured on a similar scale, or on a ladder of life with ten or eleven rungs. In order to
compare answers across surveys, we convert all subjective well being data into normalized
variables, subtracting the sample mean and dividing by the sample standard deviation.
Whenever we report the subjective well-being-income gradient, therefore, we are effectively
reporting the average number of standard deviation changes in subjective well-being associated
with a one unit change in income (or log income). This rescaling has the disadvantage of
assuming that the difference between any two levels of life satisfaction is equal, although in fact
the difference between the fifth and sixth rung on the ladder of life may be very different from
the difference between the ninth and tenth. There are many alternative ways to standardize the
scale of subjective well-being; Stevenson and Wolfers (2008) use an ordered probit and show
that the results we discuss here are robust to alternative approaches. 3

3

In Stevenson and Wolfers (2008), we estimated well-being aggregates as the coefficients from an ordered probit of
well-being on country fixed effects, which yielded very similar estimates. The most important difference is that the
ordered probit scales differences relative to the standard deviation of well-being conditional on country dummies,
while the simpler normalization in this paper scales differences relative to the (larger) unconditional standard
deviation of well-being. Given that country fixed effects account for about 20% of the variation in well-being (that
is, R2≈0.2 in an OLS regression of satisfaction on country fixed effects), this simpler normalization will tend to yield
estimates of the well-being–income gradient that are about nine-tenths as large (√1 −  ≈ 0.9).

7

III.

Within-Country Estimates of the Satisfaction-Income Gradient
We begin our study of life satisfaction and income by comparing the reported satisfaction

of relatively rich and less rich individuals in a given country at a point in time. Many authors
have found a positive and strong within-country relationship between subjective well being,
measured in various ways, and income. For example, Robert Frank argues for the importance of
income as follows: “When we plot average happiness versus average income for clusters of
people in a given country at a given time . . . rich people are in fact a lot happier than poor
people. It’s actually an astonishingly large difference. There’s no one single change you can
imagine that would make your life improve on the happiness scale as much as to move from the
bottom 5 percent on the income scale to the top 5 percent” (Frank 2005, p. 67). We confirm this
relationship, and, taking advantage of the enormous size of many of our data sets, estimate
precisely the magnitude of the within-country satisfaction-income gradient.
We assess the relationship between satisfaction and income by estimating lowess
regressions of satisfaction against the log of household income. Lowess regression effectively
estimates a separate bivariate regression around each point in the data set, but weights nearby
points most heavily (Dinardo and Tobias 2001). Traditional regression analysis imposes a linear
relationship, while the lowess procedure allows researchers to study the functional form of the
relationship between two variables, such as life satisfaction and the log of income.
In Figure 1, we plot the lowess estimate of the relationship between the satisfaction
ladder score and the log of household income for each of the largest twenty five countries in the
world (estimated separately), using data from the Gallup World Poll.4 (Analyzing income per
equivalent household yields similar conclusions.) Satisfaction scores are shown both as their raw
4

We are using a more recent vintage of the Gallup World Poll than Stevenson and Wolfers (2008), incorporating
data made available through October 13, 2008.

8

(0-10) scores on the left axis, and in their standardized form (obtained by subtracting the whole
sample mean and dividing by the standard deviation) on the right axis. To ease comparison with
subsequent figures, the standardized satisfaction scale and the income scale are kept
approximately constant in the various charts throughout the paper.
Figure 1 reveals the well-known finding that richer citizens of a given country are more
satisfied with their life. For most countries, this plot reveals that satisfaction rises linearly with
the log of income (as the horizontal axis is on a log scale). Moreover, the gradient is similar
across countries, with the estimated line for each country looking like parallel shifts of each
other. In spite of the enormous differences among these countries, the relationship between
income and life satisfaction is remarkably similar across these countries. Finally, we note that
this figure provides no evidence of satiation. While some have argued that, above a certain
point, income has no impact on well-being, in these countries we see that the curve is just as
steep at high levels of income as at low levels.
While these 25 countries account for the majority of the world’s population, Gallup
polled individuals in 132 countries, making their poll the widest survey of subjective well-being
ever undertaken. We summarize and quantify the relationship between well-being and income
by pooling data from all the countries in our data sets and estimating regressions of the following
form:
    = 

 !"#$%

 + ' !()(

*+

,(-. ) + / 0 + 1

(1)

where i indexes individuals; c indexes countries; Income is self-reported household income; and
X is a vector of individual-level controls including sex, a quartic in age, and their interaction.
We include a country-specific intercept,  , which adjusts for differences in average satisfaction
and income across countries, thereby ensuring that the estimation results are driven by
9

differences between rich and poor within each country. We denote the coefficient of interest
' !()(

*+

because it isolates the well-being- income gradient obtained when comparing

individuals within a country. In constrast to much of the literature, we focus on the relationship
between subjective well-being and the log (rather than level) of income. Our graphical evidence
supports this focus, since we observe that the satisfaction-income gradient is approximately
linear-log.5
Table 1 presents the results, estimated separately in a variety of datasets. We begin by
showing results from the 126 countries in the Gallup World Poll with valid income data. Next,
we present results from the first four waves of the World Values Survey which spans 1980-2004
and asks respondents to assess their life satisfaction on a 1-10 scale; we pool all waves and
include wave fixed effects to account for changes through time, and changes in surveys between
waves. Stevenson and Wolfers (2008) document that for several countries in this survey the
sampling frames are not nationally representative, and so we drop these observations from all of
our analyses. Finally, we also analyze the 2002 Pew Global Attitudes Survey, which covers 44
countries at all levels of development and uses the same ladder of life question as Gallup.
The first column of Table 1 reports the regression results without any controls (beyond
country fixed effects), and the estimated satisfaction-income gradient ranges from 0.216 in the
World Values Survey, to 0.281 in the Pew Global Attitudes Survey. In the second column we
add controls for age and sex, but our results remain similar.6 Within a given country, at a point
in time, people with higher income tend to report greater life satisfaction.

5

Throughout the paper, therefore, when we refer to the subjective well-being-income gradient, we mean the SWBlog income gradient.
6
These estimates are slightly smaller than those found in Stevenson and Wolfers (2008), which is partly due to the
different normalization of satisfaction scores, and partly due to the more recent vintage of the Gallup data analyzed
here.

10

We would like to compare the estimates from equation (1) to estimates of the crosscountry subjective well-being-income gradient, but to do so we need to have a comparable
concept of income changes. While differences in income between individuals within a country
reflect both transitory and permanent differences (and each has different implications for
subjective well-being), income differences between countries are likely to be much more
persistent, and indeed, close to entirely permanent.
How much of the cross-sectional variation in income within a country represents
variation in permanent income? Standard estimates for the United States suggest that around
two-fifths to a half of the cross sectional variation in annual income comes from permanent
income (Haider 2001; Gottschalk and Moffit 1994).7 Our survey asks about monthly income,
suggesting that the transitory share is larger; to be conservative, we simply choose the upper end
of these estimates. We also need to convert the variation in transitory income into its permanent
income-equivalent. If each extra dollar of transitory income persists for only one year, then
people would be indifferent between one extra dollar of transitory income, and a rise in
permanent income of about 5 cents (assuming a 5 percent discount rate). Estimates of the
transitory component of annual income suggest that it doesn’t all dissipate in one year; indeed,
the autoregressive process estimated by Haider (2001) suggests that the permanent incomeequivalent of a $1 rise in transitory income would be about twice the one-year value, or 10 cents.
Consequently a one dollar increase in income in the cross section represents on average a 50 cent
rise in permanent income, plus a 50 cent rise in transitory income, and this transitory income is
valued equivalently to a rise in permanent income of about 5 cents. This implies that to interpret
our estimated well-being–income gradient in terms of a $1 rise in permanent income, our cross7

While our calculations will use these U.S. estimates as if they are representative of the entire world, what is really
needed is similar studies for countries at different levels of development.

11

sectional estimates should be scaled up by about 80% (1/0.55). We report the adjusted estimates
in the third column of Table 1, and they tend to be slightly larger than 0.4.
We can also address this concern empirically by using an instrumental variables strategy
designed to isolate variation in income that is likely permanent. Specifically, we use a full set of
country×education fixed effects as instruments for permanent income. The instrumental
variables estimates of ' !()(

*+

—reported in the fourth column of Table 1—are larger than the

OLS estimates, and in the Pew and Gallup data, they are close to the estimates we obtain after
making the permanent income adjustment. Education however is very likely an imperfect
instrument for permanent income. While education is correlated with permanent income, it likely
also directly impacts satisfaction, leading to upward bias on the instrumental variables estimates
of ' !()(

*+

. Our reading of the within-country evidence, therefore, is that the life

satisfaction-log permanent income gradient falls between 0.3 and 0.5.
We should not push these adjustments too hard, however. While it seems straightforward
to think that permanent rather than transitory income determines subjective well-being, in fact
direct evidence on this point suggests the opposite: subjective well-being and the business cycle
move quite closely together. Stevenson and Wolfers (2008) report that the output gap strongly
predicts subjective well-being, at least in the United States. Wolfers (2003) shows this also
holds in Europe and across states in the United States.

IV.

International Comparisons of Satisfaction and Income
The within-country relationship between income and life satisfaction is well known and

admits at least two interpretations. The first interpretation is that greater earning capacity makes
people satisfied with their lives: it purchases health care; allows people to enjoy their leisure time

12

with fancier food and TVs; and affords them freedom from financial stress. A second
interpretation, however, is that people care less about money than about having money relative to
some reference point (Easterlin 1973). One reference point is their neighbor’s income, but other
reference points include a country (or the world’s) average income. Or perhaps people use their
own previous income as a reference point. Under this view, people are stuck on a “hedonic
treadmill;” as they grow richer, their expectations adapt to their circumstances, and they end up
no more satisfied than they were before (Brickman and Campbell 1971). An alternative is that
an “aspiration treadmill” means that even as higher income yields greater well-being, people may
eventually report no higher well-being than they previously reported, because their expectations
grow with their income and well-being.
To sort out these interpretations, we turn to national data. If all that matters for
satisfaction is one’s own income relative to one’s neighbor’s income, or relative to mean national
income, then people in countries with high average income should be no more satisfied than
people in poorer countries. Alternatively, to the extent that national differences in income reflect
long-lasting differences, individuals should adapt to them (if adaptation is important), so
adaptation predicts that the cross-country satisfaction-income gradient should be small. On the
other hand, if absolute income matters (or if the relevant reference point is mean global income),
then we would expect richer countries indeed to be more satisfied. Thus we now assess the
satisfaction-income gradient across countries.
Our measure of average income in a country is GDP per capita, measured at purchasing
power parity, to adjust for international differences in price levels. These data come from the
World Bank’s World Development indicators data base; where we are missing data, we turn to

13

the Penn World Tables (version 6.2), and, failing that, the CIA Factbook. For earlier years for
which data are unavailable, we turn to Maddison (2007).
Figure 2 plots average (standardized) life satisfaction data drawn from each of the first
four waves of the World Values Survey, against GDP per capita (shown on a log scale). The
figure shows both the OLS regression line and a non-parametric (lowess) fit. As previously
noted, some of these observations were not based on nationally representative surveys (typically
missing groups who might be expected to have low satisfaction), and so we plot these with
squares rather than circles; they clearly lie far from the regression line (which we calculate by
excluding them).8
The early waves of the survey, which contain mostly wealthy nations, provide suggestive
but not overwhelming evidence for a positive link between the log of GDP per capita and
subjective well-being. A researcher who mistakenly included the non-representative countries
and who plotted satisfaction against the level rather than the log of income could (erroneously)
fail to find a statistically significant relationship between GDP per capita and subjective wellbeing. Successive waves of the survey included more middle and low-income countries, and the
relationship between income and well-being is clearer in the later waves. The four waves span
25 years and 79 distinct countries with income ranging from less than $1,000 to over $32,000 (in
2000 international dollars). This figure indicates a clearly positive and approximately linear-log
relationship between life satisfaction and GDP.
Other data sets employing alternative measures of satisfaction show a similar positive
relationship. Figure 3 plots the relationship between the satisfaction ladder scores estimated
from the Pew Global Attitudes Survey and GDP per capita. The Pew data show the same pattern
8

For more details about the World Values sampling frame and which country-years include nationally
representative samples see Appendix B in Stevenson and Wolfers (2008)

14

as the World Values Survey data: richer countries exhibit higher levels of satisfaction. The nonparametric fit confirms the visual impression that there are no important non-linearities:
satisfaction grows with log income at about the same rate whether we focus on rich countries or
poor countries. This figure provides no evidence that the satisfaction-log income gradient
diminishes as income grows, suggesting that no country is rich enough to have hit a satiation
point, if such a point exists.
Although the Pew and World Values Survey results provide strong evidence on the crosscountry link between satisfaction and income, neither survey has quite the global coverage the
Gallup World Poll. In Figure 4, we plot the satisfaction ladder scores against per capita GDP for
131 countries included in the Gallup World Poll (we exclude Palestine, because we were unable
to find reliable GDP data). Every part of the GDP distribution is well represented. This figure
confirms the by-now strong impression that richer countries have higher levels of life satisfaction
than poorer countries, and that this relationship is approximately linear-log. Indeed, the
correlation between average satisfaction scores in a country and its log of GDP per capita is
above 0.8.
Because average well-being is rising in the log of average income, our results suggest
that transferring a given amount of money from rich to poor countries could raise life
satisfaction, because $100 is a larger percentage of income in poor countries than rich countries.
The linear-log relationship revealed by the non-parametric fits also provide evidence against
satiation: the relationship between well-being and income does not diminish at high levels of
income, except to the extent implied by the log functional form. If anything, the lowess curve
appears to tick upwards even more sharply at high levels of GDP.

15

We quantify the magnitude of the satisfaction-income link in by running similar
regressions to equation (1), but analyzing the satisfaction of individuals i in country c as a
function of the log of average per capita income in their country, instead of individual income
(and consequently we also drop the country fixed effects):
    =  + ' *22#$2*"$ ln(567 8 8  ) + / 0 + 1

(2)

Alternatively, we aggregate our satisfaction data up into national averages, and run:
::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
9  9 9 =  + ' *22#$2*"$ ln(567 8 8  ) + 1

(3)

We are interested in ' *22#$2*"$ , which says by how much average satisfaction in a country
increases (in standard deviations) when the log of average per capita income in a country is
higher.
These results, summarized in Table 2, confirm the impression given by the graphical
analysis: all three of our data sets show a statistically significant and positive relationship
between satisfaction and the log of GDP. These results suggest that absolute income plays an
important role in explaining the relationship between satisfaction and income. The magnitude of
the relationship is similar whether we estimate it in the individual-level data or the national
averages, and whether or not we adjust for the differential age and sex composition of
respondents. The coefficients on the log of average income vary somewhat but are centered on
0.3 to 0.4.
This range is striking for its resemblance to the within-country satisfaction-income
gradient. To emphasize the similarity, Figure plots data from the Gallup World Poll. Each point
in the figure is a separate country, and for each country we have plotted both a dot representing
the average satisfaction and income in that country, and an arrow whose slope represents the
slope of the satisfaction-income gradient when comparing people within that country. As we

16

look across the 126 countries with valid household income data, we find that there is no country
with a statistically significantly negative relationship between satisfaction and income, and the
bulk of the lines all point in similar directions, and have a similar slope. Importantly, these
slopes are roughly parallel to the dashed line, which shows the slope one obtains when
comparing individuals within a country is similar to that obtained when making comparisons
between country averages.
That is, our estimates of the satisfaction-income gradient are similar whether estimated
within or between countries. Recall that the Easterlin Paradox rested upon the belief that the
well-being-income gradient observed within countries is larger than that seen between countries.
Earlier estimates of a statistically insignificant cross-country relationship between average
satisfaction and average income reflected the fact that previous researchers were looking at small
samples of fairly homogenous countries. It was the juxtaposition of this statistically insignificant
finding with evidence of a statistically significant well-being-income relationship that led
Easterlin to declare the data paradoxical. But the historical absence of evidence for a
proposition—that richer countries are happier—should not have been confused as being evidence
of its absence. And indeed, with our larger datasets, we find statistically significant evidence
that high income countries are happier than their low income counterparts. Instead, a claim
about the importance of relative income comparisons should rest upon the quantitative
magnitudes of the estimated well-being-income gradients.
Indeed, the similarity of the within- and between- country gradients has an important
interpretation that we can express more formally. Suppose that:

17

   =  + ' *<%+

"$

=  + (' *<%+
where ' *<%+

"$

ln(-. ) + ' #$+*")$ ln

"$

-.
:::::::::::
-.

(4)

+ ' #$+*")$ ) ln -. − ' #$+*")$ ln :::::::::::
-.

and ' #$+*")$ measure the importance of absolute and relative income in

determining life satisfaction. Equation (1) estimates regressions of this form, regressing
standardized satisfaction scores on ln(-. ) yielding a coefficient ' !()(

*+

, and country

::::::::::: . That is our Table 1 estimates of the
fixed effects controlling for the influence of ln -.
within-country satisfaction-income gradient, ' !()(
income effects: ' !()(

*+

= ' *<%+

"$

*+

is the sum of the absolute and relative

+ ' #$+*")$ .

Next, taking country averages of equation (4), yields:
::::::::::::::::::
 9 9 =  + ' *<%+

"$

ln -.
:::::::::: − =' *<%+

"$

+ ' #$+*")$ >?@6

(5)

:::::::::::::
:::::::::: − ln
where ?@6 (which equals ln -.
-.) is the mean log deviation, a measure of a
country’s income inequality. This equation is very similar to the cross-country estimates of
equation (3), shown in Table 2. Indeed, if we had estimated ' *22#$2*"$ conditional on the mean
log deviation, our estimate of ' *22#$2*"$ would give an exact estimate of ' *<%+

"$

. Stevenson

and Wolfers (2010) show that the covariance between ?@6 and ln (567 ) is small, and so
whether or not one controls for the mean log deviation has only a minimal impact on our
estimate of ' *22#$2*"$ . Our estimate of ' *22#$2*"$ is therefore approximately ' *<%+

"$

.

Consequently the importance of relative income in determining life satisfaction, ' #$+*")$ ,
is equal to the difference ' !()(

*+

− ' *22#$2*"$ . Since we estimate that the between country

gradient (' *22#$2*"$ ) is similar to or slightly larger than the within country gradient
(' !()(

*+

), we conclude that relative income plays at best a minor role in determining life

satisfaction.
18

An alternative story of reference-dependent preferences is based on adaptation. By this
view, what matters for satisfaction is income relative to expectations, and these expectations
adapt in light of recent experience. That is, economic growth simply speeds up the pace of the
hedonic treadmill, as we all run faster, just to keep in place. In turn, this implies that variation in
income that has persisted for sufficiently long for expectations to adapt should be unrelated to
satisfaction. The differences in log GDP per capita shown in Figures 3 through 5 are extremely
persistent, and across the 131 countries in the Gallup World Poll, the correlation between the log
GDP per capita in 2006 shown in Figure 4, and its value in 1980 is 0.93. Consequently, this
theory suggests that these persistent cross-country differences in GDP per capita should have
little explanatory power for satisfaction. The data clearly falsify this hypothesis, too.

V.

Satisfaction and Economic Growth
So far we have shown that richer individuals report higher life satisfaction than poorer

individuals in a given country, and that on average citizens of rich countries are more satisfied
with their lives than are citizens of poor countries. These comparisons suggest that absolute
income plays an important role in determining well-being, but they do not directly address our
central question: does economic growth improve subjective well-being?
We answer this question by turning to the time series evidence on life satisfaction and
GDP, which allows us to assess whether countries that experience economic growth also
experience growth in subjective well-being. Estimating the time series relationship between
GDP and subjective well-being is difficult because sufficiently comparable data are rarely
available. For example, the General Social Survey in the United States and the Life in Nation
surveys in Japan both surveyed subjective well being over a long horizon, but both are afflicted

19

by important changes in the wording and ordering of questions that, if not recognized, can lead to
serious interpretation errors. Nevertheless, many scholars have found that the US has not gotten
any happier over the past 35 years despite becoming wealthier, a fact that Stevenson and Wolfers
(2009) note reflects a somewhat puzzling decline in female happiness. In contrast, Japan, which
was once thought to have experienced little increase in happiness over the post-war period, has in
fact experienced significant happiness gains that are similar in magnitude to what one would
expect given the cross-sectional and cross-country relationships between subjective well-being
and income. However, these happiness gains only become apparent once changes in the survey
over time are taken into account (Stevenson and Wolfers 2008); the failure to take account of
these changes had led many previous scholars astray (including Easterlin 1995, 2005a).
We draw on two long-running data sets to examine the relationship between subjective
well-being and economic growth: the World Values Survey and the Eurobarometer. We analyze
the first four waves of the World Values Survey, which span 1980 to 2004 and cover 79 distinct
countries. Because the World Values Survey added many countries in later waves, however, it is
not possible to make many comparisons of a given country. 9 The Eurobarometer survey has the
advantage that it has been surveying people in member nations of the European Union virtually
continuously since 1973; however it has the disadvantage of only covering relatively
homogenous countries. Unlike the other surveys, Eurobarometer ascertains life satisfaction on a
four-point scale. 10
Nine countries were included in the original Eurobarometer sample. Analyzing data
through 1989, Easterlin (1995) concluded that the data failed to show any relationship between
9

As noted earlier, some of the country samples in earlier waves of the World Values Survey are not directly
comparable to later waves since their survey frames were (intentionally) not nationally representative. Our analysis
focuses only on nationally representative samples.
10
For the analysis, we keep West Germany and East German as separate countries. For further details on the
Eurobarometer and our data procedures, see Stevenson and Wolfers (2008).

20

life satisfaction and economic growth. In Figure 6, we present scatter plots of life satisfaction
and the log of GDP per capita for the nine countries Easterlin analyzed. In the figure we include
as dark circles the original data he analyzed; hollow circles denote data that have subsequently
become available through to 2007. The dark circles by themselves do not always show a strong
relationship; however over the full sample, eight of the nine countries show a positive
relationship between life satisfaction and growth, and six of the nine slopes are statistically
significantly positive. The slopes range from -0.25 in Belgium to 0.68 in Ireland. This reanalysis not only suggests a positive relationship between income and growth, but also hints at
the difficulty of isolating this relationship when data are scarce.
The positive relationship between life satisfaction and economic growth is not a feature
of Europe alone. In Figure 7, we turn to the World Values Survey and plot changes in life
satisfaction against cumulative changes in real GDP. This survey covers more countries, and at
very different levels of development, which allows us to see whether populations become more
satisfied as their countries transition from low to moderate income as well as moderate to high.
To keep comparisons clean, Figure 7 excludes countries in which the sampling frame changed.
Each of the six graphs compares a different pair of waves. The top row compares short
differences—the waves are separated by about five years—while the bottom row shows longer
differences of 10-20 years. All six graphs indicate a positive association between changes in
subjective well-being and changes in income; the estimated gradients range from 0.22 between
waves I and III to 0.71 between waves I and II. The figure shows that life satisfaction is more
sensitive to short run changes in income than to long run changes, suggesting that business cycle
variation may be driving some of the association. An alternative interpretation is that over time,
individuals adapt to their new circumstances or their aspirations change, so that even though

21

their material welfare is increasing their subjective well-being gains from these increases recede
over time.
Figure 7 also reveals some potentially interesting (or problematic) outliers. Korea, for
example, often falls outside the GDP change scale, but had only a modest change in subjective
well-being; Hungary experienced very little growth, but had a serious decline in life satisfaction.
In regression results reported below, we include these outliers, but it is clear that excluding them
could change our estimates.
The comparisons in Figure 7 are particularly valuable because all the comparisons are
between common pairs of waves, so they automatically adjust for the various changes in the
survey—both question order and survey techniques—that occurred between waves. Stevenson
and Wolfers (2008) document that these World Values Survey data are strongly influenced by
these methodological changes, so this control is important. Indeed, the influence of these
changes is large enough as to render naïve comparisons of raw survey averages through time to
be problematic (Easterlin and Angelscu 2009; Easterlin and Sawangfa 2008).
To distill the information from these figures into a single estimate of the intertemporal
relationship between satisfaction and economic growth, we estimate panel regressions of the
following form:
  " = ' "A$ %$#$% ln(567" ) + 

∈ !"#$%

 + 

"∈E*)$%

C" + D"

(6)

where the time fixed effects, C" control for changes in question order between waves, and the
country fixed effects,  , ensure that only within-country changes through time drive the
comparisons.
Panel A of Table 3 reports the results of estimating equation (6) using the World Values
Survey and the Eurobarometer. We find a substantial and statistically significant relationship
22

between life satisfaction and economic growth. The estimates are not particularly precise,
however, and they differ considerably between the two data sets. The satisfaction-income
gradient is 0.51 in the World Values Survey and 0.17 in the Eurobarometer. In neither data set
can we reject the hypothesis that the true ' "A$ %$#$% lies between 0.3 and 0.4, the central
estimate from the cross-country regressions. We can however reject the null hypothesis that
' "A$ %$#$% = 0, which is the outcome suggested by the view that relative rather than absolute
income determines well-being.
In order to assess whether these regressions are driven by outliers, Figure 8 shows the
variation underlying our World Values Survey panel regression estimates, while Figure 9
illustrates the variation underlying our Eurobarometer results. Our panel regressions reflect
variation in satisfaction and log GDP per capita, stripped of country and wave fixed effects.
Thus, the vertical axis shows residual satisfaction defined by
F 9" = ::::::::::::::::::::
 9
 9 9" − G[:::::::::::::::::::
 9 9" |J K  LM  ],
which is obtained as the residual from a regression of satisfaction on country and wave fixed
effects. Likewise the horizontal axis shows residual log GDP,
F " ) = ln(567" ) − G[ln (567" )|J K  LM  ],
ln(567
which is obtained from a similar regression in which log GDP is the dependent variable. As can
be seen, when a country is experiencing relatively high levels of GDP (relative to its country
average, and the estimated wave fixed effects), it also experiences high levels of satisfaction. By
construction, our panel data regression coefficient in panel A of Table 3, 'O "A$ %$#$% , is exactly
equal to the slope of the dashed bivariate regression line shown in each figure. These figures
confirm that the results in Table 3 are not driven by a few outliers; the points fit the regression

23

line well, and the correlation is quite strong. Equally, the data in Figure 9 paint a somewhat
noisier picture for the Eurobarometer panel, although roughly similar conclusions hold.
In obtaining these estimates, however, we have drawn on all the variation in GDP in our
sample, including possibly high frequency changes to which individuals do not have a chance to
adapt. If adaptation occurs slowly, it would be better to focus on long run changes in GDP.
Indeed, Easterlin and Angelescu (2009) argue that only long run economic growth can be used to
assess the relationship between growth and well-being.
So far, only the data plotted on the bottom row of Figure 7 speak to this point, showing
that even ten-year changes in GDP continue to influence life satisfaction. However, each of
these comparisons is limited to the sets of countries that are common to a pair of waves. Instead,
F 9" and
we can assess long differences for all countries by comparing changes in  9
F " ) between the first and last time we observe a country in the World Values Survey.
ln(567
We plot these variables against each other in Figure 10 for each of the 56 countries in
World Values Survey that we observe multiple times. The average difference in time between
first and last observations is about eleven years. (This number is comparable to Easterlin and
Sawangfa’s notion of the “long run”—they require data spanning at least ten years—but
somewhat lower than Easterlin and Angelescu’s twelve year requirement.) The majority of
countries are located in the northeast and southwest quadrants, and therefore their GDP and
satisfaction moved together (relative to wave fixed effects). A notable number of countries,
however, lie in the northwest and southeast; their life satisfaction and GDP move in opposite
directions. Even so, the correlation between these variables is positive and remarkably strong,
given that we are analyzing first differences.

24

In panel B of Table 3 we report the estimate of the relationship between well-being and
F 9" against long
growth obtained from regressing these long differences in  9
F " ). We bootstrap our standard errors to account for the uncertainty in
differences in ln(567
generating residual satisfaction and GDP.11 The coefficient is 0.47 and statistically significantly
different from zero, and with these long differences, once again, we cannot reject the hypothesis
that the true ' "A$ %$#$% lies between 0.3 and 0.4.
Using these same data (although including the observations from the unrepresentative
national samples and not adjusting for wave fixed effects), Easterlin and Sawangfa (2008, p.13)
argue that “the positive association between the change in life satisfaction and that in GDP per
capita reported by Stevenson and Wolfers rests almost entirely on the positively correlated Vshaped movement of the two variables during the post-1990 collapse and recovery in the
transition countries.” In order to investigate this claim, we separately estimate our panel
regressions and long differences for the sample of transition countries only, and for all other
World Values Survey nations. While breaking the sample apart like this reduces our statistical
precision, the key inferences remain the same in both samples: the influence of GDP growth on
satisfaction is positive, statistically significantly different from zero, and we cannot reject that
these coefficients lie between 0.3 to 0.4, and if anything, the World Values Survey yields
estimates of the time series satisfaction-income gradient that is somewhat larger. The critique
leveled by Easterlin and Sawangfa seems, quite simply, wrong.
Figure 10 provides further evidence why estimating the relationship between subjective
well-being and long run growth has challenged researchers. There are indeed many countries
11

We bootstrap the two-step procedure as follows. For each bootstrap iteration, we first compute the residuals as
F " ). We perform 1000 iterations, and take the standard
F 9" against ln (567
described, and then regress  9
deviation of the distribution of computed gradients as our estimated standard error (after making a degrees-offreedom adjustment).

25

which do not fit the general trend that growth in satisfaction is correlated with GDP growth.
Bulgaria, the Ukraine, Venezuela, and Estonia all experienced considerable declines in income,
with no accompanying decline in well-being. Furthermore, a researcher, worried about outliers,
could easily drop a handful of influential countries from the sample – like Russia, Hungary,
Slovenia, and Korea. Doing so clearly does not eliminate the positive correlation between these
long differences, but removing these countries substantially reduces the statistical power of the
regression, because these extreme cases involve so much of the variation in ∆ ln(F
567" ). When
we exclude these countries from our regression of long differences, our estimate of ' "A$ %$#$%
remains positive and comparable to other estimates at 0.26, but the standard error grows to 0.15.
We repeat this exercise using the Eurobarometer data. The advantage of these data is that
we have many observations for each country, which we can combine to reduce the influence of
measurement error. Thus we construct long differences in the Eurobarometer by taking averages
F 9" and ln(F
of  9
567" ) for each country in each of the decades 1973-1982, 19831992, 1993-2002, and 2003-2007. We then construct decadal differences in satisfaction and
GDP by comparing adjacent decades, and plot these decadal differences in Figure 11. Each point
represents a single decadal difference in satisfaction and GDP for a given country. Many
countries experienced sluggish income growth but no relative slowdown in subjective wellbeing. Most of these countries are in Western Europe. For a majority of countries, however,
GDP and satisfaction do move in the same direction, although the correlation is much weaker
than in our previous estimates. The estimated satisfaction-income gradient resulting from these
long differences, also reported in the right column of Table 3, summarizes the results from this
figure. We find a marginally statistically significant gradient of 0.28.

26

Over all we find a positive but somewhat less precise relationship between growth in
subjective well-being and growth in GDP. When we use all of the time-series variation in GDP,
we find a well-being-income gradient that is similar to the within-country and cross-sectional
gradients. When we estimate longer differences, the precision of the relationship falls but the
point estimate is similar in magnitude. This remains true whether we exclude potentially
problematic “transition” economies from the sample or not, or whether we limit our attention to
long-run changes in income or not, or whether we analyze data from the World Values Survey or
the Eurobarometer. None of our estimates using the full variation in GDP allows us to reject the
hypothesis that ' "A$ %$#$% lies between 0.3 and 0.4, the range of our estimates of the static
relationship between well-being and income.

VI.

Alternative Measures of Subjective Well-Being
Thus far, we have shown that there is a positive, statistically significant, and

quantitatively important relationship between life satisfaction and income, and that this
satisfaction-income gradient is similar in magnitude whether one analyzes individuals in a given
country, countries at a point in time, or a given country over time. But life satisfaction is not the
only measure of subjective well-being, and so we now turn to considering the relationship
between various other measures of subjective well-being and income. For brevity (and also due
to data availability), we will focus on cross-country comparisons of these alternative indicators.
In Figure 12 we begin by studying happiness, showing the cross-sectional relationship
between happiness and the log of GDP per capita, using data from the fourth wave of the World
Values Survey. We follow the same graphing conventions as in previous charts, showing the
national averages as both their average on their original four point scale, and as standardized

27

values (on the right axis). We also show both the regression line (where the dependent variable
is the standardized measure of happiness) and the non-parametric fit; this regression line shows a
positive and statistically significant relationship between happiness and per capita GDP, although
the estimated happiness-income gradient is not as large as the satisfaction-income gradient we
estimate in Table 2. The presence of two extreme outliers, Tanzania and Nigeria, skews the
regression estimates considerably. These countries are particularly puzzling because they are the
poorest in the sample, but they report among the highest levels of happiness. They also have
much lower average life satisfaction—indeed, Tanzania is the least satisfied of any country in
our sample. Perhaps there is a banal explanation for this puzzle: survey documentation suggests
that there difficulties translating the happiness question in Tanzania. Stevenson and Wolfers
(2008) discuss the happiness-income link more fully and find very similar results to the
satisfaction-income link: happiness increases at any aggregation of the data, and the magnitude
of the link is not much affected by the degree of aggregation.
We turn now to alternative and more specific measures of subjective well being. The
Gallup World Poll asks respondents about many facets of their emotional health and daily
experience. For several experiences such as enjoyment, physical pain, worry, sadness, boredom,
depression, anger or love, the Gallup poll asks, “Did you experience [feeling] during a lot of the
day yesterday?” These questions sketch a psychological profile of hundreds of thousands of
people spanning the world’s income distribution. In Figure 13, we present scatter plots of the
probability that an individual in a given country experienced various emotions yesterday, against
GDP per capita. The figure suggests that citizens of richer countries are more likely to
experience positive emotions and less likely to experience negative emotions. Enjoyment is very
highly correlated with GDP, while love is moderately correlated. Physical pain, depression,

28

sadness and anger all decline moderately with GDP.12 Worry increases slightly with GDP,
although there is not a strong pattern.
The Gallup poll also probes respondents for an array of sentiments about their day
yesterday, asking whether they: felt well rested, were treated with respect, chose how to spend
their time, if they smiled or laughed a lot, were proud of something they did, or ate good tasting
food. The daily experience questions, which uniformly measure positive experiences, paint a
picture that is consistent with our analysis thus far. Figure 14 shows in each country the percent
of people who felt a certain way in the previous day. People in richer countries are more likely to
report feeling better rested and respected, smiling more, and eating good tasting foods than
people in poorer countries, although they are no more likely to take pride in what they did or to
have learned something interesting.
These data point to a more nuanced relationship between well-being and income. While
they give no reason to doubt that well-being rises with income, they also suggest that certain
facets of well-being respond less to income than others. These data hint at the possibility of
understanding which emotions and experiences translate into the part of life satisfaction that is
sensitive to changes in income.

VII.

Conclusions
This paper revisits the stylized facts on the relationship between subjective well-being

and income. We find that within a given country, rich individuals are more satisfied with their
lives than poorer individuals, and we find that richer countries have significantly higher levels of

12

See Krueger, Stevenson, and Wolfers (2010) for a more thorough exploration of the relationship between
experiencing pain and income.

29

average life satisfaction. Studying the time series relationship between satisfaction and income,
we find that economic growth is associated with increases in life satisfaction.
The key innovation is this paper is to focus explicitly on the magnitude of the subjective
well-being-income gradient (rather than its statistical significance), while also bringing the
greatest quantity of data to bear on these questions. We show that the within-country, betweencountry, and over-time estimates all point to a quantitatively similar relationship between
subjective well-being and income. This relationship is robust: we find it not only at different
levels of aggregation but using different data sets. We also find that income is positively
associated with other measures of subjective well-being, including happiness as well as other
upbeat emotions.
The fact that life satisfaction and other measures of subjective well-being rise with
income has significant implications for development economists. First, and most importantly,
these findings cast doubt on the Easterlin Paradox and various theories suggesting that there is no
long-term relationship between well-being and income growth. Absolute income appears to play
a central role in determining subjective well-being. This conclusion suggests that economists’
traditional interest in economic growth has not been misplaced. Second, our results suggest that
differences in subjective well-being over time or across places likely reflect meaningful
differences in actual well-being.
Subjective well-being data therefore permit cross-country well-being comparisons
without reliance on price indexes. As Deaton (2010) notes, if we wish to use some kind of
dollar-a-day threshold to count poverty, then we need price indices that account for differences
in quality and in quantity of consumption in different countries. In theory, constructing these
price indices is straightforward, provided one is ready to assume identical homothetic

30

preferences across countries. In practice, however, a central challenge to creating price indices
is that many countries consume very different set of goods—there is no price of smoked bonga in
some countries. When countries grow richer, previously unavailable goods become traded as
very expensive specialty items. Paradoxically, as a country grows richer, its poverty count can
grow because its prices are revised upward, devaluing income.13
As Deaton suggests, many changes in PPP adjustments simply involve better data, and
should not be ignored. But it can be difficult to know how much of the changes in the poverty
count reflect actual changes in global poverty and how much reflect updating of measurement
methods. In light of these difficulties, Deaton asks, “why don’t we just ask people?” Using data
from 87 countries spanning 2006-2008, Deaton computes average life satisfaction in each year in
the world. “For the world as a whole,” he writes, “2007 was a better year than 2006; in 2008
more households reported being in difficulty and being dissatisfied with their lives, and these
reports were worse still in 2009” (Deaton 2010, p. 30).
Deaton notes that these comparisons are only valid if life satisfaction responds to
absolute rather than relative well-being. If individuals assess their life relative to contemporary
standards, then as countries and the world grow richer, reported satisfaction may not change.
However, our analysis suggests an important role for absolute income in determining life
satisfaction, therefore we conclude that subjective well-being data is indeed likely to be useful in
assessing trends in global well-being.
Finally, we should note that we have focused on establishing the magnitude of the
relationship between subjective well-being and income, rather than disentangling causality from
correlation. The causal impact of income on individual or national subjective well-being, and the
13

As Deaton notes, adjusting for this difficulty is in theory straightforward: weight goods by whether they are
considered luxury items. This task may be quite difficult, however, because it requires making a judgment about
many thousands of goods for each country in the world.

31

mechanisms by which income raises subjective well-being, remain open and important
questions.

32

VIII.

References

Brickman, P. and Campbell, D.T. 1990. “Hedonic Relativism and Planning the Good Society.” In M.H.
Appley, ed, Adaptation Level Theory: A Symposium. New York: Academic Press.
Cantrill, Hadley. 1965. The Pattern of Human Concerns. New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press.
Deaton, Angus. 2010. “Price Indexes, Inequality, and the Measurement of World Poverty.” American
Economic Review 100(1): 5-34.
Deaton, Angus. 2008. “Income, Health and Well-Being around the World: Evidence from the Gallup
World Poll.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 22(2): 53-72.
Di Tella, Rafael, and Robert MacCulloch. 2010. “Happiness Adaption to Income beyond ‘Basic Needs’.”
In Ed Diener, John Helliwell and Daniel Kahneman, eds., International Differences in Well-Being. New
York: Oxford University Press.
Diamond, Peter A, and Jerry A. Hausman. 1994. “Contingent Valuation: Is Some Number better than No
Number?” Journal of Economic Perspectives 8(4): 45-64.
Diener, Ed. 2006.”Guidelines for National Indicators of Subjective Well-Being and Ill-Being.” Journal of
Happiness Studies 7(4): 397-404.
Diener, Ed. 1984. “Subjective Well-Being.” Psychological Bulletin 95(3): 542-75.
Diener, Ed, Richard E. Lucas, and Christie Napa Scollon. 2006.”Beyond the Hedonic Treadmill: Revising
the Adaptation Theory of Well-Being.” American Psychologist 61(4): 305-14.
Diener, Ed, and William Tov, 2007. “Culture and Subjective Well-Being.” In Shinobu Kitayama and Dov
Cohen, eds., Handbook of Cultural Psychology. New York: Guilford.
Dinardo, John, and Justin L. Tobias. 2001. “Nonparametric Density and Regression Estimation,” Journal
of Economic Perspectives 15(4): 11-28.
Easterlin, Richard A. 1973. “Does Money Buy Happiness?” The Public Interest 30: 3-10.
Easterlin, Richard A. 1974. “Does Economic Growth Improve the Human Lot? Some Empirical
Evidence.” In Paul A. David and Melvin W. Reder, eds., Nations and Households in Economic Growth:
Essays in Honor of Moses Abramowitz. Academic Press.
Easterlin, Richard A. 1995. “Will Raising the Incomes of All Increase the Happiness of All?” Journal of
Economic Behavior and Organization 27(1): 35-48.
Easterlin, Richard A. 2005a. “Feeding the Illusion of Growth and Happiness: A Reply to Hagerty and
Veenhoven.” Social Indicators Research 74(3): 429-33.
Easterlin, Richard A. 2005b. “Diminishing Marginal Utility of Income? Caveat Emptor.” Social
Indicators Research 70(3): 243-55.

References—1

Easterlin, Richard A. 2009. “Lost in Transition: Life Satisfaction on the Road to Capitalism.” Journal of
Economic Behavior and Organization 71(1): 130-45.
Easterlin, Richard A., and Laura Angelescu. 2009. “Happiness and Growth the World Over: Time Series
Evidence on the Happiness-Income Paradox.” IZA Discussion Paper No. 4060.
Easterlin, Richard A. and Onnicha Sawangfa. 2008. “Happiness and Economic Growth: Does the Cross
Section Predict Time Trends? Evidence from Developing Countries.” IZA Discussion Paper #4000.
Frank, Robert H. 2005. “Does Absolute Income Matter?” Pier Luigi Port and Luigino Bruni, eds.,
Economics and Happiness: Framing the Analysis. Oxford University Press.
Gottschalk, Peter and Robert Moffit. “The Growth of Earnings Instability in the U.S. Labor Market.”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1994(2): 217-254.
Haider, Steven J. “Earnings Instability and Earnigns Inequality of Males in the United States: 19671991.” Journal of Labor Economics 19(4): 799-836.
Kahneman, Daniel, and Alan B. Krueger. 2006. “Developments in the Measurement of Subjective WellBeing.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 20(1): 3-24.
Kahneman, Daniel, Alan B. Krueger, David Schkade, Norbert Schwarz, and Arthur A. Stone. 2006.
“Would You Be Happier If You Were Richer? A Focusing Illusion.” Science 312(5782): 1908-10.
Kruger, Alan, Betsey Stevenson and Justin Wolfers. 2010. “A World of Pain”, mimeo, University of
Pennsylvania.
Layard, Richard. 1980. “Human Satisfaction and Public Policy.” Economic Journal 90(363): 737-50.
Layard, Richard. 2005. Happiness: Lessons from a New Science. London: Penguin, 2005.
Luttmer, Erzo F. P. 2005. “Neighbors as Negatives: Relative Earnings and Well-Being.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 120(3): 963-1002.
Maddison, Angus. 2007. “Historical Statistics for the World Economic: 1-2003 AD.”
www.ggdc.net/maddison/Historical_Statistics/horizontal-file_03-2007.xls.
Stevenson, Betsey, and Justin Wolfers. 2008. “Economic Growth and Subjective Well-Being:
Reassessing the Easterlin Paradox.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2008(1): 1-87.
Stevenson, Betsey and Justin Wolfers. 2009. “The Paradox of Declining Female Happiness.” American
Economic Journal: Economic Policy 1(2):190-225.
Stevenson, Betsey and Justin Wolfers. 2010. Inequality and Subjective Well-Being. Working paper.
Wolfers, Justin. 2003. “Is Business Cycle Volatility Costly? Evidence from Surveys of Subjective WellBeing” International Finance 6(1): 1-26.

References—2

Table 1: Within-Country Satisfaction-Income Gradient
Dependent variable:
Standardized Life satisfaction
Gallup World Poll: Ladder
question

Without
controls
0.236***
(0.014)

With
Permanent Income
controls
Adjusted
***
0.232
0.422
(0.014)

Instrumental
Variables
0.449 ***
(0.027)

Sample size
171,900
(126 Countries)

World Values Survey:
Life satisfaction

0.216***
(0.017)

0.227***
(0.037)

0.413

0.26***
(0.035)

116,527
(61 Countries)

Pew Global Attitudes Survey:
Ladder question

0.281***
(0.027)

0.283***
(0.027)

0.515

0.393***
(0.033)

32,463
(43 Countries)

Notes: The table reports the coefficient on the log of household income, obtained from regressing standardized life
satisfaction against the log of household income and country fixed effects using the indicated data set. Additional
controls include a quartic in age, interacted with sex, plus indicators for age and sex missing. Our permanent income
adjustment is to scale up our estimates by 1/0.55; see text for explanation. We instrument for income using full set
of country×education fixed effects. We report robust standard errors, clustered at the country level, in parentheses.
For further details on the standardization of satisfaction and the exact wording of satisfaction question, see the text.
*** **
, and * denote statistically significant at 1%, 5% and 10%, respectively.

Tables—1

Table 2: Cross-Country Regressions of Life Satisfaction on Log GDP per Capitaa
Dependent variable:
Standardized life satisfaction
Gallup World Poll: Ladder
question

Microdata
Without
With
controls
controls
0.357***
0.378***
(0.019)
(0.019)

National Data

0.342***
(0.019)

Sample size
291,383
(131 countries)

World Values Survey:
Life satisfaction

0.360***
(0.034)

0.364***
(0.034)

0.370***
(0.036)

234,093
(79 countries)

Pew Global Attitudes
Survey: Ladder question

0.214***
(0.039)

0.231***
(0.038)

0.204***
(0.037)

37,974
(44 countries)

Notes: The table reports the coefficient on the log of per capita GDP, obtained from regressing standardized life
satisfaction against the log of GDP, using individual data with and without controls, and using national-level data
without controls, in the indicated data set. In the national-level regressions, we take the within-country average of
standardized life satisfaction as the dependent variable. GDP per capita is at purchasing power parity. The additional
controls include a quartic in age, interacted with sex, plus indicators for age and sex missing. We report robust
standard errors, clustered at the country level, in parentheses. For further details on the standardization of
satisfaction, the exact wording of satisfaction question, and the sources for GDP per capita, see the text. ***, ** and *
denote statistically significant at 1%, 5% and 10%, respectively.

Tables—2

Table 3: Time Series Regressions of Life Satisfaction on GDP per Capitaa
Dependent variable:
Standardized life
satisfaction
ln(GDP)
N

ln(GDP)
N

WVS:
All Countries

WVS:
Transition
Countries
Panel A: Panel Regressions
0.505***
0.628**
(0.109)
(0.239)
166 observations
31 observations
79 countries
10 countries
Panel B: Long differences
0.47***
0.694*
(0.128)
(0.387)
66 differences
10 differences

WVS:
Non-transition
Countries

Eurobarometer:
All Countries

0.407***
(0.116)
135 observations
66 countries

0.17**
(0.074)
776 observations
31 countries

0.35**
(0.163)
46 differences

0.278*
(0.164)
30 differences

Notes: The table reports the coefficient on the log of GDP per capita. In the panel regressions, we regress
standardized life satisfaction against the log of GDP per capita as well as wave and country fixed effects. In
the long differences, we regress the change in standardized satisfaction against the change in log GDP per
capita, after adjusting satisfaction and log GDP for wave and country fixed effects. Long differences in the
World Values Survey are taken between the first and last time we see a country; in the Eurobarometer,
between decadal averages. We report robust standard errors, clustered at the country level, in parentheses. For
further details on the standardization of satisfaction, the exact wording of satisfaction question, the sources for GDP
per capita, the procedure used to compute long differences, and the definition of transition countries, see the text. .
*** **
, and * denote statistically significant at 1%, 5% and 10%, respectively.

Tables—3

Figure 1: Relationship Between Well-being and Income, Within Individual Countries,
Gallup World Poll
9

Satisfaction ladder score (0-10)

8

USA
MEX

7
BRA

DEU
ITA FRA
THA
ZAF

GBR1

JPN
KOR

IND
EGY
PAK
VNMTUR
RUS
IRN
CHN
UKR
PHL
BGD
NGA

6

5

.5

0

ETH

-.5
4

Standardized satisfaction ladder score

1.5

-1

3
.5

1
2
4
8
16
32
64
Annual household income ($000s; Log income scale)

128

Notes: The figure shows, for the 25 largest countries, the lowess fit between individual satisfaction ladder scores
and the log of household income, measured in the Gallup World Poll. The satisfaction data are shown both on their
raw (0-10) scale on the left axis, and as standardized variables on the right axis. We plot the lowess fit between the
10th and 90th percentiles of each country’s income distribution. Satisfaction is assessed using the ladder of life
question.

Figures–1

Figure 2: Life Satisfaction and Real GDP per Capita, World Values Survey
1.0

DNK
ISL
SWE
MLTIRL AUS
NOR
CAN
NLD
GBR
USA
BEL
DEU
HUN
FRA
ITA
ESPJPN

8
7

0.5

8
7
6

KOR

5

-0.5
ARG

4
y = -4.07+0.46*ln(x) [se=0.22]
Correlation=0.57

3
.5

1

2

4

8

16

-1.0

4

-1.5

3

32

1994-99 wave

9

5

NGA

y = -4.69+0.51*ln(x) [se=0.08]
Correlation=0.74

1

PRI CHE
FIN
SWE
NZL
USA
NOR
0.5
GBR
AUS
SLV MEX
BRA
URY
DEU
CHNPHL VEN
ESPJPN
NGA
TWN
IND
POLSVN
0.0
CZE
PER
TURHRV
SVK
HUN
MKDZAF
SCG
AZE BIH
-0.5
EST
LTU
LVA
ROM
BGD
CHL
ARG
GEO ALB DOM
BGR
RUS
ARM BLR
UKR
-1.0
MDA

7
6
5
4

y = -4.00+0.43*ln(x) [se=0.05]
Correlation=0.72

3
.5

1

2

4

8

16

32

-1.5

2

4

8

16

-1.5

32

1999-2004 wave

9

1.0

PRI
DNK
MEX MLT IRL
ISL LUX
AUT
FIN
NLD
CAN
SWE
USA 0.5
BEL
VEN
DEU
GBR
ARG
SAU
SVN
ITA
CHL
SGP
CZE
ESP
ISR
PRTFRA
IDN
NGA
GRC
CHN
VNM PHL
KGZ
PER
0.0
POL KORJPN
IRN HRV
MAR
SVK
EST
BGD
DZA
SCGBIHJOR
UGA
TURZAFHUN
BGR
LVA
IRQ
-0.5
ALBROM
IND
MKD
LTU
PAK EGY
BLR
RUS
MDA
UKR

COL

8

CHN
IND

-1.0

.5
1.0

1.0

CHE
MLT DNK
ISL
IRL SWE
CAN
AUT
NLD
USA0.5
FIN
NOR
BEL
GBR
BRA
ITA
ESP
PRT
DEU
FRA
CZE
KOR
POLSVK
JPN 0.0
TUR
SVN
HUN
LTU
ROM EST
LVA
BLR RUS
-0.5
BGR
CHLMEX
ZAF
ARG

0.0

6

Satisfaction ladder score (0-10)

1989-93 wave

9

8
7
6
5
4

-1.0

ZWE

TZA

y = -2.88+0.32*ln(x) [se=0.04]
Correlation=0.72

3
.5

1

2

4

Standardized satisfaction ladder score

1981-84 wave

9

8

16

-1.5

32

Real GDP per Capita (thousands of dollars, log scale)

Notes: Respondents are asked, “All things considered, how satisfied are you with your life as a whole these
days?”; respondents then choose a number from 1 (completely dissatisfied) to 10 (completely satisfied). Data are
aggregated by first standardizing individual-level data to have mean zero and unit standard deviation, and then
taking country-year averages of the standardized values. The left axis gives the raw average satisfaction and the
right axis gives the standardized satisfaction. Dashed lines are fitted from an OLS regression; dotted lines are fitted
from lowess regressions. These lines and the reported regressions are fitted only from the nationally representative
samples. The units on the regression coefficients refer to the normalized scale. Real GDP per capita is at
purchasing power parity in constant 2000 international dollars. Sample includes 20 (1981-84) 42 (1989-93), 52
(1984-99) or 69 countries (1999-2004) from the World Values Survey. Observations represented by hollow squares
are drawn from countries in which the World Values Survey sample is not nationally representative (see Stevenson
and Wolfers (2008), appendix B, for more details).

Figures–2

Figure 3: Life Satisfaction and Real GDP per Capita, Pew Global Attitudes Survey 2002
9

1.5

1.0
Satisfaction ladder score (0-10)

GTM

7

HND
VNM

EGY

KOR

VEN
BRA

6

UZB

NGA

IDN

BOL
CIV
SEN
PAK

5

4

KEN
MLI

IND

CANUSA

MEX

PER
PHL
JOR
CHN
LBN

ARG

CZE

ITA
FRA
GBR
DEU
JPN

SVK
POL
ZAF

0.0

UKR TURRUS

BGDGHA

-0.5

UGA AGO

TZA

BGR
y = -1.73+0.20*ln(x) [se=0.04]
Correlation=0.55

3
.5

0.5

Standardized satisfaction ladder score

8

1

2

4

8

16

-1.0

32

Real GDP per capita (thousands of dollars, log scale)

Notes: Respondents are shown a picture of a ladder with ten steps and asked, “Here is a ladder representing the
‘ladder of life.’ Let's suppose the top of the ladder represents the best possible life for you; and the bottom, the worst
possible life for you. On which step of the ladder do you feel you personally stand at the present time?” Data are
aggregated by first standardizing individual-level data to have mean zero and unit standard deviation, and then
taking country-year averages of the standardized values. The left axis gives the raw average satisfaction and the
right axis gives the standardized satisfaction score. Dashed lines are fitted from an OLS regression; dotted lines are
fitted from lowess regressions. Regression coefficients are in terms of the standardized scaling. Real GDP per capita
is at purchasing power parity in constant 2000 international dollars. Sample includes forty-four developed and
developing countries.

Figures–3

Figure 4: Life Satisfaction and Real GDP per Capita, Gallup World Poll
9

Satisfaction ladder score (0-10)

8

7

6

5

4

DNK
FIN
CHE
NLD
NZL CAN
N
OR
SWE
USA
AUSIRL
CRI
BEL
AUT
ESP
SAU
ISR GBR
VEN
FRA
ITA
SGP ARE
MEX
PRI
PAN
BRA
CZE DEU
GRC
CYP
JAM
ARG
TWN
GTM
COL MYS
KWT JPN
JOR
LTU
THA CHL
TTO SVN
HRV
BLRURY POL KOR
KAZ
HKG
BOL
SLV
CUB
VNM
ESTPRT
MMR
UZB
R
US
SVK
IRN
HND
PAK
LAO
ROM
MNE
DOM
INDEGY
TUR
ZAF
UNK
BWA HUN
DZA
UKR
MAR
ECU
PER
PRY
IDN
MDA
LBN
GHA
BIH
NGA
LVA
PHL SRB
CHN
MOZ
KGZ
MRT
NPL
SEN
BGD
AZE
ALB
IRQ NIC ARM
ZMB TJK
MKD
YEM
AGO
LKA
MWIMDG
MLI
UGA CMR
RWA
KEN
NER
ETH
AFGTZA
BEN
BFA
BDI
KHMGEO
BGR
TCD
HTI

0.5

0.0

-0.5

ZWE

SLE

TGO

y=-2.955+0.342*ln(x) [se=0.019] -1.0
Correlation=0.82

3
0.5

1.0

Standardized satisfaction ladder score

1.5

1

2

4

8

16

Real GDP per capita, (thousands of dollars, log scale)

32

Notes: Respondents are shown a picture of a ladder with ten steps and asked, “Here is a ladder representing the
‘ladder of life.’ Let's suppose the top of the ladder represents the best possible life for you; and the bottom, the worst
possible life for you. On which step of the ladder do you feel you personally stand at the present time?” Data are
aggregated by first standardizing individual-level data to have mean zero and unit standard deviation, and then
taking country-year averages of the standardized values. Dashed lines are fitted from an OLS regression; dotted
lines are fitted from lowess regressions. The units on the regression coefficients refer to the normalized scale. Real
GDP per capita is at purchasing power parity in constant 2000 international dollars. Sample includes 131 developed
and developing countries.

Figures–4

Figure 5: Within-Country and Between-Country Estimates of the Life SatisfactionIncome Gradient, Gallup World Poll

9

Country-year aggregates

1.5

Within-country wellbeing gradient

1.0

0.5

0.0

-0.5

8

DNK
FIN
CHE
NLD
NZLCAN
N
OR
SWE
IRL
USA
AUS
CRI
BEL
AUT
ESP
SAU
ISR GBR
VEN
FRA
ITA
SGP ARE
MEX
PRI
DEU
PAN
BRA
CZE
GRC
CYP
JAM
ARG
TWN
GTM
COL MYS
KWT JPN
JOR THA CHLLTU
TTO SVN
HRV
BLRURY POL KOR
KAZ
HKG
BOL
CUB SLV
PRT
VNM
EST
MMR
UZB
RUS
SVK
IRN
PAK HND
LAO
ROM
MNE
DOM
TUR ZAF
IND
EGY DZA
UNK
BWA HUN
UKR
MAR
ECU
PER
PRY
IDN
MDA
GHA
LBN
BIH
NGA
LVA
SRB
CHN
MOZ
NIC PHL
KGZ
MRT
NPL
SEN
BGD
AZE
ALB
ARM
ZMB
TJK
YEM
AGO
LKA MKD
MWIMDG
MLI UGA
RWA
CMR
KEN
NER BEN
ETH
AFG
TZA
BFA
BDI
KHM
GEO
BGR
TCD
HTI

-1.0

ZWE
TGO

SLE

.5

1

2

7

6

5

Satisfaction ladder score (0-10)

Standardized satisfaction ladder score

Between-country wellbeing gradient

4

3
4

8

16

Real GDP per capita (thousands of dollars, log scale)

32

Notes: Each solid circle plots life satisfaction against GDP per capita for one of 131 developed and developing
countries. The slope of the arrow represents the satisfaction-income gradient estimated for that country from a
country-specific regression of individual standardized satisfaction on the log of their annual real household income,
controlling for gender, a quartic in age, and their interaction. Usable household income data were unavailable for
eighteen countries. The dashed line represents the between-country satisfaction-income gradient estimated from an
OLS regression of the satisfaction index on the log of real GDP per capita. GDP per capita is at purchasing power
parity in constant 2000 international dollars.

Figures–5

Figure 6: Changes in Life Satisfaction and Economic Growth in Europe,
Eurobarometer Survey
Belgium

0.50

Denmark

Greece

Life satisfaction, standardized relative to country average

0.25
0.00
-0.25
y = 2.53 + -0.25 * log(GDP) [se=0.14]
Correlation = -0.31

-0.50

y = -3.63 + 0.36 * log(GDP) [se=0.05]
Correlation = 0.73

France

0.50

y = -2.05 + 0.21 * log(GDP) [se=0.10]
Correlation = 0.22

Ireland

Italy

0.25
0.00
-0.25
y = -3.91 + 0.39 * log(GDP) [se=0.10]
Correlation = 0.63

-0.50

y = -0.90 + 0.09 * log(GDP) [se=0.05]
Correlation = 0.30

Netherlands

0.50

y = -6.75 + 0.68 * log(GDP) [se=0.09]
Correlation = 0.81

United Kingdom

West Germany

0.25
0.00
-0.25
y = -1.88 + 0.19 * log(GDP) [se=0.07]
Correlation = 0.41

-0.50
8

16

32

y = -1.34 + 0.13 * log(GDP) [se=0.03]
Correlation = 0.48

8

16

32

y = -1.08 + 0.11 * log(GDP) [se=0.08]
Correlation = 0.19

8

16

32

Real GDP per capita (thousands of dollars, log scale)

Notes: Solid circles represent separate observations from each round of the Eurobarometer survey from 1973 to
1989; these were the data analyzed in Easterlin (1995); open circles extend the sample from 1990 to 2002 using the
Eurobarometer Trendfile, and then through to 2007 using biannual Eurobarometer reports. Each panel shows data
for one of the nine countries analyzed by Easterlin (1995). Data are aggregated by first standardizing individuallevel data to have mean zero and unit standard deviation, and then taking country-year averages of the standardized
values. Dashed lines are fitted from the reported OLS regression; Newey-West standard errors (se) are reported,
accounting for first-order autocorrelation. The life satisfaction question asks, “On the whole, are you very satisfied,
fairly satisfied, not very satisfied, or not at all satisfied with the life you lead?” GDP per capita is at purchasing
power parity in constant 2000 international dollars.

Figures–6

Figure 7: Changes in Life Satisfaction and Economic Growth, World Values Survey
Changes between waves I and II

Changes between waves II and III

Changes between waves III and IV

Ch. Sat.=-0.14+0.71*Ch. GDP [se=0.15]

Ch. Sat.=-0.15+0.60*Ch. GDP [se=0.11]

Ch. Sat.=0.05+0.51*Ch. GDP [se=0.25]

0.75

KOR

0.50

Cumulative change in life satisfaction (z-scale)

EST
MDA
VEN
SVN
BGR
CZE
UKR
MEX
DEU
BLR
ESP
ALB
PRI
ROM
LVA
BIH
RUS
HRV
ZAF
LTU
PER FIN
USA
SCG
SVK
POL
SWE
HUN
PHL
GBR
JPN

ITA
ESP

0.25

BEL MLT
FRA
USA
NLD
IRL
CAN
ARG ISL
SWEJPN
DNK
GBR
NOR
DEU

0.00

BGR

JPN
SVN
FIN GBR
ARG
NOR
DEU
USA
POL
SWE
THUN
UR
BRA
CHE
CZE

-0.25
LVA
RUS EST
LTU
BLR

HUN

-0.50
-50

0

50

100 -50

0

CHL

ESP
SVK

TUR
MKD

ROM

50

100 -50

0

50

100

Changes between waves I and III

Changes between waves II and IV

Changes between waves I and IV

Ch. Sat.=-0.22+0.42*Ch. GDP [se=0.27]

Ch. Sat.=-0.09 +0.29*Ch. GDP [se=0.12]

Ch. Sat.=-0.11 +0.23*Ch. GDP [se=0.08]

0.75
0.50

SVN
KOR Offscale
(215, 0.35)

0.25
DEU
BGR CZE
AUT
FIN
FRA
NLD
ISLDNK
ESTJPN
GBR
CAN
BEL
PRT
ESPMLT
USA
ITA
POL
SWE
HUN
LVA
SVK
RUS
BLRROM
TUR
LTU

JPN
ESPGBR
ARG USA
SWEDEU
NOR
AUS

0.00
-0.25

HUN

ITA
IRL

ESP

FRA
DEU
BEL
NLD
USA
ISL DNK
CAN
JPN
GBR
SWE

KOR

-0.50

MLT

IRL

HUN

-50

0

50

100 -50

0

50

100

0

50

100

150

Cumulative change in real GDP per capita (percent)

Notes: We restrict the sample in each graph to countries in which the WVS sample that did not change sampling
frames between the given waves. Each point gives the change in life satisfaction and real GDP for a given country
and a given pair of waves. Data are aggregated by first standardizing individual-level data to have mean zero and
unit standard deviation, and then taking country-year averages of the standardized values. The dashed lines give the
OLS fit. Graphs in the first row show nineteen, ten, and seventeen comparable short first differences, and those in
the second row twenty-five, thirty-two and thirty-three long first differences. GDP per capita is at purchasing power
parity in constant 2000 international dollars.

Figures–7

Figure 8: Life Satisfaction and Log GDP, Relative to Country and Year Fixed Effects,
World Values Survey

Normalized satisfaction, relative to country and wave fixed effects

0.4

0.2

0.0

-0.2

y = 0.51*ln(x) [se=0.13]
Correlation=0.55

-0.4
-.5

-.25

0

.25

.5

Log GDP, relative to country and wave fixed effects

Notes: We plot residuals from a regression of log GDP or normalized average satisfaction against country and
wave fixed effects, using all four waves of the World Values and excluding countries for which the sampling frame
is not nationally representative. Data were aggregated by first standardizing individual-level data to have mean zero
and unit standard deviation, and then taking country-year averages of the standardized values. The dashed line gives
the OLS fit and the dotted line is fitted from lowess regression. For further details, see text.

Figures–8

.2
0
-.2

y = 0.17*ln(x) [se=0.04]
Correlation=0.15

-.4

Normalized satisfaction, relative to country and wave fixed effects

.4

Figure 9: Life Satisfaction and Log GDP, Relative to Country and Year Fixed Effects,
Eurobarometer

-.4

-.2

0

.2

.4

log GDP, relative to country and wave mean

Notes: We plot residuals from a regression of log GDP or normalized average satisfaction against country and
wave fixed effects. Data were first aggregated by first standardizing individual-level data to have mean zero and unit
standard deviation, and then taking country-year averages of the standardized values. The dashed line gives the
OLS fit and the dotted line is fitted from lowess regression.

Figures–9

Figure 10: Long Differences in Life Satisfaction and Log GDP, World Values Survey
SVN

Change in satisfaction, relative to country and wave fixed effects

0.4
KOR
KOR Offscale
(1, 0.33)

MDA
VEN

0.2

ITA
CZE

BGR

ESP
MEX
AUT
FIN

UKR

IRL

FRA

MLT

DEU
BEL
CHE
NLD

0.0

ISL

BRA

BIH
HRV
DNK

EST
ZAF

CAN
AUS

PER

PRT
NOR
USA

SCG

GBR
SWE

RUS

POL

JPN

LVA

-0.2

ALB PRI

PHL
SVK

ROM
BLR
TUR
LTU

MKD

-0.4
HUN

y = 0.00+0.47*ln(x) [se=0.14]
Correlation=0.54

-0.6
-.5

-.25

0

.25

.5

Change in log GDP, relative to country and wave fixed effects

F 9,+*%" −  9
F 9,Q#%" , and the horizontal
Notes: The vertical axis shows the long difference  9
F
axis shows the long difference ln F
(567),+*%" − ln(567),Q#%" where the subscripts denote the first and last time

F 9" and
each country was observed in the four waves of the World Values Survey. The variables  9
F " reflect the residuals estimated after regressing   " and ln(567)" (respectively) on
ln(567)
country and wave fixed effects. We use all four waves of the World Values and excluding countries for which the
sampling frame is not nationally representative. Data are aggregated by first standardizing individual-level data to
have mean zero and unit standard deviation, and then taking country-year averages of the standardized values. The
dashed line gives the OLS fit and the dotted line is fitted from lowess regression. For further details, see text.

Figures–10

Figure 11: Decadal Differences in Life Satisfaction and Log GDP, Eurobarometer

ITA 97-87

GDR 97-87

NOR 97-87

.2

ESP 07-97
FRA 07-97
GRC 87-77
DNK 87-77
FRG 97-87
NLD 87-77
LUX 87-77

DNK 97-87

PRT 97-87
FRG 87-77
ITA 87-77

GBR 07-97
NLD 97-87
GBR 87-77
FIN 07-97

BEL 97-87

IRL 07-97

0

IRL 97-87
ITA 07-97

DNK 07-97
SWE 07-97
FRA 97-87 GBR 97-87

LUX 07-97

LUX 97-87

FRA 87-77

BEL 07-97

AUT
PRT 07-97
07-97
NLD 07-97

ESP 97-87

-.2

GDR 07-97

FRG 07-97

BEL 87-77
IRL 87-77

y = 0.01+0.28*ln(x) [se=0.16]
Correlation=0.19

GRC 97-87

-.4

Change in satisfaction, relative to country and wave fixed effects

.4

GRC 07-97

-.2

0

.2

.4

Change in log GDP, relative to country and wave fixed effects

Notes: Eurobarometer 1973-2007; sources for GDP per capita described in text. The vertical axis shows the
F 9,( −  9
F 9,(RS, and the horizontal axis shows the long difference
long differences  9
F ,( − ln(567)
F ,(RS where  9
F 9,( and ln(F
ln(567)
567),( are, respectively, decadal averages of
F 9," and logF
 9
567," , taken over the decades 1973-82; 1983-92; 1993-02 and the partial decade,

F 9" and lnF
2003-07. The variables  9
567" reflect the residuals estimated after regressing
  " and ln(567)" (respectively) on country and wave fixed effects. Data are aggregated by first
standardizing individual-level data to have mean zero and unit standard deviation, and then taking country-year
averages of the standardized values. The dashed line gives the OLS fit and the dotted line is fitted from lowess
regression. For further details, see text.

Figures–11

Figure 12: Happiness and GDP: World Values Survey, 1999-2004
4
1.0
NGA

Happiness (1-4 Scale)

MEX

PRI ISL
NLD
DNK
CAN
IRL
SAU
BELUSA
0.5
SWE
LUX
PHL
AUT
SGP
FRA
CHL
MLT JPN
IDN
FIN
ZAF ARG
ESP
MAR
UGA KGZ
BIH
ISR
PRT DEU
PERDZA
KOR ITA
PAK IND
0.0
POL CZE
TUR HRV
JOR MKD
GRC
SVN
BGD
CHN
IRN LTU HUN
SCG
EST SVK
ZWEIRQ BLR
LVA
ALB
-0.5
MDA
RUS
UKR BGR
ROM
VEN

VNM

3

EGY
y = -0.89+0.11*ln(x) [se=0.05]
Correlation=0.29
Excluding NGA and TZA: y = -1.70+0.20*ln(x) [se=0.04]
Correlation=0.49

2
.5

1

2

4
8
GDP (log scale)

16

Standardized happiness

TZA

-1.0

32

Notes: World Values Survey, 1999-2004, and author’s regressions. Sources for GDP per capita are described in
the text. The happiness question asks, “Taking all things together, would you say you are: ‘very happy,’ ‘quite
happy,’ ‘not very happy,’ [or] ‘not at all happy’?” Data are aggregated into country averages by first standardizing
individual level data to have mean zero and standard deviation one, and then taking the within-country average of
individual happiness. The dashed line plots fitted values from the reported OLS regression (including TZA and
NGA); the dotted line gives fitted values from a lowess regressions. The regression coefficients are on the
standardized scale. Both regressions are based on nationally representative samples. Observations represented by
hollow squares are drawn from countries in which the World Values Survey sample is not nationally representative;
see Stevenson and Wolfers (2008), appendix B, for further details. Sample includes sixty-nine developed and
developing countries.

Figures–12

Figure 13: Cross-Country Measures of Recalled Feelings and GDP, Gallup World Poll

Enjoyment

Physical Pain

Percent experiencing the indicated feeling yesterday

Correlation: 0.49

Worry

Correlation: -0.41

Sadness

Correlation: 0.11

Correlation: -0.13

80

80

80

80

60

60

60

60

40

40

40

40

20

20

20

20

0 y=34.5+4.26*ln(x) [se=0.67]
0.5

2

8

0 y=47.9+-2.44*ln(x) [se=0.48]

32

0.5

Boredom

2

8

0 y=25.8+0.95*ln(x) [se=0.76]

32

0.5

Depression

Correlation: -0.16

2

8

0 y=27.4+-0.69*ln(x) [se=0.47]

32

0.5

Anger

Correlation: -0.34
80

80

60

60

60

60

40

40

40

40

20

20

20

20

0.5

2

8

32

0.5

2

8

32

0 y=28.4+-0.97*ln(x) [se=0.55]
0.5

2

8

32

32

Correlation: 0.23

80

0 y=29.9+-1.80*ln(x) [se=0.44]

8

Love

Correlation: -0.15

80

0 y=35.1+-1.23*ln(x) [se=0.67]

2

0 y=47.5+2.44*ln(x) [se=0.93]
0.5

2

8

32

Real GDP per capita (thousands of dollars, log scale)

Notes: Gallup World Poll, 2006. Sources for GDP per capita described in the text. Respondents were asked, “Did you experience [feeling] during a lot of the
day yesterday?” GDP per capita is at purchasing power parity in constant 2000 international dollars. Each observation represents one of up to 130 developed
and developing countries in the sample (questions were not asked in Iraq). Dashed lines are fitted from ordinary least squares regressions of the percent agreeing
with the statement on log real GDP per capita; dotted lines are fitted from lowess estimations.

Figures—13

Figure 14: Cross-Country Measures of Daily Experience and GDP, Gallup World Poll

Percent reporting indicated feeling

Would you like to have
more days just like yesterday?

Did you feel
well rested yesterday?

Were you treated with
respect all day yesterday?

Were you able to choose how
you spent your time all day?

80

80

80

80

60

60

60

60

40

40

40

40

20

20

20

20

Correlation = 0.14

Correlation = 0.15

0 y=59.2+0.99*ln(x) [se=0.61]
0.5

2

8

Correlation = 0.43

0 y=56.9+1.01*ln(x) [se=0.61]

32

0.5

Did you smile or
laugh a lot yesterday?

2

8

32

Were you proud of
something you did yesterday?

Correlation = 0.19

0 y=54.2+3.49*ln(x) [se=0.65]
0.5

2

8

0 y=57.3+1.44*ln(x) [se=0.67]

32

0.5

Did you learn or
do something interesting yesterday?

80

80

80

80

60

60

60

60

40

40

40

40

20

20

20

20

Correlation = 0.28

Correlation = 0.00

0 y=47.2+2.66*ln(x) [se=0.79]
0.5

2

8

32

Correlation = 0.01

0 y=59.5+0.03*ln(x) [se=1.00]
0.5

2

8

32

2

8

32

Correlation = 0.59

0 y=51.5+0.14*ln(x) [se=0.94]
0.5

2

Did you have good
tasting food to eat yesterday?

8

32

0 y=26.6+5.61*ln(x) [se=0.68]
0.5

2

8

32

Real GDP per capita (thousands of dollars, log scale)

Notes: Gallup World Poll, 2006. Sources for GDP per capita described in the text. Questions were prefaced as follows: “Now, please think about yesterday,
from the morning until the end of the day. Think about where you were, what you were doing, who you were with, and how you felt.” Each observation
represents one of up to 130 developed and developing countries in the sample (questions were not asked in Iraq). Dashed lines are fitted from OLS regressions of
the percent agreeing with the statement on log real GDP per capita; dotted lines are fitted from lowess estimations. GDP per capita is at purchasing power parity
in constant 2000 international dollars.

Figures—14

