                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      AN INTERNATIONAL COMPARISON OF CAPITAL STRUCTURE AND DEBT
                          MATURITY CHOICES

                                         Joseph P.H. Fan
                                         Sheridan Titman
                                           Garry Twite

                                       Working Paper 16445
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w16445


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2010




This paper has benefited from the useful comments and suggestions provided by Andres Almazan,
Heitor Almeida, Lawrence Booth, Stijn Claessens, Joshua Coval, Sudipto Dasgupta, Jay Hartzell,
Jiang Luo, Vojislav Maksimovic, Enrico Perotti, Tom Smith, participants at the 2003 European Finance
Association Conference, the 2003 Financial Management Association Conference and the 2005 American
Finance Association Meeting, seminar participants at the Australian National University, Australian
Graduate School of Management, Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong University of Science
and Technology, Shanghai University of Finance & Economics, University of Melbourne, University
of Queensland, University of Sydney, and University of Texas at Austin, and anonymous referees.
Joseph Fan thanks the financial support from the Research Grants Council of the Hong Kong Special
Administrative Region, China (Project No. CUHK6230/03H) and the University of Queensland for
research support during his visit when part of the research was carried out. Garry Twite thanks the
financial support from the Australian Research Council Discovery Project (Project ID. DP0664505).
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Joseph P.H. Fan, Sheridan Titman, and Garry Twite. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
An International Comparison of Capital Structure and Debt Maturity Choices
Joseph P.H. Fan, Sheridan Titman, and Garry Twite
NBER Working Paper No. 16445
October 2010
JEL No. G3,G32

                                              ABSTRACT

This study examines the influence of institutional environment on capital structure and debt maturity
choices by examining a cross-section of firms in 39 developed and developing countries. We find
that a country’s legal and tax system, the level of corruption and the preferences of capital suppliers
explain a significant portion of the variation in leverage and debt maturity ratios. Our evidence indicate
that firms in countries that are viewed as more corrupt tend to use less equity and more debt, especially
short-term debt, while firms operating within legal systems that provide better protection for financial
claimants tend to have capital structures with more equity, and relatively more long-term debt. In
addition, the existence of an explicit bankruptcy code and/or deposit insurance is associated with higher
leverage and more long-term debt. We also find that firms tend to use more debt in countries where
there is a greater tax gain from leverage, while firms in countries with larger government bond markets
have lower leverage, suggesting that government bonds tend to crowd out corporate debt. Countries
with more extensive defined benefit pension funds have higher debt ratios and longer debt maturities,
whereas those with more extensive defined contribution fund activities have lower debt ratios. In addition,
debt ratios are lower in countries that limit the bond holdings of pension funds. Finally, we do not
find a significant association between financing choices and the size of the insurance industry.


Joseph P.H. Fan                                      Garry Twite
School of Accountancy                                School of Finance,
Chinese University of Hong Kong                      Actuarial Studies and Applied Statistics
Shatin, N.T.                                         Australian National University
Hong Kong SAR                                        Canberra ACT 0200
pjfan@cuhk.edu.hk                                    Australia
                                                     garry.twite@anu.edu.au
Sheridan Titman
Finance Department
McCombs School of Business
University of Texas at Austin
Austin, TX 78712-1179
and NBER
titman@mail.utexas.edu
      An International Comparison of Capital Structure and
                     Debt Maturity Choices

                                         Abstract


This study examines the influence of institutional environment on capital structure and

debt maturity choices by examining a cross-section of firms in 39 developed and

developing countries. We find that a country’s legal and tax system, the level of

corruption and the preferences of capital suppliers explain a significant portion of the

variation in leverage and debt maturity ratios. Our evidence indicate that firms in

countries that are viewed as more corrupt tend to use less equity and more debt,

especially short-term debt, while firms operating within legal systems that provide better

protection for financial claimants tend to have capital structures with more equity, and

relatively more long-term debt. In addition, the existence of an explicit bankruptcy code

and/or deposit insurance is associated with higher leverage and more long-term debt. We

also find that firms tend to use more debt in countries where there is a greater tax gain

from leverage, while firms in countries with larger government bond markets have lower

leverage, suggesting that government bonds tend to crowd out corporate debt. Countries

with more extensive defined benefit pension funds have higher debt ratios and longer

debt maturities, whereas those with more extensive defined contribution fund activities

have lower debt ratios. In addition, debt ratios are lower in countries that limit the bond

holdings of pension funds. Finally, we do not find a significant association between

financing choices and the size of the insurance industry.
1.      Introduction
Corporate financing choices are determined by a combination of factors that are related to

the characteristics of the firm as well as to their institutional environment. Although most

studies focus on the importance of firm characteristics by examining corporate financing

choices within individual countries, 1 there is a growing literature that considers how

institutional differences affect these choices. To explore the cross-sectional variation in

the institutional environment, these papers examine capital structure choices across

countries (Booth, Aivazian, Demirguc-Kunt, and Maksimovic, 2001; Claessens, Djankov

and Nenova, 2001; Demirguc-Kunt and Maksimovic, 1996, 1998, 1999; Giannetti, 2003;

De Jong, Kabir and Nguyen, 2008).

        This study builds on this recent literature in two important ways. First, because

we consider these issues within a panel that includes industry fixed effects, together with

firm-level variables, we identify the variation in capital structure across countries that

cannot be explained by cross-country differences in the industrial mix and firm-level

characteristics. Second, we consider a larger number of countries and a number of

important institutional characteristics not previously explored in this literature.

        To understand our motivation, it is useful to illustrate the importance of country-

level factors relative to industry factors in determining capital structure. A regression of

firm leverage, measured as the book value of debt over the market value of the firm, on

firm-specific variables, industry fixed effects and country fixed effects, has an adjusted

R-square of 0.19. When the regression is estimated with all variables except for country


1
  Examples of empirical studies examining the association between firm characteristics and capital
structure within specific countries include Titman and Wessels (1988) – U.S., Campbell and Hamao
(1995) – Japan and Gatward and Sharpe (1996) – Australia. Barclay and Smith (1995), Stohs and Mauer
(1996) and Guedes and Opler (1996) examine the association between firm characteristics and debt
maturity in the U.S. Gatward and Sharpe (1996) undertake a similar study of debt maturity in Australia.


                                                  1
fixed effects, the adjusted R-square is reduced to 0.15.2 However, in a regression that

includes all variables except for industry dummies the adjusted R-square is reduced by

only half as much, to 0.17. When the full regression is estimated with debt maturity,

measured as the book value of long-term debt to the book value of total debt, as the

dependent variable, the R-square is 0.25. When the regression is estimated with all

variables except for country fixed effects, the R-square is substantially reduced to

0.09. However, in the regression that includes all variables except for industry fixed

effects, the R-square is only slightly reduced to 0.23.

        These experiments indicate that the country in which the firm resides is a more

important determinant of how it is financed than is its industry affiliation, which in turn

suggests that differences in country level institutional factors are likely to have a first

order effect on capital structure choices. To examine this possibility in more detail, we

estimate a panel regression on a large sample of firms from 39 countries that examines

the extent to which cross-country differences in capital structures can be explained by

differences in tax policies; legal environment; and the importance and regulation of

financial institutions.

        Our evidence suggests that the explanatory power of a model that includes

between ten and twelve institutional variables explains the cross-section of debt ratios

and maturity structures about as well as a model with 39 country dummy variables. These

regressions indicate that firms tend to use more debt in countries with a greater tax gain

from leverage, which contrasts with Booth, Aivazian, Demirguc-Kunt, and Maksimovic

(2001) who, in an earlier study of mostly developing economies, do not find a significant


2
 This result is similar in character to a regression reported by Booth, Aivazian, Demirguc-Kunt, and
Maksimovic (2001).


                                                    2
relation between debt ratios and tax policy. In addition, we find that the strength of a

country’s legal system and public governance importantly affect firm capital structure.

Weaker laws and more government corruption are associated with higher corporate debt

ratios and shorter debt maturity.3 We also find that countries with deposit insurance or

explicit bankruptcy codes, like the Chapter 11 and Chapter 7 rules in the U.S., have

higher debt ratios and longer debt maturities. These findings reinforce the prior literature

on the importance of the legal system, the enforcement of investor rights and financial

distress resolution (Claessens, Djankov, Mody, 2001; Djankov, Hart, McLiesh and

Shleifer, 2008; La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny, 1997, 1998)

         We also find that the preferences of the suppliers of capital influence capital

structure choices. 4 In particular, firms in countries with larger banking sectors have

shorter maturity debt, but the association between financing choices and the size of the

insurance industry is weak. In addition, firms in countries with higher levels of defined

contribution pension fund assets use relatively more equity, while firms in countries with

higher levels of defined benefit pension fund assets use relatively more long-term debt,

which could reflect differences in how these pension assets are invested. Finally, we find

that firms in countries with larger government bond markets have lower debt ratios and

shorter maturity debt, indicating that government bonds tend to crowd out long term

corporate debt.

         The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 discusses the association between

country level institutional factors and financial choices. Section 3 introduces the set of

3
  This result is consistent with Demirguc-Kunt, and Maksimovic (1999).
4
  One should interpret these results with some caution, because an analysis of capital suppliers does raise
endogeneity concerns. In particular, we expect financial institutions to develop in ways that satisfy the
financing needs of firms. However, as discussed in Section 2.3, we have selected variables that are less
likely to be influenced by the capital structure preferences of corporations.


                                                      3
firm level variables that influence capital structure choice.        Section 4 describes the

sample. Section 5 presents our results and Section 6 draws some conclusions.



2. Institutional factors and cross-country determinants of capital structure

This section discusses how institutional differences between countries can potentially

affect how firms within these countries are financed. Specifically, we consider

institutional variables that reflect (1) the ability of creditors to enforce legal contracts (2)

the tax treatment of debt and equity, and (3) the importance and regulation of financial

institutions that represent major suppliers of capital.

       We expect that weaker legal systems and weaker public enforcement of laws

should be associated with less external equity and shorter maturity debt contracts. We

also expect that firms in countries with lower tax preferences for debt will be less levered.

Finally, we examine whether the suppliers of capital matter. Although most of the capital

structure literature focuses on the financing preferences of firms, at the aggregate level,

firm capital structures are determined by the preferences of the suppliers of capital (i.e.

investors) as well as the preferences of firms. In particular, exogenous factors that lead

suppliers of capital to prefer to hold more or less equity relative to debt will also

influence the capital structures of firms.

       The following sub-sections introduce the variables that we consider, and discuss

how these variables are likely to influence typical debt ratios within our sample of

countries.




                                               4
2.1. Legal system

Incentive problems - conflicts of interest between corporate insiders (managers,

employees and/or majority shareholders) and external investors - are important factors

that shape corporate policy and productivity. As extensively explored by La Porta,

Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (1998), the extent to which contracts can be used

to mitigate these problems depends on the legal system, which consists of both the

content of the laws and the quality of their enforcement. In the following discussion we

will review how these legal factors influence financing choices.

       In countries with weak laws and enforcement, financial instruments (e.g. short

term debt) that allow insiders less discretion, and are contractually easier to interpret, are

likely to dominate.     La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (1998) find

significant variation in the extent of legal protection of external investors across both

developed and developing countries, and argue that legal systems based on common law

offer outside investors (debt and equity) better protection than those based on civil law,

resulting in higher security values (La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny,

2002). All else equal, this suggests that common law countries will use more outside

equity and longer-term debt. To test whether this is the case, we define an indicator

variable that takes a value of one if the country’s legal system is based on common law

and zero otherwise.

       In addition to the content of the law, the integrity and enforceability of the law is

also important, which we measure by the perceived corruption level in a country.

Corruption has been identified as a key factor shaping a country’s legal system (Djankov,

La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes and Shleifer, 2003), resource allocation and firm behavior (La




                                              5
Porta, Lopez-De-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny, 1999; Fisman, 2001; Johnson and Mitton,

2003).

         We are not the first to examine the roles of legal factors in corporate financing

choices. Demirguc-Kunt and Maksimovic (1999) find that firms have longer duration

debt in countries where the legal system has more “integrity”. Integrity, measured by a

law and order index prepared by the International Country Risk Guide, reflects the extent

to which individuals are willing to rely on the legal system to make and implement laws,

mediate disputes and enforce contracts. In contrast, we focus on corruption, defined as

the abuse of public office for private gain, measured as the Corruption Perception Index

(Transparency International), which reflects the extent to which corruption is perceived to

exist among public officials and politicians. An advantage of this index is that it provides

both time-series and cross-sectional variation; most other measures of integrity, such as

the law and order index, do not have comparable historical data.

         We reverse the index, so that in our study, it ranges from 0 to 10, with larger

values indicating more severe corruption. In the context of the firm’s capital structure

choices, the index proxies for the threat of all or part of investor rights being expropriated

by managers or public officials. Debt is expected to be used relatively more than equity

when the public sector is more corrupt, since it is easier to expropriate outside equity

holders than debt holders.    Similarly, one can argue that since short-term debt is more

difficult to expropriate, it will be used relatively more frequently than long-term debt in

more corrupt countries.

         Finally, we investigate the enforcement of debt contracts. As identified by

Djankov, Hart, McLiesh and Shleifer (2008), the legal structure that specifies the




                                              6
resolution of default differs widely across countries. Indeed, in some countries, like the

U.S., there is an explicit bankruptcy code that specifies and limits the rights and claims of

creditors that facilitates the reorganization of the ongoing business. In contrast, in other

countries with no bankruptcy codes or only weakly enforced codes, creditors often have

difficulty accessing collateral by liquidating distressed firms or seizing distressed firm

assets (Claessens, Djankov, Mody, 2001; Claessens, Djankov, and Klapper, 2003;

Claessens and Klapper, 2005; Davydenko and Franks, 2008; Dinc, 2005). With poorly

defined bankruptcy procedures, senior lenders typically possess inferior bargaining power

relative to the borrower in out-of-court renegotiations due to the weak laws and lenders’

inherent information disadvantage about the collateral relative to borrowers (Degryse and

Ongena, 2005; Petersen and Rajan, 1994) lowering demand for long-term debt. On the

borrower side, the existence of defined bankruptcy procedures for corporate

reorganization and the deferral of debt payments increase the incentive for firms to issue

long term debt since a default can be less onerous.5 We conjecture that the lack of explicit

bankruptcy codes and enforcement discourage the use of debt, in particular long-term

debt. Based on Djankov, Hart, McLiesh and Shleifer (2008), we define an indicator

variable that takes a value of one for those countries in which an insolvent firm can

undergo a court supervised reorganization proceeding.



2.2. Tax code

The tax system in general, and specifically the tax treatment of interest and dividend

payments, has been recognized as an important factor influencing capital structure


5
  The influence of the existence of a bankruptcy code on both investor demand for, and corporate supply of
long-term debt was pointed out to the authors by an anonymous referee.


                                                    7
choices since the seminal work of Modigliani and Miller (1963).6 We observe three main

categories of tax regimes:

          The first is the classical tax system in which dividend payments are taxed at both

the corporate and personal levels and interest payments are tax-deductible corporate

expenses. The classical tax system exists in Brazil, Chile, China, Hong Kong, India,

Indonesia, Israel, Japan, Korea, Malaysia, Netherlands, Pakistan, Peru, Philippines,

Singapore, South Africa, Switzerland, United Kingdom (post 2000) 7 and the United

States.

          The second is the dividend relief tax system, where dividend payments are taxed

at a reduced rate at the personal level. A dividend relief tax system exists in Austria,

Belgium, Denmark, Greece, Portugal, Sweden, Thailand and Turkey.8 In Greece and

Turkey dividend payments are not taxed at the personal level, that is, a full dividend

relief system.

          Third is the dividend imputation tax system, where corporations can deduct

interest payments, but where the domestic shareholders of a corporation receive a tax

credit for the taxes paid by the corporation. The goal of the system is to tax corporate

profits only once.       Dividend imputation systems are in place in Australia, Canada,

France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Mexico, New Zealand, Norway, Spain, Taiwan and

United Kingdom (pre 2001). The proportion of corporate tax available as a tax credit

under these imputation systems varies from country to country. In Australia, Finland,

Germany, Italy, New Zealand and Norway the full amount of the corporate tax paid is


6
  See Graham (2003) for a review of the literature on the influence of taxes on capital structure choice.
7
  The United Kingdom reverted to a classical tax system in 2001.
8
  The United States currently provides preferential tax treatment for dividend over interest payments, but
not in our sample period.


                                                    8
distributed as a tax credit. In other countries only part of the corporate tax credits are

distributed.

          All else equal, we expect that debt will be used less in countries with dividend

imputation or tax relief systems than in countries with classical tax systems that double

tax corporate profits. To test for this relationship for each country in our sample, we

estimate the tax shield, using the tax gain from leverage variable introduced in Miller

(1977):



               (1   c )(1   e )
          1
                   (1   i )



where  c is the statutory corporate tax rate,  i is the highest statutory personal tax rate

on interest income and  e is the highest effective personal tax rate on equity income

coming from dividends.9

          The tax gain from leverage can take both positive and negative values. Negative

values arise under a dividend relief tax system, when the personal tax rate on interest

income is greater than the corporate tax rate and the personal tax rate on dividend income

is less than the corporate tax rate. This is the case under a full dividend relief system as

exists in Greece and Turkey, as well as under some partial relief countries like Belgian

and Thailand The tax gain from leverage is zero under a full dividend imputation tax

system, which is the case in Australia, Germany, Italy, New Zealand and Norway. For all

other countries the value of the tax gain from leverage is positive.


9
 We also consider a dividend tax indicator variable that takes a value of one for countries with either a full
dividend relief tax system or a full dividend imputation tax system and zero otherwise.


                                                      9
2.3. Suppliers of capital

Financial economists have typically viewed the capital structure problem from the

perspective of firms that face competitive and complete financial markets, where debt

and equity capital are offered at equivalent risk-adjusted rates. However, when this is not

the case, the preferences of investors to hold debt versus equity instruments will have an

influence on how firms are financed. For example, in the Miller (1977) model, the

aggregate debt ratio in the economy is determined by aggregate investor preferences for

holding debt versus equity securities. While these preferences are determined by taxes in

Miller’s model, one can more generally consider how investor preferences for holding

various debt and equity instruments affect the capital structure choice of firms.10

           We will specifically consider the preferences of banks, pension funds and

insurance companies. Banks tend to have short-term liabilities and thus may have a

comparative advantage holding short-term debt. In contrast, pension funds have long-

term liabilities, and thus have a preference for holding long term assets. Likewise,

insurance companies tend to hold longer term assets. Hence, we might expect firms in

counties with a larger banking sector to use more short-term financing and firms in

countries with larger pension funds and insurance sectors to use more long-term

financing.

           The analysis of supply effects raise endogeneity concerns, since we expect

financial intermediaries to develop in ways that satisfy the financing needs of firms as

well as the preferences of investors. Existing studies (for example, Dermirguc-Kunt and

Maksimovic, 1999; De Jong, Kabir and Nguyen, 2008) examine the effects of stock/bond
10
     See Titman (2002) for a discussion of the effect of investor preferences on capital structure choices.


                                                        10
market size, turnover and bank total assets on capital structure choices. These variables,

however, are likely to be influenced by the capital structure preferences of corporations.

For example, in countries with industries (like high tech) that require considerable

amounts of external capital, the stock market is likely to be larger.11 With this in mind,

we depart from the existing literature and select proxies that are not likely to be directly

influenced by the capital structure preferences of corporations. In particular, we select

measures of the supply of funds available to these financial intermediaries.

         To proxy for the supply of funds to banks, we use deposits/GDP to measure the

amount of funds that are available to the banking sector.12 In addition, deposit insurance

is used in many countries to protect bank depositors, in full or in part, from losses caused

by a bank's inability to pay its debts when due. This lowers the risk of bank runs,

reducing the banks need to hedge and seek more liquid short-term debt. We conjecture

that the existence of deposit insurance will influence the lending and maturity choices of

banks. In particular, banks provide more credit to firms and lend longer term debt when

deposits are protected. Hence, one might expect that firms in countries with deposit

insurance to have higher leverage and more long-term debt. To test this relationship, we

utilize a deposit insurance indicator variable that takes a value of one if bank deposits are


11
   Demirguc-Kunt and Maksimovic (1999) recognise this endogeneity issue and address it by using a two-
stage instrumental variable regression. They chose as instruments measures of the size of the economy and
the flow of funds, plus proxies for the content, strength and integrity of the legal system. However, one can
argue that these variables either directly influence the capital structure choice or are potentially influenced
by the types of firms in the economy, and are thus indirectly related to the capital structure choice.
12
   It is possible that there are unobserved factors that affect both the willingness of investors to deposit
funds with banks and the willingness of banks to provide long-term funding to firms, creating a spurious
relation between deposits and capital structure. For example, one can argue that the financing needs of
corporations affect the funds that are available to the different investor sectors. Suppose, for example, that
the need for monitoring declines, making bank loans somewhat less attractive to long-term bonds. On the
margin, this would increase the interest rate on long-term bonds, making it more attractive for households
to invest in fixed income mutual funds rather than bank deposits. While this creates a potential
endogeniety problem, it is mitigated by the inclusion of our institutional variables and probably has a minor
influence on our estimates.


                                                     11
at least partially explicitly insured by government and zero otherwise (Demirguc-Kunt,

Karacaovali and Laeven, 2005).

        We use insurance penetration (value of total insurance premiums (life and non-

life)/GDP) to measure the amount of funds that are available to insurance companies.

Different insurance companies, however, may have very different liability structures and

may thus have different preferences for the assets that they hold. For example, life

insurance companies that offer contracts with a substantial savings component, such as

whole life contracts, might have a preference for long term debt. In contrast, insurance

companies that offer term life and property and casualty insurance tend to have shorter-

term obligations, and thus, are expected to hold shorter-term debt. Unfortunately, we do

not have data that allows us to distinguish between the different sectors of the insurance

industry.

       We measure pension fund penetration separately as the value of defined benefit

pension fund assets over GDP and the value of defined contribution pension fund assets

over GDP. This distinction may be important because in firms with defined benefit

plans, the asset allocation is determined by the plan sponsors, while with defined

contribution plans, the asset allocation is made by individuals. It should also be noted that

defined benefit pension plans are often underfunded, creating a liability that we do not

observe in our data set.

       In addition, since it is possible that cross-country differences in pension fund

regulations influence the investment choices of pension funds, we also examine

restrictions on debt and equity holdings of pension funds. We conjecture that the relative

restrictions on debt and equity holdings will influence the choice between debt and




                                             12
equity. In particular, pension funds will hold more equity when restrictions on bond

holdings are tighter relative to those on equity holdings. Hence, one might expect that

firms in countries with tighter restriction on bond holdings to issue more equity. To

investigate this possibility we estimate an index of relative restrictions on debt and equity

holdings measured as the ratio of the proportional limit on equity holdings over the

proportional limit on debt holdings taken from the Survey of Investment Regulation of

Pension Funds, OECD. For each year we ranked countries by their pension fund

regulation index, assigning countries into quartiles. We assigned a score of 1 to 4 to the

quartiles, with larger values indicating tighter restriction on bond holdings.

       An alternative measure of the supply of funds available to financial intermediaries

is the level of domestic savings, which we measure as gross domestic saving over GDP.

In addition, we examine the size of the government bond market in each country by

including domestically denominated government bonds/GDP as an independent variable.

Government bonds can influence the supply of debt capital that is available to the

corporate market for two reasons. The first is a simple crowding out argument. If there is

a fixed supply of debt capital, then government debt can compete for that fixed supply

and leave less available for corporate borrowers. The second possibility is that the supply

is not fixed, and that the presence of government borrowers can help the debt market

develop, increasing the demand for corporate debt.



3. Firm level characteristics and capital structure choice

       Consistent with the existing literature (Titman and Wessels, 1988; Guedes and

Opler, 1996; Rajan and Zingales, 1995) we include a set of firm level variables that




                                             13
capture factors that are known to affect leverage and maturity structure. These variables

include asset tangibility (fixed assets over total assets), profitability (net income over

total assets), firm size (natural logarithm of total assets) and the market-to-book ratio

(market value of equity over book value of equity). Due to data limitations in some of

the countries included in our study, we do not include variables that measure the effective

tax rate, operating risk, research and development expenditure, capital expenditure and

selling expenses as per Titman and Wessels (1988). In place of these variables we

include the market-to-book ratio, which can proxy for growth as well as the collateral

value of assets, and industry indicator variables based on two-digit SIC codes.13



4. Data and sample

This section describes the sample and presents the country and industry patterns of

capital and debt maturity structures. It then introduces the empirical procedure employed

in this study.



4.1. Sample selection

The primary source of our firm-level data is Worldscope, which contains financial data

on companies from a wide range of industries in over 50 countries. We restrict the

sample to those firms listed on the stock market of the country in which it is domiciled.

           Our analysis covers the period of 1991 through 2006. We exclude firm-year

observations with missing financial data that is required for the firm-level analysis. The

final sample consists of 36,767 firms from 39 countries, totalling 272,092 firm-years.


13   See MacKay and Phillips (2005) for evidence on the importance of industry fixed effects.



                                                     14
Table 1 provides a description of the sample, which covers a broad cross section of

developed and developing countries with every continent represented.                      Most of the

countries have observations in each of the 16 years.

            As can be seen from the last two columns of Table 1, the coverage of the sample

firms varies across countries in terms of number and/or market capitalization, reflecting

that Worldscope has uneven coverage of firms across the countries. For most of the

economies we have more than 60 percent of sample coverage in terms of market

capitalization and 50 percent in terms of number of listed firms. The economies with

lower data coverage tend to be developing economies.

                                             [Table 1 about here]



4.2. Country financing patterns

Our measures of capital structure are:

     (i)       leverage, measured as the proportion of total debt to market value of the firm

               (total debt/market value). Total debt is defined to be the book value of short-

               term and long-term interest bearing debt. Market value of the firm is defined

               as the market value of common equity plus book value of preferred stock plus

               total debt, or

     (ii)      debt maturity, measured as the proportion of the book value of long-term debt

               to total debt (long-term debt/total debt).14

     To gain a basic idea about how capital and maturity structures differ across countries,

we compute the median leverage and maturity structure by country for the period 1991 to

14
  Trade credit is an important source of financing in economies with underdeveloped financial institutions
(Demirguc-Kunt and Maksimovic, 2001; Fisman and Love, 2003). Our results are robust to including trade
credit (measured as accounts payable) in our measure of short-term debt.


                                                   15
2006. As can be seen in Figure 1, developing economies occupy both ends of the

leverage spectrum.       The highest five leverage ratios are observed in South Korea,

Indonesia, Brazil, Portugal, and Pakistan, while the lowest five are observed in Australia,

South Africa, Canada, the United States, and Turkey. Developing economies seem to

dominate the higher range, while developed economies tend to be at the lower range.

The median leverage ratio for the developing economies in the sample is 0.26,15 while for

the developed economies the median leverage ratio is 0.20. The middle range of the

leverage spectrum is mixed with both developing and developed economies.

                                            [Figure 1 about here]

        Figure 2 presents the median maturity structure by country. It is clear from the

figure that debt obligations have longer maturities in more developed economies. The

five countries with the highest long-term debt ratios are New Zealand, Norway, Sweden,

USA, and Canada. The lowest five median long-term debt ratios are observed in China,

Greece, Turkey, Taiwan, and Thailand. 16 The median long-term debt ratio for the

developing economies in the sample is 0.36, while for the developed economies the

median long-term debt ratio is 0.61.

                                            [Figure 2 about here]

        In addition to the set of firm and country-level variables described in Section 2,

we include inflation, inflation volatility (measured as the standard deviation of inflation

rates over the preceding four years) and a developed economy indicator variable that

takes a value of one if the country is classified as a developed economy according to the

15
   Economies within the sample classified as developing, according to the World Bank, are Brazil, Chile,
China, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Mexico, Pakistan, Peru, Philippines, Taiwan, Thailand, Turkey and
South Africa.
16
   This parallels the findings of Demirguc-Kunt and Maksimovic (1999) for an early sample period, 1980-
1991.


                                                  16
World Bank classification that is based on the countries’ gross national income levels.17

Inflation is included because debt contracts are generally nominal contracts and high

inflation, which is generally associated with high uncertainty about future inflation, may

tilt lenders away from long-term debt. Likewise, higher inflation volatility reflects higher

uncertainty about future inflation, tilting lenders away from long-term debt. A developed

economy indicator variable is included because it may pick up an element of economic

development that is not already captured by our other variables. Both firm and country

level variables are lagged one period to allow for the non-contemporaneous nature of the

interaction between firm/country level characteristics and financing choices.

        Table 2, which presents the summary statistics, shows cross-sectional variation in

the country-level variables.         The country-level variables are defined in Appendix 1,

along with their data sources. Except for the common law, developed economy,

bankruptcy code and deposit insurance variables that are constant across time, all

remaining variables exhibit time-series variation.18 Appendix 2 reports the country-by-

country median values of the country-level explanatory variables.

                                             [Table 2 about here]

        To gain a basic understanding of how debt ratios and maturity structures are

influenced by these variables, we compute the Pearson correlation coefficients for pairs

of the dependent and independent variables. The results, reported in Table 3, suggest that

the legal system, the tax system, and the suppliers of funds potentially influence the

capital structure choice. In particular,



17
  The set of country level independent variables are defined in Appendix 1, along with their data sources.
18
  The corruption index prior to 1995 is taken as the 1988-1992 composite level, because compatible annual
data is not available prior to 1995.


                                                   17
                 firms in more developed economies have lower debt ratios and more long-

                  term debt;

                 common law is associated with lower leverage and more long-term debt;

                 low levels of corruption are associated with lower debt ratios and a greater

                  use of long-term rather than short-term debt;

                 the existence of an explicit bankruptcy code is associated with higher debt

                  ratios and a greater use of long-term debt;

                 firms in countries that have a higher tax preference for debt have higher

                  debt ratios;

                 firms in countries with more bank deposits and larger domestic savings

                  tend to have higher leverage and more short-term debt;

                 the existence of explicit deposit insurance is associated with more long-

                  term debt;

                 the level of defined contribution pension fund assets is associated with

                  lower leverage; and

                 the level of defined benefit pension fund assets is associated with the use

                  of long-term debt.19

                                          [Table 3 about here]



19
   In unreported analysis we examined these correlations in a number of subsamples. Specifically, we
separately examine developed and developing economies, and we divide the sample between two time
periods, 1991-1998 and 1999-2006. There are some differences between the subsamples. For example, we
find that the correlation between leverage and common law is strong only in developed economies and
taxes and deposit insurance are strongly correlated with leverage in only the initial sub-period. In addition,
the size of the government bond market is negative and highly correlated with leverage in developing
economies, but only in the initial sub-period. Deposit insurance is positively correlated with debt maturity
in only the later sub-period while insurance penetration is positively correlated with debt maturity in both
sub-periods, but only in developing economies. Finally, the size of the government bond market is negative
and strongly correlated with debt maturity in the later sub-period but only in developed economies.


                                                     18
         To investigate whether these variables are likely to be subject to collinearity

problems in our later regression analysis, we examine the correlations between the

independent variables that are used in our analysis. From Table 3, we see that most

variables are not highly correlated with each other, with some notable exceptions. In

particular, the correlation between the economic development indicator variable and the

corruption index is negative 76 percent.



5. Regression analysis

This section presents regressions that estimate the influence of country-level explanatory

variables on capital structure choices controlling for firm- and industry-level

characteristics. Our regressions are estimated with a General Methods of Moments

(GMM) approach that accounts for the fact that the regression residuals are

heteroskedastic and serially correlated across both firm and country level observations.20



5.1. The determinants of leverage

Table 4 presents the results of the leverage regressions. 21 Column one reports the

regression for the full sample, column two provides evidence for the sub-sample of

developed economies only and column three the sub-sample of developing economies

only. Columns four and five provide evidence for the sub-periods, 1991-1998 and 1999-


20
   The regressions are performed on panel data where the residuals may be correlated across firms and/or
across country, and OLS standard errors can be biased. We use the ordinary least square (OLS) method
with heteroscedastic / autocorrelation corrected (HAC) errors (Andrew, 1991) and clustered at the country
level (Petersen, 2008). The HAC procedure accounts for the potential heteroscedasticity and auto-
correlation at the firm level by deriving the t-statistics of estimated OLS coefficients from Generalized
Methods of Moments (GMM) standard errors corrected for heteroscedasticity and auto-correlation.
21
   The results are robust to the use of alternative proxies for the country’s legal system, corruption, taxation
and financial market development. Alternative proxies leave unaffected other estimated coefficients. In
addition, results are substantially unchanged when we winsorize all variables at the 1 percent level.


                                                      19
2006, respectively, and Column six provides evidence for a sub-sample representing

OECD countries for which pension fund bond/equity holding restriction information is

available. Column seven provides evidence for a select sub-sample of OECD countries

for which pension fund asset information is available.

                                       [Table 4 about here]



5.1.1. Firm effects

The top half of Table 4 reports the coefficient estimates of our firm-specific variables.

These coefficient estimates indicate that leverage is positively related to asset tangibility

and firm size and negatively related to profitability, and the market-to-book ratio. These

results, which hold in the full sample as well as the sub-samples, are consistent with

evidence on U.S. firms (Bradley, Jarrell, and Kim, 1984; Titman and Wessels, 1988) and

more recent international evidence (Rajan and Zingales, 1995 and Booth, Aivazian,

Demirguc-Kunt, and Maksimovic, 2001; De Jong, Kabir and Nguyen, 2008). These

results are also generally consistent with individual country leverage regressions that we

report in Appendix 3. The coefficients for the market-to-book ratio have the same sign in

all country regressions. Asset tangibility and size are positively related to leverage in 38

and 34 out of 39 countries, respectively. Finally, profitability is negatively related to

leverage in 36 out of 39 countries.



5.1.2. Country effects

The lower half of Table 4 reports coefficient estimates for country variables.          The

regression for the full sample (Column 1) has an adjusted R-square of 0.1798 which is the




                                             20
same order of magnitude as the preliminary result reported previously, regressing

leverage on firm-specific variables, industry and country fixed effects.

        These coefficient estimates indicate that leverage is positively related to economic

development, but unrelated to both inflation and inflation volatility. Consistent with

better investor protection leading to a greater use of equity financing, we find that

corruption is associated with higher debt ratios, common law systems are associated with

lower debt ratios and the existence of an explicit bankruptcy code is associated with

higher debt ratios.22 In addition, we find that leverage is higher in countries where the tax

gain from leverage is positive. This evidence contrasts with Booth, Aivazian, Demirguc-

Kunt, and Maksimovic (2001) who do not find a significant relation between debt ratios

and tax policy. This difference in results arises because of differences in both the sample

countries and sample periods. The Booth, Aivazian, Demirguc-Kunt, and Maksimovic

(2001) sample is mainly developing economies over the period 1980 to 1991. As we

show, our evidence in favor of a tax effect comes from developed economies in a later

time period.

        We find some support for the idea that suppliers of capital influence firm debt

ratio choices. In particular, we find that leverage is higher in countries with deposit

insurance, suggesting that the banking industry is important, but we do not find a

significant relation between the size of the banking sector and debt ratios. In addition, we

do not find a significant relation between leverage and the size of the insurance industry,


22
   We also considered the possibility that in some countries regulatory barriers to entry might decrease the
risk of incumbent firms and thereby increase their debt capacities. To examine this in more detail, we
considered regulatory variables introduced in Djankov, La Porta, Lopez de Silanes and Shleifer (2002).
However, because these variables are highly correlated with corruption and our common law indicator
variable, we did not include them in the regression reported in Table 4. The high correlation between these
entry barrier variables and common law and corruption, however, may partially explain why common law
and corruption have such a strong effect on the capital structure choice.


                                                    21
the level of domestic savings or the size of the government bond market.23 However, in a

select sample of OECD countries that report the level of pension fund assets we find that

firms in countries with larger defined benefit pension funds have higher debt ratios and

those with larger defined contribution pension funds have lower debt ratios.

        There are some significant differences between the subsamples. In particular,

common law and the bankruptcy code are significant in the sample of developed

economies, but not in the sample of developing economies; while deposit insurance and

the size of the government bond market are important in developing economies, but not

in developed economies.

        In addition, we find that the level of domestic savings and the size of the

government bond market are significant in the 1991-1998 sub-period, but not in the 1999-

2006 sub-period, while taxes and deposit insurance are important in the later time period,

but not in the former period. The negative association between leverage and the size of

the government bond market in the 1991-1998 sub-period suggests that there may be a

fixed demand for fixed-income securities, so that government bonds crowd out corporate

bond issues.

        The subsample analysis reveals that corruption is consistently associated with

higher debt ratios in all subsamples. However, the common versus civil law distinction is

less important in developing economies. On the other hand, deposit insurance is




23
   The weak result with respect to insurance penetration may be due to the lack of a clear prediction as to
the association between leverage and insurance penetration. Recognizing that life insurance incorporates
both a savings (whole life and annuities) and an insurance (term insurance) product, we follow Beck and
Webb (2003) and the suggestion of an anonymous referee, and proxy for the size of the insurance sector as
a savings vehicle using insurance premiums/domestic savings. However, as with insurance penetration, we
do not find a significant relation between leverage and insurance premiums/domestic savings.


                                                    22
significant in the latter time period, reflecting, perhaps, an increase in the number of

countries adopting explicit deposit insurance from 23 to 33.

         Taxes are significant in the sample of developed economies, but not in the sample

of developing economies, and only in the later time period. This may be due to the

observation that the influence of corporate taxes is likely to be weaker in countries where

they are easier to evade. 24 In unreported regressions, we find that taxes are significant in

a sample of below median tax evasion countries, but not in a sample of above median tax

evasion countries. 25 With this index, our entire sample of developing economies is

characterized as high tax evasion countries.

         In addition, we consider an alternative tax measure that considers only the tax

treatment of dividends. As discussed in footnote 9, we estimate a dividend tax indicator

variable that takes a value of one for countries with either a full dividend relief tax system

or a full dividend imputation tax system and zero otherwise. With this measure we find

that leverage is lower in countries that tax dividends less, and this result holds strongly in

all subsamples and sub-periods.

         Finally, we find that the coefficients of inflation volatility, which are insignificant

in about half the regressions, is significantly positive in the developed country subsample,

the subsample of OECD countries for which pension fund asset information is available

and in the total sample of countries in the 1999-2006 sub-period. We also find negative

associations between leverage, the size of the banking sector and the existence of deposit




24
   The likelihood that the potential to avoid paying taxes influences the strength of the relationship between
taxes and leverage was pointed out to the authors by an anonymous referee
25
   Based on the World Bank tax evasion index, World Economic Forum, Global Competitiveness Report
2001/2002.


                                                     23
insurance in the developed economy subsample.                          These latter two findings are

inconsistent with our expectations, but appear to be driven by outliers.26



5.2 Determinants of maturity structure

5.2.1 Firm effects

Table 5 reports the results of the debt maturity structure regressions.27 These regressions

are estimated on the full sample and the sub-samples as previously discussed. Column

one reports the regression for the full sample, column two provides evidence for the sub-

sample of developed economies only and column three the sub-sample of developing

economies only. Columns four and five provide evidence for the sub-periods, 1991-1998

and 1999-2006, respectively. Column six provides evidence for sub-sample representing

OECD countries for which pension fund asset information is available.

                                                [Table 5 about here]

         The coefficients of the firm-specific variables are largely consistent with prior

research (Barclay and Smith, 1995; Stohs and Mauer, 1996; Guedes and Opler, 1996;

Demirguc-Kunt and Maksimovic, 1999) in the full sample and all sub-samples and sub-

periods. Long-term debt is used more by firms with greater asset tangibility, larger size

and higher profits. However, in contrast to the findings in the U.S., we find that the




26
   In particular, the high leverage ratios of South Korean firms generate the relation between leverage and
inflation volatility, deposits and deposit insurances in both the developed economies subsample and the
1999-2006 sub-period. South Korea is characterised by high inflation volatility, a relatively small banking
sector, the existence of deposit insurance and a relatively high level of domestic savings. After dropping
South Korea, inflation volatility, the size of the banking sector and deposit insurance are all insignificantly
related to leverage.
27
   The results are robust to the use of alternative proxies for the country’s legal system, corruption, taxation
and financial market development. In addition, results are substantially unchanged when we winsorize all
variables at the 1 percent level.


                                                      24
market-to-book ratio is only weakly associated with debt maturity in the full sample and

is unrelated to debt maturity in the developed economy subsample.

         Appendix 4 reports the results of the country-by-country debt maturity

regressions.     The most robust cross-sectional determinant of debt maturity is asset

tangibility. With one exception, asset tangibility is significantly positively related to debt

maturity structure. On the other hand, we find cross-country variation in the signs of the

estimated coefficients for profitability, firm size and the market-to-book ratio.

Profitability is positively related to debt maturity structure in 25 (statistically significant

in 15) out of 39 countries. Firm size is is positively related to debt maturity structure in

33 (statistically significant in 21) out of 39 countries and the market-to-book ratio is

positively related to debt maturity structure in 28 out of 39 countries and is statistically

insignificant in most countries. Indeed, this relation is significantly negative only in the

U.S.28



5.2.2 Country effects

         The estimates of the country level coefficients reveal that debt maturity is

negatively related to the level of corruption, but positively related to the common law

indicator variable, consistent with lower corruption and stronger investor protection

encouraging the use of long-term debt financing. Also, the existence of an explicit

bankruptcy code is associated with greater use of long-term debt. We find that debt

maturity is positively related to the level of economic development. Overall our results

28
   Prior literature also report mixed results. For example, Guedes and Opler (1996) report negative relations
for U.S. firms, while Stohs and Mauer (1996) find only mixed support for an inverse relationship for U.S.
firms. Ozkan (2000) reports a positive relationship for U.K. firms. Outside the U.S. and the U.K.,
international evidence generally does not find significant relation between the two variables (Antoniou,
Guney, and Paudyal, 2006; Terra, 2005).


                                                    25
with respect to the relation between maturity structure and country level characteristics

are more robust than those reported for leverage.

        Consistent with the preferences of the suppliers of capital having an influence on

the firms’ maturity structures, we find that debt maturity is strongly negatively related to

the amount of deposits in the country’s banking sector. This is in contrast to the negative,

but insignificant banking sector result reported by Demirguc-Kunt and Maksimovic

(1999). Further, we find that the level of domestic savings, measured as gross domestic

saving over GDP, is negatively related to debt maturity. We also find that debt maturity is

longer in countries with explicit deposit insurance reflecting the willingness of banks to

lend longer-term debt when deposits are protected. In addition, debt maturity is shorter,

the larger the government bond market. However, we find no reliable relation between

maturity structure and the degree of insurance penetration. The weak result with respect

to insurance penetration may be due to the lack of a clear prediction as to the association

between maturity and insurance penetration.29

        In general, although the results in all subsamples and sub-periods are similar,

there are several exceptions. Inflation rate volatility is associated with shorter maturity in

developed economies, but unrelated to maturity in developing economies. The size of the

insurance industry is positively related to maturity in developing economies, but

unrelated to maturity in developed economies. In addition, deposit insurance is associated

with longer debt maturity only in the latter time period, possibly due to an increase in the

number of countries adopting explicit deposit insurance from 23 to 33 over the full

sample period. The size of the government bond market is negatively related to maturity

29
   As noted previously, we include a proxy for the size of the insurance sector as a savings vehicle using
insurance premiums/domestic savings. However, as with insurance penetration, we do not find a significant
relation between maturity and insurance premiums/domestic savings.


                                                   26
only in developed economies and the relation is significant only in the latter time period.

In addition, for a subsample of OECD countries we find that the level of defined benefit

pension fund assets is associated with greater use of long-term debt, while the level of

defined contributions pension fund assets is unrelated to debt maturity. Finally, we find a

significant positive relation between debt maturity and inflation in the developing

economy subsample, in the earlier time period, and in the OECD subsample .30



5.3. Fixed-Effects and Cross-Sectional Estimates

This section examines the extent to which the cross-sectional and time-series variation in

our explanatory variables drive our results. Up to this point our emphasis has been on the

cross-sectional variation in capital structures. However, the debt ratios in individual

countries also vary from year to year, and some of that year to year variation may be

explained by the year to year changes in our explanatory variables.

        To estimate the extent to which our results are generated from the cross section

versus the time series we estimate both firm/country fixed-effects and Fama-MacBeth

(1973) regressions. Specifically, we report fixed-effects leverage and maturity structure

regressions in columns one and two of Table 6, respectively. The Fama-MacBeth (1973)

leverage and maturity structure regressions with Newey-West corrected standard errors

are reported in columns three and four, respectively. By sweeping out individual firm

and country-effects, the fixed-effects regression estimates the extent to which the time-

series variation of our independent variables explains the time-series of capital structure

choices. In contrast, the Fama-MacBeth (1973) regression estimate the regression model

30
  The result that inflation is positively related to debt maturity in both developing economies and the
earlier time period is generated by the low inflation/short-term maturity characteristic of China. After
dropping China, inflation is insignificantly related to maturity.


                                                  27
for each of the 16 years in sample period and then average the coefficients for all

independent variables across the 16 years, isolating the cross-sectional determinants of

capital structure. The coefficients and statistical significance of the independent variables

are similar to those reported in the cross-sectional, time series regressions (Tables 4 and

5).

                                    [Table 6 about here]

          The regression estimates reported in Table 6 indicate that the relationships

between financing choices and firm characteristics are significant in both the time-series

and the cross-section, and are consistent with our earlier estimates. However, the results

of the inflation and financial institution variables continue to be mixed. The results also

show that several country variables, in particular corruption and deposit insurance, have

significant effects on firm capital structure choices even though their time-serial

variations are small.



5.4 Book values and financing choices

In this section we examine how the country variables affect the levels of short-term debt,

long-term debt, and total debt relative to the asset values of the firms in our sample. We

measure book leverage as the proportion of total debt to total assets of the firm,

decomposing this measure into short-term debt to total assets and long-term debt to total

assets.

                                        [Table 7 about here]



          Table 7 presents the results of the book leverage regressions. Column one reports




                                             28
the regression for total book leverage, column two provides evidence for the long-term

debt ratio and column three provides evidence for the short-term debt ratio. As this table

illustrates, the long-term debt ratio is higher in more developed economies, countries with

common laws, lower corruption, explicit bankruptcy codes, relatively smaller banking

sectors, deposit insurance, lower domestic savings, and smaller government bond

issuances. By contrast, the short-term debt ratio is higher in less developed economies,

countries not under common laws, countries with higher corruption, higher domestic

savings, larger banking sectors, lack of deposit insurance, and higher domestic savings.

Taken together, these results of the long- and short-term debt regressions are consistent

and complementary with the results of the debt maturity ratio regressions in Table 5.31



6. Summary and Conclusion

At the outset, we described regression results that indicate that a firm’s capital structure is

determined more by the country in which it is located than by its industry affiliation,

suggesting that the institutional environment can have a profound effect on how firms are

financed. Specifically, we find that a country’s legal and taxation system, level of

corruption and the preferences of capital suppliers – banks and pension funds – explain a

significant portion of the variation in leverage and debt maturity ratios.




31 We also find that inflation rate volatility is associated with lower total debt ratio, which is in contrast to
the previous results in Table 4, where leverage is measured as total debt to market value. Note also that the
size of the banking sector is associated with lower total debt ratio. However, this result is driven by the high
leverage ratios of South Korean firms and relatively small banking sector of the South Korean economy.
After dropping South Korea the size of the banking sector is insignificantly related to book leverage.
Interestingly, the results presented in Table 7 indicate that the relationship between financing choices and
tax is more important when leverage is defined relative to total assets rather than the market value of the
firm.



                                                      29
       The effects of taxes on capital structure choices are consistent with theory. When

the tax gain from leverage is positive, firms tilt their capital structures towards more debt.

However, as we note below, the tax effect is not as strong and pervasive as other

influences on capital structure. The legal environment also has an important influence on

capital structure choices. Our strongest finding is that firms in countries that are viewed

as more corrupt tend to be more levered and use more short-term debt. We also find that

common law countries have lower leverage and use more long-term debt and that firms in

countries with an explicit bankruptcy code have higher leverage and use relatively more

long-term debt.

       We also provide evidence that suppliers of capital can influence how firms are

financed. Most notably, the debt maturity structure of corporations in countries with

larger banking sectors tend to be shorter, reflecting the preferences of banks to lend short-

term. However, controlling for the size of the banking sector, firms in countries with

deposit insurance tend to have longer maturity debt, suggesting that deposit insurance in

some way facilitates long term lending by banks. In contrast, our evidence of a relation

between the size of the insurance sector and capital structure is very weak. However, we

find that firms in countries with higher levels of defined contributions pension fund assets

use relatively more equity, while firms in countries with higher levels of defined benefit

pension fund assets use relatively more long-term debt. In addition, we find evidence that

a larger government bond sector crowds out private debt capital in the developing

countries, leading firms in these countries to borrow less. We do not, however, find an

effect of government borrowing on debt/value ratios of firms in developed countries, but




                                             30
we do find that firms in these countries tend to have shorter maturity debt when the

government bond market is larger.

        While not all of our results hold across all subgroups and sub-periods, some of the

results are quite strong and pervasive. This is particularly true in the debt maturity

regressions where corruption, legal system and the size of the banking sector are very

strong in all subsamples and sub-periods. Further, the bankruptcy code and domestic

savings are also strongly related to debt maturity in all of the subsamples. Deposit

insurance, while related to debt maturity in most subsamples, is insignificant in the 1991-

1998 sub-period.

        In the leverage regressions the results depend more on subgroups and sub-

periods. For example, while we find that for the full sample, leverage is higher in

countries where the tax gain from leverage is positive, we do not find a significant

relation between the tax gain to leverage and debt ratios in the developing economies

subsample and the tax effect is insignificant in the 1991-1998 sub-period. Likewise, the

effect of both common law and bankruptcy code are insignificant if we restrict the sample

to developing economies. However, the relationship between financial leverage and

corruption is strong and significant in all subsamples.

        Although our emphasis has been on the effect of cross-country differences in

institutions on corporate financial choices, our analysis may have implications for the

literature on how institutions can promote economic growth.32 Specifically, the fact that

institutions influence how firms are financed may provide an indirect channel through

which a country’s institutions affect economic growth. For example, there is reason to

32
  Demirguc-Kunt and Maksimovic (1998), Levine and Zervos (1998) and Rajan and Zingales (1998) find
that, for a sample of developing and developed countries, the development of stock markets, bond markets
and banks facilitate economic growth.


                                                   31
believe that if firms can raise more of their capital with equity and long-term debt, they

will be better able to make longer-term investments, which may better promote economic

growth. This suggests that an analysis of the relation between investment horizons and

institutional structure offers an interesting avenue for future research.




                                              32
References:

Andrew, D.W.K., 1991. Heteroskedasticity and Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance
Matrix Estimation. Econometrica 59, 817-858.

Antoniou, A., Guney, Y., Paudyal, K., 2002. Determinants of Corporate Capital Structure:
Evidence from European Countries. Unpublished working paper. University of Durham.

Auerbach, A. J., 1979. Share Valuation and Corporate Equity Policy. Journal of Public
Economics 11, 291-305.

Barclay, M.J., Smith, C.W., 1995. The Maturity Structure of Corporate Debt. Journal of
Finance 50, 609-631.

Beck, T., Demirgüç-Kunt, A., 2009, Financial Institutions and Markets Across Countries
and over Time: Data and Analysis. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No.
4943.

Beck, T., Webb, I., 2003, Economic, Demographic, and Institutional Determinants of
Life Insurance Consumption across Countries. The World Bank Economic Review, 17,
51-88.

Booth, L., Aivazian, V., Demirguc-Kunt, A., Maksimovic, V., 2001. Capital Structures in
Developing Countries. Journal of Finance 56, 87-130.

Botero, J., Djankov, S., La Porta, R. Shleifer, A., 2004. The Regulation of Labor.
Quarterly Journal of Economics 119, 1339-1382.

Bradley, M., Jarrell, G.A., Kim, H., 1984. On the Existence of an Optimal Capital
Structure. Journal of Finance 39, 857-878.

Campbell, J., Hamao, Y., 1995. Changing Corporate Financing Structure and the Main
Bank System in Japan. In: Aoki, M., Patrick, H. (Eds.), Japanese Main Bank System.
Oxford University Press.

Caprio, G., Laeven, L., Levine, R., 2005. Governance and Bank Valuation. Unpublished
working paper. World Bank and University of Minnesota.

Claessens, S., Djankov, S., Klapper, L., 2003. Resolution of Corporate Distress in East
Asia. Journal of Empirical Finance 10, 199–216.

Claessens, S., Djankov, S., Mody, A., 2001. Resolution of Financial Distress: An
International Perspective on the Design of Bankruptcy Laws, Eds., World Bank Institute
Development Studies, Washington, D.C.

Claessens, S., Djankov, S., Nenova, T., 2001. Corporate Risk around the World.
Unpublished working paper. World Bank, CEPR, and Harvard University.



                                          33
Claessens, S., Klapper, L., 2005. Bankruptcy around the World: Explanations of Its
Relative Use. American Law and Economics Review 7, 253–283.

Davydenko, S, Franks, J., 2008. Do Bankruptcy Codes Matter? A Study of Defaults in
France, Germany and the U.K. Journal of Finance 63, 565–608.

Degryse, H., Ongena, S., 2005. Distance, Lending Relationship and Competition. Journal
of Finance 55, 231–266.

De Jong, A., Rezaul Kabir, R., Nguyen, T., 2008. Capital structure around the world: The
roles of firm- and country-specific determinants, Journal of Banking and Finance 32,
1954–1969.

Demirguc-Kunt, A., Maksimovic, V., 1996. Stock Market Development and Firm
Financing Choices. Word Bank Economic Review 10, 341-369.

Demirguc-Kunt, A., Maksimovic, V., 1998. Law, Finance and Firm Growth. Journal of
Finance 53, 2107-2137.

Demirguc-Kunt, A., Maksimovic, V., 1999. Institutions, Financial Markets, and Firm
Debt Maturity. Journal of Financial Economics 54, 295-336.

Demirguc-Kunt, A., Maksimovic, V., 2001. Firms as Financial Intermediaries: Evidence
from Trade Credit Data. Unpublished working paper. World Bank and the University of
Maryland.

Demirguc-Kunt, A., Karacaovali, B., Laeven, L., 2005. Deposit insurance around the
world : a comprehensive database. Unpublished working paper. World Bank.

Diamond, D., 1993. Seniority and Maturity of Debt Contracts. Journal of Financial
Economics 33, 341-368.

Djankov, S., La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., 2002. The Regulation of
Entry. Quarterly Journal of Economics 117, 1-37.

Djankov, S., La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., 2003. Courts. Quarterly
Journal of Economics 118, 453-517.

Djankov, S., Hart, O., McLiesh, C., Shleifer, A., 2008. Debt Enforcement around the
World. Journal of Political Economy, 116, 1105-1149.

Djankov, S., McLiesh, C., Shleifer, A., 2007. Private credit in 129 countries, Journal of
Financial Economics 84, 299-329.

Fama, E. F., MacBeth, J.D., 1973. Risk, return, and equilibrium: Empirical tests. Journal
of Political Economy 81, 607–636.




                                           34
Fisman, R., 2001. Estimating the Value of Political Connections. American Economic
Review 91, 1095-1102.

Fisman, R. Love, I, 2003. Trade Credit, Financial Intermediary Development and Industry
Growth. Journal of Finance 58, 353-374.

Flannery, M., 1986. Asymmetric Information and Risky Debt Maturity Choice. Journal of
Finance 41, pp. 19-37.

Gatward, P. Sharpe, I., 1996. Capital Structure Dynamics with Interrelated Adjustment:
Australian Evidence. Australian Journal of Management 21, 89-112.

Giannetti, M., 2003. Do Better Institutions Mitigate Agency Problems? Evidence from
Corporate Finance Choices. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 38, 185-212.

Graham, J.R., 1995. Debt and the Marginal Tax Rate. Journal of Financial Economics 41,
41-73.

Graham, J.R., 2003. Taxes and Corporate Finance: A Review. Review of Financial
Studies 16, 1075-1129.

Guedes, J., Opler, T., 1996. The Determinants of the Maturity of Corporate Debt Issues.
Journal of Finance 51, 1809-1833.

Himmelberg, C., Hubbard, R.G., Palia, D., 1999. Understanding the Determinants of
Managerial Ownership and the Link Between Ownership and Performance. Journal of
Financial Economics 53, 353-384.

La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., Vishny, R., 1997. Legal Determinants of
External Finance. Journal of Finance 52, 1131-1150.

La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., Vishny, R., 1998. Law and Finance.
Journal of Political Economy 106, 1113-1155.

La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., Vishny, R., 1999. The Quality of
Government. Journal of Law, Economics and Organization 15, 222-279.

La Porta, R., Lopez-De-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., 1999. Corporate ownership around the
world. Journal of Finance 54, 471-518.

La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., Vishny, R., 2000. Agency Problems and
Dividend Policies around the World, Journal of Finance 55, 1-33.

La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., Vishny, R., 2002. Government
Ownership of Banks. Journal of Finance 57, 265-301.

La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., Vishny, R., 2002. Investor Protection and
Corporate Valuation. Journal of Finance 57, 1147-1170.



                                            35
Levine, R., Zervos, S., 1998. Stock Markets, Banks and Economic Growth. American
Economic Review 88, 537-558.

MacKay, P., Phillips, G.M., 2005. How does industry affect firm financial structure?
Review of Financial Studies 18, 2005, 1433-1466.

Miguel, A., Pindado, J., 2001. Determinants of capital structure: new evidence from
Spanish panel data. Journal of Corporate Finance 7, 77–99.

Miller, M.H., 1977. Debt and Taxes. Journal of Finance, 32, 261-275.

Modigliani, F., Miller, M.H., 1958. The Cost of Capital, Corporate Finance, and the
Theory of Investment. American Economic Review 48, 261-297.

Modigliani, F., Miller, M.H., 1963. Corporate Income Taxes and the Cost of Capital: A
Correction. American Economic Review 53, 433-443.

Myers, S., 2001. Capital Structure. Journal of Economic Perspective 15, 81-102.

Myers, S., Majluf, N., 1984. Corporate Financing and Investment Decisions When Firms
Have Information That Investors Do Not Have. Journal of Financial Economics 13, 187-
221.

Ozkan, A., 2000. An empirical analysis of corporate debt maturity structure. European
Financial Management 6, 197-212.

Ozkan, A., 2001. Determinants of Capital Structure and Adjustment to Long Run
Targets: Evidence from UK Company Panel Data. Journal of Business Finance and
Accounting 28, 175-198.

Perotti, E., Spier, K., 1993. Capital Structure as a Bargaining Tool: The Role of Leverage
in Contract Renegotiation. American Economic Review 83, 1131-1141.

Petersen, M.A., 2008. Estimating Standard Errors in Finance Panel Data Sets: Comparing
Approaches. Review of Financial Studies 22, 435-480.

Petersen, M., Rajan, R., 1994. The Benefits of Lending Relationship, Evidence from
Small Business Data. Journal of Finance 49, 3–37.

Rajan, R., Zingales, L., 1995. What Do We Know about Capital Structure? Some
Evidence from International Data. Journal of Finance 50, 1421-1460.

Rajan R., Zingales, L., 1998. Financial Development and Growth. American Economic
Review 88, 559-586.

Sapienza, P., 2004. The Effect of Government Ownership on Bank Lending. Journal of
Financial Economics 72, 357-384.




                                           36
Schmukler, S., Vesperoni, E., 2001. Globalization and Firms’ Financing Choices:
Evidence from Emerging Economies. Unpublished working paper. World Bank and
International Monetary Fund.

Shleifer, A., Vishny, R., 1998. The Grabbing Hand: Government Pathologies and their
Cures. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Smith, C.W., Warner, J.B., 1979. On Financial Contracting: An Analysis of Bond
Covenants. Journal of Financial Economics 7, 117-161.

Stohs, M., Mauer, D., 1996. The Determinants of Corporate Debt Maturity Structure.
Journal of Business 69, 279-312.

Titman, S., Wessels, R., 1988. The Determinants of Capital Structure Choice. Journal of
Finance 43, 1-19.

Titman, S., 2002. The Modigliani and Miller Theorem and Market Efficiency. Financial
Management 31, 101-115.

Treisman, D., 2000. The Causes of Corruption: A Cross National Study. Journal of Public
Economics 76, 399-457.




                                          37
                                                                    Figure 1
                                                Median leverage ratio of sample firms (1991-2006)
This figure plots the median leverage ratio across 39 different countries. The leverage ratio is measured as total debt over the market value of the firm. Total
debt is defined to be the book value of current and long-term interest bearing debt. Market value of the firm is defined to be the market value of common equity
plus book value of preferred stock plus total debt.




                                                                               38
                                                                    Figure 2
                                             Median long-term debt ratio of sample firms (1991-2006)
This figure plots the median debt maturity ratio across 39 different countries. The debt maturity ratio is measured as long-term interest bearing debt over total
debt. Total debt is defined to be the book value of current and long-term interest bearing debt.




                                                                                39
Table 1
The sample
The table provides a description of the sample. The number of years that data is available for each country. The mean
number of firms per year for each country. The median value of the proportion of firms represented in the sample for
each country, by number of firms and market capitalization.
                                                                                       Time series median value
                          Number of      Number of                    Number of firms in the       Market capitalization of firms in
                         years of data   firms in the                 sample/Total number of          the sample/Stock market
 Country                     used           sample       Firm-years        listed firms                     capitalization
 Australia                    16             1554           8308               0.50                              0.79
 Austria                      16              139           1144               0.75                              0.61
 Belgium                      16              169           1485               0.59                              0.49
 Brazil                       16              351           2591               0.46                              0.87
 Canada                       16             1865          10988               0.34                              0.79
 Switzerland                  16              274           2656               0.72                              0.77
 Chile                        16              158           1424               0.41                              0.58
 China                        13             1530           6827               0.57                              0.44
 Germany                      16             1011           9209               0.90                              0.69
 Denmark                      16              208           2123               0.64                              0.88
 Spain                        16              223           2315               0.17                              0.48
 Finland                      16              175           1684               0.95                              0.83
 France                       16             1205           9664               0.87                              0.73
 UK                           16             2861          21785               0.67                              0.62
 Greece                       16              321           2511               0.64                              0.53
 Hong Kong                    16              939           7108               0.62                              0.85
 Indonesia                    16              295           2573               0.62                              0.70
 India                        15              637           4388               0.07                              0.39
 Ireland                      16              109            880               0.89                              0.49
 Israel                       13              181            949               0.15                              0.36
 Italy                        16              343           2810               0.73                              0.55
 Japan                        16             4088          42611               0.97                              0.86
 Korea                        16              970           6741               0.40                              0.72
 Mexico                       16              151           1230               0.51                              0.92
 Malaysia                     16             1011           7586               0.71                              0.86
 Netherlands                  16              280           2612               0.73                              0.88
 Norway                       16              266           1826               0.77                              0.92
 New Zealand                  16              134            954               0.49                              0.94
 Pakistan                     16              114           1061               0.11                              0.42
 Peru                         14              74             491               0.20                              0.55
 Philippine                   16              188           1648               0.53                              0.81
 Portugal                     16              110            867               0.67                              0.61
 Singapore                    16              628           4111               0.76                              0.82
 Sweden                       16              447           3394               0.86                              0.91
 Thailand                     16              481           3457               0.60                              0.73
 Turkey                       15              201           1422               0.40                              0.74
 Taiwan                       16             1399           7051               0.68                              0.74
 USA                          16            11119          77909               0.81                              0.81
 South Africa                 16              558           3699               0.53                              0.78




                                                        40
Table 2
Summary statistics
The table provides the mean, standard deviation, median, minimum and maximum values of each variable. Leverage ratio is the ratio of total
debt to market value of the firm. Total debt is defined to be the book value of short-term and long-term interest bearing debt. Market value of
the firm is defined to be the market value of common equity plus book value of preferred stock plus total debt. Maturity structure ratio is the
ratio of long-term debt to total debt. Tangible assets/total assets is the ratio of fixed assets to total assets, operating risk is measured as the
absolute value of the annual change in ROA, ROA is the ratio of net income to total assets, firm size is measured as the natural logarithm of
total assets and the market-to-book ratio is the ratio of market value of equity plus book value of total debt over total assets. Country
characteristic variables are Development economy is a dummy variable equal to one when the country is classified as developed according to
the World Bank classification based on countries’ gross national income levels. Inflation rate is the annual rate of change in a country’s CPI.
Inflation rate volatility is the standard deviation of inflation rates from period t-4 to t. Corruption index is an index ranging from 0 to 10, with
larger value indicating more severe corruption. Common law is a dummy variable equal to one when a country adopts the common law
system. Bankruptcy code is a dummy variable equal to one if an insolvent firm is most likely to undergo a reorganization proceeding. Tax is
an estimate of the miller tax ratio calculated using statutory tax rates. Deposits is the ratio of a country’s bank deposits to GDP. Deposit
insurance is a dummy variable equal to one if bank deposits are insured by government. Domestic savings is the ratio of gross domestic saving
to GDP. Insurance penetration is the value of a country’s total insurance premiums to GDP. Pension fund regulation index is an index of
relative restrictions on debt and equity holdings of pension funds ranging from 1 to 4. Defined benefit pensions is the value of the country’s
defined benefit pension fund assets to GDP. Defined contribution pensions is the value of the country’s defined contribution pension fund
assets to GDP. Government bonds is the ratio of the value of domestically denominated government bonds to GDP.
Variables                                                       N           Mean         Std Dev        Median Minimum Maximum
 Leverage ratio                                             264236           0.29           0.26           0.22          0.00           1.00
 Maturity structure ratio                                   235874           0.53          0.34            0.57          0.00           1.00
 Tangible assets/total assets                               264236           0.33           0.24           0.29          0.00            0.97
 ROA                                                        264236          -0.13          0.98           0.02         -12.25           0.43
 Log total assets                                           264236          19.76          4.21           19.82        -10.93          31.94
 Market-to-book ratio                                       264236           2.50          6.87            1.51        -35.15          63.26
 Developed economy                                            624            0.86          0.35            1.00          0.00           1.00
 Inflation rate                                               624            0.03          0.05            0.02         -0.04           0.54
 Inflation rate volatility                                   624            0.02           0.39           0.01          0.00           32.88
 Corruption index                                             624           3.01           1.74           2.50          0.00            9.43
 Common law                                                   624           0.59           0.49           1.00          0.00            1.00
 Bankruptcy code                                              624            0.68          0.47            1.00         0.00            1.00
 Tax                                                          624            0.23          0.15            0.28         -0.30           0.51
 Deposits                                                     624            0.93          0.57            0.67          0.13           2.46
 Deposit insurance                                            624            0.87          0.34            1.00          0.00           1.00
 Domestic savings                                             624            0.23          0.09            0.22          0.09           0.52
 Insurance penetration                                        624            0.08          0.03            0.09          0.01           0.18
 Pension fund regulation index                                457            3.18          1.06            4.00          1.00           4.00
 Defined benefit pensions                                      72           37.55          19.07          48.10           .08           71.33
 Defined contribution pensions                                 72           24.72          18.41          29.86           .03          119.97
 Government bonds                                             624           0.36           0.25           0.30          0.00            1.19




                                                                    41
Table 3
Correlation matrix
The table provides correlation matrix for our sample. Pearson correlation coefficients for all independent variables, leverage and debt maturity, together
with each pairing of independent variables are presented. Variables are as defined in Table 2.
                                                  [1]        [2]         [3]        [4]          [5]      [6]        [7]        [8]       [9]         [10]
Leverage ratio                         [1]       1.000
Maturity structure ratio               [2]      0.062       1.000
ROA                                    [3]       0.033      0.096       1.000
Log total assets                       [4]      0.182      -0.030       0.253      1.000
Market-to-book ratio                   [5]      -0.136      0.012       0.082     -0.042       1.000
Developed economy                      [6]      -0.075      0.139      -0.058     -0.122       0.025     1.000
Inflation rate                         [7]       0.021      0.001       0.013     -0.060      -0.001    -0.374     1.000
Inflation rate volatility              [8]      0.014      -0.011       0.005     -0.028      -0.006    -0.091     0.340       1.000
Corruption index                       [9]       0.165     -0.210       0.066      0.313      -0.041    -0.757     0.328       0.073     1.000
Common law                            [10]      -0.157      0.173      -0.112     -0.414       0.035     0.054     -0.013     -0.041    -0.293       1.000
Bankruptcy code                       [11]       0.071      0.095      -0.060      0.163      -0.003     0.283     -0.045     -0.039     0.089      -0.072
Tax                                   [12]      0.061       0.036       0.014      0.213       0.014    -0.041     -0.118      0.019     0.080       0.014
Deposits                              [13]       0.070     -0.135       0.045      0.337      -0.027     0.234     -0.325     -0.044    -0.147      -0.315
Deposit insurance                     [14]       0.037      0.107      -0.027      0.014       0.009     0.298     -0.042     -0.067    -0.130      -0.126
Domestic savings                      [15]      0.109      -0.229       0.114      0.337      -0.039    -0.401     -0.117     -0.003     0.323      -0.349
Insurance penetration                 [16]       0.003     -0.066       0.021      0.183      -0.010     0.317     -0.257     -0.046    -0.206      -0.066
Pension fund regulation index         [17]      -0.034      0.071      -0.068      0.000       0.029     0.431     -0.160     -0.080    -0.192      0.159
Defined benefit pensions              [18]       0.148      0.254      -0.108     -0.463       0.065     0.158      0.385     -0.185    -0.473       0.821
Defined contribution pensions         [19]      -0.088     -0.089      -0.082     -0.343       0.046     0.075     0.272      -0.108    -0.295      0.395
Government bonds                      [20]       0.061     -0.107       0.072      0.272      -0.025     0.158     -0.195     -0.043     0.015      -0.467




                                                                              42
Table 3 (continued)
Correlation matrix
The table provides correlation matrix for our sample. Pearson correlation coefficients for all independent variables, leverage and debt
maturity, together with each pairing of independent variables are presented. Variables are as defined in Table 2.
                                                  [11]       [12]         [13]      [14]        [15]      [16]       [17]       [18]     [19]
Bankruptcy code                       [11]       1.000
Tax                                   [12]       0.344      1.000
Deposits                              [13]       0.088      0.297       1.000
Deposit insurance                     [14]       0.521      0.117        0.053     1.000
Domestic savings                      [15]      -0.256      0.113       0.296     -0.406       1.000
Insurance penetration                 [16]       0.061      0.143       0.465      0.102       0.013     1.000
Pension fund regulation index         [17]      0.549       0.441       0.269      0.337      -0.396     0.033     1.000
Defined benefit pensions              [18]       0.391      0.209       -0.622     0.323      -0.686    -0.176     0.225       1.000
Defined contribution pensions         [19]       0.081      0.060       -0.555     0.141      -0.430     0.128     -0.039      0.730    1.000
Government bonds                      [20]       0.160      0.136       0.532      0.234       0.011     0.281      0.266     -0.591    -0.603




                                                                              43
Table 4
Leverage, firm and country level determinants
This table presents regressions of leverage on both firm and country level variables, as defined in Table 2. All regressions include dummy variables for
industry (two digit SIC codes). The sample is divided between developed and developing economies as defined by the developed economy indicator
variable, a sample of OECD member countries for which pension fund bond/equity holding restriction information is available and a select sample of
OECD countries for which pension fund asset information is available. The sample is split into two sub-samples, 1991-1998 and 1999-2006. This table
also reports the adjusted R-squared and number of firm-year observations. Standard errors are robust to clustering within country over time. T-statistics
are given in parentheses.
Dependent variable: Total debt/Market value of the firm
                                  Full        Developed                Developing
 Sample                         Sample       Economies                  Economy          1991-1998        1999-2006        OECD Select OECD
 Independent variable             (1)             (2)                      (3)              (4)              (5)             (6)         (7)

 Firm Factors:
 Tangible assets/total assets            0.2178          0.2274            0.1171            0.1738            0.2359          0.2176          0.2221
                                      (28.68)***      (25.93)***        (11.39)***        (19.32)***        (25.76)***      (25.65)***      (15.28)***
 ROA                                    -0.0201         -0.0144           -0.2268           -0.1737           -0.0117         -0.0159         -0.0074
                                      (-3.77)***      (-3.04)***        (-8.44)***        (-3.63)***        (-2.41)***      (-3.12)***      (-1.76)***
 Log total assets                        0.0065          0.0057            0.0109            0.0070            0.0060          0.0056          0.0029
                                       (7.97)***       (7.09)***         (7.82)***         (4.51)***         (7.11)***       (7.05)***       (5.20)***
 Market-to-book ratio                   -0.0081         -0.0075           -0.0096           -0.0110           -0.0071         -0.0076         -0.0068
                                     (-18.04)***     (-16.98)***       (-10.45)***       (-12.69)***       (-18.62)***     (-16.97)***     (-13.89)***
 Country factors:
 Developed economy                      0.1006                                              0.1075            0.1071          0.1069          0.1361
                                      (6.20)***                                           (4.42)***         (5.80)***       (4.53)***       (2.28)***
 Inflation rate                        -0.0363          -0.2222           0.0917           -0.0674            0.0650         -0.0958         -0.6182
                                        (-0.66)          (-0.92)          (1.75)*            (-0.58)          (1.17)           (-1.35)        (-1.47)
 Inflation rate volatility               0.0043           1.1850           0.0033            0.0029          0.3570            0.0093         1.2617
                                         (0.74)         (2.04)**            (0.57)            (0.41)       (2.29)***            (1.51)      (2.84)***
 Corruption index                        0.0222           0.0232           0.0261            0.0255           0.0183           0.0240          0.0092
                                      (6.89)***       (6.28)***          (5.12)***         (5.69)***       (4.71)***         (6.60)***       (1.98)**
 Common law                             -0.0330          -0.0477           0.0430           -0.0537          -0.0266          -0.0410         -0.2615
                                     (-3.91)***       (-5.43)***            (0.98)        (-4.46)***       (-2.61)***       (-4.52)***     (-7.23)***
 Bankruptcy code                         0.0113           0.0097          -0.0136            0.0197           0.0068           0.0123          0.0378
                                      (3.51)***       (2.87)***            (-1.51)         (4.16)***        (2.13)**         (2.66)***       (2.32)**
 Tax                                    0.0654           0.1005           -0.0778           -0.0268          0.1790            0.1176         0.1295
                                       (2.22)**       (3.05)***            (-1.01)           (-0.78)       (5.03)***        (3.55)***         (1.70)*
 Deposits/GDP                            0.0004          -0.0198          -0.0057           -0.0178           0.0060          -0.0060         -0.0298
                                         (0.05)        (-2.25)**           (-0.08)           (-1.13)          (0.72)           (-0.55)        (-1.48)
 Deposit insurance                       0.0069          -0.0066           0.0400           -0.0016           0.0116           0.0082         -0.0067
                                      (2.36)***        (-2.15)**         (4.81)***           (-0.29)       (3.31)***         (1.85)***        (-0.59)
 Domestic savings                        0.0044           0.0008          -0.0102            0.0178           0.0007           0.0002         -0.0181
                                         (1.25)           (0.19)           (-1.34)         (2.85)***          (0.22)            (0.04)     (-2.23)***
 Insurance penetration                  -0.0007           0.0930           0.1373            0.2201          -0.0645           0.0007          1.6296
                                        (-0.01)           (0.71)            (0.42)            (1.14)         (-0.49)           (0.01)        (2.13)**
 Government bonds                       -0.0350          -0.0238          -0.1942           -0.1212          -0.0345          -0.0389         -0.2254
                                        (-1.60)          (-1.07)        (-3.37)***        (-4.19)***         (-1.18)        (-1.72)***     (-5.37)***
 Pension fund regulation index                                                                                                -0.0068
                                                                                                                            (-1.78)***
 Defined benefit pensions                                                                                                                     0.0032
                                                                                                                                            (3.35)***
 Defined contribution pensions                                                                                                               -0.0024
                                                                                                                                            (-2.20)**
 Number of observations                250668           218847            31821            87515             163153          232656          112722
 Adjusted R-square                     0.1798           0.1959            0.1689           0.1958            0.1932          0.1862           0.1891
        *,**, and ***, significant at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level, respectively.




                                                                          44
Table 5
Debt maturity structure, firm and country level determinants
This table presents regressions of debt maturity on both firm and country level variables, as defined in Table 2. All regressions include
dummy variables for industry (two digit SIC codes). The sample is dividend between developed and developing economies as defined by the
developed economy indicator variable, a sample of OECD member countries for which pension fund bond/equity holding restriction
information is available and a select sample of OECD countries for which pension fund asset information is available. This table also reports
the adjusted R-squared and number of firm-year observations. Standard errors are robust to clustering within country over time. T-statistics
are given in parentheses.
Dependent variable: Long-term debt/Total debt
                                                                                                                                  Select
                                                         Developed         Developing                                            OECD
 Sample                              Full Sample         Economy            Economy          1991-1998         1999-2006         Sample
 Independent variable                     (1)               (2)                (3)              (4)               (5)               (6)

 Firm Factors:
 Tangible assets/total assets           0.2648            0.2707              0.2990            0.2704          0.2659             0.2699
                                      (46.94)***        (44.70)***         (23.77)***         (37.8)***       (37.34)***        (39.22)***
 ROA                                    0.0765            0.0800              0.0650            0.0701          0.0733            0.0811
                                      (24.22)***        (26.65)***          (4.30)***         (7.12)***       (22.36)***        (46.43)***
 Log total assets                       0.0139            0.0152              0.0157            0.0106          0.0149             0.0168
                                      (23.32)***        (26.44)***         (12.12)***        (16.58)***       (20.74)***        (24.57)***
 Market-to-book ratio                   0.0005            0.0001              0.0034            0.0004          0.0003            -0.0038
                                        (1.61)            (0.44)            (3.67)***           (0.83)          (1.23)            (-1.55)
 Country factors:
 Developed economy                       0.1422                                                 0.1434            0.1296            0.0796
                                       (8.94)***                                             (5.23)***         (7.12)***          (2.09)**
 Inflation rate                          0.0883             0.2335            0.1641            0.2414            0.0047            0.9699
                                         (1.31)             (0.97)         (3.17)***          (2.09)**            (0.09)        (2.54)***
 Inflation rate volatility               0.0046            -3.0938            0.0054           0.0002            -0.2641           -1.6375
                                         (0.70)          (-5.00)***           (0.90)            (0.04)           (-1.73)*       (-4.65)***
 Corruption index                       -0.0352            -0.0335           -0.0145           -0.0321           -0.0386           -0.0043
                                     (-11.71)***         (-9.57)***        (-4.03)***        (-8.45)***        (-9.81)***         (-1.81)*
 Common law                              0.0749             0.0742            0.1821           0.0977             0.0736            0.1424
                                       (8.08)***          (7.54)***         (7.55)***        (6.85)***         (7.23)***         (5.12)***
 Bankruptcy code                         0.0460             0.0489            0.0096            0.0599            0.0425            0.0258
                                     (15.68)***          (14.50)***         (2.19)***        (9.90)***        (14.92)***         (2.84)***
 Deposits/GDP                           -0.1245            -0.1176           -0.2805           -0.0968           -0.1320           -0.1414
                                     (-16.33)***        (-13.43)***        (-5.73)***        (-7.81)***       (-15.32)***       (-8.35)***
 Deposit insurance                       0.0147             0.0147            0.0433           -0.0089            0.0283            0.0110
                                       (4.33)***          (3.87)***         (8.98)***          (-1.61)         (8.73)***            (1.36)
 Domestic savings                       -0.0335            -0.0419           -0.0201           -0.0332           -0.0353           -0.0116
                                     (-11.76)***        (-12.75)***        (-4.25)***        (-6.02)***       (-11.75)***         (-1.69)*
 Insurance penetration                   0.1272            -0.1039            0.6509            0.1880            0.1398            0.6295
                                         (1.06)             (-0.79)        (3.40)***            (0.88)            (0.91)            (1.09)
 Government bonds                       -0.0814            -0.1301            0.0205           0.0143            -0.0840           -0.0399
                                      (-4.74)***         (-8.11)***           (0.64)            (0.53)         (-4.78)***          (-1.19)
 Defined benefit pensions                                                                                                           0.0009
                                                                                                                                   (1.73)*
 Defined contribution pensions                                                                                                     -0.0006
                                                                                                                                   (-0.91)
 Number of observations                224527             194976             29551             81539            142988              97635
 Adjusted R-square                     0.2189             0.2041             0.2301            0.2068           0.2222              0.2405
    *,**, and ***, significant at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level, respectively.




                                                                      45
Table 6
Sources of Variation in Leverage and Debt Maturity
This table presents regressions of both leverage and debt maturity. The results for leverage are reported in Panel A. Panel B reports the results
for debt maturity. In both panels, Column (1) reports a fixed effects regression for leverage. Column (3) reports a Fama-MacBeth regression for
leverage. Columns (2) and (4) reports the corresponding results for maturity structure. All variables are as defined in Table 2. Industry dummy
variables (two digit SIC codes) are included in Columns (3) and (4). This table also reports the adjusted R-squared and number of firm-year
observations. T-statistics are given in parentheses.
                                                        Fixed effects                                       Fama-MacBeth
             Dependent variable:           Total debt/Market          Long-term                  Total debt/Market     Long-term
                                            value of the firm      debt/Total debt                value of the firm  debt/Total debt
 Independent variable:                             (1)                   (2)                             (3)               (4)

 Firm factors:
 Tangible assets/Total assets                     0.1610                     0.0846                      0.1964                  0.2692
                                                (7.23)***                  (5.03)***                 (17.83)***                (62.65)***
 ROA                                             -0.0260                     0.0136                     -0.1346                  0.0684
                                               (-8.29)***                  (5.56)***                  (-3.06)***               (13.49)***
 Log total assets                                 0.0110                     0.0044                      0.0075                  0.0143
                                                (4.25)***                  (3.74)***                 (14.00)***                (21.85)***
 Market-to-book ratio                            -0.0032                     0.0006                     -0.0085                  0.0000
                                               (-5.17 )***                 (2.92)***                 (-14.16)***                 (-0.04)
 Country factors:
 Developed economy                                                                                      0.1140                   0.1536
                                                                                                     (6.44)***                (12.95)***
 Inflation rate                                   0.1952                       0.0999                  -0.0012                  -0.1211
                                                 (2.15)**                    (2.12)**                   (-0.02)                  (-0.74)
 Inflation rate volatility                       -0.0050                     -0.0046                    0.1039                  -0.1100
                                                  (-0.93)                  (-2.83)***                   (0.62)                   (-0.91)
 Corruption index                                 0.0388                      -0.0206                   0.0206                  -0.0363
                                                (2.59)***                   (-1.97)**                (7.89)***                (-15.76)***
 Common law                                                                                            -0.0336                   0.0954
                                                                                                     (-6.23)***               (20.04)***
 Bankruptcy code                                                                                        0.0184                   0.0526
                                                                                                     (4.89)***                (16.63)***
 Tax                                              0.1885                                               -0.0036
                                                  (1.28)                                                (-0.15)
 Deposits                                         0.0293                     -0.0123                   -0.0243                   -0.1089
                                                  (0.61)                     (-0.55)                  (-2.15)**                (-9.40)***
 Deposit insurance                                0.0310                     -0.0051                   -0.0005                   0.0074
                                                (2.78)***                    (-1.01)                    (-0.17)                   (1.37)
 Domestic savings                                -2.7265                     0.9638                     1.1488                   -4.3573
                                                  (-1.62)                     (1.33)                 (4.14)***                (-13.62)***
 Insurance penetration                            0.0368                     0.0081                     0.5433                   -0.2434
                                                  (0.39)                      (0.05)                 (3.36)***                 (-2.65)***
 Government bonds                                -0.0240                     -0.0777                   -0.0403                   0.0002
                                                  (-1.09)                  (-5.42)***                  (-1.70)*                   (0.01)
 Number of observations                          251780                      225437                    251780                    225437
 Adjusted R-squared                               0.0757                     0.1089                     0.1102                   0.1923
*,**, and ***, significant at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level, respectively.




                                                                 46
Table 7
Book Debt Ratios
This table presents regressions for book leverage, defined as is the ratio of total debt to total assets. We further decompose the book leverage ratio
into its long-term and short-term components. Column (1) reports the regression for book leverage, defined as is the ratio of total debt to total
assets. Column (2) reports the regression for long-term debt ratio, defined as is the ratio of long-term debt to total assets. Column (3) reports the
regression for short-term debt ratio, defined as is the ratio of short-term to total assets. All variables are as defined in Table 2. All regressions
include dummy variables for industry (two digit SIC codes). This table also reports the adjusted R-squared and number of firm-year
observations. T-statistics are given in parentheses.

                     Dependent variable              Total debt/Total               Long-term debt/Total               Short-term debt/Total
                                                         Assets                            Assets                              Assets
 Independent variable                                       (1)                             (2)                                 (3)
 Firm Factors:
 Tangible assets/Total assets                              0.2016                           0.1887                               0.0110
                                                        (33.82)***                        (46.46)***                          (3.35)***
 ROA                                                       -0.1000                          -0.0120                             -0.0643
                                                        (-27.77)***                       (-6.74)***                         (-28.23)***
 Log total assets                                          0.0037                           0.0063                              -0.0019
                                                         (6.60)***                        (23.65)***                          (-4.49)***
 Market-to-book ratio                                      -0.0024                          -0.0008                             -0.0010
                                                         (-5.23)***                       (-3.52)***                          (-4.68)***

 Country factors:
 Developed economy                                         0.0667                            0.0748                             -0.0098
                                                        (6.61)***                          (9.28)***                           (-1.78)*
 Inflation rate                                           -0.0181                           -0.0141                             -0.0487
                                                           (-0.46)                           (-0.66)                             (-1.59)
 Inflation rate volatility                                -0.0073                           -0.0003                             -0.0037
                                                        (-3.89)***                           (-0.15)                             (-1.62)
 Corruption index                                          0.0124                           -0.0032                              0.0169
                                                        (5.34)***                         (-1.90)***                         (15.17)***
 Common law                                               -0.0200                            0.0214                             -0.0353
                                                        (-5.51)***                         (5.34)***                         (-12.79)***
 Bankruptcy code                                           0.0124                            0.0194                             -0.0085
                                                        (6.92)***                         (14.51)***                          (-7.58)***
 Tax                                                       0.1121
                                                        (8.70)***
 Deposits/GDP                                             -0.0163                            -0.0402                            0.0281
                                                        (-4.04)***                        (-11.55)***                         (10.06)***
 Deposit insurance                                         0.0004                             0.0043                            -0.0053
                                                           (0.27)                          (3.31)***                          (-4.30)***
 Domestic savings                                          0.0054                            -0.0069                            0.0118
                                                        (2.65)***                          (-4.74)***                         (10.96)***
 Insurance penetration                                    -0.0545                             0.0393                            0.0233
                                                           (-0.84)                            (0.77)                             (0.63)
 Government Bonds                                         -0.0337                            -0.0306                            -0.0011
                                                        (-3.56)***                         (-4.01)***                            (-0.19)
 Number of observations                                   224527                             224527                             224527
 Adjusted R-square                                         0.1474                             0.1802                             0.1676
*,**, and ***, significant at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level, respectively.




                                                                   47
Appendix 1
Definitions and data sources of country level variables
Variable                Description                                                   Source
Developed economy       A zero or one dummy variable indicating whether the           World Development
                        country is classified as developed according to the World     Indicators, World Bank
                        Bank classification based on countries’ gross national
                        income levels
Inflation rate          Annual rate of change on Consumer Price Index                    World Development
                                                                                         Indicators, World Bank
Inflation rate volatility                                                                World Development
                          Standard deviation of inflation rates from period t-4 to t     Indicators, World Bank
Corruption index          An index ranges from 0 to 10, with larger value indicating Corruption Perception
                          more severe corruption                                         Index, Transparency
                                                                                         International
Common law                An zero or one dummy variable indicating whether a             Treisman [2000]
                          country adopts the common law system
Bankruptcy code           A proxy for the existence of an explicit bankruptcy code, Djankov, Hart, McLiesh,
                          measured as a dummy variable equal to 1 if an insolvent Shleifer (2008)
                          firm is most likely to undergo a reorganization proceeding.
Tax                       Estimate of the miller tax ratio equal to (1 - [(after all tax Price Waterhouse Coopers,
                          value of $dividends)/( after all tax value of $interest)])     Doing Business
                          calculated using statutory tax rates
Deposits                  A proxy for the degree of financial intermediation of a        International Financial
                          country, measure as the country’s deposits (liquid liability) Statistics, International
                          over GDP                                                       Monetary Fund
Deposit insurance         Dummy variable equal to 1 if bank deposits are insured by Demirguc-Kunt,
                          government                                                     Karacaovali, Laeven (2005)
Domestic savings          A proxy for the level of domestic savings measure as the International Financial
                          country’s gross domestic saving over GDP.                      Statistics, International
                                                                                         Monetary Fund
Insurance penetration Value of total insurance premiums/GDP. Total insurance Swiss Reinsurance
                          premium are the sum of life and non-life insurance             Company
                          premiums.                                                      Beck, Demirgüç-Kunt
                                                                                         (2009)
Pension fund              An index of relative restrictions on debt and equity           OECD, Survey of
regulation index          holdings of pension funds measured as the ratio of the         Investment Regulation of
                          proportional limit on equity holdings over the proportional Pension Funds
                          limit on debt holdings, with larger values indicating tighter
                          restriction on bond holdings. The index ranges from 1 to
                          4.
Government bonds          Value of domestically denominated government                   International Financial
                          bonds/GDP                                                      Statistics, International
                                                                                         Monetary Fund
Defined benefit                                                                          OECD
pensions                  Value of defined benefit pension fund assets/GDP.
Defined contribution                                                                     OECD
pensions                  Value of defined contribution pension fund assets/GDP




                                                      48
Appendix 2
Median values of country level dependent variables
The table provides the median value of country level the dependent variables, classified by country. Variables are as defined in Table 2 and Appendix 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Defined     Defined
                       Developed    Inflation   Inflation rate   Corruption   Common      Bankruptcy                                  Deposit      Domestic    Insurance      Pension fund     Government   benefit   contribution
 Country               economy        rate        volatility       index        law          code        Tax      Deposits / GDP     insurance      savings   penetration   regulation index     bonds      pension     pension
 Australia                1.00        0.03          0.01           1.40        1.00          0.00        0.00          0.60            0.00          0.23        0.04            2.00             0.09         .           .
 Austria                  1.00        0.02          0.01           2.35        0.00          0.00        0.01          0.82            1.00          0.25        0.02            1.00             0.47         .           .
 Belgium                  1.00        0.02          0.01           2.90        0.00          1.00       -0.02          0.78            1.00          0.24        0.04            2.00             0.81         .           .
 Brazil                   0.00        0.08          0.10           6.35        0.00          0.00        0.15          0.37            1.00          0.18        0.00            1.00             0.32      12.36        5.88
 Canada                   1.00        0.02          0.01           1.03        1.00          1.00        0.19          0.75            1.00          0.23        0.03            2.00             0.28      52.52        1.49
 Switzerland              1.00        0.01          0.01           1.10        0.00          1.00        0.30          1.25            1.00          0.28        0.07            2.00             0.11         .        102.87
 Chile                    0.00        0.05          0.02           2.85        0.00          0.00        0.17          0.43            1.00          0.26        0.02            1.00             0.28         .        59.08
 China                    0.00        0.02          0.07           6.60        0.00          0.00        0.30          0.33            0.00          0.42        0.01            2.00             0.15         .           .
 Germany                  1.00        0.02          0.01           1.94        0.00          0.00        0.00          0.70            1.00          0.22        0.03            2.00             0.28         .           .
 Denmark                  1.00        0.02          0.00           0.50        0.00          0.00        0.05          0.53            1.00          0.25        0.04            2.00             0.57       2.71       26.92
 Spain                    1.00        0.03          0.01           3.35        0.00          1.00        0.18          0.65            1.00          0.23        0.02            3.00             0.32       0.10        6.32
 Finland                  1.00        0.01          0.01           0.40        0.00          1.00        0.00          0.48            1.00          0.26        0.07            3.00             0.37      57.85          .
 France                   1.00        0.02          0.00           3.00        0.00          1.00        0.17          0.63            1.00          0.20        0.06            3.00             0.39       1.16          .
 United Kingdom           1.00        0.03          0.01           1.52        1.00          0.00        0.13          0.90            1.00          0.16        0.09            3.00             0.33         .           .
 Greece                   1.00        0.04          0.02           5.25        0.00          0.00       -0.18          0.55            1.00          0.10        0.01            3.00             0.74         .           .
 Hong Kong,               1.00        0.02          0.02           2.25        1.00          0.00        0.16          1.92            0.00          0.31        0.03              .              0.09       5.71       15.07
 Indonesia                0.00        0.09          0.03           8.10        0.00          1.00        0.30          0.39            1.00          0.31        0.01              .              0.21         .           .
 India                    0.00        0.06          0.03           7.20        1.00          0.00        0.35          0.38            1.00          0.23        0.01              .              0.20         .           .
 Ireland                  1.00        0.03          0.01           2.50        1.00          1.00        0.13          0.70            1.00          0.36        0.07            3.00             0.36         .           .
 Israel                   1.00        0.04          0.02           2.95        1.00          0.00        0.36          0.74            0.00          0.17        0.03            3.00             0.00      24.11        4.13
 Italy                    1.00        0.03          0.01           5.25        0.00          1.00        0.00          0.53            1.00          0.22        0.03            4.00             0.80       0.46        2.04
 Japan                    1.00        0.00          0.01           2.90        0.00          1.00        0.35          1.94            1.00          0.27        0.09            4.00             0.60      10.79        0.56
 Korea, Rep.              1.00        0.04          0.02           5.76        0.00          1.00        0.28          0.49            1.00          0.35        0.09            1.00             0.11       0.50          .
 Mexico                   0.00        0.10          0.08           6.70        0.00          1.00        0.04          0.23            1.00          0.22        0.01            1.00             0.15       3.09        6.04
 Malaysia                 0.00        0.03          0.01           4.90        1.00          0.00        0.28          1.12            1.00          0.43        0.02            1.00             0.34         .           .
 Netherlands              1.00        0.02          0.01           1.05        0.00          0.00        0.35          0.99            1.00          0.27        0.05            4.00             0.42         .           .
 Norway                   1.00        0.02          0.01           1.25        0.00          1.00        0.00          0.50            1.00          0.31        0.02            4.00             0.12       6.51          .
 New Zealand              1.00        0.02          0.01           0.60        1.00          0.00        0.00          0.82            0.00          0.23        0.02            4.00             0.27       3.28        8.53
 Pakistan                 0.00        0.08          0.02           7.80        1.00          0.00        0.45          0.30            0.00          0.16        0.00              .              0.36         .           .
 Peru                     0.00        0.04          0.04           5.90        0.00          1.00        0.30          0.21            1.00          0.18        0.00              .              0.02         .        10.45
 Philippines              0.00        0.07          0.02           7.40        0.00          1.00        0.33          0.47            1.00          0.15        0.01              .              0.35         .           .
 Portugal                 1.00        0.03          0.01           3.65        0.00          1.00        0.18          0.88            1.00          0.17        0.02            2.00             0.40      11.07        0.48
 Singapore                1.00        0.02          0.01           0.82        1.00          0.00        0.26          0.98            0.00          0.47        0.03              .              0.40         .           .
 Sweden                   1.00        0.02          0.01           0.80        0.00          0.00       -0.03          0.40            1.00          0.24        0.04            1.00             0.39         .           .
 Thailand                 0.00        0.04          0.01           6.80        1.00          1.00        0.00          0.94            1.00          0.34        0.01              .              0.02         .         4.72
 Turkey                   0.00        0.54          0.05           6.40        0.00          1.00       -0.17          0.32            1.00          0.17        0.00            4.00             0.21       0.38        0.19
 Taiwan                   1.00        0.01          0.01           4.45        0.00          1.00        0.03          0.24            1.00          0.14        0.04              .              0.13         .           .
 United States            1.00        0.03          0.01           2.40        1.00          1.00        0.35          0.65            1.00          0.16        0.04            4.00             0.29      48.11       32.24
 South Africa             0.00        0.07          0.02           5.30        1.00          0.00        0.30          0.50            0.00          0.19        0.11            2.00             0.46         .           .




                                                                                                                 49
Appendix 3
Pooled firm-level regressions of leverage by country
The table presents the regression of leverage on firm level variables as defined in Table 2. The regression equation is estimated for
each country using the pooled time-series and cross-sectional sample. All regressions include dummy variables for industry (two digit
SIC codes). This table also reports the adjusted R-squared and number of firm-year observations. Standard errors are robust to
clustering within firm over time. T-statistics are given in parentheses.
                           Tangible assets/                                         Market-to-book      No of observations/
     Country Code            Total Assets              ROA        Log total assets        ratio         Adjusted R-squared
 Australia                       0.0343             -0.0061            0.0264            -0.0072               8221
                                (2.11)**             (-1.02)         (9.49)***         (-9.11)***             0.1224
 Austria                         0.2481             -0.0735            0.0133            -0.0128               1093
                               (2.86)***           (-1.74) *         (2.78) ***        (-3.59)***             0.1129
 Belgium                         0.1931             -0.5328             0.016            -0.0132               1406
                              (3.61) ***          (-4.34)***         (5.31)***         (-3.73)***             0.1824
 Brazil                          0.1930             -0.1741           -0.0010            -0.0103               2579
                               (3.09)***          (-2.81)***           (-0.31)         (-3.33)***             0.0814
 Canada                          0.0924              0.0070            0.0165            -0.0102              10806
                               (5.13)***              (0.78)         (4.05)***        (-13.46)***             0.1003
 Switzerland                     0.3178             -0.1171            0.0036            -0.0186               2583
                              (7.63) ***          (-2.14) **            (0.83)         (-5.97) ***            0.1926
 Chile                           0.0817             -0.1870            0.0181            -0.0091               1413
                                  (1.56)             (-1.01)           (1.87)*         (-2.91)***             0.0840
 China                           0.0490             -0.1378            0.0423            -0.0073               6815
                                (2.10)**          (-5.87)***         (5.26)***         (-6.85)***             0.1221
 Germany                         0.3018             -0.0520            0.0056            -0.0111               8497
                              (9.41) ***             (-3.02)            (3.73)           (-9.43)              0.1106
 Denmark                         0.2503             -0.0762            0.0003            -0.0193               2006
                               (4.27)***            (-1.74)*            (0.08)         (-6.15)***             0.1368
 Spain                           0.0767             -0.8292            0.0019            -0.0127               2025
                                 (1.76)*         (-6.83) ***            (0.85)         (-3.57) ***            0.1600
 Finland                         0.4595             -0.2516            0.0055            -0.0149               1591
                               (7.57)***          (-2.68)***          (1.78) *         (-4.19)***             0.2493
 France                          0.3408             -0.1791            0.0081            -0.0134               9063
                              (10.19)***          (-3.48)***         (4.35)***        (-13.25)***             0.1624
 United Kingdom                  0.2412             -0.0126           -0.0035            -0.0070              20741
                             (18.10) ***           (-1.93) *        (-2.81) ***       (-16.15) ***            0.1289
 Greece                          0.0335             -1.2120            0.0239            -0.0076               2471
                                  (0.72)          (-8.47)***         (3.30)***         (-7.50)***             0.2250
 Hong Kong                       0.2220             -0.0512            0.0035            -0.0130               6493
                               (7.69)***          (-4.03)***           (1.84)*        (-10.85)***             0.0982
 Indonesia                       0.2525             -0.5076            0.0034            -0.0145               2452
                               (4.55)***          (-5.01)***            (0.70)         (-5.10)***             0.1586
 India                           0.4351             -1.3180           -0.0052            -0.0192               4381
                              (11.03)***         (-13.25)***           (-1.16)         (-8.95)***             0.4328
 Ireland                         0.2047              0.0234            0.0065            -0.0091                854
                              (3.49) ***            (1.67) *            (1.09)         (-3.74)***             0.1095
 Israel                          0.5941             -0.0212            0.0221            -0.0081                934
                               (7.69)***             (-0.54)           (1.76)*          (-3.06)**             0.3667
 Italy                           0.1041             -0.5515            0.0117            -0.0213               2644
                                (1.80) *          (-2.89)***         (2.81)***         (-6.68)***             0.1169
 Japan                           0.3655             -0.6499            0.0096            -0.0055              41763
                              (18.55)***          (-6.60)***         (4.70)***         (-6.05)***             0.1116
 Korea                           0.1765             -0.1977            0.0595            -0.0201               6734
                               (4.46)***          (-4.92)***         (7.65)***         (-6.03)***             0.1764
 Mexico                          0.0821             -0.8375            0.0143            -0.0392               1224
                                  (1.03)          (-4.14)***            (1.31)         (-3.27)***             0.2132
 Malaysia                        0.1179             -0.3592            0.0079            -0.0123               7072
                               (3.77)***          (-6.27)***         (3.76)***         (-7.05)***             0.1093
 Netherlands                     0.2754             -0.0994            0.0049            -0.0108               2482
                               (6.05)***          (-4.19)***            (1.55)         (-6.52)***             0.1594
 Norway                          0.5780             -0.0231            0.0049            -0.0145               1757
                              (19.03)***             (-0.90)            (1.61)         (-5.47)***             0.4568
 New Zealand                     0.1006              0.0022            0.0033            -0.0150                917
                                (1.68) *              (0.11)            (0.38)          (-2.29)**



                                                                                                                                 50
 Pakistan                        0.3415             -1.5769              -0.0064       -0.0197     1045
                               (5.13)***          (-9.76)***              (-0.67)    (-3.67)***   0.4428
 Peru                            0.0169             -1.3765               0.0157       -0.0167     491
                                  (0.15)          (-8.23)***              (1.17)        (-1.50)   0.2523
 Philippines                     0.1738             -0.1420               0.0217       -0.0201     1523
                               (2.46) **          (-2.92)***           (5.16)***     (-4.46)***   0.1484
 Portugal                        -0.2483            -0.7286               0.0113       -0.0301     840
                              (-3.15)***         (-2.66) ***            (1.67) *     (-4.99)***   0.1775
 Singapore                       0.2632             -0.0783               0.0080       -0.0186     3973
                               (8.63)***           (-2.32)**            (2.39)**     (-6.50)***   0.1290
 Sweden                          0.4990              0.0115              -0.0016       -0.0161     3189
                              (13.16)***             (0.79)               (-0.43)    (-8.47)***   0.3777
 Thailand                        0.0853             -0.5986               0.0290       -0.0128     3403
                                (2.09)**          (-3.77)***           (3.80)***     (-3.28)***   0.1505
 Turkey                          -0.0963            -0.5521               0.0114       -0.0063     1422
                                 (-1.54)          (-5.16)***            (1.98)**      (-3.02)**   0.1925
 Taiwan                          0.0505             -0.8067               0.0395       -0.0411     7051
                                 (1.90)*         (-10.40)***          (10.21)***     (-9.31)***   0.3186
 United States                   0.2774              0.0052               0.0020       -0.0072    77132
                              (33.04)***          (2.66) ***           (3.19)***    (-38.41)***   0.1076
 South Africa                    0.0780             -0.0442              -0.0110       -0.0073     3483
                                (2.39)**            (-1.65)*         (-4.35) ***    (-4.18) ***   0.0622
*,**, and ***, significant at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level, respectively.




                                                                                                           51
Appendix 4
Pooled firm-level regressions of debt maturity structure by country
The table presents the regression of debt maturity on firm level variables as defined in Table 2. The regression equation is estimated
for each country using the pooled time-series and cross-sectional sample. All regressions include dummy variables for industry (two
digit SIC codes). This table also reports the adjusted R-squared and number of firm-year observations. Standard errors are robust to
clustering within firm over time. T-statistics are given in parentheses.
                         Tangible assets/                                          Market-to-book No of observations/
     Country Code                                   ROA         Log total assets
                          Total Assets                                                     ratio      Adjusted R-squared
  Australia                   0.1720               0.0487            0.0344              -0.0011              6292
                            (6.15)***          (3.15)***          (6.54)***               (-0.72)           0.0991
  Austria                     0.3808              -0.1207           -0.0006              0.0005               1025
                            (3.72) ***             (-1.65)          (-0.09)               (0.10)            0.0674
  Belgium                     0.4061               0.0641            0.0167               0.0028              1370
                            (5.63)***              (0.50)         (3.84)***               (1.14)            0.1333
  Brazil                      0.3386               0.1300            0.0217               0.0045              2551
                            (6.98)***          (4.17)***          (5.58)***            (1.99) **            0.1304
  Canada                      0.2135               0.0469            0.0282              -0.0018              8672
                            (8.97)***          (3.05)***          (5.70)***               (-1.49)           0.1144
  Switzerland                 0.3620               0.0296           -0.0016              -0.0055              2500
                            (7.95) ***              (0.43)           (-0.33)             (-1.58)            0.1005
  Chile                       0.3038              -0.1973            0.0440               0.0086              1301
                            (3.32)***              (-1.23)          (1.87)*               (1.47)            0.1269
  China                       0.3953               0.0590            0.0422               0.0006              6499
                            (8.65)***            (2.43)**          (2.35)**               (0.37)            0.1570
  Germany                     0.4253               0.0480           -0.0019               0.0021              7523
                           (12.06) ***            (1.76)*           (-1.06)               (1.52)            0.0846
  Denmark                     0.4435              -0.0095           -0.0046               0.0031              1931
                            (7.00)***           (-0.30)**            (-1.07)              (0.85)            0.1098
  Spain                       0.3516              -0.1312           -0.0036               0.0059              1967
                            (6.46)***             (-1..00)          (-1.25)               (1.36)            0.0726
  Finland                     0.2129              -0.1358            0.0024              -0.0040              1551
                              (4.04)            (-2.27)**             (0.61)              (-1.22)           0.0512
  France                      0.3438              -0.0037            0.0062               0.0008              8972
                           (11.21)***              (-0.11)        (2.93)***               (0.65)            0.0612
  United Kingdom              0.3790               0.0243            0.0077               0.0003             18605
                           (20.40) ***          (2.14) **         (4.55) ***              (0.41)            0.0897
  Greece                      0.4844               0.4544            0.0157              -0.0012              2262
                            (7.06)***          (3.14) ***             (1.20)              (-0.71)           0.1062
  Hong Kong                   0.3965               0.0127            0.0012               0.0019              5862
                           (10.76)***              (0.75)             (0.45)              (1.22)            0.0786
  Indonesia                   0.3888               0.2320            0.0088               0.0028              2280
                            (6.15)***          (4.72)***              (1.51)              (1.00)            0.0841
  India                       0.4336               0.0711            0.0208               0.0012              4286
                           (10.01)***              (0.87)         (3.00)***               (0.57)            0.1092
  Ireland                     0.3475               0.0875            0.0210               0.0033               766
                            (4.67)***           (2.26) **         (2.67) ***              (0.95)            0.1232
  Israel                      0.3784              -0.0453            0.0283              -0.0008               750
                             (5.21)**              (-0.65)         (2.42)**              (-0.21)            0.1572
  Italy                       0.2976               0.2107            0.0088              -0.0002              2589
                            (5.44) ***         (2.78)***            (1.87)*               (-0.08)           0.0650
  Japan                       0.4001               0.1380            0.0118               0.0038             38813
                           (22.97)***          (3.91)***          (6.72)***            (4.97)***            0.0754
  Korea                       0.1406              -0.0917            0.0223               0.0049              6303
                            (4.07)***           (-3.18)**         (3.62)***             (2.14)**            0.0353
  Mexico                      0.3308               0.3566            0.0531               0.0033              1159
                            (3.98)***          (3.97)***           (3.09)**               (0.38)            0.1765
  Malaysia                    0.2271               0.1534            0.0017               0.0010              6471
                            (6.02)***          (6.13)***              (0.60)              (0.50)            0.0362
  Netherlands                 0.4106              -0.1163            0.0181               0.0058              2270
                            (7.21)***              (-3.13)        (3.99)***            (2.37) **            0.1063
  Norway                      0.3817              0.1571            0.0082              -0.0025               1626
                            (9.03)***          (4.89)***          (2.71) ***              (-0.79)           0.1974
  New Zealand                 0.3828              0.0444            0.0022               0.0021                829
                            (5.11)***              (1.57)             (0.43)              (0.33)            0.1088



                                                                                                                                    52
 Pakistan                      0.6196            -0.2254              0.0107       0.0055     1007
                             (7.57)***            (-1.54)             (0.93)       (1.57)    0.2628
 Peru                          0.3047            -0.5953              0.0709       0.0170      467
                             (3.86)***         (-3.26)***           (4.71)***   (2.69)***    0.2179
 Philippines                   0.1777             0.0992              0.0188       0.0048     1257
                              (1.96)*              (1.61)           (2.94)***      (0.89)    0.0577
 Portugal                      0.2685             0.1624              0.0195      -0.0041      824
                            (2.66) ***             (1.10)            (2.03)**      (-0.54)   0.0658
 Singapore                     0.4891             0.0633              0.0093       0.0003     3712
                            (12.33)***          (2.61)***             (1.58)       (0.11)    0.1357
 Sweden                        0.1782             0.0159             -0.0071      -0.0018     2777
                            (3.92) ***             (0.64)           (-2.46)**      (-0.60)   0.0347
 Thailand                      0.3126            -0.0663              0.0413       0.0119     3271
                             (6.73)***            (-1.49)           (3.61)***   (4.63)***    0.1136
 Turkey                        0.2459            -0.0509              0.0206       0.0088     1286
                             (3.12)***            (-0.73)           (2.83)***   (2.79) ***   0.0505
 Taiwan                        0.3771             0.1934              0.0452       0.0191     6564
                            (11.08)***          (3.19)***           (9.26)***   (4.19)***    0.1224
 United States                 0.3169             0.0878              0.0176      -0.0010    66323
                            (35.85)***         (32.97)***          (24.42)***   (-3.38)***   0.1801
 South Africa                  0.3702            -0.0239             -0.0070      0.0063      3065
                             (9.45)***            (-0.75)         (-2.97) ***   (3.36) ***   0.1025
*,**, and ***, significant at the 10, 5 and 1 percent level, respectively.




                                                                                                      53
