NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FINANCIAL LITERACY, SCHOOLING, AND WEALTH ACCUMULATION
Jere R. Behrman
Olivia S. Mitchell
Cindy Soo
David Bravo
Working Paper 16452
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16452

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2010

This paper is part of the NBER’s Research Program on the Economics of Aging. The authors acknowledge
support provided by the TIAA-CREF Institute, the Pension Research Council and Boettner Center
at the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania, and NIH/NIA grant AG023774-01(P.I. Petra
Todd) on “Lifecycle health, work, aging, insurance and pensions in Chile.” They also thank Luc Arrondel,
Alex Gelber, Jeremy Tobacman, Javiera Vasquez, and participants in the Wharton Applied Economics
doctoral workshop as well as the 2010 LBS TransAtlantic Doctoral Conference for helpful comments,
and Richard Derrig for sharing his PRIDIT code. Opinions and errors are solely those of the authors
and not of the institutions providing funding for this study or with which the authors are affiliated.
©2010 Behrman, Mitchell, Soo, and Bravo. All rights reserved. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Jere R. Behrman, Olivia S. Mitchell, Cindy Soo, and David Bravo. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Financial Literacy, Schooling, and Wealth Accumulation
Jere R. Behrman, Olivia S. Mitchell, Cindy Soo, and David Bravo
NBER Working Paper No. 16452
October 2010
JEL No. G14,G23,I21,I3,J14,J24,J26,J32
ABSTRACT
Financial literacy and schooling attainment have been linked to household wealth accumulation. Yet
prior findings may be biased due to noisy measures of financial literacy and schooling, as well as unobserved
factors such as ability, intelligence, and motivation that could enhance financial literacy and schooling
but also directly affect wealth accumulation. We use a new household dataset and an instrumental
variables approach to isolate the causal effects of financial literacy and schooling on wealth accumulation.
While financial literacy and schooling attainment are both strongly positively associated with wealth
outcomes in linear regression models, our approach reveals even stronger and larger effects of financial
literacy on wealth. Estimated impacts are substantial enough to suggest that investments in financial
literacy could have large positive effects on household wealth accumulation.
Jere R. Behrman
University of Pennsylvania
jbehrman@econ.upenn.edu
Olivia S. Mitchell
University of Pennsylvania
Wharton School
3620 Locust Walk, St 3000 SH-DH
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6302
and NBER
mitchelo@wharton.upenn.edu

Cindy Soo
3620 Locust Walk
St 3000 SHDH
Dept of Insurance & Risk Management
Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania
csoo@wharton.upenn.edu
David Bravo
Centro de Microdatos
Universidad de Chile
Diag Paraguay #257, Torre 26
Santiago, Chile
dbravo@econ.facea.uchile.cl

1

Financial Literacy, Schooling, and Wealth Accumulation
Jere R. Behrman, Olivia S. Mitchell, Cindy K. Soo, and David Bravo
Traditional economic theory posits that forward-looking individuals maximize expected
lifetime utility using economic information to accumulate and then decumulate wealth
effectively over their lifetimes. Yet survey evidence reveals that fewer than half of U.S. workers
have even attempted to estimate how much money they might need in retirement, and many
older adults face significant retirement saving shortfalls (Lusardi and Mitchell 2007a and b;
Mitchell and Moore 1998; Scholz, Seshadri, and Khitatrakun 2006). Numerous economic
explanations for these phenomena have been suggested including dispersion in discount rates,
risk aversion, and credit constraints, but the empirical literature exploring such factors thus far
has been unable to account for much of the observed differentials in wealth (Bernheim, Skinner,
and Weinberg, 2001; Barsky, Juster, Kimball, and Shapiro, 1997).
The present study seeks to evaluate whether people who find it difficult to understand
their financial environment are also less likely to accumulate wealth. Specifically, we examine
the links between financial literacy, by which we mean the ability to process economic
information and make informed decisions about household finances, and wealth accumulation
and pension contributions. Previous studies have reported strong correlations between financial
literacy and asset accumulation as well as retirement planning.1 These findings have prompted
policymakers to support efforts to enhance household wealth accumulation and welfare through
increasing financial literacy. For instance, the U.S. President’s Advisory Council on Financial
Literacy recently stated that (PACFL, 2008, np): "While the crisis has many causes, it is
undeniable that financial illiteracy is one of the root causes... Sadly, far too many Americans do
not have the basic financial skills necessary to develop and maintain a budget, to understand
credit, to understand investment vehicles, or to take advantage of our banking system. It is
essential to provide basic financial education that allows people to better navigate an economic
crisis such as this one.” Similarly, the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development

1

For instance, Hilgert, Hogarth, and Beverley (2003) show that more financially knowledgeable US respondents are
also more likely to engage in a wide range of recommended financial practices; Lusardi and Mitchell (2007a, b) find
that more financially literate elderly U.S. respondents are also more likely to plan, to succeed in planning, and to
invest in complex assets; and Campbell (2006) reports that more educated Swedish households also diversify their
portfolios more efficiently. Cole, Sampson, and Zia (2009) find that the financially more literate are more likely to
have bank accounts in India and Indonesia.

2

(OECD nd) has recently launched a major initiative to “identify individuals who are most in need
of financial education and the best ways to improve that education.”
Despite these and other enthusiastic endorsements for programs to boost financial
literacy, questions have been raised about whether these associations reflect causality (Lusardi
and Mitchell, 2008, 2010). For example, individuals who fail to save also may be financially
illiterate due to some underlying and usually unobservable factor such as impatience, making it
difficult to assess whether boosting financial education would, in fact, enhance household wealth
accumulation. Moreover, in simple bivariate associations of financial literacy with wealth,
financial literacy might be proxying, in part, for other factors such as schooling attainment.
Empirical measures of financial literacy are also likely to have considerable measurement error
that, ceteris paribus, is likely to bias standard estimates of the impacts of financial literacy
towards zero.

Instrumental variable (IV) estimates in principle can control for both the

unobserved variable and the random measurement error biases, and schooling attainment can be
included in the same specification to control for the possibility that financial literacy proxies for
schooling. To our knowledge, however, no studies have yet used IV methods to estimate the
impact of financial literacy and schooling attainment on wealth, as we do here.2
In what follows, we draw on a unique microeconomic dataset, the Chilean Social
Protection Survey, to explore how financial literacy and schooling attainment influence wealth.3
This dataset includes extensive information on household wealth as well as individual and
household characteristics for a representative sample of prime-age adults, permitting us to
evaluate the effects of financial literacy using a richer range of ages and schooling than
heretofore available.4 Using a set of plausibly exogenous instrumental variables that satisfy
critical diagnostic tests to isolate the causal effects of financial literacy and schooling attainment
2

Some studies have looked at related issues using IV methods. For instance, Lusardi and Mitchell (2007a) test the
possible causal effect of wealth on financial planning using changes in regional housing prices as an instrument for
wealth, but they limit their study to older respondents in the U.S. Health and Retirement Study and do not consider
the possible impact of financial literacy on wealth as we do in this study. Bernheim, Garrett, and Maki (2001), Cole
and Shastry (2009), and Lusardi and Mitchell (2009) investigate how changes in U.S. schooling laws and state
mandates requiring schools to offer financial literacy relate to financial market participation, but these studies do not
focus on wealth accumulation as we do here. Ameriks, Caplin, and Leahy (2003) explore instruments for planning
by U.S. respondents but they are silent on the role of financial literacy.
3
The Social Protection Survey is described at
www.microdatos.cl/interior_areasMT.php?id_s=2&id_ss=2&id_proy=1
4
Ameriks et al. (2003) examine highly-educated TIAA-CREF survey participants; Lusardi and Mitchell (2007a) use
Health and Retirement Study respondents over age 50. In contrast, the dataset we use below is a nationally
representative sample of men age 24-65 and women age 24-60.

3

on wealth, we show that both financial literacy and schooling attainment are positively
associated with wealth outcomes. Moreover, our IV estimates indicate even stronger effects of
financial literacy on wealth than suggested by OLS models, while the opposite is true for
schooling in linear specifications; interactive specifications imply that both schooling and
financial literacy have significant positive effects.
Our results are relevant for financial educational policy in that we find that improved
financial literacy can make a significant difference for financial behavior, even after controlling
for schooling. This rigorous analysis of the impact of financial literacy on wealth accumulation
should be useful in informing governments and their policy advisers around the world, as they
consider new initiatives for financial education.5

Empirical Framework
Several prior studies have shown that financial literacy and schooling are significantly
correlated with positive financial behavior, but few have controlled for (usually) unobserved
factors such as risk aversion, self-esteem, innate ability, intelligence, and motivation that may
shape the relationship between financial literacy and financial behaviors.6 For this reason, it is
difficult to conclude, based on the scientific evidence, that improvements in financial literacy
actually enhance financial planning and saving, or whether, instead, wealth and financial literacy
are both the result of some other unobserved factors. For this reason, analyses that do not control
for such unobserved factors may be vulnerable to biases in the estimated effects of schooling and
financial literacy on financial wellbeing.

Moreover, empirical indicators of schooling and

financial literacy are noisy measures, and as is well-known, random measurement error in rightside variables tends to bias their coefficient estimates towards zero. Estimates of noise-to-signal
ratios for schooling attainment are often about 10 percent (Ashenfelter and Krueger 1994;
Behrman, Rosenzweig, and Taubman 1994), producing a bias towards zero of almost that
magnitude. Measures of financial literacy are likely subject to greater measurement errors, and

5

For instance the World Bank and the Russian Federation have recently announced a multi-million dollar, multiyear collaborative to improve financial literacy in low- and middle-income countries (see
http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/TOPICS/EXTEDUCATION/0,,contentMDK:21936796~menuPK:2643854~pa
gePK:64020865~piPK:149114~theSitePK:282386,00.html)
6

Both Lusardi (2003) and Ameriks et al. (2003) use IV strategies, but they focus on financial planning rather than
financial literacy.

4

thus, greater biases. Instrumental variable estimates are one way to eliminate the attenuation bias
towards zero due to measurement error.
Our goal is to assess whether wealth accruals could be enhanced with greater financial
literacy and schooling. Suppose the true relationship between financial literacy, schooling, and
wealth could be described for the ith person as:
Wi =0 +1FLi +2Si +3FLi *Si +4Ci +5Ei + i

,

(1)

where wealth Wi depends linearly on financial literacy FLi, schooling Si, their interaction FLi *Si,
other observed individual characteristics Ci, unobserved individual characteristics Ei, and
unobserved random shocks i. We include in relation (1) both linear terms in FLi and Si and their
interaction. We include the interaction because it is possible that the effects of financial literacy
FL depend on the level of schooling Si and vice versa. This coefficient of this interaction term
may be positive if financial literacy FLi and schooling Si are complements and reinforce each
other or negative if they are substitutes in determination of wealth accumulation. Below we
consider three variants of relation (1):
(1a) only linear terms,7
(1b) both the linear and interaction terms, and
(1c) only the interaction term.
Equation (1) posits that there are no other endogenous variables beyond financial literacy
and schooling that directly determine wealth. For example, the time one devotes to schoolwork
and how that time is divided between arithmetic and other topics might affect wealth, but our
assumption is that such effects are indirect via financial literacy and schooling. Likewise, there
could be other behavioral channels through which FLi and Si affect Wi. For instance, part of the
effects on wealth may work through choosing to contribute more to pensions, or by increasing
understanding of business news and market predictions.

Estimating equation (1) does not

illuminate such possibilities, though formulations similar to equation (1) but using some saving
pathway as the dependent variable could illuminate the roles of FLi and Si in determining the
relevant mechanism. In what follows, we offer analysis of two such pathways, the density of
pension contributions and whether the individual attempted to calculate money needed for
retirement.

7

We also consider two sub-variants of the linear case with only financial literacy or only schooling.

5

We further posit that financial literacy and schooling are determined by observed
personal characteristics Ci* (that may overlap with Ci), some factors in C* and Xi that affect
learning and schooling but do not directly affect Wi , unobserved individual characteristics Ei,
and error terms ui and vi:8
FLi =0 +1Ci* +2Xi +3Ei + ui

(2)

Si =α0 +α1Ci* +α2Xi +α3Ei + vi

(3)

In general, for consistent estimates of the coefficients of interest, ordinary least squares (OLS)
regression requires that the covariance between the disturbance terms in equations (1) and (2)
and (1) and (3) be zero: that is, there can be no unobserved factors that are correlated with
financial literacy or schooling but also affect the outcome of interest Wi. Nevertheless, the
unobserved individual factors vector Ei appears in the compound disturbance terms for all
relations, implying that OLS estimates are likely to suffer from omitted variable bias. The
direction of the bias depends on whether the true values of 5 and 3 (and similarly, of 5 and α3)
have the same or the opposite signs. For example, if the unobserved factor is ability that
positively affects financial literacy and also directly positively affects wealth, both 5 and 3 are
positive and OLS estimates of 1 are biased upward, overestimating the magnitude and
significance of financial literacy as a determinant of wealth. Conversely, if some unobserved
factor such as innate caution produced greater investment in financial literacy, but ceteris
paribus reduced wealth due to too great caution in investment behavior, OLS estimates of 1 are
biased downward, underestimating the magnitude and significance of financial literacy as a
determinant of wealth accumulation. In addition to the possibility of such omitted variable
biases, financial literacy and schooling measures are potentially subject to measurement error as
noted above, which would tend to bias OLS estimates towards zero.
8

We also could include another equation parallel to (2) and (3) for the interaction, but since the points made here for
the case in which FLi and Si enter in equation (1a) only linearly carry over to the case with the interaction, we limit
this discussion to the simpler case in which they only enter linearly. We have written equations (2) and (3) as if FLi
and Si have the same determinants except for ui and vi, which are likely to be correlated (perhaps perfectly
correlated). This is the usual setup in household models if decisions regarding FLi and Si are made at the same time
– in principle, all concurrent decisions are made in light of all the variables that determine household behaviors –
though, of course, the coefficients could differ and some may not be significantly different from zero. If decisions
are made at different times, the right-side determinants in equations (2) and (3) may differ; for example, some
expectations that determine the earlier decision could be replaced by realized outcomes that occurred prior to the
later decision. Our microeconomic dataset, like most, does not permit empirical representations of such
possibilities.

6

A similar point holds with regard to estimates that include only FLi or only Si – one at at a
time – if the true relation is actually equation (1a) with both entering linearly.9 Equations (2) and
(3) show that it is highly likely that FLi and Si are correlated because their determinants are
basically the same.10 Accordingly, if the true relation is equation (1a) with both FLi and Si
entering linearly but analysts include either FLi or Si, the coefficient estimate for the included
variable is biased because it is correlated with the excluded factor.
To handle this problem, we use an IV approach with robust standard errors to estimate
the three variants of equation (1) in light of (2) and (3), seeking to isolate the causal effects of
financial literacy and schooling, and to control for random measurement errors.

Good

instruments are ones that are sufficiently correlated with financial literacy FLi and with schooling
Si, but that are independent of unobserved effects in equation (1) determining wealth. The Xi
vector and elements of the Ci* vector excluded from Ci in equations (2) and (3) refer to such
instruments. For the IV estimation, we begin by estimating the “first stage” determinants of
financial literacy and schooling in (2) and (3); next we use these estimates to predict financial
literacy and schooling and employ them in the “second stage” estimate of equation (1). Note that
with the above assumptions, predicted financial literacy and predicted schooling are independent
of the compound error term in (1). Therefore, if equation (1) is the true relation, the IV or twostage least squares procedure leads to consistent estimates of 1 and 2.
In what follows, we utilize a set of plausible instruments and diagnostic tests to determine
whether our instruments are (a) sufficiently strong (using F tests for excluded instruments,
Angrist-Pische multivariate F tests for excluded instruments, and the Kleibergen-Paap weak
identification tests), and (b) independent of the second-stage compound disturbance term (4Ei +

i) using the Hansen J statistic overidentification test.11 Our candidate instruments, on which we
elaborate below, include (1) age-related factors such as governmental policies and
9

Some other endogenous variable Yi might also be included in equation (1) but our maintained hypothesis for our
estimates, as in other instrumental variable estimates, if that this is not the case.
10
It is possible but highly unlikely in such household models that the coefficients of the variables in equations (2)
and (3) differ so that financial literacy and schooling are orthogonal.
11
There recently has been what Stock (2010) calls a “transformation” in econometric tools for making inferences,
including development of some of the diagnostic tools that we use here(see Stock (2010) and the references therein).
As is well-known, the J statistic only tests the overidentifying restrictions, not the exogeneity of all the first-stage
instruments (e.g., Stock and Watson 2007, Wooldridge 2002). As also is well known (e.g. Wooldridge 2002), the
failure to reject the null in overidentification tests may be because the test has low power for detecting the
endogeneity of some of the instruments. As discussed below, however, in our case, the overidentification test does
have power to reject a number of candidate instruments.

7

macroeconomic conditions, (2) family background, and (3) personality traits. We find that many
of these candidates are good by conventional criteria. Nevertheless, some are insufficiently
strong predictors of the endogenous FLi and Si right-side variables, and some are not independent
of the second-stage disturbance term. Therefore, arguably, this latter group should be included
as controls in the second-stage relation (i.e., in the vector Ci in relation 1).

Data and Descriptive Statistics
Our primary data source is the Social Protection Survey (Encuesta de Protecion Social,
EPS) administered by us in collaboration with the Microdata Center of the University of Chile
(Arenas et al., 2008; Bravo et al. 2004, 2006, 2010). This survey is comparable to the U.S.
Health and Retirement Study (HRS) that provides a nationally-representative stratified random
survey on respondents over the age of 50, covering, inter alia, their wealth, schooling, financial
literacy, work history, childhood background, and selected personality traits. In contrast to the
HRS, however, the EPS covers all adults, not just respondents over age 50. In what follows, we
limit our attention to 13,054 prime-age respondents surveyed in 2006, namely men age 24-65
and women age 24-60 (since in Chile the legal retirement age is 60 for women but 65 years for
men). As noted below, we also have linked these data to some information on policies, markets
and macroeconomic conditions at critical junctures in respondents’ lives.
Wealth and Pension Contribution Outcomes: Our outcomes of interest are components of net
wealth, drawing on four EPS measures summarized in Table 1 (wealth in US$2006):


Pension wealth averages $38,600 or 54 percent of total net wealth, though with
considerable variance across respondents and about a quarter (25 percent) of
respondents have zero pension wealth. In 1981, the Chilean government terminated
the old insolvent pay-as-you-go retirement system and replaced it with a national,
mandatory defined-contribution scheme known as the AFP system (Mitchell, Todd,
and Bravo, 2008). This reform required all new formal sector employees to contribute
at least 10 percent of their salaries to one of several licensed defined contribution
pension funds.12 We believe that pension wealth is likely to be relatively accurately

12

Those who started working prior to 1980 could elect to join the new scheme or remain covered by the previous
system.

8

reported in Chile because respondents receive annual statements from the government
summarizing their defined contribution pension system accruals.


Net housing wealth averages $22,100 or 31 percent of total wealth, again with
considerable variance across respondents (though with a standard deviation only
about half as large as for pension wealth despite a greater range); about a quarter (26
percent) of respondents report none and 1 percent report negative net housing wealth.
We calculate net housing wealth based on self-reported data on market values (either
for sale or for rent) minus estimated mortgage debt. Our measure of housing wealth
is probably noisier than our measure of pension wealth and some of the other wealth
components.



Other net wealth averages $10,600 or 15 percent of total net wealth, with greater
variance across respondents than either pension or housing wealth but again about a
quarter (25 percent) of respondents report zero and more (31 percent) report negative
values. We calculated other net wealth by summing self-reported business wealth,
agricultural assets, other real estate assets, and financial investments and subtracting
all forms of household debt. This other net wealth measure probably also is a noisier
than the measure of pension wealth.



Total net wealth averages $71,500, with greater variance and greater range than the
other wealth measures just described. Total net wealth is the sum of the three
components above.

Table 1 here
In addition to these wealth measures, we also explore two possible channels via which
financial literacy and schooling might affect particularly pension wealth. The first is the “density
of pension contributions.”

This concept refers to the fraction of months each individual

contributed to the pension system, from age 18 to the survey date, and therefore is indicative of
how attached the worker is to the pension saving system. We derive this measure by tracking
respondent self-reports of the number of months they worked in covered jobs over time and
contributed to a pension fund, compared to the number of months when they could have
contributed. On average respondents report that they contributed to their pension almost half the

9

time they were eligible to do so, though there is again wide dispersion over the sample.13 About
10 percent of individuals contributed all of the available time, while 17 percent report they never
contributed. The second channel that we explore is a retirement planning indicator of whether the
individual has attempted to calculate the money he or she needs for retirement. The survey
question for this retirement planning variable is as follows:


Have you attempted to calculate the money needed in order to retire? [yes/no]

We create a dummy indicator in which 1 indicates a yes response, and 0 represents a negative
response.
Explanatory Variables: Schooling and Financial Literacy:

Our key explanatory variables are

schooling attainment and financial literacy. Schooling attainment is measured in a fairly
conventional manner (e.g., Bravo, Mukhopadhyay, and Todd 2010), with primary school
referring to grades 1-8, secondary school to grades 9-13, and post-secondary school to grades
beyond that, to a maximum of 20. The average schooling attainment in our sample (see Table 2)
is 10.4 grades, with a standard deviation of 3.9 grades.

Only about one percent of the

respondents have no schooling, and about the same fraction has the maximum of 20 years.
Table 2 here.
Financial literacy is measured using a rich set of 12 questions. The first three ‘core’
questions cover basic economics and finance including an understanding of risk and simple
interest; the second more ‘sophisticated’ set of three pertains to more elaborate financial
concepts; and a third set of six covers knowledge of retirement system rules including the legal
retirement age and how to calculate AFP pension benefits.
The “core” first three financial literacy queries were developed and implemented in the
HRS (Lusardi and Mitchell, 2007c); they have also been adopted by several other international
surveys. They are as follows:




13

If the chance of catching an illness is 10 percent, how many people out of 1000 would get the
illness?
If 5 people share winning lottery tickets and the total prize is 2 Million pesos, how much
would each receive?
Assume that you have $100 in a savings account and the interest rate you earn on this money
is 2 percent a year. If you keep this money in the account for 5 years, how much would you
have after 5 years? [more than $120, exactly $120, less than $120]

Our density estimates conform to those reported in Arenas et al. (2008).

10

The second more sophisticated set of three questions has also been fielded in a special HRS
module (Lusardi and Mitchell, 2009) intending to measure more complex concepts such as
compound interest, inflation, and risk diversification. The specific questions are:




Assume that you have $200 in a savings account, and the interest rate that you earn on these
savings is 10 percent a year. How much would you have in the account after 2 years? [exact
number]
Assume that you have $100 in a savings account and the interest rate that you earn on these
savings is 1 percent a year. Inflation is 2 percent a year. After one year, if you withdraw the
money from the savings account you could buy more/less/the same?
T/F: Buying shares in one company is less risky than buying shares from many different
companies with the same money.

The third set of questions is specific to the EPS, and it touches on some of the key aspects of the
Chilean retirement system focusing on the mandatory contribution rate, the legal retirement age
for women and men, how pension benefits are computed in the defined contribution system,
whether people are aware of the government’s welfare benefit for the elderly, and whether
people know they can contribute to the Voluntary Pension system even when they are not in
covered-sector jobs. The specific wording of these questions is:







Do you know what percentage of income is (has been or would be) deducted monthly for
pension system contributions? [yes/no]
Do you know the legal retirement age for women? [60]
Do you know the legal retirement age for men? [65]
Do you know how to calculate pensions in the AFP? [yes, by balance of individual account
and other elements such as age of retirement]
Do you know there is a minimum state guaranteed old age pension for people aged 65 and
over? [yes/no]
Have you heard of the Voluntary Pension Savings system introduced in 2002? [yes/no]
Table 3 lists all 12 financial literacy questions along with a summary of how the

individuals in our sample answered them. As is clear from Column 1, only half of the
respondents knew the correct answer to the core questions (1-3), and fewer knew the
sophisticated financial literacy questions (4-6). While people did score relatively well on the risk
diversification question, they could have been guessing as only a true/false response was
required.14 Patterns are more variable for questions regarding knowledge of pension system
benefit rules and provisions: most knew the legal retirement ages, but only about one-third knew
the mandatory contribution rates and only 10 percent could say how benefits are computed.
14

This pattern is similar to that reported for India and higher than for Indonesia (Cole, Sampson, and Zia 2009).

11

About half the sample knew about both the guaranteed minimum benefit and the Voluntary
Savings plan.
Table 3 here
Previous authors have measured financial literacy by selecting one or two key questions
and reporting whether respondents answered each one correctly (Lusardi and Mitchell, 2007a).
With such a rich set of financial literacy measures available in the EPS, however, it is inefficient
to limit ourselves to a question or two; instead, we seek to use all the information contained in
the dozen questions. A conventional way to aggregate responses would be to assign one point to
each question answered correctly and calculate an overall percentage correct score. Yet this
approach has the disadvantage of weighting each question equally and hence does not allow
distinctions among questions either in difficulty or information.
A more sophisticated approach to measuring financial literacy employs a weighted
scoring mechanism called PRIDIT, first designed to deal with difficult-to-observe outcomes
where indicator variables that proxy for the dependent variable are binary or categorical. For
example, Brockett et al. (2002) use the approach to assess insurance fraud, where investigators
use several indicator variables (such as whether an individual had time gaps between medical
treatments or experienced many hospital visits) to assess whether a given claim might be
fraudulent. PRIDIT has also been used in the health economics field to evaluate hospital care,
where indicators of quality are used to generate a ‘best’ or most informative quality index
(Lieberthal, 2008).
In what follows, we use the PRIDIT approach to develop financial literacy scores and
highlight which questions are the most informative indicators of financial literacy.15 This
approach involves a two-step weighting scheme, where the first step links each individual’s
responses on particular questions to others’ responses to the same question. One goal is to
determine which questions are more difficult – ones that few people answer correctly – and then
it gives more credit to particularly difficult questions that few people can answer correctly. A
simple aggregation would simply assign zero credit for an incorrect answer and a full point for
each correct answer; by contrast, PRIDIT applies a negative penalty for an incorrect answer and
a greater penalty for a question that more of the population answers correctly. As an example, a
small fraction of the sample answered question 4 correctly (Table 3, Column 1), so question 4 is
15

A related approach was implemented in Mitchell et al. (2008) in an analysis of pension switching patterns.

12

considered a difficult question. Consequently, answering question 4 correctly is assigned a
greater reward, while answering it incorrectly results in only a relatively small penalty. Unlike
simple integer scoring, this method captures the degree and direction to which an individual’s
response stands out relative to the population.
The second PRIDIT step applies a principal components analysis to take into account
correlations across questions.16 The resulting PRIDIT scores indicate how financially literate an
individual is in relation to the average population and to specific questions asked. Questions tend
to be informative, ceteris paribus, the less they are correlated with other questions. The bivariate
correlations are suggestive though not conclusive in this regard, because correlations of the
answers to a question with a linear combination of the answers to other questions may differ
from the bivariate correlations. The bivariate correlations among the correct answers to the
questions vary considerably, from 0.04 (for the correlations between question 4 and questions 8,
9, and 11) to 0.63 (for the correlation between questions 8 and 9). Also the mean correlations of
each question with the other 11 questions vary considerably, with those for questions 4 and 10
only about half of those for questions 1, 2 and 12 (third column from right in Table 3). By this
criterion, in isolation, questions 4 and 10 seem to be relatively important. But this is not the only
criterion.

Questions also tend to be more important on average, ceteris paribus, if the

proportions correct are closer to one half, rather than almost zero or almost one. The intuition
for this is clear by considering the extremes: questions for which the proportion correct is zero or
one provide no information because the answers are the same for everyone, whereas questions
for which the proportion correct is close to zero or close to one provide substantial information to
distinguish among those in the tails of the distribution. However, if the distribution of the
underlying latent variable for true financial literacy is normal, relatively few individuals will be
in the tails of the distribution, versus in the middle. By this criterion, questions 4 and 10 are
relatively unimportant, particularly in comparison to the three ‘core’ HRS questions (1-3) and
questions 6, 11 and 12 (penultimate column in Table 3).
The last column of Table 3 reports PRIDIT weights for each question that are indicative
of how “informative” a given question is regarding the underlying latent financial literacy
16

Specifically, we calculate the first principal component vector for each of the 12 questions and the eigenvalue of
the first principal component. The eigenvector with the largest eigenvalue captures more of the variance in the data
than any other eigenvector. Using these values, we then calculate a weight for each question that gives more weight
to questions that are more informative on financial literacy.

13

variable, relative to other questions based on both criteria. The ‘core’ HRS financial literacy
questions receive the greatest weight compared to the other financial literacy questions included
in the EPS. Next most informative are the queries on pension system knowledge (e.g. question 7
“Do you know what percentage of income is deducted for monthly pension system
contributions?” and question 12 “Have you heard of the Voluntary Pension Savings system
introduced in 2002?”). Despite being most informative by the criterion of being least correlated
with other questions, question 4 “Assume that you have $200 in a savings account, and the
interest rate that you earn on these savings is 10 percent a year. How much would you have in
the account after 2 years?” and question 10 “Do you know how to calculate pensions in the
AFP?”) have the smallest PRIDIT weights because of the second criteria discussed in the
previous paragraph (i.e., proportions correct close to zero).
The PRIDIT score thus computed is highly correlated with a simple percentage correct
tally, and results using either type of aggregation are very similar. Nevertheless, we favor the
PRIDIT approach as it incorporates additional information about the relative difficulty of each
question and value-added of each question, and we use it in estimates presented below.
Control Variables. Demographic controls included in our specification for equation (1) include
Age in a quadratic form to account for the typical hump-shaped life-cycle pattern of wealth
accumulation.

The mean age of our respondents is 43 years, with a standard deviation of 11

years. We also control on the variable Male, a dichotomous variable to allow for shifts on
average between wealth accumulations for men versus women. Just over half (52 percent) of our
respondents are male.
We do not include in the set of controls any variables likely to be determined in part by
schooling and financial literacy, and hence possibly affect wealth, such as marital status and
current residence.17 We do include as controls some of the candidate instruments that do not
satisfy the second condition for a good instrument, independence of the disturbance term in
equation (1), which are apparently correlated with factors that have direct effects on wealth

17

We adopt this approach because we are interested in the gross effect of schooling and financial literacy, not net of
effects through such behaviors as marital status and current residence. Moreover, if we were to include such
variables it would be necessary to treat them as endogenous, but it is difficult to increase the number of endogenous
variables beyond the two on which we focus. For this reason, our approach thus assumes that these are among the
channels through which schooling and financial literacy work to affect wealth. (Below we explore the robustness of
our estimates to the inclusion of such factors in the second-stage estimates, but without treating them as
behaviorally-determined.)

14

accumulation in addition to any effects that work through schooling and financial literacy. We
indicate which variables these are in our discussion of the results below.
Candidate First-Stage Instruments: As is generally the case, we cannot identify good instruments
a priori, only possible candidate instruments that might predict schooling and financial literacy
well, while not being correlated with the second-stage disturbance. Even experiments that
directly affect schooling and financial literacy might not be good instruments if they have weak
effects on schooling and financial literacy (and therefore do not satisfy the first condition), or if
they affect wealth directly through some other channel than schooling and financial literacy (and
therefore do not satisfy the second condition). In what follows, we consider as three broad sets
of candidate instruments: Age-dependent variables, Family Background factors, and Respondent
Personality traits. We describe each in turn.
For the Age-dependent variables, we include factors indicative of where the respondents
attended primary school as children, how old they were when an innovative national voucher
program was implemented by the government in 1981, what macroeconomic conditions were
when they were of an age to have been making marginal schooling and labor market entry
decisions, and what pension marketing practices prevailed when they were of an age to have
completed initial job searches and to have settled in more permanent positions. These four
variables are as follows:
− Primary School in Urban Area: In Chile, as in many countries, urban primary schools on
average tend to be better and have a wider range of options, which may lead to more
learning relevant for financial literacy and greater schooling attainment. Chile is a fairly
urban country and 81 percent of the respondents did attend primary school in urban areas.
− School Voucher Exposure (years of school age under voucher system): In 1981, the
Chilean government adopted a national school voucher system for primary and secondary
school. Anyone turning age 18 prior to 1981 therefore had no exposure, whereas younger
individuals had varying numbers of years of exposure to the new school voucher
program. We posit that this exogenous policy change may have had significant effects on
individual schooling attainment and financial literacy. At the same time, the introduction
of school vouchers could also have had direct effects on wealth accumulation through
increasing schooling quality, beyond direct effects on financial literacy and schooling
attainment.

For instance, Bravo, Mukhopadhyay, and Todd (2010) report that this

15

schooling reform improved schooling quality and resulted in subsequent higher labor
market earnings for adults exposed to the voucher system when they were children. Our
respondents averaged 2.2 years of exposure to the voucher system when they were of
primary school age and 1.8 years of exposure to the voucher system when they were of
secondary school age, but with a fair amount of variance among respondents depending
on when they were born. In fact, a substantial majority of our respondents (73 percent)
had no exposure to the school voucher system at all due to having been older than age 18
at the time of the reform.
− Macroeconomic conditions around the time of the school-leaving/labor-market-entry
decision: It is also likely that the state of the macroeconomy around the age respondents
made school-leaving and labor market entry decisions influenced both their schooling
attainment and financial literacy. For this reason we control for the unemployment rate in
the Santiago metropolitan area at the time the individual was age 16, since these rates
(but not national rates) are available for a sufficiently long time period and a large
fraction of the population lives in the capital city.
− Pension marketing activities around end of early adult job search: We also posit that
AFP marketing agents and expenditures early in a respondent’s work life could increase
financial literacy, by enhancing awareness of wealth accumulation in general and of
pensions in particular. Accordingly, we measure the number of marketing agents and
AFP marking expenditures around the time the individual completed initial labor market
search and settled down in more permanent employment, around age 24. But such AFP
marketing activities might also have direct effects on wealth accumulation in addition to
indirect effects through financial literacy (or possibly schooling, though most respondents
completed their schooling prior to age 24), a pathway we test below. In fact, there was
substantial variation in the number of AFP marketing agents and marketing expenditures
across respondent birth cohorts; at the same time, almost 40 percent of respondents were
older than 24 before the AFP system was implemented, so for them marketing activities
around this age were zero.
We posit that these four conditions are unlikely to have been affected by conscious decisions by
either the respondents when they were young, or their families, to increase respondents'
subsequent wealth levels. That is, we assume that respondents’ parents did not move to urban

16

areas when the children were in primary school for reasons correlated with the respondents' later
wealth accumulations, and that neither the respondents nor their parents could affect national
schooling voucher policies, macroeconomic conditions, or AFP marketing. Nevertheless, some
of these variables might not satisfy the second condition for good instruments, as we note above
and test in the empirical work.
For the Family Background Variables, it is well-known that there are strong empirical
links between family background and schooling attainment, and family background is included
among instruments in some previous studies where schooling attainment is a right-side
explanatory variable.18 We argue that a similar association exists with financial literacy (though
there is no literature to date on the topic), and accordingly family background should meet the
first condition for a good financial literacy instrument as well. Nevertheless, it seems a priori
plausible that family background could also proxy for factors such as intergenerationally
correlated ability endowments via channels other than schooling and financial literacy that
directly affect wealth.19 Accordingly, we include indicators of family background in our set of
candidate instruments, but we test whether they satisfy the second condition for being good
instruments. The specific family background indicators we include are:
− Paternal and Material Schooling Attainment: These averaged 7.2 and 6.6 grades,
respectively, indicating considerable intergenerational increases in schooling attainment
given the respondents’ average of 10.4 grades of schooling completed.
− Poor Economic Background when Child: Some eight percent of respondents
characterized their childhood family economic background as poor.
− Respondent Worked when Under 15 Years of Age: Child labor generally is associated
with poorer family backgrounds; in our sample; 7 percent of respondents reported that
they had started to work when younger than 15 years of age.
Respondent Personality Traits are enduring individual characteristics that generally
reflect genetic endowments and earlier life experience rather than states that change over fairly
short time periods for adults. McCrae and Costa (1990), for example, report that both many
longitudinal studies following the same individuals over time and cross-sectional comparisons
18

See Hanushek and Welch (2006), as well as studies mentioned in the next note and the citations therein.
For example, studies of the impact of maternal schooling on child schooling find that significantly positive
associations become much smaller or even reversed in sign if estimation techniques using twins data, adopted
children, or policy changes are used to control for unobserved intergenerationally-correlated endowments such as
ability (e.g., Behrman and Rosenzweig 2002, 2005; Black, Devereux, and Salvanes 2005; Plug, 2004).
19

17

across different age groups show a high degree of stability in personality traits during
adulthood.20 Heritability variance decompositions using twins data typically attribute half (and
sometimes much more) of the overall variance of personality traits to genetic variation, and the
remaining variance is mostly due to early life experience. 21 For this reason, we posit that some
personality traits observed in our data are relatively stable and may have significant effects on
schooling and financial literacy. Of course they may also have direct effects on wealth
accumulation in addition to indirect effects through schooling and financial literacy, and thus
they could violate the second condition for good instruments, something that we also test below.
The specific variables we use from the EPS are as follows:
− Risk Aversion, referring to a respondent’s reluctance to accept a risky but possible more
rewarding alternative versus a choice with a more certain but lower expected payoff.
This is measured using a dichotomous variable for a positive answer for Alternative A to
the following question:22
Suppose that you, as the only source of household income, have to choose between
the following two jobs. What alternative would you choose in [this] situation?
Alternative A. A fixed income job that is stable for life.
Alternative B. A job where you have the same possibility of earning double or only
three quarters of your income for the rest of your life.
By this measure almost two-thirds (65 percent) of our sample is risk averse.23
− Self Esteem is used by psychologists to refer to an individual’s overall evaluation of his
or her own worth (Mruk 2006). For empirical research, this is usually assessed with a
20

For some other examples see Kahnemann (1999:14) who argues that, with respect to wellbeing or happiness,
“each individual may be on a personal treadmill that tends to restore well-being to a predetermined setpoint after
each change of circumstances.” Csikszentmihalyi and Jeremy (2003: 185–186) conclude that “chance events like
personal tragedies, illness, or sudden strokes of good fortune may drastically affect the level of happiness, but
apparently these effects do not last long.” And Costa et al. (1987: 54) report that “objective circumstances appear to
be limited in the magnitude, scope, and particularly duration of their effects on psychological well-being, which, in
the long run, is likely to reflect instead stable characteristics of the individual.” Easterlin (2005) reviews the
psychological literature with respect to this “set-point theory” of happiness.
21
Lykken and Tellegen (1996) report that variation in the well-being component of the Multidimensional Personality
Questionnaire for twins in the Minnesota Twin Registry is primarily associated with genetic variation; that is,
genetic effects account for up to 80 percent of the variance in happiness indicators obtained by averaging repeated
measures of well-being. Moreover, socioeconomic status, schooling, family income, marital status, and religious
commitment do not account for more than three percent of the variance in these averaged measures of well-being.
In another example, Bouchard and McGue (2003) summarize the estimated heritabilities for the “Big Five”
personality traits to be about one-half.
22
This is third question in a series of three alternative pairs, where the previous two indicate riskier options for
Alternative B.
23
For other recent studies linking risk aversion and economic behavior, see Dohmen et al. (2010 a, b), Eckell et al.
(2005); and Guiso et al. (2005, 2008). Borghans, Duckworth, Heckman and ter Weel (2008) provide another recent
discussion about personality traits and economics.

18

self-report inventory such as the Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale that usually uses a 10question battery scored on a four-point response system that requires participants to
indicate their level of agreement with a series of statements about themselves. The 2006
EPS applied a version of the Rosenberg test as follows:
Finally, we ask about the level of agreement or disagreement with the following
statements: [Scale: 1. Strongly Disagree, 2. Disagree, 3. Agree, 4. Strongly
Agree]
1. I feel that I am a valuable person, at least with respect to others
2. I feel that I have a number of good qualities
3. I definitely tend to think that I am a failure
4. I can do things as well as other people
5. I do not feel that I have much to be proud of
6. I have a positive attitude about myself
7. All in all, I am happy with myself
8. I would like to have more self-respect
9. I sometimes feel useless
10. I sometimes feel that I am good for nothing.
In our analysis, we focus on a measure of positive self-esteem defined as the sum of the
answers to questions 1, 2, 4, 6 and 7, as well as a measure of negative self-esteem defined as the
sum of the answers to questions 3, 5, 8, 9 and 10.24 Both sums range from 1 to 20, with a mean
for positive self-esteem of 16.1 and for negative self-esteem of 10.5. Each of the five respective
components in each sum is weighted equally, so we also investigate whether any of the
components has significantly different effects than the sums.
Finally we also include a vector of other respondent characteristics for robustness tests
in some alternative specifications. We do not include these in our basic estimates because many
could argue they are endogenous, including residence in the Santiago metropolitan area at the
time of the survey (38 percent), self-reported bad (6 percent) or good health (69 percent), being
never married (23 percent) or married at the time of the survey (66 percent), being a household
head (56 percent) or spouse of household head (24 percent) at the survey date.

Ordinary Least Squares Estimates
Since most prior studies have used ordinary least squares (OLS) models that did not treat
schooling and financial literacy as behaviorally determined or imprecisely measured due to
24

We also considered a combined index defined as positive self-esteem – negative self-esteem, but the two separate
indices have greater predictive power so we include them separately in our estimates.

19

random measurement errors, we also begin with OLS estimates to describe the associations
among schooling, financial literacy, and the wealth, pension density and retirement planning
outcomes. Results appear in Table 4 (control variables are identical to those used later in IV
models so estimates can be compared across results).
Table 4 here
Panel I of Table 4 reports estimated coefficients for a specification that includes only the
PRIDIT index of financial literacy and excludes schooling (equation 1a-subvariant 1). Results
indicate that the PRIDIT index is positive and strongly statistically significant in all four wealth
equations, the density of pension contributions, and the probability of calculating the money
needed for retirement. Moreover, the estimates are quantitatively important, implying that a 0.2
standard deviation increase in the PRIDIT index (taken from Table 2) is associated with an
average $4,000 increase in net wealth, or almost 6 percent increase in mean net wealth. The
largest response is for pension wealth ($2,200), with other wealth ($1,000) and housing wealth
($800) less than half as large. A 0.2 standard deviation increase in PRIDIT is also associated
with an average increase of 1.4 percent in the density of pension contributions and 0.8 percent
increase in the probability of calculating the money needed for retirement.
Panel II of Table 4 provides coefficient estimates for an OLS specification that includes
schooling as an explanatory variable but excludes the PRIDIT financial literacy measure
(equation 1a-subvariant 2). Schooling coefficient estimates are positive and highly significant
for all four wealth measures, the density of pension contributions, and retirement planning.
Moreover they are substantial and even somewhat larger than the PRIDIT effects in that they
imply that that a 0.2 standard deviation increase in schooling (taken from Table 2) is associated
with an average $5,900 increase in net wealth, or 8.3 percent of mean net wealth. The largest
component of this overall wealth increment again is pension wealth ($3,000), with other wealth
($1,600) and housing wealth ($1,300) taken together almost as large. A 0.2 standard deviation
increase in schooling is associated with an average increase of 1.4 percent in the density of
pension contributions and 0.6 percent increase in the probability of calculating money needed for
retirement.
Yet the PRIDIT financial literacy index and schooling are significantly positively
correlated (r=0.51), so their coefficients estimates are anticipated to change when both are
included in the same regression. Indeed this is the case, as is shown in Panel III of Table 4

20

(equation 1a), where the PRIDIT coefficient estimates drop by a quarter for the density of
pension contributions to two-thirds for housing wealth, with total wealth in between, dropping by
half. The schooling coefficient estimates also decline, though by less, around 10 percent for
housing wealth and 16 percent for total wealth. Consequently, one can conclude that including
only one of these two explanatory variables in OLS regressions produces larger estimates for
each, than if both are included. Nevertheless, when both are included, the associations remain
significant and fairly large in magnitude for both.
As noted in the discussion of equation (1), having only linear terms for schooling and
financial literacy is but one possible specification choice. Adding interactions between schooling
and the PRIDIT financial literacy index in addition to the linear terms alters the results somewhat
(Panel IV of Table 4, equation 1b). The linear schooling coefficient estimates remain about the
same magnitudes as without the interaction term, and they are estimated with greater precision.
Yet the linear PRIDIT coefficient estimates become negative and significant for three of the four
wealth outcomes (of course, the total association of PRIDIT with the wealth outcomes for any
schooling attainment must include the interaction with schooling attainment). For the density of
pension contributions, in contrast, the coefficient estimates of both the PRIDIT and the schooling
terms remain significantly positive and the coefficient estimates of the interaction is significantly
negative. For the retirement planning variable, the coefficient estimates on both the PRIDIT and
the schooling terms also remain significantly positive but the coefficient estimate of the
interaction is insignificant.
If the specification of the effects of financial literacy and schooling is limited to only the
PRIDIT-schooling interaction term (Panel V in Table 4, equation 1c), the coefficient estimates of
the interaction are positive, significant, and fairly substantial for all of the wealth outcomes and
for the density of pension contributions and retirement planning.

Instrumental Variable Estimates
As noted above, omitted variables and/or measurement error can bias measured OLS
coefficients, so next we turn to instrumental variable (IV) estimates using the candidate
instruments discussed above. Some of the candidate instruments – namely, years of exposure to
school vouchers when of school age, AFP marketing efforts, family background, and risk
aversion – do not appear to be independent of the second-stage disturbance term but do seem to

21

affect wealth accumulation and the density of contribution directly, in addition to indirect effects
through schooling and financial literacy. This result suggests that the Hansen J statistic has some
power in identifying problematic candidate instruments, and we include all these variables as
controls in results to follow (as well as in the OLS estimates discussed above). Our remaining
instruments, discussed at the end of this paragraph and listed in Appendix Table B, work quite
well. First, they predict both financial literacy and schooling well as is required by the first
condition for good instruments. For instance, when financial literacy and schooling enter
linearly, the F tests for excluded instruments respectively are 156.56 and 215.57 (prob > F =
0.0000 in both cases), the Angrist-Pischke multivariate F test of excluded instruments
respectively are 17.19 and 24.58 (prob > F = 0.0000 in both cases), and the Kleibergen-Paap
Wald F weak identification test statistic is 15.767, indicating between 5 percent and 10 percent
maximal IV relative bias according to the Stock-Yogo weak ID test critical values. Second, they
are independent of the second-stage disturbance term as required by the second condition for
good instruments. The Hansen J statistic for the overidentification test of all instruments’ p
values are from 0.26 to 0.92 for the linear specification in equation 1a (see Table 5), indicating
that our instruments are independent of the disturbance term in the second-stage relation.25 The
patterns of significant coefficient estimates are also plausible a priori: positive effects are
recorded for having had primary schooling in an urban area and positive self-esteem, and
negative effects of unemployment rates when age 16 and negative self-esteem (with some
significant deviations from equal weighting for some of the components of esteem).26
Interestingly, negative self-esteem is a much more important predictor of both financial literacy
and schooling than is positive self-esteem.
When only the PRIDIT financial literacy index is included and instrumented (equation
1a-subvariant 1), the coefficient estimates are positive, significant, substantial, and twice to three
times larger than the OLS estimates presented earlier (compare Panel I of Table 5 with Panel I of
Table 4). When only schooling is included and instrumented (equation 1a-subvariant 2), the
coefficient estimates are positive, significant, substantial, and from 16-84 percent larger than the
comparable OLS estimates (Panel II of Table 5 versus Panel II of Table 4). But when we include
25

The p values also are satisfactory for the specification with only the PRIDIT measure of financial literacy in Panel
I of Table 5. For the specification with only schooling in Panel II of Table 5 the p values for four of the outcomes
are below 0.011. However if the true relation is equation (1a), this relation is actually mis-specified because
financial literacy is excluded, which could account for this result.
26
See Appendix B for a complete set of estimates.

22

both the instrumented schooling and the PRIDIT financial literacy variables (equation 1a), the
schooling effects mostly become statistically insignificant and negative, whereas the PRIDIT
effects are positive, significant, substantial and much larger than the OLS results (compare Panel
III in Tables 4 and 5; the latter effects are 282-1775 percent larger for the PRIDIT variable) for
all of the dependent variables except retirement planning. The effect of financial literacy on
retirement planning is no longer statistically significant when we instrument both financial
literacy and schooling.
Table 5 here
This pattern suggests that, if equation (1a) is the true model, OLS coefficient estimates
substantially understate the effect of financial literacy on wealth accumulation, due to random
measurement error and omitted variable bias. This may be due to omitted factors in the OLS
framework that are negatively associated with wealth accumulation but positively correlated with
financial literacy. For example, as noted above, over-cautious individuals who invest more in
financial literacy may be less successful in accumulating wealth.27 If the IV estimates can be
interpreted causally, as we argue is appropriate, these estimates mean that financial literacy is a
powerful determinant of wealth and pension contributions. Specifically, they imply that a 0.2
standard deviation increase in the PRIDIT financial literacy score could, on average, raise net
wealth by $13,800, broken down into about a $5,200 boost in pension wealth, a $1,600 rise in net
housing wealth, and a gain of $6,900 in other wealth. The same 0.2 standard deviation increase
in the PRIDIT financial literacy score would also boost the density of pension contributions by
on average of 3 percent and the probability of calculating retirement money by an average of .5
percent. In other words, increased financial literacy can have relatively large payoffs in wealth,
particularly pension and other wealth, and less so in terms of housing wealth.
Since the two sets of the HRS questions have also been introduced recently in other
international surveys, we assess the marginal impacts of correct responses of the individual
questions on each of the six outcomes of interest. Table 6 gives simulated impacts for the “core”
as well as the “sophisticated” HRS questions, based on the linear specification of 0.2 standard
deviation increases in correct responses to individual questions underlying the PRIDIT estimates.
The findings suggest that knowing the correct answers to the HRS ”core” questions has a
27

Another example of such positive selection is offered by Finkelstein and McGarry (2006) who show that longterm health care insurance buyers tend to be healthier, which they interpret to indicate that cautious people buy
insurance and take good care of their health.

23

particularly strong impact. It is also of interest that schooling has only a small and insignificant
impact when both factors are instrumented. In other words, if the true model is equation (1a) for
these outcomes, mis-specifying the relation by leaving out financial literacy (as Table 5, Panel II)
leads to rather misleading estimates of the impact of schooling on household wealth
accumulations.28 Our preferred linear estimates (Table 5, Panel III) for these outcomes suggest
that it is financial literacy that actually counts, rather than increasing general schooling
attainment.29
Table 6 here
Adding a PRIDIT-schooling interaction term in Panel IV of Table 5 (equation 1b) results
in coefficient estimates for the interaction terms that are positive for all wealth components
(though not for the density of pension contributions or retirement planning) and substantially
more precisely estimated than the linear PRIDIT and schooling terms for three of the four wealth
components. Indeed the interactions are the only variables that have significantly nonzero
coefficient estimates for the wealth components at even the 0.10 level (and for total wealth at the
0.05 level), which suggests a specification that includes only the interaction between PRIDIT
and schooling (as in Panel V of Table 5, equation 1c). The diagnostics for such estimates are
good: the F test for excluded instruments30 is 109.74 (prob > F = 0.0000) and the KleibergenPaap rk Wald F weak identification test statistic is 109.74, indicating substantially less than 5
percent maximal IV relative bias according to the Stock-Yogo weak IV test critical values. With
regard to the second condition for good instruments, the Hansen J statistic for the
overidentification test of all instruments p values are from 0.39 to 0.95 for the wealth
components (last row of Table 5), suggesting that our instruments are independent of the
disturbance term in the second-stage relation.31

The root mean squared errors are somewhat

smaller for the interactive specification in Panel V (equation 1c) than for the linear specifications
for other wealth and total wealth (Panel III, equation 1b), but slightly larger for pension wealth,

28

As well as problems with the Hansen’s J-test for overidentifying restrictions that suggests that the second
condition for good instruments is not satisfied, as noted above.
29
For other wealth, the schooling coefficient estimate is significant and fairly large but negative (which carries over
at the 10% significance level for total wealth); this result is surprising and may be implausible. We conjecture that
this negative schooling coefficient estimate may reflect some interaction with financial literacy that also probably
underlies the relatively large coefficient estimate for financial literacy for this outcome.
30
In the one endogenous variable case, this also is the Angrist-Pischke multivariate F test of excluded instruments.
31
For the density of contributions this test also is satisfactory with a probability of 0.21. For the financial planning
indicator, however, it is less so with a probability of 0.06.

24

household wealth, the density of pension contributions, and retirement planning.
These findings indicate that a case can be made to favor the interactive over the linear
specification for other wealth and total wealth, though the estimated effects for the interactive
specification are, in any case, substantial for the wealth components and similar to those for the
linear model in Panel III of Table 5 discussed above. They imply that a 0.2 standard deviation
increase PRIDIT in the interactive format would induce a $11,600 increase in total net wealth,
attributable to a $5,900 increase in pension wealth, a $3,600 increase in other wealth, and a
$2,100 increase in housing wealth. These are somewhat bigger than the implied effects the same
PRIDIT change in the linear model for pension wealth (13 percent bigger) and housing wealth
(by 28 percent), but substantially smaller for other wealth (48 percent smaller) and somewhat
smaller for total wealth (by 16 percent).32
Finally, we assess how robust our estimates are to specification changes (results available on
request). For example, given intergenerational correlations in schooling (significant correlations
of 0.34 with fathers, 0.38 with mothers), including parental schooling as a control in the secondstage could change estimated impacts of respondent schooling attainment. Interestingly, we find
no substantial changes in our variables of interest. Similarly, it might be thought that including
the family background variables as second-stage controls could make a difference, but again
there are no substantial changes in results. Finally, we allow for the possibility that respondent
characteristics at the time of the survey, such as current urban residence, current health, marital
status, household head/spouse, could enter the second stage; again the relevant coefficient
estimates are robust.

Discussion and Implications
In this paper we use an instrumental variable approach to identify the impact of financial
literacy and schooling on wealth accumulation and pension contribution patterns. Prior studies
have linked financial literacy and schooling with positive financial outcomes, but they usually do
not control for unobserved factors that might shape both financial literacy and schooling, as well
as wealth outcomes, nor do they control for possible measurement error in financial literacy and
schooling. Using an IV approach (and conditional on our specification assumptions), we have
32

The interactive estimates seem more plausible for other wealth and possibly total net wealth, because the
relatively large positive coefficient estimate for financial literacy in the linear case (Table 5, Panel III) may
compensate for the substantial significantly negative coefficient estimate for schooling.

25

isolated the causal effects of financial literacy and schooling on wealth outcomes using plausibly
exogenous variation of instruments available in the Chilean Social Protection Survey. Results for
a nationally-representative sample of adults indicate that financial literacy and schooling
attainment are both positively and significantly correlated with wealth, pension contributions,
and retirement planning using OLS, while the IV estimates uncover an even stronger positive
impact of financial literacy. They also indicate no significant positive effects of schooling
attainment, conditional on financial literacy, in a linear specification, though the effect is positive
when interacted with financial literacy.
There are several implications of our findings. First, prior studies using OLS models to
estimate the effects of financial literacy and schooling are likely to be misleading due to
measurement error and unobserved factors. IV estimates indicate that financial literacy is at least
as important, if not more so, than schooling, in explaining variation in household wealth and
pension contributions. Second, our improved estimates of the impact of financial literacy are
economically meaningful and potentially quite important. Indeed, in our view they are
substantial enough to imply that investments in financial literacy could well have high payoffs.
Third, our estimates indicate that some components of financial literacy, such as the HRS ”core”
questions, are particularly important. This insight would not have been gained with the most
representations of financial literacy (e.g., percentage correct) used in the previous literature,
Fourth, our paper contributes to a growing body of research on the factors influencing peoples’
attachment to financial markets. Households that build up more net wealth, particularly via the
pension system, may be better able to smooth consumption in retirement and thus enhance risksharing and wellbeing in old age. Our finding that financial literacy enhances peoples’ likelihood
of contributing to their pension saving suggests that this is a valuable pathway by which
improved financial literacy can build household net wealth.
In future work we hope to evaluate in more detail the costs as well as the benefits of
enhancing financial literacy levels. Nevertheless, we view as very important the central finding
of this paper that individuals, firms, and governments can enhance household wealth and
wellbeing by investing in financial literacy.

26

References
Ameriks, John, Andrew Caplin, and John Leahy. 2003. “Wealth Accumulation and the
Propensity to Plan.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 68, 1007-1047.
Arenas de Mesa, Alberto, David Bravo, Jere R. Behrman, Olivia S. Mitchell, and Petra E. Todd.
With assistance from Andres Otero, Jeremy Skog, Javiera Vasquez, and Viviana Velez-Grajales.
2008. “The Chilean Pension Reform Turns 25: Lessons from the Social Protection Survey.” In
Stephen Kay and Tapen Sinha. eds. Lessons from Pension Reform in the Americas, eds. Oxford:
OUP 23-58.
Ashenfelter, Orley and Alan Krueger. 1994. "Estimates of the Economic Return to Schooling
from a New Sample of Twins," American Economic Review 84:5 (December), 1157-74.
Barsky, Robert, Tom Juster, Miles Kimball, Matt Shapiro, Doug Bernheim, Jon Skinner, and S.
Weinberg. 2001. “What Accounts for the Variation in Retirement Wealth among U.S.
Households.” American Economic Review 91, 832-857.
Barsky, Robert, Thomas Juster, Miles Kimball, and Matthew Shapiro. 1997. “Preference
Parameters and Behavioral Heterogeneity: An Experimental Approach in the Health and
Retirement Survey.” NBER Working Paper.
Behrman, Jere R. and Mark R. Rosenzweig. 2002. “Does Increasing Women’s Schooling Raise
the Schooling of the Next Generation?” American Economic Review 92:1(March), 323-334.
Behrman, Jere R. and Mark R. Rosenzweig. 2005. “Does Increasing Women’s Schooling Raise
the Schooling of the Next Generation? – Reply” American Economic Review 95:5 (December),
1745-1751.
Behrman, Jere R., Mark R. Rosenzweig, and Paul Taubman. 1994. “Endowments and the
Allocation of Schooling in the Family and in the Marriage Market: The Twins Experiment.”
Journal of Political Economy 102:6 (December), 1131-1174.
Bernheim, Doug, Daniel Garrett, and D. Maki. 2001. “Education and Saving: The Long-term
Effects of High School Financial Curriculum Mandates”, Journal of Public Economics, 85, 435565.
Bernheim, Douglas, Jonathan Skinner, and Steven Weinberg. 2001. “What Accounts for the
Variation in Retirement Wealth among U.S. Households”, American Economic Review, 91(4),
832-857.
Black, Sandra E., Paul J. Devereux, and Kjell G. Salvanes. 2005. “Why the Apple Doesn’t Fall
Far: Understanding Intergenerational Transmission of Human Capital,” American Economic
Review 95:1 (March), 437-449.
Borghans, L., Duckworth, A.L., Heckman, J.J., & terWeel, B. 2008. The Economics and
Psychology of Personality Traits. Journal of Human Resources, 43(4), 972-1059.

27

Bouchard T.J. Jr, and M. McGue. 2003. "Genetic and Environmental Influences on Human
Psychological Differences." Journal of Neurobiology, 54, 4-45
Bravo, David, Jere Behrman, Olivia S. Mitchell, and Petra Todd. 2004. Análisis y Principales
Resultados: Primera Encuesta de Protección Social (Historia Laboral y Seguridad Social,
2002). www.proteccionsocial.cl/english/docs/AnalisisPrincipalesResultadosPrimeraEncuestaProteccionSocial.pdf
Bravo, David, Jere R. Behrman, Olivia S. Mitchell, and Petra Todd. 2006. Encuesta de
Protección
Social
2004:
Presentación
General
y
Principales
Resultados.
http://www.proteccionsocial.cl/english/docs/Encuesta_Protección_Social%2020041.pdf

Bravo, David, Sankar Mukhopadhyay, and Petra Todd. 2010. “How Universal School Vouchers
Affect Educational and Labor Market Outcomes: Evidence from Chile.” Quantitative Economics
(forthcoming).
Brockett, Patrick, Richard A. Derrig, Linda L. Golden, Arnold Levine, Mark Alpert. 2002.
“Fraud Classification Using Principal Component Analysis of RIDITs.” Journal of Risk and
Insurance, 69, 341-371.
Campbell, John. 2006. “Household Finance,” Journal of Finance, 61, 1553-1604.
Cole, Shawn and Gauri Shastry. 2009. “Smart Money: The Effect of Education, Cognitive
Ability, and Financial Literacy on Financial Market Participation.” HBS Working Paper 09-071.
Cole, Shawn, Thomas Sampson, and Bilal Zia. 2009. “Money or Knowledge?” HBS working
paper 09-117.
Costa, P. T., A. B. Zonderman, R. R. McCrae, J. Cornonihuntley, B. Z. Locke, and H. E.
Barbano. 1987. “Longitudinal analyses of psychological well-being in a national sample—
Stability of mean levels,” Journal of Gerontology 42(1): 50–55.
Csikszentmihalyi, M. and H. Jeremy. 2003. “Happiness in Everyday Life: The Uses of
Experience Sampling,” Journal of Happiness 4(2): 185–189.
Dohmen, Thomas, Armin Falk, David Huffman, and Uwe Sunde. 2010a. “Are Risk Aversion
and Impatience Related to Cognitive Ability?” American Economic Review 100 (June): 1238–
1260.
Dohmen, Thomas, Armin Falk, David Huffman, Uwe Sunde, Jürgen Schupp, and Gert G.
Wagner. 2010b. “Individual Risk Attitudes: New Evidence from a Large, Representative,
Experimentally-Validated Survey.” Journal of the European Economic Association.
(forthcoming).

28

Easterlin, Richard A., 2005. “Is There an ‘Iron Law of Happiness?” Department of Economics
Working Paper, University of Southern California.
Eckel, Catherine, Cathleen Johnson, and Claude Montmarquette. 2005. “Saving Decisions of the
Working Poor: Short- and Long-Term Horizons.” In Research in Experimental Economics. Vol.
10: Field Experiments in Economics, ed. J. P. Carpenter, G. W. Harrison, and J. A. List, 219–60.
Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Finkelstein, Amy and K Kathleen McGarry. 2006. “Multiple Dimensions of Private Information:
Evidence from the Long-Term Care Insurance Market.” American Economic Review,
(September) 96(4): 938–958.
Guiso, L., and M. Paiella. 2005. “The Role of Risk Aversion in Predicting Individual Behavior.”
Bank of Italy Economic Working Paper No. 546.
Guiso, L., and M. Paiella. 2008. “Risk Aversion, Wealth, and Background Risk.” Journal of the
European Economic Association, 6(6): 1109–50.
Hanushek, Erik and Finis Welch, 2006, The Handbook of the Economics of Education,
Amsterdam: Elsevier-North-Holland.
Hilgert, M., Hogarth, J., and Beverley, S. 2003. “Household Financial Management: The
Connection between Knowledge and Behavior.” Federal Reserve Bulletin Report #309-322.
Kahneman, Daniel. 1999. “Objective Well-being,” in D. Kahneman, E. Diener, and N. Schwarz
(eds.), Well-Being: Foundations of Hedonic Psychology. New York: Russell Sage Foundation,
3–25.
Lykken, D. T. and A. Tellegen. 1996. “Happiness is a Stochastic Phenomenon,” Psychological
Science 7(3): 186–189.
Lusardi, Annamaria. 2003. “Planning and Saving for Retirement.” Working Paper, Dartmouth
College.
Lusardi, Annamaria, Olivia S. Mitchell, and Vilsa Curto. 2010. “Financial Literacy among the
Young: Evidence and Implications for Consumer Policy.” Journal of Consumer Affairs. (44, 2):
358-380.
Lusardi, Annamaria and Olivia S. Mitchell. 2007a. “Baby Boomer Retirement Security: The
Roles of Planning, Financial Literacy, and Housing Wealth.” Journal of Monetary Economics
54, 205-224.
Lusardi, Annamaria and Olivia S. Mitchell. 2007b. “Financial Literacy and Retirement Planning:
New Evidence from the RAND American Life Panel.” NBER Working Paper.

29

Lusardi, Annamaria and Olivia S. Mitchell. 2007c. “Financial Literacy and Retirement
Preparedness: Evidence and Implications for Financial Education.” Business Economics 42, 3544.
Lusardi, Annamaria and Olivia S. Mitchell. 2008. “Planning and Financial Literacy: How Do
Women Fare?” American Economic Review P&P, 98, 413-417.
Lusardi, Annamaria and Olivia S. Mitchell. 2009. “How Ordinary Consumers Make Complex
Economic Decisions: Financial Literacy and Retirement Readiness.” Cambridge, MA: NBER
Working Paper.
McCrae, R. R. & Costa, P. T. (1990). Personality in Adulthood. New York: The Guildford Press.
Mitchell, Olivia S. and James Moore. 1998. “Can Americans Afford to Retire? New Evidence
on Retirement Saving Adequacy.” Journal of Risk and Insurance, 65 (3) December: 371-400.
Mitchell, Olivia S., Petra Todd, and David Bravo. 2008. “Learning from the Chilean Experience:
The Determinants of Pension Switching.” In Annamaria Lusardi, Ed. Overcoming the Saving
Slump: Making Financial Education and Saving Programs More Effective. University of
Chicago Press, 301-323.
Mruk, C. 2006. Self-Esteem Research, Theory, and Practice: Toward a Positive Psychology of
Self-esteem (3rd ed.). New York: Springer
OECD.Nd.“Financial Education.” Directorate for Financial and Enterprise Affairs.
www.oecd.org/department/0,3355,en_2649_15251491_1_1_1_1_1,00.html

Plug, Erik. 2004. “Estimating the Effect of Mother's Schooling on Children's Schooling Using a
Sample of Adoptees,” American Economic Review 94:1 (March), 358-368.
President’s Advisory Committee on Financial Literacy (PACFL). 2008. Annual Report to the
www.ustreas.gov/offices/domestic-finance/financial-institution/finPresident: Executive Summary.
education/council/exec_sum.pdf

Scholz, John Karl, Seshadri, Ananth and Khitatrakun, Surachai. 2006. “Are Americans Saving
'Optimally' for Retirement?” Journal of Political Economy, 114 (August), 607-643.
Srivastava, S., John, O. P., Gosling, S. D., & Potter, J. 2003. “Development of Personality in
Early and Middle Adulthood: Set like Plaster or Persistent Change?” Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 84, 1041-1053
Staiger, Douglas and James H. Stock. 1997. "Instrumental Variables Regression with Weak
Instruments." Econometrica 65:3, 557-586.
Stock, James H. 2010. "The Other Transformation in Econometric Practice: Robust Tools for
Inference," Journal of Economic Perspectives 24:2 (Spring), 83-94.

30

Stock, James H. and Mark W. Watson. 2007. Introduction to Econometrics, Boston, San
Francisco, New York: Peason-Addison Wesley.
Wooldridge, Jeffrey M. 2002. Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data,
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

31

Table 1. Summary Statistics for Dependent Variables.
Mean

St. Dev.

Min.

Max.

Pension Wealth

38.6

87.3

0

1076.8

Housing Wealth

22.1

43.7

-223

1395.8

10.9
71.5
47.7
7.9

123
166.1
34.8
26.9

-553.8
-519.7
0
0

11572
11985
100
100

Wealth components (2006 US$ 1000s)

Other Wealth
Total Wealth
Pension Density (%)
Calculated Retirement Money (%)

Note: Calculated from Chilean 2006 Social Protection Survey (EPS) on a sample of 13,054 respondents age 24retirement age (60 for women, 65 for men) for whom key variables (including wealth outcomes, financial literacy,
schooling) are available. See text.

32

Table 2. Summary Statistics for Right-Side Variables and Candidate Instruments.
Key Right-Side Variables
Financial Literacy PRIDIT Score
Schooling Attainment (Grades)
PRIDIT*Schooling Attainment
Right-Side Demographic Controls
Age (Years)
Male (%)
Candidate First-Stage Instruments
I. Age-Related Variables
Primary School Urban (%)
School Vouchers
Primary Ages
Secondary Ages
Total
AFP Activities at Age 24
Number of Agents (10^3)
Marketing Expenditures (P10^9)
No AFP Activities (%)
Macroeconomy at Age 16
Unemployment Rate (%)
II. Family Background
Father Schooling Attainment (Grades)
Mother Schooling Attainment (Grades)
Poor Economic Background (%)
Respondent Worked < 15 Y of Age (%)
III. Personality Traits
Risk Aversion (%)
Positive Self Esteem (Sum)
Valuable Person
Number of Good Qualities
Can Do Well As Others
Positive Attitude about Self
Happy with Self
Negative Self Esteem (Sum)
Think I am a Failure
Not Much to be Proud of
Like More Self Respect
Sometimes Feel Useless
Feel Good for Nothing
Selected Current Characteristics
Santiago Metropolitan Residence (%)
Health Bad (%)
Health Good (%)
Never Married (%)
Now Married (%)
Household Head (%)
Spouse of Household Head (%)
Note: For sample see Table 1.

Mean

St. Dev.

Min.

Max.

0.6
10.4
15

7.7
3.9
84.3

-15.3
0
-259.5

23.3
20
466.4

42.7
51.9

10.6
50

24
0

65
100

80.9

39.3

0

100

2.2
1.8
4

3.2
1.9
4.9

0
0
0

8
4
12

6.2
2.2
39.2

6.9
2.7
48.8

0
0
0

23.7
10.1
100

10.3

5.2

3

23.2

7.2
6.6
8
6.9

3.5
3.4
27.1
25.4

0
0
0
0

20
20
100
100

64.5
16.1
3.2
3.2
3.3
3.2
3.2
10.5
1.8
2.1
2.6
2.2
1.9

47.9
2.5
0.7
0.6
0.7
0.7
0.7
2.6
0.7
0.9
0.8
0.8
0.8

0
5
1
1
1
1
1
5
1
1
1
1
1

100
20
4
4
4
4
4
20
4
4
4
4
4

38.4
6.4
68.7
22.8
65.7
55.5
24.3

48.6
24.5
46.4
41.9
47.5
49.7
42.9

0
0
0
0
0
0
0

100
100
100
100
100
100
100

33

Table 3. Financial Literacy Questions: Percent Correct and PRIDIT Weighting Scheme
Question

Correct (%)

PRIDIT
weights

If the chance of catching an illness is 10%, how many people out of 1000 would get the illness?

50%

0.64

44%

0.59

50%

0.59

2%

0.29

26%

0.42

46%

0.44

37%

0.54

Concepts of basic economics and finance
Main HRS questions:
(1)
(2)
(3)

If 5 people share winning lottery tickets and the total prize is 2 Million pesos, how much would
each receive?
Assume that you have $100 in a savings account and the interest rate you earn on this money is
2% a year. If you keep this money in the account for 5 years, how much would you have after 5
years? [over $120, exactly $120, less than $120]

Additional questions:
Assume that you have $200 in a savings account, and the interest rate that you earn on these
(4)
savings is 10% a year. How much would you have in the account after 2 years? [exact number]
Assume that you have $100 in a savings account and the interest rate that you earn on these
(5)
savings is 1% a year. Inflation is 2% a year. After one year, if you withdraw the money from
the savings account you could buy more/less/the same?
T/F: Buying shares in one company is less risky than buying shares from many different
(6)
companies with the same money.
Knowledge of benefit rules and institutions
Do you knows what percentage of income is (has been or would be) deducted monthly for
(7)
pension system contributions? [yes/no]
(8)

Do you know the legal retirement age for women? [60]

79%

0.44

(9)

Do you know the legal retirement age for men? [65]

84%

0.41

10%

0.37

53%

0.42

55%

0.58

(10)
(11)
(12)

Do you know how to calculate pensions in the AFP? [yes, by balance of individual account and
other elements such as age of retirement]
Do you know there is a minimum state guaranteed old age pension for people aged 65 and
over? [yes/no]
Have you heard of the Voluntary Pension Savings system introduced in 2002? [yes/no]

Note: For sample see Table 1. The PRIDIT financial literacy score is calculated using the 12 financial literacy questions in the 2006 EPS. Column 1 lists the % of
people that answered the question correctly; Column 2 provides PRIDIT weights for each question (see text).

34

Table 4. OLS Models of Wealth and Pension Density: PRIDIT Alone, Schooling Alone, and
Both, Plus Interactions
Components of Wealth
Housing
Wealth

Other
Wealth

Total
Net
Wealth

Pension
Density

Calculated
Retirement
Money

1.46

0.49

0.62

2.57

0.91

0.51

12.48

8.43

5.82

14.24

25.24

14.72

3.89

1.7

2.01

7.59

1.76

0.80

14.52

12.92

5.78

15.59

21.89

9.93

0.81

0.17

0.25

1.23

0.69

0.44

6.61

2.82

2.58

6.91

16.98

11.37

Pension
Wealth
I. PRIDIT
Index Alone

II. Schooling
Alone

PRIDIT
t
Schooling
t

III. Both
PRIDIT and
Schooling

IV. Linear and
Interaction
Effects

V. Interaction
Effect Alone

PRIDIT
t
Schooling
t

3.07

1.53

1.75

6.35

1.06

0.36

10.75

11.13

4.87

12.46

11.78

4.07

PRIDIT

-0.32

-0.87

-1.17

-2.36

1.5

0.29

t

-1.02

-4.9

-2.74

-3.92

14.95

3.01

Schooling

3.14

1.59

1.84

6.56

1.01

0.37

t

10.75

11.62

4.83

12.4

11.22

4.09

PRIDIT*Schooling

0.1

0.1

0.13

0.33

-0.07

0.01

t

3.56

5.54

3.3

5.83

-8.89

1.56

PRIDIT*Schooling

0.13

0.05

0.07

0.25

0.06

0.04

t

11.13

8.69

5.18

12.48

19.77

12.99

Notes: For sample size see Table 1. A complete set of coefficient estimates is provided in Appendix A.
Pension density is included in the estimates as proportion between 0 and 1 but the coefficient estimate is
multiplied by 100 in this table to be of the same magnitude as the other coefficient estimates. Other
control variables include age, age squared, male, years of exposure to school vouchers when of school
age, AFP marketing efforts, family background, and risk aversion. “t” refers to t-statistic.

35

Table 5. IV Models of Wealth and Pension Density: PRIDIT Alone, Schooling Alone, and
Both, Plus Interactions
Components of Wealth

I. PRIDIT
Index Alone

II.
Schooling
Alone

Pension
Density

Calculated
Retirement
Money

6.2

1.88

0.62

10.31

15.15

5.58

0.14

0.96

0.29

2.66

10.18

3.23

1.12

7.28

4.01

10.23

14.22

5.68

0.01

0.17

0.01

0.00

0.00

0.29

3.4

1.06

4.46

8.93

1.94

0.31

3.23

1.9

3.64

4.77

4.92

0.90

-0.34

0.14

-5.05

-5.25

-0.12

0.58

Pension
Wealth

Housing
Wealth

Other
Wealth

PRIDIT
z
Hansen J p

3.23

1.14

1.83

9.18

7.46

4.47

0.35

0.40

0.09

Schooling
z
Hansen J p

5.55

1.98

9.12

Total
Net
Wealth

III. Both
PRIDIT and
Schooling
PRIDIT
z
Schooling
z
Hansen J p

-0.18

0.14

-2.6

-1.68

-0.17

0.95

0.26

0.30

0.82

0.34

0.92

0.26

PRIDIT
z
Schooling
z
PRIDIT*Schooling
z
Hansen J p

-2.28

-1.51

0.28

-3.51

2.15

2.19

-0.67

-1.01

0.09

-0.65

1.83

1.97

2.44

1.4

-3.01

0.82

-0.23

-0.34

0.99

1.24

-1.22

0.21

-0.25

-0.41

0.44

0.2

0.33

0.97

-0.02

-0.15

1.75

1.7

1.26

2.36

-0.19

-1.80

0.41

0.39

0.86

0.92

0.85

0.5

PRIDIT*Schooling
z
Hansen J p

0.34

0.12

0.2

0.66

0.19

0.06

IV. Linear
and
Interaction
Effects

V.
Interaction
Effect Alone

9.03

7.3

4.35

9.91

14.25

5.01

0.53

0.52

0.39

0.95

0.21

0.06

Notes: For sample size see Table 1. A complete set of coefficient estimates is provided in Appendix B.
Pension density is included in the estimates as proportion between 0 and 1 but the coefficient estimate is
multiplied by 100 in this table to be of the same magnitude as the other coefficient estimates. Other
control variables include age, age squared, male, years of exposure to school vouchers when of school
age, AFP marketing efforts, family background, and risk aversion. “z” refers to z-statistic; see text.

36

Table 6. Predicted Change in Measured Outcomes for Correct Answer to Financial
Literacy Question

Core HRS Questions:
If the chance of catching an
illness is 10%, how many
(1)
people out of 1000 would
get the illness?
If 5 people share winning
lottery tickets and the total
(2)
prize is 2 Million pesos, how
much would each receive?
Assume that you have $100
in a savings account and the
interest rate you earn on this
money is 2% a year. If you
(3)
keep this money in the
account for 5 years, how
much would you have after
5 years?

Pension
Wealth
($000)

Housing
Wealth
($000)

Other
Wealth
($000)

Total
Net
Wealth
($000)

Pension
Density
(% pts)

Calculated
Retirement
Money
(% pts)

1.2

0.4

1.6

3.1

0.7

0.11

1.1

0.4

1.5

2.9

0.6

0.10

1.1

0.3

1.4

2.9

0.6

0.10

Sophisticated HRS:
Assume that you have $200
in a savings account, and the
interest rate that you earn on
0.6
0.2
0.7
1.5
0.3
0.05
(4)
these savings is 10% a year.
How much would you have
in the account after 2 years?
Assume that you have $100
in a savings account and the
interest rate that you earn on
these savings is 1% a year.
0.8
0.2
1.0
2.1
0.4
0.07
(5) Inflation is 2% a year. After
one year, if you withdraw
the money from the savings
account you could buy
more/less/the same?
T/F: Buying shares in one
company is less risky than
0.8
0.3
1.1
2.1
0.5
0.07
(6) buying shares from many
different companies with the
same money.
Note: The table presents simulated marginal effects of increasing the probability of answering each
question correctly by a quarter standard deviation (Table 2 indicates mean responses) on outcomes,
holding population responses to other questions constant.

37

Appendix A: Complete Set of OLS Coefficient Estimates for Table 4*
Components of Wealth

I. PRIDIT
Index
Alone

II.
Schooling
Alone

III. Both
PRIDIT
and
Schooling

Pension Housing Other
Wealth Wealth Wealth

Total
Net
Wealth

Calculated
Pension
Retirement
Density
Money

PRIDIT
Male
Age
Age-squared
Risk averse
Voucher exposure primary ages
Number of agents
No AFP activities
Mother schooling attainment
Father schooling attainment
Poor economic background
Worked when <15 years of age
Constant

1.46
15.74
4.63
-0.04
-3.99
0.55
0.00
5.13
0.52
0.48
-21.54
-4.84
-90.09

0.49
-3.18
-0.09
0.01
-1.17
0.27
0.00
1.10
0.87
0.79
-1.14
-4.62
3.46

0.62
0.18
1.38
-0.01
-3.43
0.38
0.00
5.09
0.69
1.31
0.76
-7.20
-47.90

2.57
12.95
5.52
-0.04
-8.18
1.15
0.00
10.84
2.05
2.58
-22.18
-16.90
-127.14

0.91
19.22
2.36
-0.02
0.90
0.98
0.00
4.05
0.00
-0.15
-36.35
-5.33
-22.22

0.51
2.27
0.65
0.00
-0.14
0.02
0.00
0.13
-0.03
0.03
-2.17
0.08
-11.80

Schooling
Male
Age
Age-squared
Risk averse
Voucher exposure primary ages
Number of agents
No AFP activities
Mother schooling attainment
Father schooling attainment
Poor economic background
Worked when <15 years of age
Constant

3.89
19.70
4.02
-0.03
-2.29
0.42
0.00
4.01
-0.04
0.16
-19.68
0.62
-121.33

1.70
-1.81
-0.21
0.01
-0.62
0.22
0.00
0.75
0.61
0.61
0.30
-1.88
-12.29

2.01
1.86
1.25
-0.01
-2.79
0.32
0.00
4.70
0.39
1.10
2.31
-4.04
-66.67

7.59
19.75
5.05
-0.03
-5.71
0.96
0.00
9.46
0.97
1.87
-17.07
-5.30
-200.30

1.76
21.34
2.30
-0.02
1.47
0.99
0.00
3.88
-0.18
-0.22
-36.27
-3.22
-41.48

0.80
3.40
0.64
0.00
0.15
0.03
0.00
0.08
-0.08
0.02
-2.50
0.87
-21.24

PRIDIT
Schooling
Male
Age
Age-squared
Risk averse
Voucher exposure primary ages

0.81
3.07
18.02
3.97
-0.03
-2.62
0.39

0.17
1.53
-2.16
-0.22
0.01
-0.69
0.21

0.25
1.75
1.35
1.23
-0.01
-2.89
0.31

1.23
6.35
17.21
4.98
-0.03
-6.21
0.91

0.69
1.06
19.93
2.26
-0.02
1.19
0.96

0.44
0.36
2.51
0.62
0.00
-0.03
0.01

38

Number of agents
No AFP activities
Mother schooling attainment
Father schooling attainment
Poor economic background
Worked when <15 years of age
Constant

0.00
3.93
-0.05
0.09
-18.28
0.39
-109.59

0.00
0.74
0.61
0.60
0.59
-1.93
-9.81

0.00
4.68
0.39
1.08
2.74
-4.11
-63.05

IV. Linear
and
Interaction
Effects
PRIDIT
-0.32
-0.87
-1.17
Schooling
3.14
1.59
1.84
PRIDIT*Schooling
0.10
0.10
0.13
Male
1.29
17.98
-2.21
Age
-0.25
1.19
3.94
Age-squared
0.01
-0.01
-0.03
Risk averse
-2.25
-0.35
-2.42
Voucher exposure primary ages
0.35
0.18
0.27
Number of agents
0.00
0.00
0.00
No AFP activities
4.13
0.92
4.93
Mother schooling attainment
-0.10
0.33
0.56
Father schooling attainment
0.05
1.03
0.56
Poor economic background
-0.54
1.16
-19.51
Worked when <15 years of age
0.42
-1.90
-4.07
Constant
-63.48
-109.92 -10.12
V.
Interaction
Effect
Alone
PRIDIT*Schooling
0.13
0.05
0.07
Male
-0.04
15.97
-3.33
Age
-0.11
1.35
4.22
Age-squared
0.01
-0.01
-0.04
Risk averse
-1.00
-3.22
-3.13
Voucher exposure primary ages
0.47
0.25
0.35
Number of agents
0.00
0.00
0.00
No AFP activities
1.18
5.18
4.95
Mother schooling attainment
0.46
0.84
0.64
Father schooling attainment
1.26
0.46
0.76
Poor economic background
-1.58
0.26
-23.71
Worked when <15 years of age
-5.33
-4.55
-7.07
Constant
3.99
-47.08
-82.94
Note: *italics indicate significance at 5% level or better. See also Table 4.

0.00
9.35
0.94
1.77
-14.95
-5.65
-182.45

0.00
3.82
-0.19
-0.28
-35.09
-3.42
-31.53

0.00
0.04
-0.09
-0.01
-1.75
0.73
-14.97

-2.36
6.56
0.33
17.05
4.88
-0.03
-5.02
0.79
0.00
9.97
0.79
1.63
-18.89
-5.54
-183.52

1.50
1.01
-0.07
19.96
2.28
-0.02
0.92
0.99
0.00
3.68
-0.16
-0.24
-34.18
-3.44
-31.28

0.29
0.37
0.01
2.50
0.62
0.00
0.02
0.00
0.00
0.07
-0.10
-0.02
-1.91
0.73
-15.02

0.25
12.60
5.45
-0.04
-7.35
1.06
0.00
11.31
1.94
2.47
-25.02
-16.95
-126.02

0.06
19.59
2.38
-0.02
1.10
1.00
0.00
4.30
0.03
-0.10
-37.96
-5.81
-23.91

0.04
2.32
0.65
0.00
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.24
-0.03
0.03
-2.90
-0.05
-12.08

39

Appendix B: Complete Set of IV Estimates for Table 5; first-stage estimates and
diagnostics, and second-stage estimates and diagnostics*
Components of Wealth

I. PRIDIT
Index
Alone

II.
Schooling
Alone

III. Both
PRIDIT
and
Schooling

Pension Housing Other
Wealth Wealth Wealth

Total
Net
Wealth

Pension
Density

Calculated
Retirement
Money

PRIDIT
Male
Age
Age-squared
Risk averse
Voucher exposure primary ages
Number of agents
No AFP activities
Mother schooling attainment
Father schooling attainment
Poor economic background
Worked when <15 years of age
Constant
Hansen J p

3.23
12.66
4.32
-0.04
-4.19
0.38
0.00
4.43
0.08
0.01
-15.08
-1.50
-77.73
0.35

1.14
-4.30
-0.22
0.01
-1.23
0.20
0.00
0.83
0.71
0.62
1.17
-3.67
8.15
0.40

1.83
-1.91
1.12
0.00
-3.56
0.27
0.00
4.57
0.38
0.99
5.18
-5.01
-38.71
0.09

6.20
6.44
5.22
-0.04
-8.99
0.86
0.00
9.83
1.18
1.62
-8.72
-10.17
-108.28
0.14

1.88
17.54
2.19
-0.02
0.79
0.89
0.00
3.66
-0.25
-0.40
-32.83
-3.51
-15.48
0.96

0.62
2.09
0.63
0.00
-0.15
0.01
0.00
0.09
-0.05
0.01
-1.79
0.28
-11.08
0.29

Schooling
Male
Age
Age-squared
Risk averse
Voucher exposure primary ages
Number of agents
No AFP activities
Mother schooling attainment
Father schooling attainment
Poor economic background
Worked when <15 years of age
Constant
Hansen J p

5.55
19.95
4.22
-0.03
-2.21
0.38
0.00
3.98
-0.38
-0.14
-16.27
4.51
-140.83
0.01

1.98
-1.73
-0.25
0.01
-0.53
0.20
0.00
0.66
0.55
0.56
0.81
-1.50
-14.26
0.17

2.66
2.08
1.12
0.00
-2.58
0.29
0.00
4.47
0.24
0.99
3.57
-2.67
-70.93
0.01

10.18
20.30
5.09
-0.03
-5.32
0.88
0.00
9.11
0.41
1.42
-11.90
0.34
-226.01
0.00

3.23
21.78
2.13
-0.02
1.95
0.89
0.00
3.40
-0.51
-0.49
-33.51
0.00
-52.21
0.00

1.12
3.50
0.61
0.00
0.24
0.01
0.00
-0.02
-0.16
-0.03
-1.89
1.57
-23.58
0.29

3.40
-0.34
12.25

1.06
0.14
-4.13

4.46
-5.05
-8.01

8.93
-5.25
0.11

1.94
-0.12
17.39

0.31
0.58
2.79

PRIDIT
Schooling
Male

40

Age
Age-squared
Risk averse
Voucher exposure primary ages
Number of agents
No AFP activities
Mother schooling attainment
Father schooling attainment
Poor economic background
Worked when <15 years of age
Constant
Hansen J p
IV. Linear
and
Interaction
Effects
PRIDIT
Schooling
PRIDIT*Schooling
Male
Age
Age-squared
Risk averse
Voucher exposure primary ages
Number of agents
No AFP activities
Mother schooling attainment
Father schooling attainment
Poor economic background
Worked when <15 years of age
Constant
Hansen J p
V.
Interaction
Effect
Alone
PRIDIT*Schooling
Male
Age
Age-squared
Risk averse
Voucher exposure primary ages
Number of agents
No AFP activities
Mother schooling attainment
Father schooling attainment

4.33
-0.04
-4.31
0.39
0.00
4.46
0.11
0.03
-15.09
-1.90
-74.03
0.26

-0.22
0.01
-1.18
0.20
0.00
0.82
0.70
0.61
1.18
-3.50
6.58
0.30

1.26
-0.01
-5.33
0.30
0.00
5.11
0.88
1.21
5.12
-11.08
16.60
0.82

5.36
-0.04
-10.83
0.89
0.00
10.38
1.69
1.85
-8.79
-16.47
-50.84
0.34

2.19
-0.02
0.75
0.89
0.00
3.67
-0.23
-0.40
-32.84
-3.66
-14.12
0.92

0.62
0.00
0.05
0.01
0.00
0.02
-0.11
-0.02
-1.78
0.98
-17.47
0.26

-2.28
2.44
0.44
14.32
4.06
-0.04
-1.91
0.17
0.00
4.88
-0.44
-0.38
-18.83
2.09
-99.93
0.41

-1.51
1.40
0.20
-3.19
-0.34
0.01
-0.09
0.11
0.00
1.01
0.45
0.43
-0.52
-1.69
-5.14
0.39

0.28
-3.01
0.33
-6.48
1.06
-0.01
-3.57
0.14
0.00
5.42
0.47
0.91
2.36
-8.14
-2.47
0.86

-3.51
0.82
0.97
4.65
4.79
-0.03
-5.57
0.42
0.00
11.30
0.48
0.96
-17.00
-7.74
-107.54
0.92

2.15
-0.23
-0.02
17.31
2.20
-0.02
0.66
0.90
0.00
3.66
-0.21
-0.38
-32.70
-3.80
-13.18
0.85

2.19
-0.34
-0.15
2.11
0.70
-0.01
-0.75
0.08
0.00
-0.12
0.07
0.12
-0.54
-0.34
-8.88
0.50

0.34
11.71
4.18
-0.04
-3.11
0.23
0.00
4.97
-0.13
-0.20

0.12
-4.64
-0.26
0.01
-0.85
0.15
0.00
1.02
0.64
0.54

0.20
-2.67
1.01
0.00
-2.92
0.17
0.00
4.86
0.23
0.83

0.66
4.40
4.93
-0.04
-6.88
0.55
0.00
10.85
0.74
1.17

0.19
17.11
2.12
-0.02
1.41
0.81
0.00
3.99
-0.35
-0.51

0.06
2.03
0.62
0.00
0.04
-0.01
0.00
0.20
-0.07
-0.01

41

Poor economic background
Worked when <15 years of age
Constant
Hansen J p

Notes: also Table 4.
Source: Authors’ computations.

-18.00
-1.02
-74.43
0.53

0.16
-3.49
9.35
0.52

3.83
-4.51
-35.96
0.39

-14.01
-9.03
-101.04
0.95

-34.69
-3.35
-14.03
0.21

-2.51
0.24
-10.94
0.06

42

Appendix Table B. First Stage Estimates
PRIDIT Index

Schooling

PRIDIT*Schooling

1.77
0.07
0.00
0.17
-0.04
0.00
0.04
0.17
0.19
-2.96
-1.41
2.92
-6.21
0.08
0.46
0.28
0.04
0.10
-0.58
-3.25

-0.25
0.09
0.00
-0.25
0.03
0.00
0.18
0.18
0.13
-1.51
-1.90
2.32
-1.32
0.12
0.19
0.16
-0.14
0.01
-0.24
8.11

19.87
1.22
-0.01
-1.65
0.13
0.00
-1.28
2.31
2.50
-20.16
-15.13
20.18
-58.02
1.87
4.05
1.91
-2.06
1.36
-6.04
-31.71

F test stat:
Angrist-Pischke multivariate F stat:

156.56

215.57

109.72

III. Both PRIDIT and Schooling

17.19

24.58

2.32

19.05

Male
Age
Age-squared
Risk averse
Voucher exposure primary ages
Number of agents
No AFP activities
Mother schooling attainment
Father schooling attainment
Poor economic background
Worked when <15 years of age
Primary school urban
Unemployment rate at age 16
Think I am a Failure
Can Do Well As Others
Positive Attitude about Self
Like More Self Respect
Postive Self Esteem (Sum)
Negative Self Esteem (Sum)
Constant

IV. Linear and Interaction Effects
Kleibergen-Paap Wald F stat:
III. Both PRIDIT and Schooling

15.77

IV. Linear and Interaction Effects
9.43
Note: *italics indicate significance at 5% level or better
Source: Authors’ computations.

3.16

