                    NRER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 THE EFFICIENCY GAINS FROM SOCIAL
                  SECURITY BENEFIT — TAX LINKAGE


                         Al an J. Auerhach

                      Laurence l• Kotlikoff


                      Working Paper No. 1645




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    11)50 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                            June 1985




This paper is part of the Brookings Institution project on retire-
ment and aging which is funded by Brookings and the Department of
Health and Human Services. Brookings Institution holds the
copyright. We thank Yves Balcer and participants at the May 1985
Brookings conference on Retirement and Aging for helpful comments.
The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Taxation and project in Government Budget. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                      NBER Working Paper #1645
                                                      June 1985




                         The Efficiency Gains from Social
                          Security Benefit - Tax Linkage



                                     ABSTRACT




        This paper examines the efficiency gains from linking marginal Social
Security benefits to marginal Social Security payroll taxes. In the U.S. the
current combined employer-employee OASI payroll tax rate is 10.4 percent.
Recent estimates suggest that the average marginal income tax rate is roughly 27
percent (Barro and Sahaskul (1983)). If marginal OASI payroll taxes provided no
marginal Social Security benefits or were incorrectly perceived to provide no
marginal benefits, the effective marginal federal government taxation of labor
supply would average roughly 38 percent. Since the efficiency costs of distor-
tionary taxation rise as roughly the square of the tax rate, the Social Security
payroll tax may be more than doubling the dead weight loss of labor income taxa-
tion.

          The findings of this paper suggest that there may be very significant
efficiency gains available from tightening the connection between marginal
Social Security taxes paid and marginal Social Security benefits received.
Indeed, the simulated efficiency gains are very large in comparison with those
obtained from analyses of the gains from structural tax reform. Restructuring
Social Security to greatly enhance marginal benefit-tax linkage may be
infeasible, at least in the short run. However, simply providing annual Social
Security reports indicating how a worker's projected benefits are affected by
his    or her tax contributions could provide substantial increases in economic
efficiency. Such efficiency gains are potentially as large as increasing GNP
by 1 percent this year and every year in the future.




Alan   3. Auerbach                                   Laurence 3. Kotlikoff
Economics Department                                 Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania                           Boston University
3718 Locust Walk/CR                                  Boston, MA 02115
Philadelphia, PA 19104
                                    —1—


                   The Efficiency Gains from Social Security

                             Benefit — Tax Linkage

                                       by

                                1an J. Auerbach

                             Laurence J. Kotlilcoff




        This paper examines the efficiency gains from linking marginal Social

Security benefits to marginal Social Security payroll taxes. In the U.S. the

current combined employer—employee OASI payroll tax rate is iO.1 percent.

Recent estimates suggest that the average marginal income tax rate is roughly 21

percent (Barro and Sahaskul (1983)). If marginal OASI payroll taxes provided no

marginal Social Security benefits or were incorrectly perceived to provide no

marginal benefits, the effective marginal federal government taxation of labor

supply would average roughly 38 percent. Since the efficiency costs of distor—

tionary taxation rise as roughly the square of the tax rate, the Social Security

payroll tax may be more than doubling the dead weight loss of labor income taxa-

tion.

        In a fully funded Social Security System in which individual "tax"

contributions were registered in individual accounts and paid out with market

interest in old age, the government would simply be providing forced savings

accounts for individuals, and, assuming no liquidity constraints, a dollar

contributed to Social Security would be viewed as a dollar of saving, with no

distortionary effect on labor supply. The linkage in this case, in present
                                      _0.


value,   of marginal benefits in return for marginal contributions ("taxes")   j
dollar for   dollar. While   individual accounts and tightly linking marginal bene-
fits   to marginal taxes have often alleged to be incompatible with an unfunded,
"pay as you go" Social Security system, such is   not the case. Marginal linkage
can   be equal to, greater than, or less than dollar for dollar in either a funded

or an unfunded system. Consider, for example, a fully funded system in which

uniform benefits are paid independent of individual tax contributions. In this

case the marginal linkage is zero; full funding requires only that each cohort's

old age benefits equal the cohort's accumulated tax contributions. It does not

require that individual cohort members view their own tax payments as effec-

tively identical to payments to a personal saving account.

          In an unfunded system the government can establish marginal linkage by

simply specifying a benefit formula which, at the margin, provides X dollars in

present value of additional benefits for each dollar of additional tax contribu-

tion, where X can exceed, equal, or be less than one. The fact that one's

marginal benefits and, indeed, one's total benefits are financed by members of

the next generation is of no concern in formulating individual optimal intertem—

poral consumption and labor supply decisions.

         Despite the fact that the U.S. Social Security System is essentially

completely unfunded, marginal benefit—tax linkage in the U.S. appears to be

significantly greater than one for one for some groups (e.g., older married

males with low lifetime earnings and whose wives never worked); for other groups

(e.g., low earning wives who will collect dependent and survivor benefits on

their husbands' accounts) the marginal linkage is zero. Blinder, Gordon, and
                                    —3—


Wise (1983) is the first systematic study of marginal benefit—tax linkage. This

study shows that at least prior to 1917 the benefit formula provided a very

significant return on marginal "tax" contribution to men in their early- 60s.

Some rough estimates of marginal linkage that are updated to include the 1983

legislated changes to Social Security are presented below. While these

actuarial calculations are not highly complicated, they require a clear

understanding of Social Security's benefit formula, including its method of wage

indexing, its early retirement actuarial redaction provisions, its dependent and

survivor benefit provisions, and its rules concerning the number and choice of

years of earnings entering the calculation of AIME (average indexed monthly

earnings). Given the surprised reaction to Blinder, Gordon, and Wise's findings

by students of Social Security (including the authors), it appears extremely

unlikely that typical American workers are aware of the marginal benefits they

can expect under current law in exchange for their marginal taxes. Since the

calculation of even a rough estimate of this linkage is difficult, since Social

Security neither provides such information on a systematic basis nor will calcu—

late such a number on request, and since Social Security legislation is subject

to future changes, typical workers may simply, if incorrectly, assume that the

marginal linkage is zero.

        This paper studies the efficiency costs of zero linkage when dollar for

dollar and, indeed, greater than dollar for dollar linkage is feasible. The

analysis is based a fiscal policy simulation model (Auerbach and Kotlikoff

(1983a, l983b, 1983c, 1983d, 1985, 1986), Auerbach, Kotlikoff, and Skinner

(1983)). The model assumes life cycle saving behavior and rational expectations
                                       _)4_




(actually   perfect foresight since there is no uncertainty). The version of the

model used here includes an unfunded Social Security System and the financing of

government expenditures through alternative progressive or proportional income

taxes. In addition, there is a special fiscal institution, the lump sum

redistribution   authority (LSRA), that can redistribute resources in a non

distortionary manner across generations. This fiscal agency is used in the

model to decompose welfare changes from benefit—tax linkage into those arising

from pure efficiency gains and those associated with policy—induced intergenera-

tional redistribution.

        Calculations based on the model suggest very sizeable potential

efficiency gains from running linked rather than unlinked Social Security

programs. Indeed, the efficiency gains from dollar for dollar linkage exceed,

in our model, the efficiency gains available from switching from proportional

income to proportional consumption taxation. The results are illustrative and

should not he viewed as providing estimates for the U.S. However, if P1merican

workers systematically underestimate actual marginal linkage, the results

suggest that the efficiency of the U.S. fiscal structure could be greatly

enhanced by providing, at a minimum, better information to workers about the

marginal return on their payroll tax dollars, and at a maximum, by substantially

increasing the extent of the marginal linkage. Assuming workers incorrectly

believe that they receive nothing at the margin in return for Social Security

taxes, then the model suggests that the efficiency gains from annual reporting

of marginal benefit accrual could be as large as 1 percent of GNP on an annual

basis, i.e., the possible efficiency gain is equivalent to a 1 percent larger
                                           —5—


level of    GNP this year   and every   year in the future.
        The next    section, II, contains rough estimates of marginal linkage in

the U.S. system for young workers just entering the program. Section III

describes how benefit—tax linkage alters effective labor income taxation. This

description is conducted in the context of summarizing the basic eQuations of

the simulation model and the method used to solve the model. Section IV pre-

sents the efficiency gains calculations, and Section V summarizes the paper's

findings.
                                            —6--



II. Senefit—Tax Linkage in the U.S.          Social Security System
          Many of the elements determining benefit—tax linkage in the U.S.   Social
Security Systeni can be illustrated by considering the simple case of a

twenty—year old in 1985 whose benefit formula is determined by the Social

Security Act as amended in 1983. For simplicity assume that the worker never

marries, retires at age 61 (the normal retirement age legislated for this

worker), and dies at age 15. The worker's nominal wage rate is        at age 20 and

grows through time at rate (i+m)(1+g)(i±T)—i, where m is an individual—specific

growth factor, g is the assumed constant economy—wide growth in real labor ear-

nings, and r is the assumed constant inflation rate.

          The present value of the individual's labor earnings plus Social

Security benefits (PVR) is given by:




PYR =
        s=0
              (l     + m)S(l + g)S(1 +)(i —T(1 —
                                (1 + r) (1 + it)
                                                       ) — T5)L5
                                                                              (i)



                  B(AIME)(1 +
                                      S

          5=148     (i + r)(l + )S

where r is the real interest rate, (l+r)(1+ii)—l is the nominal interest rate,

and the function B(AIME) gives the initial age 6 nominal benefit calculated on

the basis of the worker's AIMS. Since benefits, at least under current law, are

indexed for inflation, nominal benefits rise at the rate of it each year. The

income and OASI tax rates are given by T and it3, respectively. The term

(1_T5/2) reflects the fact that the employer's half of the payroll tax is

deductible from the income tax. Finally, L is the worker's supply of labor at
                                                    —1—




age s.

               The function B(AIME) can be expressed as


               B(AIME) = a + b(AIMEx12),                                                                (2)



where the constants a and b are determined by the workers' AIME bracket. There

are three indexed AIME brackets. For workers in the lowest bracket b equals

.90, b equals .32 for workers in the middle bracket, and it equals .15 for those

wnose juu is in trie               nignest   nracket.

               The formula for AIME is given in (3). It takes into account the fact

that wage indexation occurs only up through age 60. Between ages 60 and 67

(unindexed)               nominal earnings are entered into the average "indexed" monthly ear-

nings calculation.

               142                                                           147

                         W0(i+m)5(1+g)5(1+)5[(1+g)(1+)]142_5L5 +                   w0(i ÷ m)5(1 + g)5(1 +
AIME— s=13                                               38x12
                                                                        s=143




This formula assumes that the worker's final 38                      years         are his or her 38   years     of


highest earnings. The term [(1+g)(1+)]405 represents indexation for economy—

wide nominal wage growth prior to age 60. Combining (i), (2), and (3) yields:

         14i    W        (i + m)S(l + g)5(1 - T (1 — T /2) — T )L
                     0                                    5   5 S
PVR=                                                                                                      (14)
      s=0                              (1 + r)5



                            w0(i + m)S(l + g)14°(l + ¶)140L +            w0(i + m)S(l + g)S(1 +
 aD                  r513                                            s=14l
                                                    38        (+r)
                                                  —B—



            55
                      1
where D =             +   r )• Some minor additional manipulation indicates that
         st8
the effective tax rate on labor supply prior to age 63 (s<L3), T                               is:




Tes =   T(l      -   T/2)    + Ts -    [b(l + g)(l +)(i + r)SD1                        13     S < O, ()

and between ages 61 and 6 it is:


Tes= t(i —        T/2)      + T5
                                      [b( 1 + r )S(
                                                  38
                                                       +
                                                           ]   ,   1            S      )47,          (6)


where the formula relating age to s is age=20+s. Prior to age 33 when s = 13,

the benefit tax linkage is zero, and te,s=Ty(1_Ts/2)+Ts• The bracketed terms on

the right—hand side of (5) and (6) give the effect of benefit linkage in

reducing the effective taxation of labor supply. Stated differently this is the

marginal payroll tax offset due to linkage. If g =                 r   =   TI       = 0 the offset equals

bD/38 independent of age. Positive values of it lower the offset and thus raise

the effective tax rate at all ages prior to 67 because of the nori—indexation of

earnings between ages 60 and 67. Higher values of g raise the offset and thus

lower effective tax rates prior to age 61, when indexation ceases, with the

biggest reduction in effective tax rates occurring at young ages (prior to age

32). This reflects the fact that earnings in early years are given more weight

in the AIME calculation the bigger the wage growth indexation factor. Larger

values of r lower the offset factor and thus raise effective taxes; since D

declines with r, when r rises the present value of the marginal Social Security

benefits earned with marginal tax contributions declines. The decline is,

naturally, larger at younger ages.

        Table 1 presents values of the marginal payroll tax offsets arising from
                                      —9—


benefit linkage for different ages, for different assumed values of g, r, and n,

and for the three bend point bracket values of b. To put these numbers in

perspective, suppose that the value of the terms T(1_T5/2)+T is .50 for a

worker in the top (b=.l5) bend point bracket, .30 for a worker in the middle

(b=.32) bracket, and .20 for a worker in the first bracket (b=.9o). The offset

factor for workers ending up in the first AIME bracket against which the .20

figure should be compared is quite substantial; assuming a real interest rate of

.0)4, a growth rate of .03, and, and inflation rate of .05, and b=.90, the off-

set factors are .066 at age 32, .07)4 at age 45, .086 at age 60, and .159 at age

6. Hence, if .20 is the effective tax on labor supply in the absence of the

benefit—tax offset, with the offsets it is reduced to .134 at age 32, .126 at

age 45, .114 at age 60, and .041 at age 67'.   If the worker's spouse earns so

little that he or she will collect dependent and survivor benefits based- solely

on the worker's covered earnings (i.e., the spouse has an offset of zero

throughout his or her life), then the offsets of the hypothetical worker should

be increased by a factor of roughly 2.1 In this case the effective tax rate for

the low earning (b=.90) principal earning spouse is .068 at age 32, .052 at age

45, .028 at age 60, and —.118 at age 67!

        While the offsets are much smaller for workers in the h=.32 and b=.15

brackets, they are still important. At age 45 they reduce the effective tax

rate for the b=.32 worker from an assumed .30 to .27)4 for a single worker and to

roughly .248 for a worker whose spoase will collect as a dependent and possibly

as a survivor. For the b=.15 age 45 worker, the assumed effective tax is

lowered from .50 to .488 if the worker is single and to .476 if the worker is
                                       —10—


married   and   has a low earning dependent/survivor spouse. While this reduction

in effective marginal rates may seem small, the simulation findings presented

below suggest that, starting from a marginal tax of 30 percent or greater, a

reduction in the effective marginal tax by as little as one or two percentage

points can significantly improve economic efficiency. It should also be pointed

out that for high earners, whose earnings exceed the taxable maximum and who,

correspondingly receive the maximum benefit, marginal linkage is zero.

          At young ages the offsets in Table 1 are fairly sensitive to assumed

values of r and g. For example, lowering r to .02 from         with g=.03 and 1T=.05

more than doubles the offset factors at age 32. ks suggested by eQuations (5)

and (6) the offsets are less sensitive to the assumed inflation rate. When

r=.0L and g=.03 doubling ir    from .05 to .10 lowers the b=.90 offset by only 2

percentage points at age 32.

          A final point indicated by the table is that at least when r>g, which

seems the historically relevant case (see Kotlikoff and Summers (1981)), the

offsets rise significantly with age. In the case r=.04, g=.03, 1T.05 the off-

sets are zero prior to age 32 and then jumps to .066 when b=.90, to .023 when

b=.32, and to .011 when b=..15. The offsets more than double between age 32 and

67'. This feature would appear to reinforce the distortion arising under the

capital income tax that leads workers to substitute leisure when young for

leisure when old.

          The simulation model described in the following sections abstracts from

age—related changes in the marginal—tax offsets with the exception of those

associated with transitional changes in the Social Security tax rate. Given the
                                        —11—


apparently very poorly understood general level of these offests, let alone

their patterns with age, and given the added complexities of modeling age—

varying offsets, the simulation analysis is confined to describing the effi-

ciency gains from benefit—tax linkage that results in age—invariant offsets.

Presumably, if in light of the potentially large efficiency gains from benef it—

tax linkage, Congress were to legislate changes in Social Security that made

explicit benefit—tax linkage (see Boskin, Kotlikoff, and Shoven (1982) for an

example   of a proposed benefit—tax linked restructuring of   Social Security)),

such   legislation   would also likely eliminate the anonomalous pattern of offsets

with age exhibited by the current system.
                                      —12—


lit. Simulating the Efficiency Gains from Benefit - Tax Linkage

             The simulation model used to study the effects of social security

benefit—tax linkage is a general equilibrium life—cycle growth model with fifty—

five overlapping generations of households. There is a single production sec-

tor, and three government sectors, one responsible for general fiscal policy

that levies an income tax, a separate, self—financing social security system,

and a self—financing lump sum redistribution authority (LSRA). The LSRA is used

to isolate efficiency effects of various policy changes from the coincident

intergerational transfers of resources. For given values of parameters charac-

terizing the tastes of households, the technology of firms, and the policies of

government, numerical solution of the model yields a description of the path of

the economy over time and of the behavior of individual households of different

generations. Households are assumed to have perfect foresight; that is, their

current decisions are based on expectations about the future that are correct.

          We next describe, in turn, the household, production, and government

sectors, paying particular attention to the way Social Security enters the

model.



Households

          At any given time, the household sector comprises fifty—five

overlapping generations of adults. Each year one generation dies and another

takes its place. It is useful to think of these "new" adults as being twenty—

one years old with an expected age of death of seventy—five. As with other

aspects of uncertainty found in the real world, lifetime uncertainty is not con—
                                        —13—


sidered in the model.

          Individual tastes are assumed to he identical, with differences in

behavior being generated entirely by     differences   in economic opportunities.

Hence, one can describe the aggregate behavior of members of a cohort by the

behavior of a representative member. The version of the model examined here

does not include children and explicit family structure. The rate of population

growth is fixed at a constant annual rate, denoted n.

          Households in the model make lifetime decisions about consumption and

leisure based on the life cycle model of behavior, leaving no bequests and

receiving no inheritances. Each household is assumed to have preferences that

can be represented by a utility function with current and future values of con-

sumption and leisure as arguments. Leisure is measured as a fraction of the

maximum amount of time an individual could work in a given year, taking on a

value between zero and one.

          We restrict preferences by requiring that this utility function be

time—separable and of the nested, constant elasticity of substitution form.

Time separability means that lifetime utility can be expressed as a function of

individual functions of leisure and consumption in each period:


(i)       u( c,)   =
                       U[u1(c1,Z1),   ...u55(c55, z55)1

where c and     are consumption and leisure in year t. It is also assumed

here that the functions Ut( ) do not vary over time, so that Ut( )             = u(   ).   The

nested CES form further restricts both functions, u(       )   and   TJ( ).   The annual

function takes the form:
                                                   -i4-

(8)                      E(11/P) +         (l-1/p)11/(1-1/p)
while   the lifetime function is written:


                              1
                                       \l+—(t-i)   (i—i/i)
                 -
                 —
                         1—1/1' t=O
                                           /       u.

where p, i,      y,      and      are taste parameters, and T is the age of death. Age zero

in the model corresponds to actual age 20. Each is associated with a different

aspect of individual tastes. Variation in these values produces a wide range of

alternative behavioral responses.2

            In the absence of social security, the household's budget constraint

depends only on current and future values of after—tax interest rates and wage

rates. The requirement that the present value of lifetime consumption not

exceed the present value of lifetime earnings is, in this case:


              T t-l
(10)         '       {   TI
                                  S    5       t
                              (i+r (i—f ))'}[w (l—r )e (1—9. )
                                                        t t        t
                                                                       —   C
                                                                               t
                                                                                   I   0,
            t=Os=0

where r is the annual interest rate at age t, wt is the standardized wage rate

at age t (the wage rate of a new adult), T                    is   the average income tax rate that

applies at age t, and e is an adjustment factor to allow for the fact that the

household may earn more or less per hour at age t because of differences in

skill levels among households of different ages. One may think of the vector e,

composed of values of et for all t, as the household's "human capital" profile,

reflecting its change in earning capacity over time. It is taken as fixed from

the household's viewpoint.

            In addition to this overall budget constraint, one must impose the

requirement that labor supply can never be negative. This is represented by the
inequality constraints:

                    1             for all t




Accounting for Social Security

            The social security system in the model assesses payroll taxes on

individual households and gives them retirement benefits. Because it, like the

actual U.S. system, is an unfunded, pay—as—you—go scheme, it will not generally

give each generation, as a whole, an actuarially fair return on its contribu-

tions. Instead, each generation's benefits are financed by the tax payments of

those younger generations still working. In the long run, this will result in

retirees, as a group, receiving a rate of return equal to the growth rate of

covered earnings, rather than the after—tax interest rate. This rate, in turn,

will equal the sum of the growth rates of real wages and the labor force.3

       Social security affects household behavior in the model through its

appearance in the lifetime budget constraint. Expression (10) becomes:

                        T t-l
            PVB +            II   (i+r (i—Y}
(12)                     {

                    t=0 s=0
                                               [w(1_r_e)(1_ )c   0,



where PVB equals the present value of lifetime Social Security benefits, and

6 equals payroll taxes paid at age t. In an unfunded system, as in a funded

system, the government is free to specify a formulae that relates Social

Security benefits to lifetime labor earnings. The fact that, as a long run pro-

position, the return paid by Social Security on tax contributions equals the

economy's growth rate places some restrictions on the generosity of the benefit
                                           —16—


formula, at least in the long run. It does not, however, restrict the design

of the benefit formula at the margin. Table 1 illustrates for the actual U.S.

system that, at the margin, benefit formulae can be designed such that a dollar

of tax payments generates, at the margin, more or less than a dollar in present

value of benefits. In this paper we consider the following linear formula

relating the present value of benefits (PvB) received by generation i to the

present value of its Social Security taxes (PvT.).



(13)    FVB. =        ÷ X1PVT


Since

                  T        t—l
(14)    PVT. =              TI
                       {

                 t=O s=O
                                 (1+r5(1—)) lO.w(1_.)

the payroll tax offset factor at age t simply equals              Hence, if the social

tax rate is constant over a worker's lifetime, his or her offset is constant at

each age. While not capturing the rise in offsets with age (assuming a constant

tax rate) exhibited in Table 1, this formulation (13) is quite convenient for

simulating the efficiency gains from benefit—tax linkage.

          With this formula the effective marginal labor income tax rate on a

worker age s in year t is: Tt + e(i_X), where                 is the age s year t

marginal income tax rate, and           is the year t Social Security tax rate. Note

that .O is the case of no linkage, X1=l is the case, in our model, in which

the payroll tax offset exactly offsets the payroll tax, and X.>l is the case in

which the payroll tax offset is sufficiently large to lower the effective tax on
                                        —11—


labor income below the marginal income tax. We examine each of these cases

below. Another case examined here is           = 0 and X.=PVB./PVT.. Note that in the

steady state PVB<PVT cx is negative if X exceeds PVB/PVT, it is positive if X is

less than PVB/PVT.

         Figure 1 describing a one period consumption—leisure choice model with

Social Security the only government policy may help clarify how the choice of X

can influence economic efficiency. The budget constraint linking consumption to

labor earnings and Social Security benefits in a one period model is:



(15)     C = w(l—O)(i—z) + B



where C is consumption, W is the wage rate, 9.     is   leisure, 0 is the payroll tax

rate, and B is the Social Security benefit. Now let B = a + x(Ow(i—2J).          In the

figure budget line AA is the case of no Social Security and permits a maximum

utility of TJ. Budget line ADD is the case in which a fixed benefit, a:, equal

to the distance DA, is provided independent of the amount of payroll taxes paid,

i.e., A0. The utility level obtained in this case is U1, and the reduction in

private resources associated with the benefit tax program is AE; i.e., the

Social Security program depicted in Figure 1 is not actuarially fair since AE =

9W(l—2..)—B >   0.

           The budget line AF also leaves the government collecting AE in net

resources from the private sector, but permits utility of U2. The difference in

utility U2_U1 is the efficiency gain from switching from an unlinked benefit

formula in which cx > 0 and X =   0,   to a linked formula in which a = 0 and X >   0.
                                                              18-


In       this case X is set such that W(1—Z2)O(i_X) = AE.                         Since 5 will, in general,

depend on X, this expression will, in general, be a non—linear equation in X.

Given the solution to this equation, X, the government simply announces it will

pay X dollars in benefits for every dollar paid in taxes. Optimizing behavior

on the part of atomistic workers leads each to supply                                   units of leisure pro—

viling the government with sufficient tax receipts to pay benefits equal to the

preannounced X times these tax receipts with AE left over for its other expen—

U. S   1, U. I. C U C C Li C


                       The budget line EE represents the first best method of collecting AE.

In this case the government announced that G = —AE and sets X = 1.                                   This is, of

course, identical to levying a lump sum tax, which may seem infeasible.

Suppose, however, the government disquises this lump sum tax by announcing a

benefit formula with the following characteristics. There is a minimum benefit

         > 0 plus an additional benefit equal to X times the amount of taxes paid in

excess of ct*. If X is set equal to one, and cr* and                                   are choosen such that

        —            =         = —AE, then the budget line is AGGE which, in terms of the worker's

marginal choice behavior, is effectively equivalent to the budget line EE.

Certainly "a minimum benefit coupled with higher benefits for tax payments in

excess of a threshold value" sounds more feasible politically although it is

really not different from a lump sum tax.

                       The addition of an income tax to this one period model raises the

possibility of choosing X >                       1 in order also to eliminate the distortion from the

income tax. If Ty is the income tax, setting X =                                           leaves the effective
                                                                               (e+Ty)/e
tax on labor supply equal to zero. Figure 1 can now be reinterpreted to repre—
                                        —19—


 sent both the case of payroll and income taxation. The slopes of DD and GG in

this case are equal to W(1—T_O) and the budget frontier AGGE results from the

government announcing a minimum benefit of a plus X =      (8+T)/B   in additional

benefits for each dollar paid in taxes above a.

          Unlike the non—convex budget constraint AGGD, the U.S. system may

look, at least for some workers, more like the convex budget set ARID,     where
along the segment AR (corresponding to the first AIME bracket) the effective tax

rate is negative, it is positive, but small along HI (the second AIME bracket),

and it is substantial along ID (the third AIME bracket). In considering the

simulation findings it may be useful to keep in mind the values of X that would

arise in the U.S. if the actual U.S. benefit formula were replaced by benefit

formula (13), with a. set equal to zero and       set equal to PVT/PVB. Table 2
based on Table y   of   Pellechio and Goodfellow (1983) provides estimates of these

values of X for different family types age 25 in 1983. The figures are based on

current law and incorporate the 1983 Social Security Actuaries' intermediate

interest rate and other assumptions. These assumptions involve a real interest

rate of roughly 2 percent, a ) percent inflation rate, and a 1.5 percent rate of

real earnings growth. Unlike the calculations of Table 1, the Table 2 figures

include OASI dependent and survivor benefits. Table 2 indicates values of

PVB/PVT in excess of .9 for one earner couples in each of the 1983 earnings

categories. For two earner couples the values of X       PVB/PVT exceeds .9 for the

earnings levels below $25,000. These high values of PVB/PVT are paid, in part,

by single workers, particularly those with high earnings levels. For a single 25

year old male earning $35,100 (the 1983 taxable maximum), the ratio of PVB •to

PVT is .1l.
                                            —20—


Determination of Equilibrium Transition Values of Social Security's Benefit
   Formula Parameters and Tax Rates


             In the simulations conducted in this study we examine (i) the case of

setting a = 0 for all i, and            =                 and (2) the case of setting a. =
                                            PVB/PVT,
PVB.   —                                                          for all generations. The
           XPVT, where X is set equal to either 1 or
baseline from which these benefits formulae are evaluated is the economy's ini-

tial steady state in which a = PVB, and X = 0.              At the time a new program of

benefit—linkage is announced there are, of course, initial Social Security bene-

ficiaries in the model. These initial steady state Social Security recipients

who exceed age 1t5 (65 in real time) at the time of the new policy are grand—

fathered in under the old Social Security programs; i.e., they are permitted to

continue receiving the same benefits they were collecting prior to the change in

the benefit formulae

            Since Social Security is financed on a pay as you go basis, aggregate

Social Security benefits at any point in time, t, must equal aggregate Social

Security taxes:

                  )45We(1—2
                     t a           )
                               t,a ——
                                         5 Bt,a
             0    V
                 a=0   (l+r)
                               a
                                        a=46 (l÷n)
                                                   a'
where fl is the population growth rate,                is the year t Social Security tax

rate, a indexes age, Zt,a is the leisure of a worker age a at time t, and

Bt,a is the benefit received by a Social Security beneficiary age a in year t.

For simplicity let us assume that each beneficiary's benefit remains constant

                                                   =                  S   9. Now (16) can be
between ages )6 through 55, i.e.,                      t+s,6+s'   0

written as:
                                                      —21—




                 Wtea(1_9ta)
(17)                                       =    5
              a=O (1÷n)                        a=L6      (1+n)

For each worker the present value of his or her benefits is related to the pre-
sent value of taxes by the formula:


                                     55
                                                             1
                 =
(18)      PVBt       Bt+i6,6        Y      I

                                               TI    (i+rt+s (i-ft+s ))
                                               s=O


                 +
                       j0           ii    (i-+-r
                                                t+s
                                                    (i—T
                                                        t,s
                                                            ))
                                    s=O


where FVBt, a, and          are respectively the values of the present value of

benefits, of a, and of X for the generation born in year t. Tts is the

average tax rate paid by the generation age s in year t. Substituting for

Bt+,4646 from (18) into (iT) gives a sequence of equations of the form (19).

                     We (1—9.
               1L5
                     ta
(19)      t   a=O      (i÷it)
                                a
                                 t,a       =



                            15
                     . Ot_a+jwt_a+jej (l_9. a+j ,j
 55
 L
       1 \a t—a t—a'(3°
                     -j
                                                                          '1
                                                                          j j
                                                                                55
                                                                                V
                                                                                                  1

a=16                                                                                 TI (1+r t—a+s (i—f
                           it (i+r                  (i—f        )
                                          t—a+s         t—a+s,s                                       t—a+s,s
                          s=0                                                        s=O


Suppose the time path of the Social Security tax rates, the values of O, is

given. Also assume that either the sequences of                            or        are set exogeneously

according to the policy experiments (i) and (2) described above. If the time

paths of W, rt, Tt,a and 9.t,a (which depends on 't-a were also given, this

sequence of equations could be used to solve for the endogenous sequence of
                                                —22—


either at or X. In the simulation model this sequence of equations plus other

equations determing W, rt, Tt,a and                      are solved simultaneously. Actually,

the values of the time path of the Social Security tax rates, the t' are also

endogenously determined. The time path of tax rates is set equal to that which

would be required to finance monthly benefits for each successive generation

equal to 60 percent of its average indexed monthly earnings (AIMs). This choice

for setting the time path of Social Security tax rates ensures that the general

scale of the system is not affected by the particular formula choosen that links

individual benefits to individual taxes. Equation (20) indicates the deter-

mination of the time path of tax rates, Ut:

                                                         12xAIME
(20)            y
                     t
                145 W e (i—2.
                          a           )
                                   t,a =   .6
                                                  55
                                                                 t,a
           t                      a                            a
               a=0       (i+rt)                  a=146    (l+ri)



where AIMEta is the level of AIME over the 145 year work span for the cohort
that is age a in year t.

          Having described the inclusion of the Social Security System, we turn

to a brief description of the production sector as well as the model's treatment

of the government's non—Social Security fiscal policy.



Firm Behavior

          The model has a single production sector that is assumed to behave

competitively, using capital and labor subject to a constant—returns—to—scale

production function. Capital is assumed to be homogeneous and nondepreciating,

while labor differs only in its efficiency. That is, all forms of labor are

perfect substitutes, hut individuals of different ages supply different amounts
                                      —23—


of some standard measure of labor input per unit of leisure foregone. This

amount is the term et for age cohort t, introduced above.

           The production function is assumed to be of the Cobb—Douglas form:


(21)       Yt =   AK

where Y, Kt, and Lt are output, capital, and labor at time t, A is a scaling

constant, and     is a parameter measuring the factor share of capital in produc-

tion. A is assumed to be constant over time, thereby ruling out the possibility

of technological change.4

           Competitive behavior on the part of firms insures that the marginal

products of labor and capital are set equal to their respective factor returns,

w and r.



Government Behavior

           The government in this model raises income taxes to pay for its own

consumption of goods and services which is assumed to grow at the same rate as

the population.    In addition, there is a separate social security system,

already described, plus a self—financing redistribution branch, the LSRA, that

is included for the sole purpose of disentangling the distributive and eff i—

ciency effects of various policies.

           In financing its consumption, the government in this analysis uses

either a proportional or a progressive income tax. In the case of progressive

income tax marginal rates are linearly related to income. We assume that the

main fiscal authority's budget is balanced in each year, so that there is no
national debt and government spending equals income tax collections.

            When the LSRA is used to redistribute intergenerationally, it

The LSRA assesses a lump sum tax (which may be negative) on each generations,

subject to the constraint that the present value of these lump sum taxes equals

zero. The lump sum taxes levied on those generations alive at the initiation of

the new Social Security benefit—tax linkage policy are choosen to maintain the

utility levels of these generations equal to what they would have been absent

the new policy regime. The lump sum taxes on all generations at the start of

the transition and thereafter are set so as to raise or lower the utility levels

of all these generations by an identical amount. Since the model is solved in

full general equilibrium the LSRA lump sum taxes are endogeneous and their

equilibrium values are determined in the course of solving for the economy's

equilibrium transition path. Auerbach, Kotlikoff, and Skinner (1983) provide a

more extensive description of the LSRA. The Appendix describes the general

method of solving the model and also describes the parameterization of the

model.



IV. Simulation Results

            Table 3 reports the efficiency gains from switching from an unlinked

(X=o) Social Security benefit formula to three alternative benefit—tax linked

formulae. The three formulae have alternative values of X equal to either 1, ,

or   the realised ratio of the present value of Social Security benefits to the

present value of Social Security taxes. Two alternative methods of financing

government consumption are considered. The first is a 30 percent proportional
                                            —25—




income tax; the second is a progressive income tax in which the marginal tax

rate, T m   , is   a linear function of income:



(22)         T     =   .25 +


Recall   that the LSBA in these simulations levies cohort—specific lump sum taxes

such that (1) the utility levels of all generation's initially alive is not

altered and (2) that the utility of all generations born at the time the new

policy is introduced and thereafter is increased (in the case of a positive

efficiency gain) or decreased (in the case of an efficiency decline) by a uni-

form amount. Thus the LSRA is charged with maximizing the minimum welfare of

generations born after the new policy is announced. This maxiinin policy results

in a uniform utility level for all further generations.

             The efficiency gain is measured as the percentage increase in the

present value of full time earnings required to raise the welfare of individuals

living in the initial (X = 0) steady state to that uniform welfare level

received by all new generations under one of the three benefit—tax linked for-

mulae. In the case that X = PVB/PVT, and government consumption is financed by

an income tax, the efficiency gain is 1.3 percent of full lifetime resources.

Since a new generation is born each year, the efficiency gain is equivalent, in

present value, to an annual stream equal to 1.3 percent of full lifetime

earnings. The present value of actual lifetime earnings in the initial steady

state is somewhat more than one half of full lifetime earnings; the efficiency

gain is over 2.4 percent of the present value of actual lifetime earnings (or
                                     —26—



lifetime consumption since the two are equal). Measured as a percent of GNP,

the efficiency gain is equivalent to permanently increasing GNP by .18 percent.

To put the 1.3 percent figure in further perspective, one can compare it to the

comparable efficiency gain associated with a switch from a proportional income

tax to a proportional consumption tax. The gain from such a policy is 5.3

percent of full lifetime resources.5 Hence, the gain from proportional

benefit—tax linkage (A = PVB/PVT) is about one fourth of that available from

switching to a consumption tax.

          The final steady state value of A in this simulation equals .13, and

the final steady state payroll tax rate is 9.8 percent. Since the final steady

state income tax rate is .29, proportional benefit—tax linkage lowers the effec-

tive tax rate from an initial steady state value of 39.8 percent to a final

steady state value of 31.4 percent. !ote that this simulated value of A is much

smaller than those reported in Table 2, reflecting in part the model's higher

real interest rate.

          Setting A 1 or A = 4 produces strikingly large efficiency gains, 7.6

percent and 12.8 percent, respectively! The effective tax rate in the former

case is reduced from 39.8 percent to 26.9 percent. In the latter case the

effective tax is lowered from 39.8 percent to —7.1 percent; i.e., the benefit—

tax linkage when A =   is sufficiently large to more than fully offset both the

payroll tax and the income tax, leaving a net effective subsidy to labor supply

in the final steady state.

          As one would expect the efficiency gains from benefit tax linkage are

larger still if a progressive rather than a proportional income tax is being
                                    —27—


used to finance the same level of government consumption as under the propor-

tional income tax. In the initial steady state the marginal tax rates asso-

ciated with the progressive tax rate schedule (22) are 40 percent at age zero

(age 20), 50 percent at age 24 (age 45), 31 percent at age 50 (age 70), and 25

percent at age 55 (age 75) The efficiency gains reported in Table 2 from

benefit—tax linkage in the presence of this progressive income tax are 2 percent

for A = PVB/PVT, 15.1 percent for A = 1, and 26.5 percent for A =    . easured
as a percent of GNP these figures are 1.2 percent, 9.1 percent, and i6.o percent.

          Table 4 contains information about the stock of capital and the supply

of labor for the six economies referenced in Table 1. The first thing to notice

from this table is that the initial steady state capital stock and labor supply

under the progressive tax regime are significantly smaller (30 percent and 9

percent, respectively) than under the proportional tax regime. P second feature

is that when A = 1 and A = 4 benefit—tax linkage significantly increases the

supply of labor, particularly at the early stages of the transitions. The

linkage, coupled with the LSRA's tax—transfer policy, leads to substantial long

run increases in the capital stock when A = 1 or A = 4.   In the case of the

progressive income tax when A = 4, the capital stock increases by a factor of

2.7! In viewing these numbers it should be understood that the parameteriza—

tion of the model is fairly conservative with respect to the extent of substitu-

tion possibilities between consumption and leisure both at a point in time and

over time. The significant substitution effects underlying the results of Table

3 appear to reflect the substantial changes in the relative price of leisure

that occurs when A is set to 1 and especially when A is set to 4.
                                      —28—


          Table 5 shows for the case of X = 1 how the LSRA affects the results.

Note that without the LSRA, as with the LSRA, the economy's transition path

involves a pareto improvement. The reduced long run welfare gain with no LSRA

relative to that with the LSRA (1.5 percent rather than 7.6 percent) reflects

the improved welfare of those generations who are initially alive at the time

the ) = 1 benefit—tax linkage policy is implemented. The capital stock is also

larger with the LSRA since the LSRA must tax initial generations to lower their

welfare to the value it would have attained in the absence of the new policy.

These taxes lower the consumption of such early generations, accounting for the

larger accumulated saving.
                                    —29—


V. Conclusions

          The findings of this paper suggest that there may be very significant

efficiency gains available from tightening the connection between marginal

Social Security taxes paid and marginal Social Security benefits received.

Indeed, the simulated efficiency gains are very large in comparison with those

obtained from analyses of the gains from structural tax reform. Restructuring

Social Security to greatly enhance marginal benefit—tax linkage may be

infeasible, at least in the short run, However, the results suggest that simply

providing annual reports under the current system indicating how a worker's pro-

jected benefits are affected by his or her tax contributions could provide a

considerable increase in economic efficiency — perhaps as large as 1 percent of

GNP on an annual basis.
                                   —30—


                                  Footnotes


          1. Suppose, as is typically the case, that the non—working or low
earning spouse is the wife. The wife is entitled to collect dependent benefits
equal to half of her husband's benefit while her husband is alive and 100 per-
cent of the husband's benefit when he is dead. Since women live longer than men
and wives are typically 2—3 years younger than their husband, the factor of 2
seems appropriate.
          2. The parameter p, the elasticity of substitution between concurrent
leisure arid consumption, determines how responsive an individual's annual labor
supply response is to that year's wage rate. The term u represents the inten-
sity of preference by the household for leisure relative to consumption. The
greater is 1, the less labor the household will supply in order to obtain con-
sumption goods, preferring a greater amount of leisure instead. The term 5 is
the rate of time preference. The remaining taste parameter, ', equals the
household's elasticity of substitution between consumption in different years,
between leisure in different years, and between consumption and leisure in dif-
ferent years. The size of ' determines in part the responsiveness of households
to changes in the incentive to save.

          3. For example, consider the steady state of a two—period model in
which the elderly generation receives benefits equal to the taxes of the younger
generation. In this case, the benefits of the elderly will equal WyLyPy the
product of the steady state Social Security tax rate, 8, times the steady state
earnings of the younger generation which equals the steady state wage,
times the labor supply per young person, L, times the population of young
workers, P. The taxes previously paid by the elderly were OWy•LyP0/(1+g), where
P0 is the population of elderly retirees, and g is the growth rate of wages. If
the growth rate of population is ri, the elderly receive a return of (l+g)(1+n)
on their taxes. Put another way, the present value of Social Security benefits
equals (1+g)(l+n)/(1+r(l—r)) per dollar of payroll taxes.

          4 It is generally impossible to include such change without also
assuming continuous changes in tastes; otherwise the result would be either an
increasing or decreasing trend in labor force participation, leading in the long
run to an absurd result.

          5.   Thisvalue is much larger than that reported in Auerbach,
Kotlikoff, and Skinner (1983) which ignores Social Security. The larger value
found here reflects the fact that the consumption tax implicitly levies a lump
sum tax on Social Security benefits as well as private assets, when Social
Security is included in the model.
                                                             —31—


                                                        References


Auerbach, Alan J. and Laurence J. Kotlikoff, "Simulating Alternative Social
        Security Responses to the Demographic Transition," National Tax Journal,
        June 1985.

__________ Dynamic Fiscal Policy, Cambridge University Press, forthcoming 1986.
            "National Savings, Economic Welfare, and the Structure of Taxation,"
        in Behavioral Simulation Methods in Tax Policy Analysis, ed.: Martin
        Feldstein, Chicago: U. of Chicago Press, l983a, pp. 1459_98.
             "Q,,i-t1   C-+-
                        JCL L&.I. -L UJ   LifliLi -4-1,
                                                   IJSJ.'L                    ,-, ,-'
                                                             .LJL LI LALIISLS L'   L/ L -4-k
                                                                                         USSL .LJLIIILIi CiJJ LLS   L
                                                                                                                        m          44-4,,-
                                                                                                                        SI. 011 IS S U SL/tS
        Washington,     D.C.: The Brookings Institution, 1983b.

            "Investment Versus Savings Incentives; The Size of the Bank for the
        Buck and the Potential for Self—Financing Business Tax Cuts," in
        The Economic Consequences of Government Deficits, ed.: 1.5. Meyer,
        Boston: Kluwer—Nijhoff Pub., l983c, pp. 121—514.

__________  "An Examination of Empirical Tests of Social Security and Savings,"
        in Social Policy Evaluation: An Economic Perspective, eds.: Elhanan
        Helpman et al, N.Y.: Academic Press, l983d.

__________, Laurence J. Kotlikoff, and Jonathan Skinner, "The Efficiency Gains
        from Dynamic Tax Reform, mt. Econ. Rev., vol. 214, no. 2, Feb. 1983,
        pp. 81—ioU.

Barro, R.J. and Chaipat Sahasakul, "Measuring the Average Marginal Tax Rate
        from the Individual Income Tax," Journal of Business, vol. 56, no.
        1983, pp. 1419—52.

Blinder, Alan S., Roger H. Gordon, and Donald E. Wise, "Reconsidering the Work
        Disincentive Effects of Social Security," National Tax Journal, vol. 33,
        no. 14, Dec. 1980.

Boskin, Michael J., Lawrence J. Kotlikoff, and John B. Shoven, "Personal
        Securities Accounts: A Proposal for Fundamental Social Security
        Reform," presented to the National Commission on Social Security Reform,
        August 20, 1982.

Gordon, Roger H., "Social Security and Labor Supply Incentives," National Bureau
        of Economic Research, Working Paper 989, September 1982.

Gordon, Roger H. and Alan S. Blinder, "Market Wages, Reservation Wages, and
        Retirement Decisions," Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 114(2), October
        1980, pp. 217 — 308.

Kotlikoff, Laurence J. and Lawrence H. Summers, "The Role of Intergenerational
        Transfers in Aggregate Capital Formation," Journal of Political Economy,
        1981, Vol. 89, No. 14, pp. 706—32.
                                   —32—


Peilechio, anthony J. and Gordon P. Goodfellow, "Individual Gains and Losses
        from Social Security Before and After the 1983 Social Security
        Amendments, mimeo, June 1983.
                                       —33—


              Appendix: Solution Method and Parameterization of Model



Solution for Equilibrium under Perfect Foresight

             The calculation of the equilibrium path of the economy, given a par-

ticular parameterization, proceeds in three stages. In the first stage the

model solves for long run steady state of the economy before the assumed change

in fiscal policy begins. If the long run steady state is independent of the

transition path, it next solves for the long run steady state to which the eco—

nomny eventually converges after the policy takes effect, and finally it solves

for the transition path that the economy takes between these two steady states

over time. The last year, 150 of the transition path, also provides the final

steady state equilibrium.

             The perfect foresight assumption is important only in this third

stage, since in either of the long run steady states economic variables are

constant from one year to the next; any plausible assumption about expectations

formation would lead to individuals having correct foresight in such situations.

The transition begins when new information about the policy change becomes

available. One should visualize this information as an unanticipated change in

fiscal policy regimes.

             The iteration techniques used in each of the three stages of the solu-

tion are basically the same, although the actual procdure is more complicated

when solving for the transition path because economic variables are changing

over time.
                                    -3 ) -




The Steady States

          Solution for the equilibrium of the economy in the initial steady

state amounts to solving a complicated system of nonlinear equations based on

the behavior of households, firms, and the government derived from the optimiza-

tion behavior outlined above. The solution is obtained using an iterative tech-

nique often referred to in the literature as the Gauss—Seidel method.

          The algorithm starts with initial guesses of a subset of the endoge—

nous variables and momentarially treats these variables as exogenous in some of

the equations of the system where they appear. This simplification makes the

resulting system easier to solve for the endogenous variables plus the variables

for which initial guesses were made. When the solution for these "guessed"

variables equals the guesses themselves, a true solution to the full system has

been found. Otherwise, the "solution" is not consistent with equal values of

the guessed endogenous variables in all equations, and new guesses are tried,

typically a combination of the two sets of values from the previous iteration.

Typically, ten to twenty iterations are required to achieve convergence to a

solution for the initial steady state. The solution for the final steady state

is identical to that for the initial steady state.



The Transition

          Solution for the economy's equilibrium transition path proceeds in a

manner similar to the approach used to calculate the initial and   final   steady

states. There are several complications, however. First, because the economy

undergoes a transition with conditions changing over time, it is necessary to
                                       —35—


solve explicitly for behavior in each year. Moreover, because households and

firms are assumed to take account of future prices in determining their beha-

vior, it is necessary to solve simultaneously for equilibrium in all transition

years.

             This is done in the following way. The simulation model provides the

economy with 150 years to reach a new steady state. fter 150 years, the model

constrains all prices, tax rates, and shadow wages to be constant. If the final

steady state has already been calculated, it is used to provide the values of

these variables. Otherwise, they are solved for together with those of the

years 1 through 150. The choice of 150 years is arbitrary, but is intended to

provide enough time so that the economy settles down by itself well before it is

"forced" to in year 150. Thus, the constraint on the number of years in the

transition to be no more than 150 is not binding. The same path would result if

1140 or i6o years were assumed, but not if a substantially shorter period, such

as 30 years, were used, for in that time the economy typically is still

adjusting.

             As with the steady states, a Gauss—Seidel iteration algorithm is

employed, but here the problem is 150 times larger since the years are solved

for all at once. Aside from this greater complexity, a final difference in

solving for the transition path as opposed to the initial steady state is that

individuals alive at the time the policy is adopted must be treated differently.

While individuals born after the transition begins know the economic conditions

that will confront them, those born before the beginning of the transition

behave up to the time of the change in government policy as if the old steady
                                       —36—



state would   continue forever. At the time of the announcement of a new policy

to be instituted either immediately or in the near future, existing cohorts are

Thorn again' (see Falwell 198)4, Orwell 198)4): they behave like members of a new

generation, but with a shorter life expectancy and with initial assets resulting

from prior accumulation.



Parameterization of the Model

          To solve the model, it is necessary to choose values for the pre-

ference parameters, ii,   , p,   y, the capital share in production, ,   the   produc-

tion scaling constant, P, and the human capital vector, e. Some of these

parameters have been precisely estimated in several empirical studies. For the

others, however, this is not true, and for certain parameters indirect methods

must be used to obtain values. For all simulations presented below, we use the

following set of parameters:



          L:=1 5

          S=.Oi


          y=.25

          3=.25



A is scaled so that the wage of a 21 year old equals 1 when there is no social

security and the income tax is 15 percent. The vector e is based on wage profi-

les estimated by Welch (1979). Further details are provided in Auerbach,

Kotlikoff, and Skinner (1983).
                                Table 1

                    Marginal Payroll Tax Offsets



                                                        b

Age     r     g           II           D      0.90     0.32    0 •   15




20    0.02   0.03        0.05         2.89     0.000   0.000   0.000


30    0.04   0.03        0.05         1.01     0.000   0.000   0.000


32    0.02   0.03       0.05         2.89     0.141    0.050   0.024
32    0.04   0.03       0.05         1.07     0.066    0.023   0.011
32    0.06   0.03       0.05         0.40     0.031    0.011   0.005
32    0.04   0.02       0.05          1.07'   0.050    0.018   0.008
32    0.04   0.03       0.10          1.07'    o.o4    0.017   0.008


45    0.02   0.03       0.05          2.89    0.124    0.044   0.021
45    0.04   0.03       0.05          1.07'   0.074    0.026   0.012
45    0.06   0.03       0.05         0.40     0.045    0.016   0.008
45    0.04   0.02       0.05          1.07'   o.o64    0.023   0.011
45    0.04   0.03       0.10          1.07    0.054    0.019   0.009

6o    0.02   0.03       0.05          2.89    0.107    0.038   0.018
60    0.04   0.03       0.05          1.07'   o.o86    0.031   0.014
60    o.o6   0.03       0.05         0.40     0.070    0.025   0.012
60    0.04   0.02       0.05          1.07    0.086    0.031   0.014
60    0.04   0.03       0.10          1.07    0.062    0.022   0.010


67    0.02   0.03       0.05          2.89    0.173    0.062   0.029
67    0.04   0.03       0.05          1.07'   0.159    0.057   0.027
67    o.o6   0.03       0.05         0.40     0.147    0.052   0.025
6     0.04
      0.04
             0.02       0.05
                        0.10
                                     1.07     0.159    0.057   0.027
                                                               0.027
67           0.03                    1.07     0.159    0.057
                                           TABLE 2

                Ratio of Present Expected Value of Social Security
               Benefits to Present Expected Value of Payroll Taxes




Total Family                         Family rpe
  Earnings             One Earner Couple         Two Equal     Single   Single
  in 1983               (Husband works)        Earner Couple    Male    Female

$10,000                      1.58                    1.30       .73      1.03
 15,000                      1.38                    1.08       .63       .90
 20,000                      1.28                               .58       .83
 25,000                      1.11                     .87       .50       .72
 30,000                      1.00                     .82       .45       .64

 35,700                       .92                     .78       .41       .59

Source:   Pellechio and Goodfellows, "Individual Gains and Losses from Social
          Security Before and After the 1983 Social Security Amendments,"
          Table   7.
                                    Table 3

    Efficiency Gains from Linking Social Security Benefits to Payroll Taxes




                           A -   PVB
                                 PVT
Tax Regime                                     A =1        A =




Proportional   Income        1.3%              1.6%         12.8%
 Tax



Progressive Income           2.0%             15.1%         26.5%
  Tax
                                       Table 4

           Steady State and Transitional Values of Capital and Labor
                 Proportional Income Tax           Progressive Income Tax
Capital Stock   X = PVB/PVT    X=l    X=)4       X=PVB/PVT     X=l     X=L

 Year

  o                  56.2     56.2       56.2       39.b      39.)4     39.
  5                  56.7'    58.7'      61.9       39.7'     42.5

  10                 57.2     6i.        68.L       Lo.i                55.7
 50                  58.9     75.0      97.5        Li.7'     67.2     108.2

150                  58.7'    7)4.1     97.5        !42.5     66.9     106.9



Labor Supply

 Year

  0                  i8.1     18.)-L    18.4        16.8      16.8      16.8

  5                  i8.6     20.1      23.2        17.1      18.9      22.3

 10                  i8.6     20.0      22.9        17.1      18.7     22.0

 50                  18.5     19.5      22.4        17.0      17.8     21.5

150                  18.5     19.4      22.3        16.3      17.9     21.0
                                      Table 5

          Efficiency Gains from Social Security Benefit/Payroll Tax Linkage


                                       x=l
                                LSRA versus NO LSRA


Generation Born                                  Welfare Gain
   in Year                            No LSRA                    LSRA

    —55                                  0                        0

    —25                                  .3                       0

    —10                                  .9                       0

      O                                 i.1                       0

      1                                 1.5

     10

     25                                 1.7
     50                                 1.6

    100                                 1.5                      7.6

    150                                 1.5                      7.6




                                   Capital    Stock

Transition Year                       No LSRA                    LSRA

      0                                56.2                     56.2

     10                                58.6                     6i.i
     50                                60.7                     75.0

   100                                 60.5                     7L.5

   150                                 6o.'
