                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              DECODING INSIDE INFORMATION

                                           Lauren Cohen
                                         Christopher Malloy
                                          Lukasz Pomorski

                                        Working Paper 16454
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16454


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2010




We would like to thank Dan Bergstresser, Sabrina Buti, John Campbell, Jeff Coles, Josh Coval, Chuck
Dale, Craig Doidge, Esther Eiling, Ben Esty, Fritz Foley, Harold Hau, Inigo Fraser-Jenkins, Julian
Franks, Robin Greenwood, Raymond Kan, Inmoo Lee, Jan Mahrt-Smith, Jennifer Marietta-Westberg,
Jeff Pontiff, Bryan Routledge, Nejat Seyhun, Tao Shu, Sunil Wahal, Jason Wei, and seminar participants
at AQR Capital, Arrowstreet Capital, Binghamton, Canada Pension Plan Investment Board, the Chicago
Quantitative Alliance Annual Fall Conference, the China International Conference, Dartmouth University,
the European Finance Association Meeting in Frankfurt, Harvard Business School, Missouri, the Rothschild
Caesarea Center 7th Annual Conference, Universidad Autonoma de Barcelona, the United States Securities
and Exchange Commission (SEC), and the Western Finance Association Meeting in Victoria for helpful
comments and suggestions. We thank David Kim for outstanding research assistance. We are grateful
for funding from INQUIRE UK. This article represents the views of the authors and not of INQUIRE
or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Lauren Cohen, Christopher Malloy, and Lukasz Pomorski. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Decoding Inside Information
Lauren Cohen, Christopher Malloy, and Lukasz Pomorski
NBER Working Paper No. 16454
October 2010
JEL No. G12,G14,G18

                                              ABSTRACT

Using a simple empirical strategy, we decode the information in insider trades. Exploiting the fact
that insiders trade for a variety of reasons, we show that there is predictable, identifiable “routine”
insider trading that is not informative for the future of firms. Stripping away these routine trades, which
comprise over half the entire universe of insider trades, leaves a set of information-rich “opportunistic”
trades that contains all the predictive power in the insider trading universe. A portfolio strategy that
focuses solely on opportunistic insider trades yields value-weight abnormal returns of 82 basis points
per month, while the abnormal returns associated with routine traders are essentially zero. Further,
opportunistic trades predict future news and events at a firm level, while routine trades do not.


Lauren Cohen                                         Lukasz Pomorski
Harvard Business School                              Rotman School of Management
Baker Library 273                                    University of Toronto
Soldiers Field                                       105 St. George Street
Boston, MA 02163                                     Toronto, Ontario M5S 3E6
and NBER                                             lpomorski@rotman.utoronto.ca
lcohen@hbs.edu

Christopher Malloy
Harvard Business School
Baker Library 277
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
cmalloy@hbs.edu
Price setters and regulators share a common challenge: how to sift through the

multitude of information events that bombard securities markets each day, and

determine which events contain viable information, and which do not.              Price

setters in these markets must ascertain which of these events, and what parts of

their contents, have insight into firm value. Regulators, on the other hand, must

work to ensure that information flow in the capital markets is "timely,

comprehensive and accurate."1

       A class of information events that is especially difficult to decipher is the

trading activity of corporate insiders.       Insiders are a unique class of traders as

they, by definition, have favored access to private information about the given

firm. Because of this preferential access, insiders are subject to increased scrutiny,

regulation, and restrictions regarding their trading activities.

       Another unique aspect of insiders is that they often receive a large

proportion of their stakes in firms through non-market transactions (e.g. stock

grants). Through initial ownership, stock grants, and other market transactions,

insiders’ firm stockholdings are often a non-trivial percentage of their wealth.

Thus personal liquidity and diversification motives, in addition to signaling and

regulatory issues, will affect the timing and nature of insider trades, making it

more difficult for price setters to interpret any given insider trade as informative or

not.

       The detection of illegal insider trading, meanwhile, presents an even higher

hurdle: the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) must demonstrate


1
 From the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission website:
http://www.sec.gov/about/whatwedo.shtml#intro.

                             Decoding Inside Information — Page 1
that a person "trades a security while in possession of material nonpublic

information in violation of a duty to withhold the information or refrain from

trading."2 The rash of high-profile insider trading cases in recent years, notably

the government’s investigation into the Galleon Group in late 2009--the largest

hedge fund insider trading case in U.S. history--indicates that the SEC continues

to expend substantial resources trying to address this difficult problem.

       In this paper we provide a new framework for thinking about detection and

information flow in the capital markets.           Using a simple, novel approach, we

decode the information in insider trades, showing that there is predictable,

identifiable “routine” insider trading that is not informative for the future of firms.

Classifying trades in this way allows us to strip away these uninformative signals,

leaving information-rich “opportunistic” trades that contain all of the predictive

power for future firm news, events, and returns.

       Our analysis rests on the simple idea that insiders, while possessing private

information, trade for many reasons. For example, routine sells by insiders are

commonplace in the market, and can be driven by diversification or liquidity

reasons, with the insider wanting to signal that he is not trading on information

about the firm (e.g., Bill Gates). Routine buys, on the other hand, may occur

after an insider receives a bonus; since bonuses are often paid out in the same

month each year, and since insiders often receive discount plans on their company

stock (and hence are more likely to buy the stock), insider buying in the same

calendar month is common and often uninformative. Thus if one can classify these


2
 From the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission website:
http://www.sec.gov/about/whatwedo.shtml#intro.

                             Decoding Inside Information — Page 2
trades ex-ante that are routine trades (and so less informative), one can better

identify the true information that insiders contain and thus develop a richer

understanding of firm-level asset prices.

          To better understand our approach, consider the following example from our

sample.3 Moonburst is a large, publicly traded firm, which in 1994 operated in

over 40 states, and employed more than 30,000 people. The firm had a number of

insiders. In particular, two of these insiders were actively trading, but in much

different ways. In Figure 1, we illustrate what the trades of both of these insiders

looked like from January 1994 to June 1996. The first insider (the routine trader),

traded consistently over the time period, routinely trading in each and every

month. The second insider (the opportunistic trader), who also happens to be the

CFO of Moonburst, traded much differently. Her trades came at very selective

times, as can be seen in Figure 1.

          Not only do the trades of the opportunistic trader appear to contain much

more information for prices, they also have predictive ability over future news.

For instance, following the June 1996 trade of the opportunistic trader, there were

15 news announcements in the subsequent month. These news articles highlighted

the important company announcement that it would be delaying its earnings

announcement for the given quarter, and speculated as to why. This large number

of news was accompanied with a -10.0% return in the month.             These patterns

regarding the predictability of news announcements are true throughout the lives

of these Moonburst routine and opportunistic traders. In sum, the trades of the

opportunistic trader predict over twice as many news announcements as the trades

3
    The name of the firm and the dates involved have been disguised.

                                Decoding Inside Information — Page 3
of routine traders. What is important to note here is that both the opportunistic

and routine traders were trading in their respective manners throughout their

entire trading histories, so one could predictably identify these traders as either

opportunistic or routine traders before the period we have shown here. We exploit

this ability to predictably classify insiders into these two classes of traders

throughout the paper.

       Had one taken the naïve strategy of replicating all insider trades, one would

have sold short Moonburst each month over this two and a half year period and

made an average monthly return of -2.5% (as the monthly return was +2.5%). If,

on the other hand, one were to use the fact that different insider behavior conveys

different information, in a potentially predictable way, one could have sold short in

only the months when the opportunistic insider sold, and made an average of

10.9% during these trading months (or roughly 70 bp per month over the full two

and a half years).

       In this paper we demonstrate that the above example of Moonburst

represents a much more systematic pattern across the entire universe of corporate

insiders and publicly traded firms. We are able to systematically and predictably

identify insiders as either opportunistic or routine traders throughout our sample

period (1986-2007).     Further, an attractive feature of our approach is that our

classification scheme essentially divides the insider trading universe in half, with

roughly 45% of all trades originating from opportunistic traders, and 55% of all

trades originating from routine traders.        We show that the abnormal returns

associated with routine traders are essentially zero, indicating that our approach is

able to weed out more than half the universe of insider trades, and specifically the

                           Decoding Inside Information — Page 4
half that has no predictive power for future returns or firm news. Meanwhile, the

half that remains contains all the predictive power in the insider trading universe.

       Our empirical strategy for identifying routine traders is simple. For each

insider, we analyze her past trading history, and look for consistent patterns in the

timing of trades. Specifically, we define a routine trader as an insider who placed a

trade in the same calendar month for at least a certain number of years in the

past. We then define opportunistic traders as everyone else, i.e. those insiders for

whom we cannot detect an obvious discernible pattern in the past timing of their

trades. We thus designate all insiders as either routine traders or opportunistic

traders at the beginning of each calendar year, based on their past history of

trades, and then look to see how they trade from that point onwards.

       We show that focusing only on the trades of opportunistic traders allows us

to weed out uninformative signals and identify a set of information-rich trades that

are powerful predictors of future firm returns, news, and events. For example, a

long-short portfolio that exploits solely the trades of opportunistic traders

(opportunistic buys minus opportunistic sells) earns value-weight abnormal returns

of 82 basis points per month (9.8 percent annualized, t=2.15), and equal-weight

abnormal returns of 180 basis points per month (21.6 percent annualized, t=6.07).

Meanwhile, a portfolio that mimics the behavior of routine traders (routine buys

minus routine sells) earns value-weight returns of -20 basis points per month (t=-

0.57), and equal-weight returns of only 43 basis points per month (t=1.73).

Finally, we demonstrate that an alternate approach for identifying routine

trading–focusing on trade-level patterns within a given insider, and thus allowing

a given insider to be both routine and opportunistic at different times–yields

                          Decoding Inside Information — Page 5
similar inferences regarding the predictive power of routine versus opportunistic

trades.

          Importantly, we show that over half of the improvement in predictive power

gained by focusing on opportunistic trades comes from the superior performance of

opportunistic sells relative to routine sells; this is in contrast to much of the

literature (see Jeng et al. (2003) for a discussion), which generally finds weak

evidence on the profitability of insider sales. Further, we find that the returns to

these opportunistic trades continue to rise for roughly six months following the

opportunistic trading month, and then level off, exhibiting no future reversal.

Thus, it appears that the information being conveyed through the trades of

opportunistic insiders has lasting implications for firm values.

          We also examine if the number of trades of a given type (i.e., the strength

of the signal) conveys incremental information above and beyond the mere

knowledge that a particular type of trade took place. We find that this is the case:

the abnormal future returns of a firm are significantly higher the more

opportunistic buys occur, and significantly lower the more opportunistic sells

occur. In terms of magnitude, a one-standard deviation increase in the number of

opportunistic buys predicts an increased abnormal return of 35 basis points per

month in the following month (t=4.56), while a one-standard deviation increase in

the number of opportunistic sells results in a 29 basis point lower abnormal return

(t=4.97). In contrast, a similar move in the number of routine trades (both buys

and sells) at a firm has statistically insignificant and near zero predictive power for

future returns.

          Next we explore the mechanism at work behind our findings by analyzing

                            Decoding Inside Information — Page 6
firm-level news and events, as well as opportunistic trading after SEC news

releases regarding illegal insider trading. If opportunistic trades truly do contain

important information for the future of the firm, we might expect to see this

revealed in future news and events related to the firm. We find that the trades of

opportunistic insiders show significant predictive power for future news about the

firm, while trades by routine insiders do not. Meanwhile, consistent with the idea

that opportunistic traders dampen their trading activity when the potential costs

of illegal insider trading increase, we find that the fraction of traders who are

opportunistic in a given month is negatively related to the number of recent news

releases by the SEC regarding illegal insider trading cases. Further, we examine

which types of opportunistic insiders execute trades before information events, and

find evidence that local insiders, who we might expect to be more informed ex-

ante, have opportunistic trades that are especially informative for future

information events.

     Lastly, we perform a variety of robustness checks to verify that our results

are not concentrated in certain types of stocks, or at certain specific times. We

show that our main result that opportunistic trades are more informative than

routine trades holds for both large stocks and small stocks, both heavily-traded

stocks and lightly-traded stocks, and both inside and outside explicit “blackout”

periods.

     The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section I of the paper

provides a brief background and literature review, while Section II describes our

data on insider transactions, as well as the other data we use in the paper. Section

III provides the main results on the performance of opportunistic traders versus

                          Decoding Inside Information — Page 7
routine traders. Section IV explores the mechanism behind the predictive power of

opportunistic trades, and Section V provides robustness checks.            Section VI

concludes.




   I. The setting

       The trades of corporate insiders are among the most widely scrutinized

activities in the stock market each day. Regulators, investment managers, media

members, and academics continually parse these trades for signs of illicit behavior,

and for signals about a company’s future prospects.              Not surprisingly, the

widespread interest in insider trading has spawned a large empirical literature,

most of which examines the cross-sectional return forecasting ability of insider

trades aggregated at the firm level. By contrast, our focus is on the individual

insiders themselves and their past trading records, and as such our approach tries

to isolate predictable variation in the informativeness of insider trades by

identifying which insiders are likely to be trading on information and which are

not.

       Numerous papers study the cross-sectional variation of future stock returns

as a function of past insider-trading activity.      Many of these articles (see, for

example, Lorie and Niederhoffer (1968), Jaffe (1974), Seyhun (1986, 1998), Rozeff

and Zaman (1988), Lin and Howe (1990), Bettis, Vickery, and Vickery (1997) and

Lakonishok and Lee (2001)) focus on the abnormal returns to firms in relation to

various metrics of firm-level insider trading frequency over well-defined periods.

Seyhun (1998) summarizes this evidence and reports that several different trading


                          Decoding Inside Information — Page 8
rules lead to profits.4 Similarly, Jeng et al. (2003) take a performance-evaluation

perspective and find that insider purchases earn abnormal returns of more than 6%

per year, while insider sales do not earn significant abnormal returns.

        Also relevant to our findings are a series of papers, many in the accounting

literature, that examine insider trading around/before various types of firm events.

For example, with respect to future earnings news, Piotroski and Roulstone (2005)

show that insider trades reflect both contrarian beliefs and superior information

about future cash flow realizations, while Ke, Huddard and Petroni (2003)

demonstrate that insiders trade before significant accounting disclosures as much

as two years prior to the disclosure.5 In related work, Kahle (2000) finds that the

long-run performance after seasoned equity offerings is significantly related to

measures of insider trading, while Clarke, Dunbar, and Kahle (2001) provide

evidence consistent with insiders exploiting windows of opportunity by trying to

issue overvalued equity. Finally, Jagolinzer (2009) focuses on a small sample of

insiders who publicly disclose 10b5-1 plans (these plans came into existence in late

2000 and permit an insider to pre-specify her buys and sells on a given firm); he

finds that insiders initiate sales plans before bad news and terminate sales plans

before good performance.6 However, Sen (2008) examines these same plans and

finds no significant difference in stock price performance surrounding the initiation


4
  A related strand of the literature (see, for example, Seyhun (1988, 1992, 1998) and Lakonishok
and Lee (2001), among others) studies insiders’ ability to forecast the time series of aggregate stock
returns, a subject we do not explore in this paper. See also Fernandes and Ferreira (2009) for
cross-country evidence on insider trading laws and stock price informativeness.
5
  See also Fidrmuc, Goergen, and Renneboog (2006), and Elliott, Morse, and Richardson (1984) for
other evidence of insiders trading around news events.
6
  Our evidence pre-dates the existence of these plans: e.g., in unreported results we find very similar
differential performance of opportunistic versus routine trades before 2000, suggesting that our
results are not driven by trades in these plans.

                                Decoding Inside Information — Page 9
or termination of the plans.



    II. Data

          The data in this study are collected from several sources. Our primary data

on insider trades are drawn from the Thomson Reuters insider filings database.

Section 16a of the Securities and Exchange Act of 1934 requires that open-market

trades by corporate insiders be reported to the Securities and Exchange

Commission (SEC) within 10 days after the end of month in which they took

place.7 Corporate insiders include officers with decision-making authority over the

operations of the firm, all board members, and beneficial owners of more than 10%

of a company’s stock.          These reports, filed on the SEC’s Form 4, contain

information about each insider transaction and about each insider’s relationship to

the firm.8 Our data are drawn from these Form 4 filings for the period January,

1986 to December, 2007. Our analysis focuses on open-market purchases and sales

by insiders, and hence we exclude options exercises and private transactions. We

merge our insider transaction data with firm-level data from CRSP/Compustat,

including monthly stock returns, market capitalization figures, and book-to-market

ratios.

          For our tests involving insider trades before news announcements, we

extract headline news data from various newswires using the Factiva web interface.

First, we use the CRSP monthly stock name file to identify all company names of

CRSP firms between 1989 and 2007. We then select all the Dow Jones Newswires,

7
  This 10-day deadline was later changed to a 2-day deadline in 2002. The median delay between
trade date and report date over our entire 22 year sample is 3 days.
8
  See Jeng et al. (2003) for details on data issues with Form 4.

                             Decoding Inside Information — Page 10
as well as other newswires, that are available on Factiva. For each stock on the

CRSP tape we extract all the news events where the firm’s name (or any of the

names if multiple names exist for a given stock) is mentioned in either the headline

or in the lead paragraph. We restrict the search to news items in English

containing at least 5 words. We exclude republished news and recurring pricing or

market data. For every news item we retain the headline, the release date, the

release time, the word count and the data source. The final sample includes

2,956,862 headlines for 12,455 stocks between the years 1989 to 2000. The reason

we include news data only up to 2000 is that Factiva had a structural break in

their indexing system in that year, and hence from 2000 onwards indexed many

fewer firms in the news articles in its data.

       Table I presents summary statistics for our sample. This table presents an

overview of the Thomson Reuters insiders database, as well as the subset of the

data for which we can define the “routine” and “opportunistic” traders that

feature in our analysis. As noted earlier, routine trades are made for a variety of

reasons. For example, routine sells by insiders are often driven by diversification

or liquidity reasons, with the insider wanting to signal that he is not trading on

information about the firm (e.g., Bill Gates). Routine buys, on the other hand,

may occur after an insider receives a bonus; since bonuses are generally paid out in

the same month each year, and since insiders often receive discount plans on their

company stock (and hence are more likely to buy the stock), insider buying in the

same calendar month is common and often uninformative.

       We require an insider to make at least one trade in each of the three

preceding years in order to define her as either an opportunistic or a routine

                          Decoding Inside Information — Page 11
trader. Specifically, we define a routine trader as an insider who placed a trade in

the same calendar month for at least three consecutive years.9                  We then define

opportunistic traders as everyone else, i.e. those insiders for whom we cannot

detect an obvious discernible pattern in the past timing of their trades. We thus

designate all insiders as either routine traders or opportunistic traders at the

beginning of each calendar year, based on their past history of trades, and then

look to see how they trade from that point onwards. All subsequent trades that

are made after we classify each insider as either routine or opportunistic are then

placed into one of two buckets: a) “routine trades” (i.e., all trades made by routine

traders), and b) “opportunistic trades” (i.e., all trades made by opportunistic

traders).

        Note that this simple algorithm for identifying routine buying or selling by

insiders is clearly a noisy proxy for actual routine trading; our strategy will not

perfectly and correctly classify each and every insider trade. But the essence of

our approach is that on average, trades made for information reasons are less likely

to be regular in their timing, and trades made for liquidity and diversification

reasons are more likely to be regular in their timing. We have experimented with

more refined measures (with similar and often stronger results),10 but these simple

measures are sufficient to illustrate our main point. Also, as noted above, if we

alter our classification scheme in order to exploit trade-level patterns within a

given insider--and thus allow a given insider to be both routine and opportunistic
9
   We have experimented with different back-windows (one, two, three, four, and five years) of past
trading in the same calendar month. We find similar results in both magnitude and significance for
all windows. We show the results from the mid-point of these trading back-windows (i.e., three
years of past trading) throughout the paper.
10
   For instance, we have tried a more stringent definition of routine based on both identical past
calendar month and identical past trade size, and again find similar results.

                              Decoding Inside Information — Page 12
at different times--we again find similar results on the relative predictive power of

routine versus opportunistic trades; these results are described in Section III.

        Table I indicates that by implementing our routine trade identification

assumptions (e.g., requiring three years of past insider transactions), our final

sample is about one-third the size of the entire sample of insider transactions.

Panel A shows that our sample is tilted towards bigger stocks, and slightly towards

growth stocks (i.e., lower book-to-market ratios). We can also see this in Figure 2.

Specifically, from Figure 2, our insider sample has fewer micro-cap stocks (smallest

decile) and roughly twice the percentage of largest decile stocks as compared to the

CRSP universe. Panel B of Table I shows that the insiders we include in our

sample have a somewhat higher average number of trades (4.8 buys to 2.4, and 8.2

sells to 4.1) relative to all insiders.11

        We have verified that our sample is representative of the larger universe of

all insider trades in terms of the percentage of insider buys and sells (24% buys in

the entire sample, 25% in our sample) and in terms of the overall return

predictability of insider buys and insider sells. For example, the difference in

profitability of a value-weight long-short portfolio that goes long insider buys and

short insider sells, in our sample versus the overall sample, is only 21 basis points

per month and is statistically insignificant (t=0.83). Table A1 in the Appendix

presents further evidence on the profitability of insider trades, by splitting the

insider universe into young versus old companies (where the cutoff for young

companies is 3 years since the IPO). Table A1 shows that there is no statistical

11
  Note that the average number of trades only includes trades made after we classify an insider as
opportunistic or routine. All insiders in our sample have at least three more years worth of trades
that we use to classify insiders, but do not use in our subsequent tests.

                              Decoding Inside Information — Page 13
difference in the profitability of insider trades in young versus old companies; thus

we are not imposing any bias in our sample by focusing more often on insider

trades made in large companies.12

        We classify roughly 64% of insider purchases and 52% of insider sales as

routine trades; hence 36% of insider purchases and 48% of insider sales are

classified as opportunistic trades.            Overall, trades made by routine traders

comprise 55% of the total sample, while trades made by opportunistic traders

represent 45% of the total sample. This roughly 50/50 split in the data, coupled

with our subsequent results showing that all the predictive power (in terms of

future firm returns and news) is concentrated among the opportunistic trades,

suggests that our identification procedure is able to weed out a set of

uninformative signals that makes up more than half the universe of insider trades.

      Table II presents correlation coefficients for the main variables that feature in

our analysis. The number of insider sells, and particularly routine sells, is higher

for larger firms and growth firms, while the number of insider buys, and

particularly opportunistic buys, is higher for smaller firms and value firms.

Consistent with the past literature, insiders are contrarian, buying after low past

returns (measured over the prior 12 months) and selling after high past returns.




         III. Results: Performance of Opportunistic Trades versus Routine Trades

      In this section we examine the future stock return predictability of insider

12
  We have also verified (in Table A2 in the Appendix) that there is no statistical difference in the
profitability of "young" versus "old" insiders (where youth is measured by years of trading history
for a given insider--"old" insiders are those with more than 3 years of trading history).

                               Decoding Inside Information — Page 14
transactions. The goal of our approach is to identify, out of the tens of thousands

of insider trades made each year, which trades are truly informative. To do so we

implement our routine trade classification, and then analyze the stock return

performance of routine trades versus opportunistic trades.

       Our first tests employ regressions of one-month-ahead stock returns on

indicators for routine and opportunistic trades. We run pooled regressions with

standard errors clustered at the firm level; we also include month fixed effects

where indicated. In addition, we include controls for well-known determinants of

stock returns, such as size (log of market capitalization), (log) book-to-market

ratio, one-month lagged returns, and cumulative past returns from month t-12 to

t-2.

       Table III presents these regression results. Columns 3 and 6 illustrate the

main result of the paper: both opportunistic buys and opportunistic sells are strong

predictors of future returns, while routine buys and sells are not. For example, the

coefficient on opportunistic buys in column 3 indicates that opportunistic buys

yield an incremental 90 basis points (t=4.64) in the following month relative to all

insider trades.      Meanwhile, routine buys yield only 14 additional basis points

(t=0.81). The difference in the coefficients on opportunistic buys and routine buys

(=76 basis points) is statistically significant (F-test=10.07, p-value=0.002).13 The

results for sells are similar: Column 6 shows that opportunistic sells earn an

additional -78 basis points (t=5.67), while routine sells earn +4 additional basis

points (t=0.24). Again, this difference between opportunistic sells and routine sells


13
  The test of equality of routine and opportunistic coefficients is based on the point estimates and
the robust covariance matrix of the estimates (clustered at the firm level).

                               Decoding Inside Information — Page 15
is large (=-82 basis points) and statistically significant (F-test=29.30, p-

value=0.000).

         Columns 7-9 of Table III present similar results, but with all four dummy

variables (Opportunistic Buy, Routine Buy, Opportunistic Sell, Routine Sell)

included in the same regression. Consistent with the results in Columns 1-6, these

tests indicate that opportunistic trades are informative for future returns, while

routine trades are not.             In Column 9, the difference in coefficients between

opportunistic buys and routine buys is 77 basis points (F-tests=10.32, p-

value=0.001), and the difference in coefficients between opportunistic sells and

routine sells is 81 basis points (F-test=28.87, p-value=0.000).

         Overall, the combined differences in the coefficients between opportunistic

trades and routine trades in Table III translate into an increase of 158 basis points

per month in the predictive ability of opportunistic trades relative to routine

trades.14 Additionally, our results demonstrate that over half the improvement in

predictive power gained by focusing on opportunistic trades comes from the

superior performance of opportunistic sells relative to routine sells; as noted earlier,

this is in contrast to much of the literature (see Jeng et al. (2003) for a discussion),

which often struggles to find evidence that insider sales predict lower future

returns.

           We have also experimented with an alternate, trade-level measure of

"routine" and "opportunistic," rather than the insider-level measure used so far.

This measure allows a given trader to have both routine and opportunistic trades;

e.g., a given trader may be dubbed routine after having three straight January

14
     From column 9, the difference is 158 bp [=(57-(-20)-(-67-14)].

                                 Decoding Inside Information — Page 16
trades, but in this alternate setup we only dub his subsequent January trades as

routine trades, and categorize his trades in all other months as opportunistic. And

also, an opportunistic trader can have routine trades if he establishes a routine in

any given calendar month.      In Appendix Table A3, Column 3 shows that the

spread between opportunistic and routine buys using this trade-level measure

(analog of Column 3 in Table III) is again large and significant (=94 basis points,

F-test=8.39, p-value=0.0038), while Column 6 indicates that the spread between

opportunistic and routine sells (analog of Column 6 in Table III) is also again large

and significant (=94 basis points, F-test=15.99, p-value=0.0001).       These results

demonstrate that our identification of informed insider trading is robust to slight

changes in the classification procedure.

       Next we analyze the returns of portfolios formed according to our routine

trade classification scheme. These provide a further test of the predictive ability of

opportunistic versus routine trades.       To construct our portfolios, we identify

opportunistic and routine trades each month, and then form opportunistic buy,

opportunistic sell, routine buy, and routine sell portfolios containing these stocks.

We then hold these stocks over the month following these insider trades; at the

end of the month, we rebalance the portfolios based on new insider trades.

Although the official SEC regulation was a requirement to report by the tenth day

of the following month (which was then changed to 2 days after the trade date in

2002), nearly all of the trades in our sample were reported to the SEC within a few

days of the trade (median of 3 days over the entire sample), so we are confident




                          Decoding Inside Information — Page 17
they were available at portfolio formation here.15 We compute both equal- and

value-weight portfolios, and report the results in Table IV.

        Table IV reports raw portfolio returns, as well as risk-adjusted portfolio

returns (alphas) for the CAPM, Fama-French three-factor model, the Carhart

(1997) four-factor model, and the five-factor model including a liquidity factor, as

well as DGTW characteristic-adjusted returns.16 Table IV shows that a portfolio

strategy that focuses solely on the trades made by opportunistic traders earns large

and significant returns, while a strategy that follows the trades of routine traders

does not.     For example, the equal-weight portfolio that goes long opportunistic

buys and short opportunistic sells earns a five-factor alpha of 180 basis points per

month (t=6.07), or over 21.6% per year, while the portfolio that goes long routine

buys and short routine sells earns a only marginally significant 43 basis points per

month (t=1.73).

        The bottom half of Table IV reveals a similar pattern for value-weight

returns.    While the spread between routine buys and routine sells is actually

negative when using value-weight returns, the spread in five-factor alphas between

opportunistic buys and opportunistic sells is a positive and significant 82 basis


15
   Given that the actual required reporting date for insiders is the 10th of the following month, in
the Appendix Table A4 we re-run all the results from Table III, but this time using returns from
the 11th day of day 1+1 to the 10th day of month t+2 in our tests (rather than from the 1st day of
month t+1 to the last day of month t+1), and the results are virtually identical to those in Table
III, meaning that our results are not sensitive to the timing convention we employ here; this finding
also demonstrates that our results are fully tradable in real-time.
16
   Daniel and Titman (1997, 1998) suggest that characteristics can be better predictors of future
returns than factor loadings. Following Daniel, Grinblatt, Titman, and Wermers (1997), we
subtract from each stock return the return on a portfolio of firms matched on market equity,
market-book, and prior one-year return quintiles (a total of 125 matching portfolios). These 125
portfolios are reformed every month based on the market equity, M/B ratio, and prior year return
from the previous month. The portfolios are equal weighted and the quintiles are defined with
respect to the entire CRSP universe in that month. We term these abnormal returns DGTW
characteristic-adjusted returns.

                              Decoding Inside Information — Page 18
points per month (t=2.15), or 9.8% per year. Thus our predictability evidence is

not limited to smaller firms, as in some prior studies that use insider trading data

(see Lakonishok and Lee (2001) for a discussion).          Further, these results again

demonstrate that all of the return predictability in the insider universe is

concentrated within the trades of opportunistic traders.

      In Figure 3 we plot event-time returns based on the portfolios out to twelve

months, to illustrate the longer-term performance of opportunistic trades relative

to routine trades. Figure 3 indicates that the twelve-month event-time return on a

value-weight four-leg spread portfolio (=[Opportunistic Buy-Opportunistic Sells]-

[Routine Buys-Routine Sells]) is roughly 4%; for the equal-weight four-leg spread

portfolio, the twelve-month event-time return is roughly 8%.            In both cases,

returns continue to rise for the first six months, and then level off, exhibiting no

future reversal. This suggests that the information being conveyed through the

trades of opportunistic insiders has a lasting impact on firm value.

      Taken as a whole, the findings in Table IV and Figure 3 corroborate our

earlier regression results, and provide economically and statistically significant

evidence that insider trades by opportunistic traders are much more informative

than insider trades by routine traders.

     Next we investigate the impact of trade clustering on the relative performance

of opportunistic trades and routine trades, under the hypothesis that the number

of a given type of trade (i.e., the strength of the signal) may convey incremental

information above and beyond the mere knowledge that a particular type of trade

took place. Specifically, instead of using a simple indicator variable on the right-

hand side of our regressions to identify the execution of any routine or

                          Decoding Inside Information — Page 19
opportunistic trades, we now use the actual number of each type of trade as our

independent variable and run the same predictive regressions as before.

      Table V demonstrates that the (natural log of the) number of opportunistic

buys is strongly positively related to future returns.                To get an idea of the

magnitude of this effect, the coefficient estimate in Column 3 (=0.66, t=4.56)

implies that a one-standard deviation increase in the log number of opportunistic

buys (=0.54) per month translates to higher future returns of 35 basis points per

month.     Meanwhile, the number of routine buys in a given trading month is

unrelated to future returns, suggesting that insider buying intensity is a poor

predictor of returns when those trades are of the routine variety. Columns 4-6

reveal an analogous result for opportunistic sells. The coefficient in Column 6 (=-

0.31, t=4.97) implies that a one-standard deviation increase in the log number of

opportunistic sells (=0.93) translates to a decrease in future returns of 29 basis

points per month. By contrast, the number of routine sells is uninformative for

future returns. And again when we include all of the routine and opportunistic

variables together in a single regression (in Columns 7-9), the results are the

same.17

      Collectively our results in Tables III-V indicate that opportunistic trades, and

the intensity of these trades, are informative for future returns, while routine

trades are not.      These findings suggest that the ability to predictably classify

insiders into either routine or opportunistic traders, using our simple empirical

17
  Note that we have also run all tests in Tables III and V using Fama-MacBeth regressions, as well
as pooled regressions with month and firm fixed effects, and the results are very similar. For
instance, the analog of the full specification in Table V, Column 9 using a Fama-MacBeth
estimation gives buy and sell coefficients of 0.70 (t=3.72) and -0.40 (t=-2.86), and using month
and firm fixed effects gives coefficients of 0.56 (t=2.46) and -0.21 (t=2.23).

                              Decoding Inside Information — Page 20
strategy, allows one to focus in on the half of the insider universe that contains all

the informative trades.



     IV. Mechanism

      In this section we examine information events and the timing of insider

transactions.     Our goal is to explore the mechanism behind the large return

predictability that we observe following opportunistic trades.

      We start by examining whether opportunistic trades are more likely than

routine trades to precede important information events for the firm. To do so, we

run panel regressions of firm-level information events (available from 1989-2000) on

the number of opportunistic trades and the number of routine trades.                        The

information events we examine are: headline news events about the firm, sell-side

analyst research releases about the firm (i.e., annual and quarterly earnings

forecast revisions, as well as buy/sell recommendation changes), and important

management disclosures about the firm (SEO announcements and merger

announcements).18 We use the number of firm-level information events in a given

category in a given month as our left-hand side variable, and control for the

general level of news about the firm on the right-hand side (using, for example, the

number of information events last month, and the average number of information

events over the prior six months). As in Tables III and V, we also control for firm-

level measures of size, book-to-market, and past returns.

      Table VI shows that opportunistic trades are predictive of future information

18
  We exclude other firm events such as earnings announcements and dividend announcements that
are often pre-scheduled far in advance and subject to explicit insider trading blackout periods.

                             Decoding Inside Information — Page 21
events at the insider’s firm, while routine trades are not. This result holds across

all information events, holds for a variety of sub-categories, and holds whether or

not we control for the general level of news about a firm. For example, in Column

3 of Table VI, where we use the sum of all information events as the left-hand side

variable, the coefficient on the number of opportunistic trades is positive (=0.03)

and significant (t=2.78), while this same coefficient for routine trades is

insignificant.   To get an idea of the magnitude of this effect, a one-standard

deviation increase in the number of opportunistic trades translates into 1.0 more

total information events in the following month for the firm; the average number of

total information events per firm per month is 4.8 (median=5), so this effect

implies a percentage increase of around 20% in the number of important events

following these opportunistic trades.

     Looking specifically at firm news, Columns 4-6 show that opportunistic

insider trades are strongly predictive of future headline news events.          The

coefficient on opportunistic trades in Column 6 (=0.03, t=3.26) implies that for a

one-standard deviation move in the number of opportunistic trades, the firm

experiences 1.0 more headline news events next month relative to an average of 3.3

events per month (median=3); in percentage terms this translates to a 32% to 35%

increase in the number of headline news events. Finally, in the Appendix Table

A5 we show that if we split the number of opportunistic insider trades into the

number of opportunistic buys and sells separately, both variables predict future

news.   In fact, Column 6 of Table A5 indicates that opportunistic sells have

somewhat more predictive power for future news than opportunistic buys, although

both are significant predictors of future news. This provides additional evidence on

                          Decoding Inside Information — Page 22
the power of our classification scheme to identify informative insider sells in

particular, in contrast to much of the literature.

     Next we explore the behavior of opportunistic traders in the wake of news

about illegal insider trading litigation cases.      Since opportunistic trades predict

future firm-level returns, as well as future firm-level news, it is plausible that

opportunistic traders might be especially sensitive to the potential costs and

penalties associated with illegal insider trading. We test this idea by regressing the

fraction of insiders trading in a given month who are opportunistic on recent SEC

releases regarding litigation cases against illegal insider trading. Specifically, the

dependent variable we examine is the number of opportunistic insiders trading in

month t+1 divided by the number of all insiders trading in month t+1, and the

independent variable of interest is the natural logarithm of one plus the number of

SEC releases regarding litigation cases against illegal insider activity in month t.

We also include control variables for the fraction of opportunistic insiders trading

in month t and month t-1, the CRSP value-weight market return in month t, the

standard deviation of daily market returns in month t, and various windows of

past cumulative market returns (month t-3 to t-1, month t-6 to t-1, and month t-

12 to t-1).

     Table VII illustrates that opportunistic trading decreases significantly

following recent releases from the SEC regarding illegal insider trading cases,

consistent with the idea that opportunistic traders dampen their trading activity

when the potential costs of illegal trading increase. Specifically, the coefficient on

the number of SEC releases in Column 7 is -0.015 (t=2.41).

     Finally, we explore our results in even greater depth by analyzing which types

                          Decoding Inside Information — Page 23
of opportunistic insiders are especially informed about future news events.                          We

explore this idea in Table VIII by adding a series of additional explanatory

variables to the specifications we employ in Columns 1-3 of Table VI, where we use

the total number of information events as our dependent variable. Specifically, in

addition to the number of opportunistic trades, we add independent variables equal

to: a) the number of opportunistic trades by local insiders (where local is defined

as residing in the same state as the firm’s corporate headquarters), b) the number

of opportunistic trades by senior insiders (where senior is defined as either the

CEO, CFO, or Chairman of the Board), c) the number of opportunistic trades by

inside/non-independent directors,19 and d) the number of opportunistic trades by

outside/independent directors (where independent directors are identified using the

“role-code” variable in the Thomson database).20

      Table VIII provides modest evidence consistent with the idea that informed

opportunistic      insiders     trade    more     before     information       events    than     other

opportunistic insiders. Specifically, the first column of Table VIII indicates that

the number of opportunistic trades by local insiders is positively related to the

total number of firm-level information events in the following month.                               The

magnitude of the coefficient in Column 1 (=0.03, t=2.85) implies that for a one-

standard deviation move in the number of opportunistic trades by locals, the firm

experiences 1.0 additional information events next month (so a roughly 20%

increase, with an average of 4.8 and median of 5). By contrast, comparing these to

19
   Note that not all insiders are necessarily directors. The class of insiders includes non-directors,
inside directors, and outside directors.
20
   We have also examined the characteristics of opportunistic versus routine traders in a logit
framework. Their characteristics are, by and large, remarkably similar; e.g., the percentage of
insiders that are local, independent, or senior, are not reliably different across the two groups.

                                Decoding Inside Information — Page 24
the opportunistic trades of the other classes of insiders in Columns 2-4, and

especially in the full specification of Column 5, we find no significant difference in

the explanatory power between the opportunistic trades of independent directors,

senior insiders, or inside directors.   Given the evidence in Ravina and Sapienza

(2009) that the difference in the profitability of insider trades by executives

relative to those by independent directors is quite small, these results may not be

surprising.



     V. Robustness

     In this section we perform a series of additional tests in order to evaluate the

robustness of our findings.      The goal is to verify that our results are not

concentrated in certain types of stocks, or at certain specific times. To do so, we

examine a variety of subsamples, such as large stocks versus small stocks, stocks

heavily-traded by insiders versus stocks lightly-traded by insiders, and finally

trades made only during specific times (such as inside or outside explicit

“blackout” windows).

     Table IX presents tests for these various subsamples. The regressions are

performed identically to Table III, where future one-month returns are regressed on

the dummy variables Opportunistic Buy, Routine Buy, Opportunistic Sell, and

Routine Sell, plus a series of control variables. Columns 1 and 2 (3 and 4) include

only stocks in the top (bottom) half of the market capitalization distribution,

where market cap is measured in December of the prior year. These results show

that opportunistic trades (both buys and sells) predict returns for both large stocks


                          Decoding Inside Information — Page 25
and small stocks, while routine trades (both buys and sells) are uninformative for

both large and small stocks.

      Next we explore if insider trading intensity (see Seyhun (1998) and

Lakonishok and Lee (2001)) is related to our findings. Specifically, Columns 5 and

6 (7 and 8) include only stocks in the top (bottom) half of the distribution of

fraction of shares outstanding traded by insiders in the prior year. Again we find

that both opportunistic buys and sells are strongly predictive of future returns for

both high- and low-intensity stocks. Meanwhile, routine sells do not predict future

returns for high- or low-intensity stocks.                Routine buys exhibit marginal

predictability, but only for high-intensity stocks, and with only roughly a third the

magnitude of the opportunistic buys.

      Finally, we explore if our results are concentrated inside (or outside) explicit

“blackout” windows.         Blackout windows are times during which insiders are

allegedly prohibited from trading in their company’s stock.                    Although these

windows vary by firm (see Bettis, Coles, and Lemon (2000)), many firms explicitly

allow insider trading solely during the month following a quarterly earnings

announcement (e.g., trading days +3 to +24 after an earnings release). Note that

in our data we do observe frequent trading outside this post-earnings (+3 to +24

day) trading window for many firms, but this stringent window is a time during

which insider trading is unambiguously permitted by many firms. Hence, exploring

the behavior of opportunistic versus routine traders inside and outside this window

allows us to assess the impact (if any) of blackout windows on our findings.21


21
  We have experimented with a variety of other definitions for blackout windows, and the results
are similar to those presented here.

                              Decoding Inside Information — Page 26
     Columns 9 and 10 include only those trades that are unambiguously

permitted, i.e., trades made within the post-earnings (+3 to +24) trading window,

while also excluding any trades that occur up to 30 days before an M&A

announcement; Columns 11 and 12 explore the remaining “blackout window”

trades. We find that during both blackout and non-blackout periods, opportunistic

buys (and sells) are strong predictors of future returns. In contrast, routine trades

(buys and sells) have no predictive power for future returns during either blackout

or non-blackout periods.

     Overall, the results in Table IX indicate that opportunistic trades are much

more informative than routine trades for a variety of subsamples: large stocks,

small stocks, heavily-traded stocks, lightly-traded stocks, and inside and outside

pre-defined blackout windows.



     VI. Conclusion

     In this paper we employ a simple empirical strategy to decode the information

in insider trades.    Our analysis rests on the basic premise that insiders, while

possessing private information, trade for many reasons, and that by identifying ex-

ante those trades that are routine (and hence uninformative), one can better

isolate the true information that insiders contain about the future of firms. Using

simple definitions of routine trades, we are able to systematically and predictably

identify insiders as either opportunistic or routine traders throughout our sample.

We show that stripping away the uninformative signals of routine traders leaves a

set of information-rich opportunistic trades that are powerful predictors of future


                           Decoding Inside Information — Page 27
firm returns, news, and events. An advantage of our approach is that it weeds out

roughly half the universe of insider trades, and specifically the half that has no

predictive power for future returns or firm news. Meanwhile the half that remains

contains all the predictive power in the insider trading universe.

     We show that while the abnormal returns associated with routine traders are

essentially zero, a portfolio strategy that instead focuses solely on opportunistic

insider trades yields value-weight (equal-weight) abnormal returns of 82 basis

points per month (180 basis points per month). Similarly, in a regression context

the combined differences in the coefficients between opportunistic trades and

routine trades translate into an increase of 158 basis points per month in the

predictive ability of opportunistic trades relative to routine trades. Further, this

effect increases with the strength of the opportunistic signal: the more

opportunistic buys (sells) there are on a given firm, the more pronounced are the

positive (negative) future returns. By contrast, we find no relation between the

number of routine trades and future returns.

        In exploring the mechanism at work behind our identification and return

results, we demonstrate that trades by opportunistic insiders predict future firm

news and future firm events, while trades by routine insiders do not. Further, we

find that opportunistic traders decrease their trading activity in the wake of

increases in the number of news releases by the SEC regarding illegal insider

trading cases, consistent with the idea that opportunistic traders are sensitive to

the potential costs of illegal insider trading. Finally, we find evidence that some

classes of opportunistic insiders that we might expect to be more informed ex-ante

(such as local insiders) have trades that are especially informative for future

                          Decoding Inside Information — Page 28
information events.

     Collectively our results suggest that it is possible to identify, out of the tens

of thousands of insider trades made each year, which trades are truly informative.

More generally, decoding the true information in other activities in the market,

such as the trades made by banks or institutional investors, would help price

setters, market regulators, and all active participants in securities markets develop

a clearer picture of the information environment that helps form asset prices.




                          Decoding Inside Information — Page 29
References


Bettis, Carr, Jeffrey Coles, and Michael Lemmon, 2000, Corporate policies
       restricting trading by insiders, Journal of Financial Economics 57, 191-220.

Bettis, Carr, Don Vickery, and D. W. Vickery, 1997, Mimickers of corporate
       insiders who make large-volume trades, Financial Analysts Journal 53,
       57-66.

Clarke, Jonathan, Craig Dunbar, and Kathleen M. Kahle, 2001, Long-run
      performance and insider trading in completed and canceled seasoned equity
      offerings, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 36, 415-430.

Daniel, K., Titman, S., 1997, Evidence on the characteristics of cross sectional
       variation in stock returns. Journal of Finance 52, 1-33.

Daniel, K., Titman, S., 1998, Characteristics or covariances? Journal of Portfolio
     Management 24, 24-33.

Daniel, K., Grinblatt, M., Titman, S., Wermers, R., 1997, Measuring mutual fund
     performance with characteristic-based benchmarks. Journal of Finance 52,
     1035-1058.

Elliot, John, Dale Morse, and Gordon Richardson, 1984, The association between
        insider trading and information announcements, Rand Journal of
        Economics 15, 521-536.

Fernandes, N., and M. A. Ferreira, 2009, Insider trading laws and stock price
      informativeness, Review of Financial Studies 22, 1845-1887.

Fidrmuc, J., Goergen, M. and L. Renneboog (2006), Insider trading, news releases
      and ownership concentration, Journal of Finance 61, 2931-2973.

Jaffe, Jeffrey F., 1974, Special information and insider trading, Journal of Business
        47, 410-428.

Jagolinzer, Alan D., 2009, SEC Rule 10b5-1 and insiders’ strategic trade,
       Management Science 55, 224-239.

Jeng, Leslie A., Andrew Metrick, and Richard Zeckhauser, 2003, Estimating the
       returns to insider trading: a performance-evaluation perspective, The
       Review of Economics and Statistic 85, 453-471.

Kahle, Kathleen M., 2000, Insider trading and the long-run performance of new
      security issues, Journal of Corporate Finance 6, 25-53.


                          Decoding Inside Information — Page 30
Ke, Bin, Steven Huddard, and Kathy Petroni, 2003, What insiders know about
      future earnings and how they use it: Evidence from insider trades, Journal
      of Accounting and Economics 35, 315-346.

Lakonishok, Josef, and Inmoo Lee, 2001, Are insiders’ trades more informative?,
      Review of Financial Studies 14, 79-111.

Lin, Ji-Chai, and John S. Howe, 1990, Insider trading in the OTC market, Journal
       of Finance 45, 1273-1284.

Lorie, James H., and Victor Niederhoffer, 1968, Predictive and statistical
       properties of insider trading, Journal of Law and Economics 11, 35-53.

Piotroski, Joseph D., and Darren T. Roulstone, 2005, Do insider trades reflect
       contrarian beliefs and superior knowledge about cash flow realizations?,
       Journal of Accounting and Economics 39, 55-81.

Ravina, Enrichetta, and Paola Sapienze, 2009, What do independent directors
      know? Evidence from their trading, Review of Financial Studies
      (forthcoming).

Rozeff, Michael S., and Mir A. Zaman, 1988, Market efficiency and insider trading:
       New evidence, Journal of Business 61, 25-44.

Sen, Rik, 2008, Are pre-planned insider sales strategically timed?, Working paper,
      New York University.

Seyhun, H. Nejat, 1986, Insiders’ profits, costs of trading, and market efficiency,
      Journal of Financial Economics 16, 189-212.

Seyhun, H. Nejat, 1988, The information content of aggregate insider trading,
      Journal of Business 61, 1-24.

Seyhun, H. Nejat, 1992, Why does aggregate insider trading predict future stock
      returns?, Quarterly Journal of Economics 107, 1303-1331.

Seyhun, H. Nejat, 1998, Investment Intelligence from Insider Trading, Cambridge,
      MA: The MIT Press.




                          Decoding Inside Information — Page 31
                                   Figure 1: Moonburst Example
Below are a table and figures for the Moonburst firm from our sample. The table contains Opportunistic
and Routine insider sell trades over a period of two and a half years, and also the returns in the months
following the trades. Also contained in the table are full-sample averages of returns following
Opportunistic and Routine insider trade sales, and the average number of news events in the months
following Opportunistic and Routine sales. The accompanying graphs show the full-sample average of
returns to insider sells and news following insider sell trades. The firm’s name and trade dates have been
disguised.


 Insider Trade   Opportunistic   Routine   Return Next
     Month          Sells         Sells      Month                   Avg Returns to Insider
     Jan-94                        1          12.2%
     Feb-94                        1           4.5%                          Sales
    Mar-94                         1         -13.2%
     Apr-94                        1           2.0%             5.00%
    May-94             1           1         -11.9%
     Jun-94                        1          14.1%             0.00%
     Jul-94                        1           8.6%
    Aug-94                         1          -9.8%                       Avg Ret Routine    Avg Ret Opportun
     Sep-94                        1           0.3%            ‐5.00%
     Oct-94                        1          -0.8%
    Nov-94                         1           8.5%
     Dec-94                        1          12.7%           ‐10.00%
     Jan-95                        1           7.9%
     Feb-95                        1          -1.1%           ‐15.00%
    Mar-95                         1           3.4%
    Apr-95                         1           2.5%                   Avg Ret Routine      Avg Ret Opportun
    May-95                         1           5.4%
     Jun-95                        1           1.8%
     Jul-95                        1           3.5%
    Aug-95                         1          -1.8%
     Sep-95                        1          12.1%
     Oct-95                        1          12.4%
    Nov-95                         1          -3.1%
     Dec-95                        1           3.3%                      Avg News following
     Jan-96                        1           0.9%
     Feb-96                        1           7.8%                         Insider Sales
    Mar-96                         1          -2.4%           6.00
    Apr-96                         1           9.9%
    May-96                         1          -4.5%           5.00
     Jun-96            1           1         -10.0%           4.00
 Avg Ret Following Routine Sells               2.5%           3.00
 Avg Ret Following Opportunistic Sells        -10.9%          2.00
                                                              1.00
              Full Sample for Moonburst                       0.00
 Avg Ret Following Routine Sells               2.2%                     Avg News Routine     Avg News Opportunistic
 Avg Ret Following Opportunistic Sells        -11.8%
                                                                     Avg News Routine      Avg News Opportunistic
 Avg News Following Routine Sells              2.71
 Avg News Following Opportunistic Sells        5.67
                                      Figure 2: Size distribution

This figure plots the distribution of market capitalization of the opportunistic and routine trade sample.
Every calendar month we assign stocks to size deciles using NYSE breakpoint. We plot the % of stocks in
each size bin between 1989 and 2007.




 35%


 30%


 25%


 20%


 15%


 10%


  5%


  0%
          D1        D2        D3        D4       D5        D6         D7        D8        D9       D10
           All CRSP Stocks         Stocks with opportunistic trades        Stocks with routine trades
                                          Figure 3: Returns to Opportunistic Trades, Event-time Returns

     This figure shows the event-time returns to portfolios that follow the trades of opportunistic and routine insiders from 1989 to 2007. Opportunistic
     trades are defined as in Table I, as are routine trades. This figure presents the difference in performance following opportunistic versus routine
     buys (dashed line), opportunistic versus routine sells (dotted line), and of the buy-sell, opportunistic-routine spread portfolio (solid line), over 12
     months following portfolio formation.


     Returns to Opportunistic and Routine Trades in the following 12 months



                           Equal-weight portfolios                                                        Value-weight portfolios
10                                                                                5
 8                                                                                4
 6                                                                                3
 4                                                                                2
 2                                                                                1
 0                                                                                0
-2      0     1    2      3     4    5    6     7     8   9   10    11   12            0     1    2      3    4    5     6     7     8   9    10   11    12
                                                                                 -1
-4
                                                                                 -2
                       Opportunistic minus Routine (Buys - Sells)                                     Opportunistic minus Routine (Buys - Sells)
                       Opportunistic (Buys - Sells)                                                   Opportunistic (Buys - Sells)
                       Routine (Buys - Sells)                                                         Routine (Buys - Sells)
                                    Table I: Summary Statistics

This table presents an overview of the sample we use in this paper, for which we can define programs
(Opportunistic Universe), compared to the entire TFN Insiders database (Insider Universe), between 1989
and 2007. Each year, the opportunistic universe is that universe of insiders who have at least one trade in
each of the preceding 3 years (so that routine traders and opportunistic traders can be defined). Panel A
presents firm-level characteristics, with all numbers being full sample averages (medians), except for # of
unique companies, which is the total number of unique companies over the entire sample period. Size is
defined as the market capitalization of the firm in millions of dollars. Book-to-markets that are negative,
or greater than 100 (likely mistakes in the data) are excluded from the data. Panel B presents insider-
level characteristics for both the Opportunistic Universe and the Insider Universe. Trades over the last
three years are used to characterize insiders as either routine or opportunistic traders. All subsequent
trades that are made after we classify each insider as either routine or opportunistic are then placed into
one of two buckets: a) “routine trades” (i.e., all trades made by routine traders), and b “opportunistic
trades” (i.e., all trades made by opportunistic traders).

                                  Panel A: Firm-Level Characteristics
                                                Opportunistic Universe         Insider Universe
                                                  Average       Median        Average     Median
        Size                                        3274           330          1604        117
        Size percentile                           63.95%        69.57%        52.38%      53.93%
        Book-to-market                              0.66          0.47          0.84       0.55
        Book-to-market percentile                 42.52%        39.18%        47.47%      45.43%
        # buys/ company                            21.10            2           31.45       15
        # sells/ company                           68.89            6           59.17       20
        # of unique companies                       5493                       15276

                                   Panel B: Insider-Level Characteristics
                                                   Opportunistic Universe      Insider Universe
                                                     Average       Median     Average     Median
        # buys/ insider                                4.79            0        2.35         1
        Buy trade size (bps)                           16.62         1.94       14.93      1.61
        % all buys that are routine                   64.44%
        % all buys that are opportunistic             35.56%
        # sells/ insider                               8.24            1       4.06          1
        Sell trade size (bps)                          13.15         3.00      25.59        3.72
        % all sells that are routine                  52.02%
        % all sells that are opportunistic            47.98%
        # companies/ insider                           2.23            2        2.29         2

        % all trades that are routine                54.81%
        % all trades that are opportunistic          45.19%
                                Table II: Correlation Between Routine and Opportunistic trades, 1989—2007

Pearson correlation coefficients are calculated over all months and over all available stocks for the following variables. # Opportunistic Buys is the
number of opportunistic buys for the given firm and month, and # Routine Buys is the number of routine buys in the given firm in the given
month. These variables are defined analogously for sells. Log(Size) is the log of market capitalization as of the end of the previous calendar
month. Log(B/M) the log of the book-market ratio, which is the market value of equity divided by Compustat book value of equity. The timing of
B/M follows Fama and French (1993) and is as of the previous December year-end. RET is the return in the prior 12 months before the month of
trading for the given firm and month.


                            # Opportunistic      # Routine      # Opportunistic       # Routine
                                     Buys             Buys                Sells            Sells        Log(Size)        Log(B/M)                RET
# Opportunistic Buys                      1         -0.001              -0.029           -0.016           -0.079             0.066             -0.024
# Routine Buys                                           1              -0.017           -0.008           -0.039             0.011              0.002
# Opportunistic Sells                                                         1           0.001            0.101            -0.059              0.015
# Routine Sells                                                                               1            0.111            -0.091              0.005
Log(Size)                                                                                                       1           -0.436              0.122
Log(B/M)                                                                                                                         1             -0.118
RET                                                                                                                                                 1
                                     Table III: Performance of Routine and Opportunistic Trades
This table reports pooled regressions of returns on indicators of routine and opportunistic trades in the prior month. The dependent variable in
each is future one-month returns (RET). Routine and opportunistic trades are defined as in Table I. Opportunistic Buy is a categorical variable
equal to one if there were any opportunistic buys on a given firm in the prior month, and zero otherwise. Routine Buy is a categorical variable
equal to one if there were any routine buys on a given firm in the prior month, and zero otherwise. Opportunistic Sell and Routine Sell are
defined equivalently for insider sales. Size and BM are the natural logarithms of the firm characteristics of market equity and book-to-market of
the given firm. Past Returns are the return of the given firm over the prior sixth month period. Month fixed effects (Month) are included where
indicated. Standard errors clustered at the firm level. t-statistics are shown below the estimates, and 1%, 5%, and 10% statistical significance are
indicated with ***,**, and *, respectively.


                                     (1)        (2)         (3)        (4)         (5)         (6)        (7)         (8)         (9)

        Opportunistic Buy            1.45***    1.02***     0.90***                                       0.68***     0.65***     0.57**
                                     (8.22)     (5.24)      (4.64)                                        (2.80)      (2.60)      (2.30)

        Routine Buy                  0.87***    0.30*       0.14                                          0.09        -0.08       -0.20
                                     (5.54)     (1.73)      (0.81)                                        (0.37)      (-0.32)     (-0.84)

        Opportunistic Sell                                             -1.44***    -0.95***    -0.78***   -1.14***    -0.75***    -0.67***
                                                                       (-11.11)    (-6.65)     (-5.67)    (-5.69)     (-3.64)     (-3.37)

        Routine Sell                                                   -0.58***    -0.02       0.04       -0.30       0.16        0.14
                                                                       (-4.19)     (-0.13)     (0.24)     (-1.49)     (0.77)      (0.69)

        Size                                    -0.22***    -0.20***               -0.23***    -0.20***               -0.22***    -0.20***
                                                (-5.19)     (-4.55)                (-5.38)     (-4.70)                (-5.20)     (-4.56)

        BM                                      0.36***     0.37***                0.37***     0.38***                0.37***     0.38***
                                                (3.13)      (3.30)                 (3.26)      (3.42)                 (3.23)      (3.40)

        Past Month Returns                      -0.03***    -0.05***               -0.03***    -0.05***               -0.03***    -0.05***
                                                (-4.00)     (-6.09)                (-3.93)     (-6.03)                (-3.90)     (-6.01)

        Past Year Returns                       0.005***    0.01***                0.005***    0.01***                0.01***     0.01***
                                                (3.68)      (4.71)                 (3.81)      (4.80)                 (3.82)      (4.79)

        Fixed Effect                                        Month                              Month                              Month

        Number of observations       52444     48460       48460       52444       48460       48460      52444       48460       48460
                                   Table IV: Portfolio Returns to Routine and Opportunistic Trades

This table shows the returns to buy and sell portfolios that follow the routine and opportunistic trades in our opportunistic universe from 1989-
2007. Opportunistic and routine trades are defined as in Table I. A firm is included in the opportunistic buy portfolio, for example, in month
(t+1) if any of its insiders placed an opportunistic buy on the firm in month t. At the end of the month (t+1), we rebalance the portfolios based
on new insider trades. Below are the monthly returns to these opportunistic and routine buy and sell portfolios in percentages, shown for both
equal and value weighting. Panel A shows results for equal-weighted portfolios, while Panel B shows results for value-weighted portfolios. t-
statistics are shown in parentheses, and 1%, 5%, and 10% statistical significance are indicated with ***,**, and *, respectively.
Panel A: Equal           Opportunistic    Routine                       Opportunistic   Routine                       Opportunistic   Routine
weights                  Buys             Buys           L/S Buys       Sells           Sells          L/S Sells      (Buys-Sells)    (Buys-Sells)
Average returns          2.33             1.65           0.68           0.77            1.41           -0.63          1.55            0.25
Standard dev.            4.95             4.06           3.03           5.97            6.01           2.64           4.91            4.67
CAPM alpha               1.51***          0.92***        0.59***        -0.30           0.32           -0.61***       1.81***         0.60**
                         (5.89)           (4.34)         (2.98)         (-1.31)         (1.44)         (-3.47)        (5.86)          (2.25)

Fama-French alpha        1.20***          0.64***        0.56***        -0.21           0.43***        -0.65***       1.41***         0.20
                         (5.49)           (3.78)         (2.74)         (-1.34)         (2.72)         (-3.60)        (5.04)          (0.87)

Carhart alpha            1.45***          0.82***        0.63***        -0.19           0.38**         -0.57***       1.64***         0.44*
                         (6.82)           (4.92)         (3.03)         (-1.18)         (2.32)         (-3.11)        (5.86)          (1.89)

DGTW Char Adj            1.24***          0.40**         0.83***        -0.27**         0.42***        -0.69***       1.51***         -0.02
                         (4.99)           (2.00)         (3.39)         (-2.09)         (2.75)         (-4.52)        (4.98)          (-0.06)

5-Factor alpha           1.58***          0.87***        0.70***        -0.23           0.45***        -0.67***       1.80***         0.43*
                         (7.03)           (5.00)         (3.18)         (-1.30)         (2.59)         (-3.48)        (6.07)          (1.73)
                         Opportunistic    Routine                       Opportunistic   Routine                       Opportunistic   Routine
Panel B: Value weights   Buys             Buys           L/S Buys       Sells           Sells          L/S Sells      (Buys-Sells)    (Buys-Sells)
Average returns          1.79             1.27           0.52           0.72            1.00           -0.29          1.08            0.27
Standard dev.            5.96             5.02           5.27           5.70            6.16           2.92           5.88            5.97
CAPM alpha               0.87***          0.45*          0.42           -0.34*          -0.09          -0.25          1.22***         0.55
                         (2.88)           (1.73)         (1.20)         (-1.73)         (-0.39)        (-1.29)        (3.14)          (1.44)

Fama-French alpha        0.64**           0.18           0.46           -0.08           0.28           -0.36          0.72**          -0.09
                         (2.16)           (0.75)         (1.27)         (-0.46)         (1.35)         (-1.83)        (2.06)          (-0.29)

Carhart alpha            0.52*            0.09           0.43           -0.09           0.17           -0.26          0.62*           -0.07
                         (1.73)           (0.37)         (1.16)         (-0.50)         (0.80)         (-1.29)        (1.71)          (-0.22)

DGTW Char Adj            0.57**           0.26           0.31           -0.18           0.06           -0.24          0.75**          0.21
                         (2.35)           (1.26)         (1.04)         (-1.29)         (0.31)         (-1.46)        (2.48)          (0.72)

5-Factor alpha           0.72**           0.09           0.63           -0.10           0.29           -0.39*         0.82**          -0.20
                         (2.27)           (0.34)         (1.61)         (-0.49)         (1.32)         (-1.84)        (2.15)          (-0.57)
                               Table V: Impact of the Number of Routine and Opportunistic Trades
This table reports panel regressions of returns on continuous measures of the number of routine and opportunistic trades in the prior month. The
dependent variable in each is future one-month returns (RET). Routine and opportunistic trades are defined as in Table I. Number of
Opportunistic Buys is equal to the natural logarithm of one plus the number of opportunistic buys in the given firm for the prior month (so is
equal to zero if there were zero trades). Number of Routine Buys is equal to the natural logarithm of one plus the number of routine buys in the
given firm for the prior month (so is equal to zero if there were zero trades). Number of Opportunistic Sells and Number of Routine Sells are
defined equivalently for insider sales. Size and BM are the natural logarithms of the firm characteristics of market equity and book-to-market of
the given firm. Past Returns are the return of the given firm over the prior sixth month period. Month fixed effects (Month) are included where
indicated. All standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the firm level, and t-stats using these clustered standard errors are included in
parentheses below the coefficient estimates; 1%, 5%, and 10% statistical significance are indicated with ***,**, and *, respectively.


                                        (1)        (2)        (3)         (4)        (5)        (6)         (7)        (8)         (9)
    Number of Opportunistic Buys        0.95***    0.74***    0.66***                                       0.67***    0.61***     0.59***
                                        (6.77)     (4.97)     (4.56)                                        (4.52)     (3.97)      (3.93)

    Number of Routine Buys              0.39***    0.10       0.01                                          0.14       -0.02       -0.05
                                        (4.09)     (0.92)     (0.12)                                        (1.37)     (-0.16)     (-0.43)

    Number of Opportunistic Sells                                         -0.63***   -0.43***   -0.31***    -0.49***   -0.35***    -0.25***
                                                                          (-10.29)   (-6.75)    (-4.97)     (-7.36)    (-5.21)     (-3.70)

    Number of Routine Sells                                               -0.24***   0.01       0.07        -0.12*     0.07        0.12
                                                                          (-3.64)    (0.17)     (0.97)      (-1.75)    (0.99)      (1.64)

    Size                                           -0.24***   -0.20***               -0.24***   -0.22***               -0.22***    -0.20***
                                                   (-5.43)    (-4.71)                (-5.66)    (-5.17)                (-5.18)     (-4.71)

    BM                                             0.39***    0.39***                0.40***    0.42***                0.38***     0.39***
                                                   (3.39)     (3.52)                 (3.49)     (3.69)                 (3.31)      (3.51)

    Past Month Returns                             -0.03***   -0.05***               -0.03***   -0.05***               -0.03***    -0.05***
                                                   (-4.05)    (-6.14)                (-4.00)    (-6.10)                (-3.92)     (-6.04)

    Past Year Returns                              0.00***    0.01***                0.00***    0.01***                0.01***     0.01***
                                                   (3.67)     (4.71)                 (3.73)     (4.75)                 (3.82)      (4.79)

    Fixed Effect                                              Month                             Month                              Month
    Number of observations              52444      48460      48460      52444       48460      48460       52444      48460       48460
                                   Table VI: Opportunistic Trades and the Arrival of Information
This table reports panel regressions of information events on the number of routine and opportunistic trades in a company in the prior month. The
dependent variables in the regressions are: in Columns 1-3, a proxy for firm information environment using the number of news, annual and
quarterly earnings forecast revisions, recommendation changes, SEO and M&A activities (All Firm Info), in Columns 4-6, solely the number of
news (News). The main independent variables of interest are the Number of Opportunistic Trades and the Number of Routine Trades, defined as
in Table V. Lag 1 Month News is equal to the number of information events (for each respective specification of information events) observed for
the given firm in the prior month, while Lag 6 Month News is defined equivalently for information events of the firm in the 6 months prior to last
month. Past Month Returns and Past 6 Month Returns are defined equivalently for returns, while Size is described in Table II. Month fixed
effects (Month) are included where indicated. All standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the firm level, and t-stats using these clustered
standard errors are included in parentheses below the coefficient estimates; 1%, 5%, and 10% statistical significance are indicated with ***,**, and
*, respectively.

                                                   (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)        (5)          (6)
               Type of Information:                All Firm Info   All Firm Info   All Firm Info   News       News         News

               Number of Opportunistic Trades      0.20***         0.03***         0.03***         0.21***    0.03***      0.03***
                                                   (5.77)          (2.72)          (2.78)          (5.69)     (2.90)       (3.26)

               Number of Routine Trades            0.12***         -0.00           0.02            0.12***    0.01         0.01
                                                   (3.11)          (-0.11)         (1.33)          (2.88)     (0.46)       (1.04)

               Size                                                0.10***         0.03***                    0.03***      0.02***
                                                                   (16.49)         (8.01)                     (5.28)       (4.96)

               BM                                                  -0.04***        -0.01                      -0.03***     -0.01
                                                                   (-3.16)         (-1.58)                    (-3.51)      (-1.46)

               Past Month Returns                                  -0.00*          0.00***                    -0.00        0.00***
                                                                   (-1.76)         (2.86)                     (-0.78)      (3.98)

               Past Year Returns                                   0.00            0.00                       0.00         0.00
                                                                   (0.75)          (1.15)                     (1.42)       (1.13)

               Past Month News                                     0.58***         0.22***                    0.73***      0.28***
                                                                   (38.68)         (19.33)                    (54.36)      (18.83)

               Past 6 Month News                                                   0.46***                                 0.39***
                                                                                   (54.89)                                 (65.79)

               Fixed Effect                                        Month           Month                      Month        Month

               Number of observations             22071            20198           20198           22071      20198        20198
                        Table VII: SEC Activity and Opportunistic Trading

 This table reports regressions of the fraction of insiders trading in a given month who are opportunistic on
 recent SEC releases regarding litigation cases against illegal insider trading. The dependent variable is
 the number of opportunistic insiders trading in month t+1 divided by the number of all insiders trading
 in month t+1. The independent variable of interest is equal to the natural logarithm of one plus the
 number of SEC releases regarding litigation cases against illegal insider activity in month t. We also
 include control variables for the fraction of opportunistic insiders trading in month t and month t-1, the
 CRSP value-weight market return in month t, the standard deviation of daily market returns in month t,
 and various windows of past cumulative market returns (month t-3 to t-1, month t-6 to t-1, and month t-
 12 to t-1). t-stats based on robust standard errors are included in parentheses below the coefficient
 estimates; 1%, 5%, and 10% statistical significance are indicated with ***,**, and *, respectively.

                          (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)         (5)          (6)         (7)

Num SEC Releasest         -0.019***   -0.012**    -0.013**     -0.014**    -0.014**     -0.014**    -0.015**
                          (-2.65)     (-1.99)     (-2.17)      (-2.26)     (-2.24)      (-2.35)     (-2.41)

Fraction Insiderst                    0.588***    0.390***     0.357***    0.352***     0.323***    0.249***
                                      (8.77)      (4.77)       (4.21)      (4.15)       (3.84)      (3.00)

Fraction Insiderst-1                              0.336***     0.352***    0.347***     0.320***    0.241***
                                                  (4.59)       (4.90)      (4.74)       (4.28)      (3.07)

Market Returnt                                                 0.182**     0.158        0.132       0.089
                                                               (2.04)      (1.39)       (1.34)      (0.95)

StdMarketRett                                                  0.192       0.382        0.761       1.384
                                                               (0.21)      (0.38)       (0.73)      (1.44)

Market Returnt-3,t-1                                                       0.033
                                                                           (-0.48)

Market Returnt-6,t-1                                                                    0.079*
                                                                                        (1.67)

Market Returnt-12,t-1                                                                               0.116***
                                                                                                    (3.76)
Number of
observations              147         147         147          146         146          146         146
             Table VIII: Which Opportunistic Traders Are the Most Informed?

This table reports panel regressions of information events on the number of opportunistic trades by
various insider types in a company in the prior month. The dependent variable in the regressions is a
proxy for the firm information environment using the number of news, annual and quarterly earnings
forecast revisions, recommendation changes, SEO and M&A activities. The main independent variables of
interest are the Number of Opportunistic Trades, as defined in Table VI, for various types of insiders.
The types of insiders we consider are: Local Insiders (defined as insiders that reside in the same state as
their firm’s headquarters), Senior Officers of the firm (defined as CEO, CFO, or Chairman of the Board),
Inside Directors, and Independent Directors of the firm. Lag 1 and Lag 6 Month News are defined as in
Table IV. Month fixed effects (Month) are included where indicated. All standard errors are adjusted for
clustering at the firm level, and t-stats using these clustered standard errors are included in parentheses
below the coefficient estimates; 1%, 5%, and 10% statistical significance are indicated with ***,**, and *,
respectively.


                                                      (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)

    Opportunistic Trades by Local Insiders            0.03***                                 0.03**
                                                      (2.85)                                  (2.22)

    Opportunistic Trades by Independent Directors               0.02                          0.01
                                                                (1.50)                        (0.41)

    Opportunistic Trades by Senior Insiders                               0.01                0.00
                                                                          (0.96)              (-0.11)

    Opportunistic Trades by Inside Directors                                        0.01      0.01
                                                                                    (0.60)    (0.52)

    Trades by Routine Insiders                        0.01      -0.00     0.01      0.00      0.01
                                                      (0.93)    (-0.04)   (0.53)    (0.39)    (0.51)

    Size                                              0.03***   0.03***   0.03***   0.03***   0.03***
                                                      (7.92)    (7.03)    (7.93)    (7.93)    (7.01)

    BM                                                -0.01*    -0.02*    -0.01*    -0.01*    -0.02*
                                                      (-1.71)   (-1.90)   (-1.79)   (-1.83)   (-1.74)

    Past Month Returns                                0.00***   0.00***   0.00***   0.00***   0.00***
                                                      (2.93)    (2.69)    (3.06)    (3.09)    (2.50)

    Past Year Returns                                 0.00      0.00      0.00      0.00      0.00
                                                      (1.12)    (1.08)    (1.18)    (1.20)    (1.02)

    Past Month News                                   0.22***   0.22***   0.22***   0.22***   0.22***
                                                      (19.21)   (15.63)   (19.08)   (19.10)   (15.77)

    Past 6 Month News                                 0.46***   0.49***   0.46***   0.46***   0.49***
                                                      (54.90)   (36.40)   (54.77)   (54.78)   (36.58)

    Fixed Effect                                      Month     Month     Month     Month     Month

    Number of observations                            20198     12221     20198     20198     12221
                                                               Table IX: Robustness Checks

       This table reports pooled regressions of returns on indicators of routine and opportunistic trades in the prior month. The dependent variable in
       each is future one-month returns (RET). Routine and opportunistic trades are defined as in Table I. Opportunistic Buy is a categorical variable
       equal to one if there were any opportunistic buys on a given firm in the prior month, and zero otherwise. Routine Buy is a categorical variable
       equal to one if there were any routine buys on a given firm in the prior month, and zero otherwise. Opportunistic Sell and Routine Sell are
       defined equivalently for insider sales. Size and BM are the natural logarithms of market equity and book-to-market of the given firm. Columns 1
       and 2 (3 and 4) include only stocks in the top (bottom) half of the market capitalization distribution, where market cap is measured in December
       of the prior year. Columns 5 and 6 (7 and 8) include only stocks in the top (bottom) half of the distribution of fraction of shares outstanding
       traded by insiders in the prior year. Columns 9 and 10 (11 and 12) include only those trades made within (outside) a 21-day trading window (+3
       to +24 days) after an earnings announcement, while also excluding (including) any trades that occur up to 30 days before an M&A announcement.
       Month fixed effects (Month) are included where indicated. Standard errors clustered at the firm level. t-statistics are shown below the estimates,
       and 1%, 5%, and 10% statistical significance are indicated with ***,**, and *, respectively.

                             (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)        (5)         (6)        (7)        (8)         (9)       (10)        (11)         (12)
                                                                           High Intensity         Low Intensity      Non-Blackout Only          Blackout Only
                              Large Stocks           Small Stocks
                                                                              Stocks                 Stocks
Opportunistic Buy        0.55**                 0.80***                1.27***                0.56**                 1.28***                0.85***
                         (2.31)                 (2.78)                 (4.14)                 (2.36)                 (3.81)                 (3.69)
Routine Buy              0.08                   -0.01                  0.46*                  -0.17                  0.34                   0.14
                         (0.37)                 (-0.05)                (1.69)                 (-0.80)                (1.25)                 (0.70)
Opportunistic Sell                   -0.55***               -0.83***               -1.13***              -0.39**                -0.99***               -0.78***
                                     (-3.44)                (-3.29)                (-5.45)               (-2.13)                (-4.43)                (-4.65)
Routine Sell                         0.11                   0.11                   -0.03                 0.07                   -0.21                  0.08
                                     (0.62)                 (0.37)                 (-0.14)               (0.36)                 (-0.90)                (0.45)
Size                     -0.08       -0.08      -0.50***    -0.50***   -0.24***    -0.25***   -0.15***   -0.15***    -0.11      -0.11*      -0.22***   -0.23***
                         (-1.34)     (-1.43)    (-3.54)     (-3.50)    (-3.10)     (-3.28)    (-2.73)    (-2.78)     (-1.57)    (-1.72)     (-4.27)    (-4.43)
BM                       0.40***     0.43***    0.23        0.22       0.34**      0.37**     0.39**     0.39**      0.37*      0.39**      0.40***    0.42***
                         (3.06)      (3.27)     (1.26)      (1.18)     (2.14)      (2.33)     (2.44)     (2.41)      (1.94)     (2.04)      (3.10)     (3.22)
Past Month Returns       -0.03***    -0.03***   -0.06***    -0.06***   -0.05***    -0.05***   -0.06***   -0.06***    -0.03***   -0.03***    -0.06***   -0.06***
                         (-2.87)     (-2.77)    (-5.62)     (-5.61)    (-4.45)     (-4.38)    (-4.46)    (-4.43)     (-2.84)    (-2.81)     (-6.60)    (-6.57)
Past Year Returns        0.01***     0.01***    0.00**      0.00**     0.01***     0.01***    0.01       0.01        0.01***    0.01***     0.01***    0.01***
                         (4.98)      (5.06)     (2.21)      (2.30)     (4.69)      (4.81)     (1.39)     (1.41)      (2.63)     (2.65)      (3.35)     (3.42)
Fixed Effect             Month       Month      Month       Month      Month       Month      Month      Month       Month      Month       Month      Month
Number of observations   26543       26543      21927       21927      26345       26345      22115      22115       17594      17594       36605      36605
    Appendix Tables:
Decoding Inside Information
                           Table A1: Portfolio Returns to Insider Trades, Young Versus Old Companies

This table shows the returns to insider buys and insider sells in young companies (those insider trades that are made within three years of the
company’s first appearance in CRSP) and old companies (those insider trades that are made three or more years after the company’s first
appearance in CRSP). A firm is included in the buy (sell) portfolio in month (t+1) if any of its insiders bought (sold) on the firm in month t. At
the end of the month (t+1), we rebalance the portfolios based on new insider trades. Below are the monthly returns to and alphas on these buy
and sell portfolios, in percentages, shown for both equal (in Panel A) and value weighting (in Panel B). t-statistics are shown in parentheses, and
1%, 5%, and 10% statistical significance are indicated with ***,**, and *, respectively.

                                           Young Companies                          Old Companies                           Young Minus Old
Panel A: Equal weights           Buys         Sells  Buys-Sells        Buys         Sells       Buys-Sells        Buys       Sells    Buys-Sells
Average returns                  1.73         0.56   1.17              1.95         0.75        1.20              -0.21      -0.18    -0.03
Standard dev.                    6.55         8.07   3.45              5.27         5.34        2.27              2.94       4.11     3.02
CAPM alpha                       0.91***      -0.38  1.29***           1.20***      -0.04       1.24***           -0.29      -0.34    0.05
                                 (3.62)       (-1.28)   (6.70)         (6.37)       (-0.28)       (9.22)          (-1.68)    (-1.48)   (0.28)

Fama-French alpha                0.95***      -0.19     1.14           1.04***      -0.11         1.15***         -0.09      -0.08     -0.01
                                 (4.61)       (-1.04)   (6.82)         (7.34)       (-1.51)       (8.92)          (-0.64)    (-0.45)   (-0.09)

Carhart alpha                    1.28***      0.05      1.22***        1.31***      -0.10         1.41***         -0.03      0.15      -0.19
                                 (6.70)       (0.31)    (7.22)         (10.45)      (-1.36)       (12.74)         (-0.22)    (0.89)    (-1.14)

                                           Young Companies                          Old Companies                           Young Minus Old
Panel B: Value weights           Buys         Sells  Buys-Sells        Buys         Sells       Buys-Sells        Buys       Sells    Buys-Sells
Average returns                  0.96         0.74   0.22              1.07         0.64        0.42              -0.11      0.10     -0.21
Standard dev.                    6.67         8.53   4.47              4.95         4.77        2.25              4.58       5.63     4.64
CAPM alpha                       0.10         -0.25  0.34              0.29***      -0.14**     0.43***           -0.20      -0.11    -0.09
                                 (0.43)       (-0.81)   (1.33)         (2.55)       (-2.35)       (3.18)          (-0.73)    (-0.34)   (-0.34)

Fama-French alpha                0.22         0.05      0.17           0.23**       -0.11*        0.33**          0.00       0.16      -0.16
                                 (1.13)       (0.22)    (0.73)         (2.03)       (-1.87)       (2.56)          (-0.01)    (0.68)    (-0.60)

Carhart alpha                    0.21         -0.04     0.26           0.35***      -0.15***      0.50***         -0.14      0.11      -0.24
                                 (1.05)       (-0.19)   (1.04)         (3.20)       (-2.59)       (3.97)          (-0.58)    (0.46)    (-0.90)
                             Table A2: Portfolio Returns to Insider Trades, Young Versus Old Insiders

This table shows the returns to buys and sells of young insiders (those insider trades that are made within three years of a given insider’s first
trade in the database) and of old insiders (those insider trades that are made three or more years after a given insider’s first trade in the
database). A firm is included in the buy (sell) portfolio in month (t+1) if any of its insiders bought (sold) on the firm in month t. At the end of
the month (t+1), we rebalance the portfolios based on new insider trades. Below are the monthly returns to and alphas on these buy and sell
portfolios, in percentages, shown for both equal (in Panel A) and value weighting (in Panel B). t-statistics are shown in parentheses, and 1%, 5%,
and 10% statistical significance are indicated with ***,**, and *, respectively.

                                             Young Insiders                            Old Insiders                        Young Minus Old
Panel A: Equal weights          Buys         Sells        Buys-Sells       Buys        Sells     Buys-Sells      Buys       Sells    Buys-Sells
Average returns                 1.95         0.65         1.30             1.98        0.83      1.14            0.00       -0.18    0.17
Standard dev.                   5.70         6.18         2.59             5.53        5.44      3.22            2.15       1.84     2.08
CAPM alpha                      1.17***      -0.20        1.36***          1.26***     0.09      1.19***         -0.02      -0.22*   0.18
                                (5.67)       (-1.04)       (9.11)          (5.24)      (0.51)    (5.80)          (-0.15)    (-1.89)   (1.33)

Fama-French alpha               1.08***      -0.15         1.23***         1.08***     0.02      1.08***         0.03       -0.15     0.16
                                (6.78)       (-1.73)       (9.17)          (5.37)      (0.22)    (5.48)          (0.24)     (-1.43)   (1.19)

Carhart alpha                   1.38***      -0.10         1.48***         1.46***     0.02      1.47***         0.03       -0.08     0.10
                                (9.93)       (-1.14)       (12.64)         (8.07)      (0.17)    (8.36)          (0.20)     (-0.79)   (0.72)

                                             Young Insiders                            Old Insiders                        Young Minus Old
Panel B: Value weights          Buys         Sells        Buys-Sells       Buys        Sells     Buys-Sells      Buys       Sells    Buys-Sells
Average returns                 1.09         0.58         0.52             1.09        0.70      0.32            -0.02      -0.18    0.21
Standard dev.                   5.21         5.04         2.79             4.94        4.72      3.15            2.87       1.43     3.09
CAPM alpha                      0.30**       -0.22**      0.52***          0.37**      -0.02     0.35            -0.04      -0.17    0.18
                                (2.38)       (-2.45)       (3.09)          (2.20)      (-0.28)   (1.73)          (-0.25)    (-1.87)   (0.89)

Fama-French alpha               0.26**       -0.13         0.39**          0.31*       0.03      0.23            -0.02      -0.15     0.17
                                (2.07)       (-1.63)       (2.43)          (1.86)      (0.38)    (1.22)          (-0.13)    (-1.61)   (0.84)

Carhart alpha                   0.40***      -0.23***      0.64***         0.49***     -0.04     0.49***         -0.03      -0.19     0.22
                                (3.25)       (-3.07)       (4.22)          (3.03)      (-0.49)   (2.64)          (-0.18)    (-2.11)   (1.05)
                   Table A3: Performance of Routine and Opportunistic Trades,
                                    Trade-Level Classification
This table reports pooled regressions of returns on indicators of routine and opportunistic trades in the prior
month. The dependent variable in each is future one-month returns in month t+1 (RET). To define routine
trades, we investigate insiders’ trading patterns in the three preceding years. If an insider traded a stock in
the same calendar month in three consecutive years, all trades he or she made subsequently in the same
month are labeled as routine and trades made in a different month are labeled opportunistic. If an insider
traded in three consecutive years, but no trades were made in the same month in these three years, all
subsequent trades of that insider are labeled as opportunistic as well. Opportunistic Buy is a categorical
variable equal to one if there were any opportunistic buys on a given firm in the prior month (month t), and
zero otherwise. Routine Buy is a categorical variable equal to one if there were any routine buys on a given
firm in the prior month (month t), and zero otherwise. Opportunistic Sell and Routine Sell are defined
equivalently for insider sales. Size and BM are the natural logarithms of the firm characteristics of market
equity and book-to-market of the given firm. Past Returns are the return of the given firm over the prior
sixth month period. Month fixed effects (Month) are included where indicated. Standard errors clustered at
the firm level. t-statistics are shown below the estimates, and 1%, 5%, and 10% statistical significance are
indicated with ***,**, and *, respectively.



                                  (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)
   Opportunistic Buys             1.29***     0.77***      0.65***
                                  (8.01)      (4.39)       (3.79)

   Routine Buys                   -0.44**     -0.21        -0.29
                                  (-2.48)     (-1.14)      (-1.57)

   Opportunistic Sells                                                 -1.33***     -0.77***     -0.63***
                                                                       (-8.70)      (-4.66)      (-3.84)

   Routine Sells                                                       0.53***      0.44***      0.31**
                                                                       (3.77)       (3.06)       (2.29)

   Size                                       -0.23***     -0.20***                 -0.24***     -0.21***
                                              (-5.50)      (-4.76)                  (-5.60)      (-4.83)

   BM                                         0.38***      0.38***                  0.39***      0.39***
                                              (3.35)       (3.47)                   (3.42)       (3.52)
   Past Month Returns                         -0.03***     -0.05***                 -0.03***     -0.05***
                                              (-4.28)      (-6.31)                  (-4.30)      (-6.33)
   Past Year Returns                          0.00***      0.01***                  0.00***      0.01***
                                              (3.69)       (4.72)                   (3.70)       (4.72)
   Fixed Effect                                            Month                                 Month
   Number of observations         52444       48460        48460       52444        48460        48460
                  Table A4: Performance of Routine and Opportunistic Trades,
                         Waiting Until 11th Day of Following Month
This table reports pooled regressions of returns on indicators of routine and opportunistic trades in the prior
month. The dependent variable in each is future one-month returns, computed from the 11th day of the
month subsequent to when insiders trade (i.e., month t+1) to the 10th day of the following month (i.e., month
t+2). Routine and opportunistic trades are defined as in Table I. Opportunistic Buy is a categorical variable
equal to one if there were any opportunistic buys on a given firm in the prior month (month t), and zero
otherwise. Routine Buy is a categorical variable equal to one if there were any routine buys on a given firm in
the prior month (month t), and zero otherwise. Opportunistic Sell and Routine Sell are defined equivalently
for insider sales. Size and BM are the natural logarithms of the firm characteristics of market equity and
book-to-market of the given firm. Past Returns are the return of the given firm over the prior sixth month
period. Month fixed effects (Month) are included where indicated. Standard errors clustered at the firm
level. t-statistics are shown below the estimates, and 1%, 5%, and 10% statistical significance are indicated
with ***,**, and *, respectively.


                                    (1)        (2)        (3)         (4)         (5)        (6)

       Opportunistic Buy            1.43***    1.05***    1.00***
                                    (7.86)     (5.39)     (5.26)

       Routine Buy                  0.88***    0.35**     0.20
                                    (6.07)     (2.20)     (1.26)

       Opportunistic Sell                                             -1.46***    -1.04***   -0.90***
                                                                      (-11.41)    (-7.45)    (-6.58)

       Routine Sell                                                   -0.59***    -0.11      -0.12
                                                                      (-4.24)     (-0.72)    (-0.84)

       Size                                    -0.16***   -0.13***                -0.17***   -0.13***
                                               (-4.19)    (-3.34)                 (-4.24)    (-3.38)

       BM                                      0.44***    0.40***                 0.44***    0.40***
                                               (3.93)     (3.70)                  (3.97)     (3.70)

       Past Month Returns                      0.01       -0.01                   0.01       -0.01
                                               (0.82)     (-1.59)                 (0.89)     (-1.51)

       Past Year Returns                       0.00       0.00**                  0.00       0.00**
                                               (0.64)     (2.06)                  (0.76)     (2.15)

       Fixed Effect                                       Month                              Month

       Number of observations       52444      48460      48460       52444       48460      48460
       Table A5: Predicting News Events with Opportunistic Buys and Sells Separately
This table reports panel regressions of information events on the number of routine and opportunistic buys
and sells in a company in the prior month. The dependent variables in the regressions are: in Columns 1-3, a
proxy for firm information environment in month t+1 using the number of news, annual and quarterly
earnings forecast revisions, recommendation changes, SEO and M&A activities (All Firm Info), in Columns 4-
6, solely the number of news in month t+1 (News). The main independent variables of interest are the
Number of Opportunistic Buys, the Number of Opportunistic Sells, the Number of Routine Buys, and the
Number of Routine Sells, each defined as the logarithm of one plus the number of trades of a given type,
made in the prior month (month t). Lag 1 Month News is equal to the number of information events (for each
respective specification of information events) observed for the given firm in the prior month (month t), while
Lag 6 Month News is defined equivalently for information events of the firm in the 6 months prior to last
month. Past Month Returns and Past 6 Month Returns are defined equivalently for returns, while Size is
described in Table II. Month fixed effects (Month) are included where indicated. All standard errors are
adjusted for clustering at the firm level, and t-stats using these clustered standard errors are included in
parentheses below the coefficient estimates; 1%, 5%, and 10% statistical significance are indicated with ***,**,
and *, respectively.


                                  (1)             (2)              (3)             (4)       (5)        (6)
Type of Information:              All Firm Info   All Firm Info    All Firm Info   News      News       News
Number of Opportunistic Sells     0.26***         0.03**           0.03**          0.26***   0.03***    0.04***
                                  (8.18)          (2.54)           (2.37)          (7.09)    (2.85)     (3.31)
Number of Opportunistic Buys      -0.08**         0.02             0.03**          0.00      0.02*      0.02**
                                  (-2.49)         (1.58)           (2.40)          (0.13)    (1.69)     (2.01)
Number of Routine Sells           0.31***         0.03*            0.02            0.26***   0.02       0.02
                                  (6.63)          (1.72)           (1.58)          (4.49)    (1.41)     (1.33)
Number of Routine Buys            -0.11***        -0.04**          0.00            -0.05     -0.01      0.00
                                  (-3.17)         (-2.29)          (0.35)          (-1.50)   (-1.10)    (0.05)
Size                                              0.09***          0.03***                   0.02***    0.02***
                                                  (15.87)          (7.86)                    (4.87)     (4.66)
BM                                                -0.03**          -0.01                     -0.03***   -0.01
                                                  (-2.42)          (-1.37)                   (-2.93)    (-1.01)
Past Month Returns                                -0.00**          0.00***                   -0.00      0.00***
                                                  (-2.02)          (2.77)                    (-0.97)    (3.76)
Past Year Returns                                 0.00             0.00                      0.00       0.00
                                                  (0.44)           (1.12)                    (1.30)     (1.09)
Past Month News                                   0.58***          0.22***                   0.72***    0.28***
                                                  (39.76)          (19.36)                   (54.63)    (18.86)
Past 6 Month News                                                  0.46***                              0.39***
                                                                   (19.36)                              (65.62)
Fixed Effect                                      Month            Month                     Month      Month
Number of observations            22071           20198            20198           22071     20198      20198
