                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                PORTFOLIO ALLOCATION FOR PUBLIC PENSION FUNDS

                                         George Pennacchi
                                          Mahdi Rastad

                                       Working Paper 16456
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w16456


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2010




We are grateful to Wilshire Associates for allowing our use of their data. Valuable comments were
provided by Jeffrey Brown, Stephen Zeldes, and participants of the National Bureau of Economic
Research State and Local Pensions Conference. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by George Pennacchi and Mahdi Rastad. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Portfolio Allocation for Public Pension Funds
George Pennacchi and Mahdi Rastad
NBER Working Paper No. 16456
October 2010
JEL No. G11,G23,G28

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper presents a dynamic model of a public pension fund’s choice of portfolio risk. Optimal
portfolio allocations are derived when pension fund management maximize the utility of wealth ofD
representative taxpayer or when pension fund management maximize their own utility of compensation.7KH
model’s implications are examined using annual data on the portfolio allocations and plan characteristics
of 125 state pension funds over the 2000 to 2009 period. Consistent with agency behavior by public
pension fund management, we find evidence that funds chose greater overall asset – liability portfolio
risk following periods of relatively poor investment performance. In addition, pension plans that select
a relatively high rate with which to discount their liabilities tend to choose riskier portfolios. Moreover,
consistent with a desire to gamble for higher benefits, pension plans take more risk when they have
greater representation by plan participants on their Boards of Trustees.


George Pennacchi
College of Business
University of Illinois
4041 BIF, Box 25, MC520
515 E. Gregory Drive
Champaign, IL 61820
gpennacc@illinois.edu

Mahdi Rastad
Department of Economics
University of Illinois
419 David Kinley Hall
1407 W. Gregory Drive
Urbana, IL 61801
rastad@uiuc.edu
I. Introduction

       This paper examines the portfolio allocation policies of U.S. state and local

government pension funds. It presents a dynamic model of public pension fund

investment choice and analyzes how risk-taking behavior may vary with the pension

plan’s characteristics. Risk is measured by the volatility of a fund’s asset portfolio rate of

return relative to the rate of return on the market value of its liabilities. The model’s

implications are examined using annual data on 125 state pension funds over the period

from 2000 to 2009.

       The asset allocation choice of a public pension fund is critical to understanding

the problem of public pension plan under-funding. A public pension fund’s annual

investment return is typically much larger in magnitude than its annual employer and

employee contributions (Munnell and Soto (2007)). Furthermore, the fund’s portfolio

allocation across broad asset classes is the major determinant of its investment return

(Brinson, Hood, and Beebower (1986) and Brinson, Singer, and Beebower (1991)).

Thus, a pension fund’s portfolio allocation policy has first-order consequences for its

funding status.

       Public pension fund asset allocation also is of interest because, in aggregate, it has

changed drastically over time. Based on Federal Reserve Flow of Funds data, Figure 1

shows that state and local government pension funds invested almost entirely in cash and

fixed income instruments during the 1950s, but gradually increased their portfolio

allocations in equities and, more recently, in other investments (including real estate,
                                                      2


private equity, and hedge fund investments). 1 This trend slowed over the last decade, a

period when public pension portfolio allocations to equities, fixed income, other

investments, and cash have averaged 59%, 30%, 9%, and 2%, respectively.

           A benchmark policy for assessing a pension fund’s investment choice is a

portfolio allocation that best hedges or “immunizes” the risk of its liabilities. The value

of a pension fund’s liabilities equals the value of the retirement annuities that it is

obligated to pay its employees and retirees. These retirement annuities typically are

linked to a worker’s wages and years of service, and most often payments are partially

indexed to inflation. Hence, the value of pension liabilities is exposed to risks from real

or nominal interest rate changes and also changes in wage rates. Therefore, a satisfactory

analysis of portfolio choice with a goal of liability immunization should account for

uncertainty in both interest rates and wage growth.

           Portfolio allocations that deviate from the benchmark portfolio which best

immunizes liabilities introduce what we refer to as “tracking error.” This paper considers

how different pension fund objectives influence the choice of tracking error volatility and

how this volatility might be influenced by the pension plan’s funding ratio, past returns,

and other plan characteristics. Our study is perhaps the first to examine the overall asset

- liability risks of a time series – cross section sample of public pension funds. We use

data on state and local government wages and various investment classes to compute a

single measure of tracking error volatility for each pension fund during each year. We

estimate the risks of wage changes and changes in the returns on long-term real and

nominal liability payments as well as the risks of returns on seven different investment

1
    Munnell and Soto (2007) also document this trend in public pension allocation. Similar behavior has
                                                     3


categories: U.S. equities, foreign equities, U.S. fixed income, foreign fixed income, real

estate, private equity, and hedge funds. By using the covariance matrix of these assets’

returns and an individual pension fund’s portfolio allocation and liability structure, we

calculate each fund’s overall tracking error volatility and then relate this measure to the

fund’s characteristics.

         The plan of the paper is as follows. Section II briefly discusses related theoretical

and empirical work on the portfolio allocations of state and local pension funds. Our

model is presented in Section III. Section IV describes our data and variable

construction, while Section V presents the empirical results. Concluding comments are

in Section VI.

II. Related Literature on Public Pension Fund Portfolio Allocation

         The focus of this paper is a public pension fund’s portfolio allocation relative to a

benchmark portfolio that best hedges (immunizes) the fund’s liability risks. To evaluate

liability risk, one must first determine a method for valuing pension liabilities since they

are not marketable securities. There is disagreement on how this should be done, with

the major conflict between the actuarial approach specified by the Government

Accounting Standards Board (GASB) and the market value approach based on finance

theory. 2 The GASB actuarial approach discounts a pension plan’s future retirement

payments using the expected rate of return on the pension plan’s assets, rather than a

discount rate appropriate to the actual risk of the pension plan’s retirement payments.


occurred with corporate defined-benefit pension plans. See, for example, in Ruthen (2005).
2
  GASB is a private organization established in the early 1980s. While not obligated to do so, in practice
state and local pension plans report the value of their pension liabilities using GASB standards. GASB
also sets standards for contributions that public pension funds should make to prevent significant
underfunding. Munnell, Haverstick, Sass, and Aubrey (2008) credit the creation of GASB with improved
funding by public pension plans.
                                                    4


           As pointed out in many papers, most recently by Brown and Wilcox (2009),

Lucas and Zeldes (2009), and Novy-Marx and Rauh (2009), valuation using the GASB

actuarial standard is inconsistent with basic financial theory. Moreover, its use creates

moral hazard incentives in the form of “accounting arbitrage”: a pension plan has the

incentive to invest in assets with high systematic risk in order to justify a higher discount

rate that will reduce the actuarial valuation of its liabilities. The GASB standard also can

lead to accounting games that reach beyond the public pension fund by reducing the

accounting value of a municipality’s overall budget deficit via the issuance of pension

obligation bonds. 3

           A financial valuation approach eliminates these arbitrage opportunities and moral

hazard incentives. We take it as a settled question that a financial theory-based market

valuation approach more accurately reflects the risk of pension liabilities. A more subtle

issue is whether the most relevant market value measure should be the pension fund’s

Accumulated Benefit Obligation (ABO) or Projected Benefit Obligation (PBO).

Typically, the annual annuity payment paid by a public pension plan to a participant is

the product of the participant’s final average salary over the last one to five years, years

of credited service, and a benefit multiplier often from 1% to 2.5%. The ABO is the

present value of these payments based on current years of service and the current average

salary, whereas the PBO is the present value based on current years of service and an

estimated future average salary just prior to retirement.

           Arguments for using ABO include Bulow (1982), Bodie (1990), Gold and

Hudson (2003), and Brown and Wilcox (2009). In contrast, Lucas and Zeldes (2006),

3
    Munnell, Calabrese, Monk, and Aubry (2010) show that issuance of pension obligation bonds became a
                                                      5


Peng (2009), and Munnell, Kopcke, Aubry, and Quinby (2010) support the use of PBO.

ABO may better reflect the pension fund’s current legal obligation to pay benefits.

However, for hedging liability risk when the public pension plan is likely to be a

continuing concern, the PBO better incorporates future risks. Therefore, we employ it to

value our benchmark immunizing portfolio. 4 The effect of using PBO is to include

future wage uncertainty as a component of overall liability risk.

         Black (1989) recommends that if a pension fund manager takes a narrow view by

hedging the ABO measure of pension liabilities, the pension portfolio should invest

almost exclusively in duration-matching bonds. If a broader PBO view is taken, then he

recommends some allocation to stocks under the assumptions that stock returns are

positively correlated with wage growth. Peskin (2001) supports this view and finds that a

20% to 90% allocation to equities could be optimal depending on the characteristics of a

particular public pension fund.

         Lucas and Zeldes (2009) come to a similar conclusion from a model where a

municipality wishes to minimize tax distortions and pension liabilities are positively

correlated with stocks. Their model predicts that pension funds should invest more in

stocks if their liabilities are more wage-sensitive, which should be the case if a pension

fund has a relatively high ratio of currently-employed pension participants to pension

plan retirees. However, they find no empirical evidence for this prediction based on year

2006 Boston College Center for Retirement Research (CRR) data on equity allocations


losing investment strategy as a result of the recent financial crisis.
4
  Bodie (1990) argues that a corporate pension fund’s relevant obligation to be hedged is its ABO because
its PBO is not guaranteed by the corporation or by the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation (PBGC)
should the corporation fail. This reasoning is less relevant for public pension plans. Peng (2009) argues
that public plan benefits are relatively more secure because, unlike corporate plans, municipalities typically
                                                    6


for state and local pension funds. They did find that pension plans with higher funding

ratios allocated more to stocks.

III. A Public Pension Fund Model

        A public pension fund’s portfolio choice will derive from its objective function.

Therefore, we begin by considering both normative and positive objectives of a public

pension fund’s investment management.

III.A The Public Pension Fund’s Investment Objective

        As will be discussed, academics and practitioners often disagree on the proper

objective of a public pension plan. The divergence of views partly may arise due to the

difficulty of envisioning an objective for a public pension fund that is separate from the

overall objective of its municipal government. As one component of the government, a

public pension fund’s portfolio choices could be made in conjunction with the

municipality’s other asset and liability decisions. For example, pension portfolio

decisions might account for a desire to hedge liability risks that include municipal bonds

and other benefit obligations, in addition to pension liabilities.

        Taking an even broader Ricardian (1820) / Modigliani-Miller (1958) perspective

would imply that even the municipal government’s overall objective is not relevant when

it is but one component of individuals’ overall portfolio decisions. As discussed in Bader

and Gold (2007), arguments along the lines of Barro (1974) imply that any balance sheet

(including pension fund) decision made by a municipal government would be offset by

the savings and portfolio decisions of rational private agents. If private individuals and

firms recognize the future tax consequences of a government’s (dis-) savings and


cannot extinguish their obligations to pay pension benefits, even following bankruptcy. As a consequence,
                                                   7


portfolio decisions, those public decisions could be over-turned by private portfolio

decisions. 5

        However, as summarized in Elmendorf and Mankiw (1999), the conditions that

enable private individuals to fully neutralize government savings and portfolio decisions

are unlikely to hold in practice. Heterogeneity amongst individuals, borrowing

constraints, tax distortions, and imperfect information regarding government policies

implies that public pension policies very likely effect the net tax burdens by individuals

and, therefore, have real welfare consequences.

        Due to such frictions, Peskin (2001) argues that the risk that pension fund returns

fail to match pension fund liabilities imposes intergenerational transfers because future

generations are not compensated for the taxes they pay to cover current pension

obligations resulting from pension underfunding. Intergenerational equity is likely to be

improved if unfunded pension costs are not borne by later generations of taxpayers.

Moreover, relative to the federal government, state and local governments have more

limited means with which to cope with underfunding: they cannot inflate-away the value

of their liabilities via money creation. Thus, unlike the federal social security program

that operates on a pay-as-you-do basis, state and local governments may want to maintain

a funded pension plan in order to minimize the possibility of unsustainable fiscal

imbalances. Peng (2009) believes this is the reason why almost all state and local

pension plans are pre-funded.




a public-sector worker who continues to be employed is likely to receive her PBO at retirement.
5
  For example, McDonald (1983) argues for a Miller Theorem result where a reduction in equity issuance
by private corporations offsets increased municipal bond issuance. Lucas and Zeldes (2009) discuss how a
Modigliani-Miller (1958) Theorem can hold where private portfolio decisions undo public ones.
                                                       8


            Even if pension fund deficits are covered by an immediate rise in taxes paid by

the current generation of taxpayers, risk-aversion and intra-generational equity can be an

additional rationale for hedging. Not only might a pension fund’s objective be to fund

the present value of pension obligations as they accrue, but also to reduce the uncertainty

that investment returns fail to match the change in the present value of obligations due to

changing market conditions. A fully-funded pension plan whose investments best hedge

the change in value of its liabilities fits this ideal of minimizing the uncertainty of taxes

needed to fund pension obligations. 6

           We find this argument compelling, with one caveat. It is unlikely that a

municipal government’s other expenditures for non-pension benefits are fully matched by

contemporaneous tax revenues at each point in time. In particular, during economic

downturns, tax revenues (excluding pension contributions) typically fail to cover non-

pension expenditures. If one wished to hedge the net tax surplus of the municipality’s

aggregate balance sheet, pension investments might be chosen so that their returns

outperform those of pension liabilities during economic recessions and underperform

them during economic expansions. 7

           Thus, from a normative view based on minimizing inter- and intra-generational

inequities, a strong argument may be made that pension liabilities should be funded as

they accrue and investment policy should be that which best hedges liabilities and,

possibly, the municipality’s other budget deficits.

           In practice, state and local governments typically do not incorporate pension fund

investment decisions within a single, framework for managing their overall balance

6
    The Lucas and Zeldes (2009) model with costly tax distortions provides these insights.
                                                    9


sheets. Rather, governments delegate the administration of a public pension plan to a

Board of Trustees who may be appointed or may be elected by plan participants. The

Board’s scope of responsibility tends to focus narrowly on the pension plan, without

regard to other municipal assets and liabilities. Most commonly the Board sets policy

objectives regarding investment policies and asset allocation that are carried out by a

supporting staff headed by an executive director. The Board and staff often further

delegate investment decisions to professional pension plan consultants and money

managers.

        The typical procedure is for the Board to establish broad asset allocations in

various investment classes, such as fixed income, equities, and alternative investments.

Within these classes, internal staff and/or external money managers are given

responsibility for choosing particular securities and investments. Most frequently, a

money manager’s performance is measured against market benchmarks or peer money

managers having similar investment styles.

        Evidence suggests that the most important aspect of a pension fund’s overall

investment performance is its decisions regarding allocations into various asset classes,

rather than the choice of money managers for each given asset class. Empirical studies of

large corporate pension funds by Brinson, Hood, and Beebower (1986) and Brinson,

Singer, and Beebower (1991) find that over 90% of investment returns are explained by a

fund’s asset allocation policy. Hence, it would appear that the pension Board’s asset

class allocation decisions are critical.



7
 One indication of such a situation is when a municipal government finds it difficult to make pension
contributions to cover accrued liabilities during poor economic conditions.
                                                     10


           Presumably, the objectives set by a public pension fund’s Board would determine

the chosen asset-class allocations. Peng (2009) notes that typically these objectives state

numerical goals for ex-post investment returns, rather than a desire to hedge the risk of

liabilities. Moreover, asset-class portfolio weights often are chosen based on mean-

variance portfolio efficiency with little regard to the risk characteristics of pension

liabilities. As a consequence, a pension fund’s chosen investments may leave it exposed

to significant risk from changes in the market value of its liabilities. 8

           Why might the investment objectives of many public pension funds have minimal

connection to the risk characteristics of their liabilities? A potential explanation for this

behavior is that archaic GASB pension fund accounting clouds the true market valuation

of pension liabilities. Lacking a market value measure of liabilities to benchmark the

market value of pension assets may discourage the hedging of pension liability risk.

Moreover, opaque accounting of pension liabilities may affect how the pension fund’s

performance is measured. Rather than, or in addition to, being judged on how the pension

fund’s investments hedge the market risk of its liabilities, the pension Board and staff’s

performance may be gauged against the investment performance of similar public

pension funds. Peskin (2001) describes such a peer group benchmark as belonging to the

“traditional” approach to public pension investment management. Park (2009) argues

that such a peer group benchmark is a result of career concerns by the public pension

plan’s Board of Trustees and staff and is reinforced by “prudent person” fiduciary

standards.

III.B Public Pension Fund Portfolio Choice

8
    For example, Ruthen (2005) and Adams and Smith (2009) point out that the typical pension fund’s large
                                                      11


         Given the previous discussion, we begin with a model that assumes a non-

Ricardian environment where a pension fund’s objective recognizes that its future

funding status has tax consequences for a representative resident of the municipality.

Since a pension plan’s Board of Trustees tend to have a narrow scope of responsibility,

we also assume that the pension fund’s objective is separable from the other assets and

liabilities composing the municipality’s overall balance sheet. Because future funding

status depends on the risk of pension liabilities, in addition to pension investments, our

analysis first recognizes the role of liability risk and considers a liability immunizing

portfolio as the benchmark investment strategy. We will later consider the consequences

of an investment objective that is divorced from liability risk and where the pension

fund’s benchmark becomes the average performance of its peers.

         The model is similar to Chen and Pennacchi (2009), and details regarding its

derivation can be found in that paper. Let the initial date be 0 and let the end of the

pension fund’s performance horizon be date T. The interval from date 0 to T might be

interpreted as the municipality’s fiscal year or a longer period over which pension over-

or under-funding has tax consequences and thereby affects the wealth of the

municipality’s residents. Since our focus is on portfolio allocation given an initial level

of funding, we assume that contributions by the pension fund’s government employer and

its employees are made just prior to date 0, as are any cash outflows to pay retirement

benefits. Thus from date 0 to date T, the only changes in the values of pension assets and

liabilities are assumed to derive from their market rates of return.




allocation to equities while its liabilities are fixed income in nature exposes it to increased underfunding
when interest rates unexpectedly decline.
                                                    12


        During the interval from dates 0 to T, the pension fund’s benchmark, which for

now is assumed to be its liabilities, Lt, follows the process

                                     dLt
                                         = α L dt + σ L dzL                                             (1)
                                      Lt

where dzL is a Brownian motion process. The Appendix shows how a rate of return

process of this form can be derived from the value of individual employees’ projected

benefits and retirees’ annuities. In particular, the process depends on risks from changes

in wages and changes in the value of nominal or, in the case of Cost of Living

Adjustments (COLAs), inflation-indexed (real) bonds.

        The pension fund can choose investments that are assumed to perfectly match

(immunize) the above rate of return on liabilities. It can also choose another portfolio of

“alternative” securities. These alternative securities are defined as the portion of the

fund’s total assets that accounts for the difference between the fund’s portfolio and one

that is invested solely in the liability immunizing benchmark portfolio. Let At be the date

t value of this alternative securities portfolio. Its rate of return follows the process 9

                                      dAt
                                          = α A dt + σ A dz A                                           (2)
                                       At

where dzA is another Brownian motion such that σLdzLσAdzA = σALdt. For simplicity, σA,

σL, and σAL are assumed to be constants. αA and αL may be time varying, as would be the

case when market interest rates are stochastic, but it is assumed that their spread, αA -αL,

is constant.



9
 Although we only consider the choice of a single alternative securities portfolio, the appendix of Chen
and Pennacchi (2009) shows that permitting multiple alternative security choices can simply to this single
alternative portfolio choice problem.
                                                         13


           If at date t the pension fund allocates a portfolio proportion of 1-ωt to the

immunizing portfolio and a proportion ωt to the alternative investments, then the value of

the pension fund’s asset portfolio, Vt, satisfies

                    dVt            dL     dA
                        = (1 − ωt ) t + ωt t
                    Vt              Lt     At                                                                (3)
                           = ⎡⎣(1 − ωt ) α L + ωtα A ⎤⎦ dt + (1 − ωt ) σ L dz L + ωtσ A dz A

Whenever ωt ≠ 0, the fund’s return in equation (3) deviates from the liability immunizing

portfolio’s return. Now define Gt ≡ Vt/Lt to be the pension fund’s date t funding ratio;

that is, value of the fund’s assets relative to that of its liabilities. At date 0, G0 =V0 /L0

and then by Itô’s lemma evolves over the interval from date 0 to date T according to

                           = ωt (α A − α L + σ L2 − σ AL ) dt + ωt (σ A dz A − σ L dz L )
                       dGt
                                                                                                             (4)
                       Gt

           Given that a public pension fund must pay its promised retirement benefits, future

over- or under-funding at date T is assumed to be the obligation of the municipality’s

taxpayers. Thus, an aggregate change of wealth equal to VT – LT accrues to taxpayers at

date T. For analytical convenience, the population of representative taxpaying

individuals at date T is assumed to be proportional to the value of date T liabilities. 10

Hence, the representative taxpayer’s date T wealth might be written as

                                                     VT − LT
                                      WT = wˆ + λ            = wˆ − 1 + λGT
                                                        LT                                                   (5)
                                           = w + λ GT

where w ≡ wˆ − 1 is assumed to be a constant that includes wealth unrelated to pension

funding and λ > 0 is the ratio of pension liabilities per representative taxpayer. The


10
     This would be approximately the case if there is a steady-state ratio of pension benefits to population, λ.
                                                       14


larger is λ, the more sensitive is the taxpayer’s wealth to the pension plan’s funding

status. If taxpayers’ utilities display constant relative risk aversion with coefficient (1- γ)

> 0, and pension investment policy has the objective of maximizing their utility, then the

pension fund’s asset allocation problem is

                                                            ⎡ ⎛ w + λ G ⎞γ ⎤
                                             Max E0 ⎢⎜                 T
                                                                         ⎟ ⎥                       (6)
                                         ω ( t ) ∀t∈[0,T ]
                                                           ⎣⎢⎝     γ     ⎠ ⎥⎦

subject to the pension funding ratio dynamics in equation (4). The solution for the

optimal portfolio proportion invested in the alternative securities for any date t ∈ [0,T]

is 11

                                                 αG       ⎛    w ⎞
                                     ωt* =                  1+
                                             (1 − γ ) σ G ⎝ λGt ⎟⎠
                                                        2 ⎜
                                                                                                   (7)


where α G ≡ α A − α L + σ L2 − σ AL and σ G2 ≡ σ A2 − 2σ AL + σ L2 . Equation (7) says that when αG is

positive (negative), the pension fund takes a long (short) position in the alternative

securities. 12 This deviating position is tempered by the relative volatility of the

alternative securities, σG, and also the representative taxpayer’s coefficient of relative

risk aversion, (1- γ).

           Perhaps the most interesting insight from equation (7) is how allocations away

from the perfectly immunizing portfolio vary with the current pension funding level, Gt:

                                       ∂ ωt*                 αG
                                               = −w                                                (8)
                                        ∂Gt           (1 − γ ) λGt2σ G2
This derivative is negative whenever w is positive, so that when the representative

taxpayer’s wealth unrelated to pension funding is sufficiently large, declines in Gt raise

11
     See Chen and Pennacchi (2009) for the derivation.
                                                        15


ωt* . In other words, a fall in the pension plan’s funding ratio leads to a larger deviating

allocation and greater “tracking error” risk, which might be interpreted as risk-seeking

behavior. The reverse holds when w is negative, so that when wealth unrelated to

pension funding is small, the pension fund decreases its deviating allocation (tracking

error) with pension underfunding; that is, it better hedges its liabilities as its funding ratio

declines. The intuition for this behavior stems from the desire to avoid negative wealth

when w < 0 makes it a possibility.

           Based on our earlier discussion, these model results come with several caveats.

First, the representative taxpayer faces taxation risk not just from the municipality’s

pension under-funding but from other deficits/surpluses that may arise from the

government’s other activities. Recognizing these other sources of tax uncertainty in the

individual’s wealth in equation (5) could motivate the pension fund to hedge those risks.

For example, if budget surpluses were procyclical, the pension fund might wish to choose

counter-cyclical alternative securities that produce high (low) returns relative to the

benchmark during economic recessions (expansions).

           Second, the model takes the individual’s portion of wealth unrelated to pension

returns, w, as non-stochastic, as might be the case if the individual invested entirely in a

default-free bond maturing at date T. If this other wealth were invested in risky assets,

then again there would be a hedging motive when the pension fund chose its portfolio

weight in the alternative securities. Third, if the representative taxpayer’s choice of

assets that composed her personal wealth were endogenous, then the pension fund’s

portfolio choice and the uncertainty of GT could be offset by personal portfolio decisions.

12
     It can be shown that the optimal portfolio behavior ensures that [1 + w/(λGt)] is always positive.
                                                     16


Fourth, if personal portfolio decisions were endogenous and the municipality wished to

maximize the representative taxpayer’s utility of wealth after paying federal income

taxes, then Bader and Gold (2007) show that the pension fund should be invested in

bonds, rather than equities. Because equities are taxed at a lower federal personal tax

rate relative to bonds, but all pension fund investments are federal tax-exempt,

individuals would pay lower federal taxes if their exposure to (relatively high-taxed)

bonds were held by the pension fund and they held equities in their personal portfolio.

           Finally, it may be unrealistic to assume that when the pension fund ends with a

surplus (GT > 1) that the representative taxpayer’s wealth is incremented by that amount.

Political pressure leads to a sharing of the surplus with employees in the form of a

reduction in employee contributions or an increase in pension benefits. 13

           These numerous caveats cast doubt on whether a public pension fund’s

investment strategy should attempt to provide an optimal tradeoff of expected return for

risk on behalf of taxpayers as outlined in equation (7). Rather, these qualifications tend

to favor an investment policy that passively follows the liability immunizing strategy

where ωt = 0 ∀ t. Such a strategy would be transparent to taxpayers, allowing them to

focus on their individual portfolios. It also avoids generating surpluses that taxpayers

would be forced to share with employees. In addition, since this policy entails primarily

fixed-income investments, it provides federal tax savings.

           Shifting from a normative to a positive theory of public pension fund investment

behavior, we note that the practice of delegating pension fund management could lead to

agency problems where the Board of Trustees and staff maximize their own utility of


13
     This point is made by Peskin (2001), Bader and Gold (2007), Peng (2009), among others.
                                               17


wealth rather than that of a representative taxpayer. In addition, since stated objectives

guiding pension plan investments often downplay the risk of pension liabilities, the

Board and staff may be judged against a broader set of benchmarks that include the

investment performance of peer pension plans. In this light, the wealth in equation (5)

can be re-interpreted as that of the pension Board and staff where the process followed by

the benchmark Lt in (1) may not necessarily be the rate of return on the pension fund’s

liabilities but could be a benchmark such as the average rate of return earned by other

public pension funds. Thus, if explicit or implicit (career concern) compensation is

performance-related, the pension Board and staff’s wealth will be linked to future relative

performance, GT = VT/LT, measured as the pension plan’s funding ratio or its investment

performance relative to its peers.

        The solution for optimal portfolio choice continues to satisfy equations (7) and

(8), so that if the Board and staff’s wealth unrelated their pension performance is

sufficiently large (w > 0), they will increase the fund’s tracking error risk as their relative

performance declines. If their wealth that is unrelated to performance is low (w < 0), the

pension fund’s management will decrease its tracking error risk as its performance

declines.

        The next sections of the paper examine the empirical evidence related to our

model based on a time series and cross section of state pension plans. We investigate

how a state pension plan’s choice of tracking error volatility, which from equation (4) is

given by ωt σ G , relates to its characteristics, such as the plan’s funding ratio and its

performance relative to its peers. We also consider other characteristics related to plan
                                                        18


design, governance, and participant demographics that could determine tracking error

risk.

IV. Data and Variable Construction

           Our data on state pension funds comes from two sources. The first source is

Wilshire Associates who generously provided us with an annual time series of investment

information on 125 state pension funds over the 2000 to 2009 period. 14 This data

includes each fund’s actuarial values of liabilities and actuarial and market values of

assets for each of the ten years. Also for each year, it gives every fund’s proportion of

assets allocated to eight different categories: U.S. equities, non-U.S. equities, U.S. fixed

income, non-U.S. fixed income, real estate, private equity, hedge funds, and other. Also

included is each fund’s assumed rate for discounting liabilities and the total payroll for

active participants in the pension fund.

           The second source of pension fund information comes from the Boston College

Center for Retirement Research (CRR). This is publicly-available data on 112 state

pension funds for the year 2006. 15 It includes individual pension fund characteristics

pertaining to governance, the type of plan participants (general employees, teachers, or

police and firefighters), the design of plan benefits (e.g., the type of COLA), and numbers

of active members and annuitants.

           Comparing the state pension funds in the Wilshire data to those in the CRR data

led to 97 matches. Based on these 97 state plans, we selected from the CRR the

following variables: the ratio of a pension fund’s Board members who are plan

participants to the total Board members of the pension fund; a dummy variable equaling

14
     Due to late reporting, information on only 50 state funds is available for the year 2009.
                                                      19


1 if the pension fund had a separate investment council (zero otherwise); and a dummy

variable equaling 1 if the contribution rate of the pension fund sponsor was statutorily set

(zero otherwise).

         As previously mentioned, our measure of a pension fund’s overall asset - liability

risk-taking is its tracking error volatility. To translate a given pension fund’s asset-class

allocations for a given year into this risk measure, we collected for the period January

1997 to April 2010 monthly time series of asset returns in order to estimate a covariance

matrix of returns for seven different asset classes. 16 The following asset return series

were chosen: U.S. equities – Vanguard Total Stock Market Index Institutional Fund;

Non-U.S. equities – Vanguard Total International Stock Index Fund; U.S. fixed income –

Vanguard Total Bond Market Index Institutional Fund; Non-U.S. fixed income –

Barclays Capital Global Majors, Ex. U.S., Fixed-Income Index; Real estate – Wilshire

U.S. REIT Index; Hedge funds – Morningstar MSCI Composite Hedge Fund Returns;

and Private equity – Cambridge Associates U.S. Private Equity Returns. 17 In addition,

while not an asset class specified in the Wilshire data, a part of our analysis of tracking

error volatility will use a Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities (TIPS) return series,

which we proxied by the Vanguard Inflation-Protected Securities Institutional Fund.

         Time series were also collected on wage growth and returns on nominal and real

(inflation-indexed) bonds. This data was used to estimate the variances of market returns


15
   This data is at http://crr.bc.edu/frequently_requested_data/state_and_local_pension_data_4.html.
16
   Recall that the Wilshire data reports eight different asset allocation classes, but one of them is “Other.”
Because the average “Other” allocation was only 1.9%, we ignored it when computing tracking error
volatility and proportionally increased the other allocation weights so that they summed to one.
17
   Each of these asset return series is at a monthly frequency except for the Cambridge Associates U.S.
Private Equity Returns, which is quarterly. We used the monthly series to estimate the covariance matrix
of returns, except for those matrix elements relating to the private equity returns, which were estimated
based on a quarter time series of returns.
                                                   20


on pension fund liabilities as well as these returns’ covariances with the different asset

classes. For wages, we used the Bureau of Labor Statistics quarterly Employment Cost

Index for State and Local Government Workers. For bonds, a monthly time series of 15-

year maturity, zero-coupon bond returns were constructed for nominal Treasuries and

Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities (TIPS) using the data of Gürkaynak, Sack, and

Wright (2007, 2008). 18 We choose return series for nominal and real bonds having a

maturity of 15 years because several sources indicate that the typical pension fund’s

liabilities have a duration of that length. 19

        In our model, tracking error volatility was represented by the quantity ωt σ G ,

which is mathematically equivalent to the square root of the variance of the difference in

the rates of return on pension assets (Vt) and pension liabilities (Lt): σ V2 + σ L2 − 2 ρVLσ V σ L . 20

We estimated the variance of a pension fund’s assets in a given year as σ V2 = ω ′Ωω , where

Ω is the estimated covariance matrix of returns for the seven asset classes and ω is the

7×1 vector of the fund’s portfolio weights (allocations) in these seven asset classes.

        As shown in the Appendix, pension liabilities under a PBO measure are

composed of wage and bond risk, where the bond risk is either nominal or real (in the

case of COLA benefits). Thus, the standard deviation of pension liabilities σL can be

computed from the estimated standard deviations of wage growth (σLw ) and nominal or

real bond returns σLp as well as their correlation ρwp: σ L2 = σ Lw
                                                                 2
                                                                    + σ Lp
                                                                        2
                                                                           + 2 ρ wpσ Lwσ Lp . We


18
   This Treasury and TIPS yield data is at http://www.federalreserve.gov/econresdata/researchdata.htm.
We converted the monthly real returns on a 15-year TIPS to nominal ones using the Consumer Price Index.
19
   Ryan and Fabozzi (2002) state “an average 15.5 duration should be close to the median or average
duration of the pension industry.” Also, consulting firm Mercer LLC (2010) uses a 15-year duration for
the average pension plan and states that a pension plan with a typical mix of active members and retirees
has a duration between 13 and 16 years.
                                                              21


calculated this pension liability standard deviation, σL, for four different assumptions: 1)

nominal liabilities; 2) real (COLA) liabilities; 3) nominal liabilities adjusted for the ratio

of active to total plan participants; 4) real (COLA) liabilities adjusted for the ratio of

active to total plan participants. The Appendix details how, in the latter two cases, the

standard deviations of wage growth and bond risk (duration) were adjusted using the

fund’s ratio of active (employed) to total plan participants (including retirees). These

adjustments permit a fund’s liabilities to have a duration between 6 and 20 years.

            As discussed in the previous section, in practice some pension funds may not

view their liabilities as a benchmark but may benchmark their performance to that of peer

public pension funds. Therefore, we created an additional tracking error volatility

measure where, instead of the liability volatilities just discussed, we set

σ L2 = ωa′ Ωωa where ωa is a 7×1 vector of portfolio weights (allocations) that are the

averages across the 125 state funds for a particular year.

            The last step in constructing tracking error volatility calculates the covariance

between a fund’s chosen assets and the selected liability/peer performance for a particular

year: ρVLσ V σ L . Then the final measure of tracking error volatility is the square root of

σ V2 + σ L2 − 2 ρVLσ V σ L .

            Table 1 gives summary statistics for different asset class rates of return, as well as

state and local employee wage growth and returns on 15-year zero-coupon nominal and

real bonds. It is the annualized standard deviations and correlations from this table,

which were calculated over the 1997 to 2010 period, that we use to construct tracking



     Note σ V = (1 − ωt ) σ L + ωt σ A + 2ωt (1 − ωt ) σ Aσ L ρ and ρ LV σ V σ L = (1 − ωt ) σ L + ωtσ Aσ L ρ .
20           2             2   2    2   2                                                      2
                                              22


error volatilities. Of particular interest is the estimated correlation of -0.27 between state

and local wage growth and U.S. equity returns. Prior research, including Black (1989),

Cardinale (2003), and Lucas and Zeldes (2006, 2009) advocate pension fund investments

in equities as a way to hedge wage uncertainty under the presumption that equities and

wages are positively correlated.

       A potential criticism of our negative wage-equity correlation estimate is that it is

calculated over a quarterly holding period. Recommendations for using stocks to hedge

wage growth assume that their correlation is positive over a longer holding period.

Models by Lucas and Zeldes (2006), Benzoni, Collin-Dufresne, and Goldstein (2007),

and Geanakoplos and Zeldes (2010) show that wage growth and stock returns can have

zero short-run correlation but, due mean reversion, a correlation that becomes approaches

1 over long horizons. 21

       As a check, we calculated correlations between wages and equity returns over

longer holding periods. Because the BLS state and local worker wage index extends

back to only 1981, correlations between wage growth and equity returns and wage

growth and bond returns were calculated using the BLS national wage index, which

extends back to 1952. The return on equities was taken to be the S&P 500 return and the

return on bonds was a 10-year and 20-year maturity Treasury bond return obtained from

the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP).

       Table 2 presents estimated wage – asset return correlations for holding periods

from one year to nine years. Panel A indicates that there is little evidence of a positive

correlation between wages and stock returns, and the correlation point estimates trend
                                                    23


more negative as the holding period increases. This pattern of correlation is consistent

with Jermann (1999) who estimates wage – stock correlations over the 1929 – 1996

period, finding correlation point estimates that are negative at horizons from 7 to 17 years

before turning positive. Since a typical pension fund’s duration of liabilities is about 15

years, it is not clear whether stocks are the best hedge of wage risk if their correlation

becomes positive only at longer horizons.

         Another asset class, possibly bonds, might better hedge wage risk. 22 Panels B

and C of Table 2 find a correlation between wage growth and bond returns whose point

estimates becomes more positive as the holding period increases. Though none of the

correlation estimates in Table 2 are statistically significant, the overall evidence does not

justify large equity holdings for hedging wage risk at horizons relevant to a typical

pension fund.

         Given our estimated asset return and wage growth standard deviations and

correlations, the final input in constructing tracking error volatilities is each pension

fund’s asset allocations for each year. Summary statistics of these allocations and the

resulting tracking error volatilities are given in Table 3. Over the 2000-2009 period,

there was a moderate decline in the allocation to U.S. equities that was offset by a rise in

Non-U.S. equities and private equity. The allocation to U.S. fixed-income peaked at 33%

in 2002 following the decline in technology stocks, but then trended downward to its

minimum of 25% in 2009.



21
   In contrast, Lustig and Van Nieuwerburgh (2008) present theory and empirical evidence for a negative
correlation between innovations in human capital and financial asset returns that is counter to models such
as Benzoni, Collin-Dufresne, and Goldstein (2007).
22
   Most models that demonstrate a long-run correlation between stock returns and wages assume that
interest rates are constant. Hence, they do not consider the hedging characteristics of bonds.
                                                    24


         The average tracking error volatilities in Table 3 show the average overall risk

taken by the pension funds. The volatilities tend to be slightly lower when adjusted for

fund-specific demographic differences as measured by the ratio of active (employed) to

total participants. It may be unsurprising that when the average of funds’ allocations is

used as the benchmark, rather than a fund’s liabilities, tracking error volatilities typically

are the least.

         Table 3 also includes the yearly averages for two variables that our model

predicts may influence tracking error volatility: the plan’s funding ratio and its

investment return. The funding ratio is measured as the market value of assets divided by

the actuarial value of liabilities. The plan’s investment return in a given year is estimated

as the product of its asset-class allocation weights times the returns earned by each of the

asset classes. 23 As might be expected, the average funding ratio of these 125 state

pension plans was highest at 109% during 2000 prior to the technology stock decline and

was at a minimum of 58% during 2009. The significant underfunding in 2009 followed

an estimated 30% investment loss in 2008.

V. Empirical Evidence

V.A Immunizing Allocations

         As a prelude to examining how state pension funds’ tracking error volatilities

vary with their plan characteristics, we first ask what would be the asset portfolio

allocations that minimize the typical fund’s tracking error volatility. 24 This was done


23
   While we have no data on each fund’s actual investment return but only the fund’s portfolio allocation
for different asset classes and the asset classes’ returns, the evidence Brinson, Hood, and Beebower (1986)
and Brinson, Singer, and Beebower (1991) suggests that our proxy should be a close approximation.
24
   In principle, we could compute “optimal” portfolio allocations according to the model results in equation
(7). However, this computation requires each asset class’s expected rate of return, which are inaccurately
estimated over our short sample period (Merton, 1980), so that the results would be highly speculative at
                                                     25


using our estimated covariance matrix for the asset classes’ returns as well as these

returns’ covariances with wages and the 15-year duration liabilities of a typical pension

plan. 25 We adjusted this typical pension fund’s liabilities for demographics that assume a

ratio of active participants to total participants of 66.57%, which was the average for our

sample of pension plans. The portfolio allocations that best hedge (immunize) this

pension fund’s liabilities are given in Table 4.

         Columns 1, 2, and 3 of Table 4 show results when the pension fund’s liabilities

are assumed to be purely nominal, having no COLAs. In column 1, the unconstrained

allocation that minimizes tracking error volatility calls for a 9% short position in U.S.

equities, a 160% allocation to U.S. fixed income, a 24% allocation to private equity, and

a 67% short position in hedge funds. The huge allocation to U.S. fixed income is partly

explained by our assumption that the pension funds’ fixed-income investments are of

lower duration (lower interest rate sensitivity) than the 15-year duration of the pension

funds’ nominal liabilities. 26 Effectively these allocations imply that the pension fund

should borrow via short positions in other asset categories in order to increase its U.S.




best. For example, Table 1 reports that the mean return on U.S. equities is less than that on U.S. fixed-
income over the sample period, implying a negative equity premium. While a longer time series for
equities and fixed income might be used to estimate expected returns, longer series for other asset
categories are not generally available. Also, the aforementioned model caveats tend to move the socially
optimal allocation toward full immunization, so arguably tracking-error minimizing allocations are
probably close to optimal.
                                                               −1       −1
 The tracking error minimizing weights are given by ω * = Ω Ψ − λΩ 1 where Ω is the 7×7 covariance
25

matrix of asset returns and Ψ is a 7×2 vector of covariances between the asset returns and pension
liabilities (wage and nominal or real bond), 1 is a 7×1 vector of ones, and λ =   (1′Ω   −1
                                                                                                 ) / (1′Ω 1) .
                                                                                              Ψ −1
                                                                                                         −1


26
  Table 1 shows that the annualized standard deviation of U.S. Fixed Income returns is 0.0885 while that
of the 15-year nominal bond is 0.1376, implying that the duration of the pension funds’ U.S. fixed-income
investments is approximately 15×(0.0885/0.1376)= 9.6 years. Adams and Smith (2009) believe that the
typical pension funds’ fixed income investments are of a lower duration than that of their liabilities.
                                                    26


fixed income investment, thereby raising its asset interest sensitivity. 27 If, instead, the

pension fund’s U.S. fixed income portfolio was assumed to take the form of 15-year zero-

coupon bonds, then its tracking error minimizing allocation would be approximately

100%, rather than 160%, in U.S. fixed income. 28

         Because a short position in hedge fund investments is infeasible and a large

allocation to private equity may be unrealistic, column 2 of Table 4 shows the volatility

minimizing allocation if no private equity or hedge fund investments are permitted.

There the allocation to fixed income becomes 136%, with a 13% short position in U.S.

equities and a 17% short position in non-U.S. fixed income. Column 3 reports tracking

error minimizing allocations when short sales are not permitted. Interestingly, the

immunizing allocation is to invest 100% in fixed-income.

         Columns 4 to 8 of Table 4 assume that the pension fund’s liabilities are fully

inflation-indexed, real liabilities. Given the widespread presence of COLAs in state and

local pension benefits, this case may be more realistic relative to that of purely nominal

liabilities. Though the Wilshire data do not specifically identify funds’ allocation to

inflation-indexed bonds (they would likely be included in U.S. fixed income), we

consider allocations with and without including TIPS. When TIPS are included, column

4 shows that the immunizing allocation is 139% in TIPS with a large short position in

private equity. If, as in column 5, private equity and hedge fund investments are

disallowed, the TIPS allocation becomes 101%. Column 6 reports allocations when TIPS


27
   Interestingly, some public pension funds are borrowing (short-term) to fund greater long-term bond
investments. However, their motivation for this strategy appears more to increase their expected target rate
of return rather than better hedge their liabilities. See “Pensions Look to Leverage Up: State of Wisconsin
Investment Board Clears Plan to Borrow to Juice Returns,” The Wall Street Journal, January 27, 2010.
28
   This ignores the desire to hedge the wage risk of liabilities. The allocation might be slightly more than
100% given the positive correlation between bond returns and wage growth.
                                                         27


are excluded. The allocation to U.S. fixed income becomes 60% and the allocation to

non-U.S. fixed income is a large 18%. Moreover, the allocation to hedge funds switches

signs, to a large 38% allocation financed with a 20% short position in private equity.

            In column 7, the allocation that excludes TIPS and short sales calls for U.S. and

foreign fixed income allocations of 70% and 21%, respectively, with an 8% allocation to

hedge funds. The sizable position in foreign fixed income makes sense since it is likely to

be a good hedge against U.S. inflation, assuming that exchange rates adjust with

purchasing power parity. Column 8 permits investments in TIPS but no short positions.

The result is a simple 86% allocation to TIPS and a 14% allocation to U.S. fixed-income.

            Finally, note from the last row of Table 4, the minimum tracking error volatilities

for both nominal and real liabilities are much lower than the average tracking error

volatilities estimated in Table 3 for our sample of state pension funds. Figure 2 explores

this point further by plotting the sample distribution of tracking error volatilities. It

graphs, for each fund during each year, the volatility of tracking error relative to the

fund’s demographically-adjusted real liabilities (horizontal axis) versus the fund’s

volatility of tracking error relative to its peers (vertical axis). The distribution appears

skewed, with only a few pension funds (primarily those with very high allocations to U.S.

fixed-income) choosing allocations that immunize real liabilities. 29 The vast majority of

pension funds’ allocations result in peer tracking error volatilities below 4%, indicating a

tendency to herd far away from an immunizing portfolio.

V.B Tracking Error Volatility and Plan Characteristics




29
     A similar pattern of tracking error volatilities occurs if the funds’ liabilities are assumed to be nominal.
                                                    28


       Let us now investigate the relationship between a fund’s characteristics and its

choice of tracking error volatility. Our examination is based on the following linear

regression model:

         σ TE ,i ,t = β1 × ( Funding ratio )t −1 + β 2 × ( Return relative to peers )t −1
                                                                                                (9)
                   + β3 × ( Governance variables ) + β 4 × ( Other Control variables ) + ε it

where σTE,i,t is the tracking error volatility of fund i in year t. Taking the normative view

that the pension fund should maximize the utility of a representative taxpayer, our model

predicts that tracking error should be negatively related to the plan’s funding ratio (β1 <

0) if the taxpayer’s wealth is sufficiently large (w > 0).

       Instead, if the pension fund is managed to maximize the utility of wealth of the

pension Board and staff, and their benchmark for compensation includes the “traditional”

one of return performance relative to the fund’s peers, then tracking error volatility

should vary with the fund’s past investment return. In particular, if the wealth of the

pension Board and staff is sufficiently large (w > 0), then tracking error risk should be

high following a poor relative return. A poor relative return might also proxy for the

amount of recent underfunding for which the Board and staff are directly responsible.

Consequently, these interpretations of the model predict β2 < 0.

       The regression includes additional explanatory variables listed in Table 5. These

include governance-related variables as well as other controls related to the type of

participants and other characteristics such as a proxy for fund size (the natural log of the

market value of pension assets), the ratio of payroll to pension liabilities, and the rate

chosen by the fund to discount its liabilities. We include the fund’s chosen discount rate,
                                                      29


not because it is an exogenous variable, but to explore whether tracking error risk is

associated with a possible motive to underreport liabilities via a higher discount rate.

         Table 6 reports the outcome of regressions in the general form of equation (9).

Each regression specification controls for time (year) fixed-effects. In columns 1, 3, 5, 7,

and 9, the regressions include time-invariant fund characteristics from the CRR dataset,

so our observations drop to 97 pension plans per year. In columns 2, 4, 6, 8, and 10 we

exclude the CRR data but control for fund fixed-effects, in which case the observations

equal 125 pension plans per year.

         The results in Table 6 do not differ much when the dependent variable, tracking

error volatility, is based on a nominal or real pension liability benchmark that is or is not

adjusted for the demographic characteristics of the individual pension plan. As shown in

columns 1 to 8, three explanatory variables are always statistically significant: the prior

year’s investment return relative to peers; the fund’s chosen rate used to discount

liabilities; and the proportion of members of the Board of Trustees who are participants.

In addition, the prior year’s funding ratio is significant when the larger 125 plan sample,

estimated with fund fixed effects, is used. 30

         The negative coefficients on the fund’s prior-year return and its funding ratio can

be interpreted as risk-taking behavior on the part of the Board and its staff. If

compensation depends on the fund’s investment performance relative to its peers, as well

as possibly its funding ratio, then our model predicts that when Board wealth is




30
   In unreported regressions that exclude the discount rate, the results are nearly identical except that the
lagged funding ratio is significantly negative only for the regression with demographically unadjusted real
liabilities and fund fixed-effects. As another check of robustness, we also substituted each fund’s equity
allocation for tracking error volatility as the dependent variable and obtained qualitatively the same results.
                                               30


sufficiently large (w > 0), the pension fund chooses greater tracking error volatility

following poor investment performance.

          The positive relationship between a fund’s chosen rate to discount liabilities and

its tracking error volatility also seems consistent with risk-taking behavior, though the

direction of causality is unclear. 31 According to GASB standards, funds with higher

tracking error volatility may be able to justify a higher discount rate because they are

investing in assets with higher systematic (priced) risks. Or, it might be the case that a

fund is motivated to select a higher discount rate in order to understate its liabilities and

fictitiously increase its net worth in order to justify greater tracking error risk.

          The finding that a fund takes more tracking error risk when it has greater

participant representation on its Board of Trustees might be explained in a couple of

ways. If pension participants are less financially literate than typical Board members,

they may have less ability to select asset class allocations that provide a good hedge of

the pension plan’s liabilities. Alternatively, participants may knowingly wish to take

more tracking error risk. If such a gamble results in a significant pension surplus, Peskin

(2001), Bader and Gold (2007), and Peng (2009) point out that this surplus is typically

shared with participants in the form of increased benefits or lower employee contribution

rates. In contrast, if the gamble ends with a greater deficit, benefits for current

participants typically cannot be cut and greater contributions by the state’s taxpayers may

result.

          Columns 9 and 10 report regression results where the benchmark is assumed to be

the average investment allocation by peer pension plans. The estimated coefficients tend
                                                     31


to be qualitatively different from the previous regressions where a liability benchmark

was used. The positive and statistically significant coefficients on the plan’s prior-year

funding ratio and prior investment return indicate that pension funds deviate more from

their peers following better performance. This finding that better-performing pension

funds increase their tracking error relative to the average allocation of other funds is not

inconsistent with the previous regression results. Figure 2 shows that peer and liability

benchmarks are quite different, so when better-performing funds deviate more from their

peers they move closer to an immunizing portfolio. In other words, a poorly-performing

pension fund reduces the hedging of its liabilities and gambles by choosing a riskier

portfolio more typical of its peers.

VII. Conclusion

         This paper presented a model of public pension fund asset allocation that might

guide how a municipality chooses its pension investments. Out model suggests that

hedging risk from changes in the market value of the pension fund’s liabilities would be

the primary concern in determining asset allocation decisions. The model also was

extended to a setting where career concerns dictate the behavior of a pension fund’s

portfolio managers. Our empirical results seem consistent with such agency behavior.

We find that a public pension fund’s Board of Trustees and staff tend to allocate assets

based on the performance of peer pension funds rather than based on hedging the pension

plan’s liabilities.




31
  That funds choosing higher discount rates also choose higher tracking error volatility is consistent with
Park (2009) who finds that public plans selecting higher discount rates are more likely to invest in real
estate and alternative investments (including private equity and hedge funds).
                                              32


       Consistent with this positive, rather than normative, interpretation of the model,

our empirical analysis of 125 state pension plans over the 2000-2009 period finds that a

fund tends to take more asset - liability “tracking error” risk following declines in its

relative performance. Tracking error volatility also is higher for pension funds that select

a high rate with which to discount their liabilities and pension funds that have a greater

proportion of participants on their Boards of Trustees.

       The portfolio choices of public pension plans that deviate substantially from the

liability immunizing strategies advocated by many academics seem hard to justify on

public policy grounds. Opaque and misleading accounting standards that are divorced

from finance theory may encourage public plans to follow their “traditional” investment

strategies of choosing investments with little regard to their true liability risks. The

pension fund asset-liability mismatches resulting from these strategies pose a potential

burden to taxpayers that will be realized then economic conditions decline and when

losses are most difficult to bear.
                                                          33


                                                          Appendix

        This appendix derives the value and risk characteristics of a pension fund’s
projected benefit obligation (PBO) when an employee’s retirement benefit equals an
annuity proportional to the employee’s wages over the last N years of work. Both wage
rates and interest rates are stochastic. One source of uncertainty that we neglect is the
worker’s probability of separation, though it would be relatively straightforward to
incorporate this risk. 32

         Let the date t wage rate be wt, which is assumed to grow at a rate that is a constant
δ less than the rate of return on a tradeable security that has the same priced risk as wage
growth. 33 Then the risk-neutral process followed by the wage rate can be modeled as

                                    dwt / wt = ( rt − δ ) dt + σ w dzw                                      (A.1)
where σw is the standard deviation of wage growth and rt is the instantaneous-maturity
default-free (riskless) interest rate.

       It is assumed that the term structure of default-free interest rates follows the
model of Vasicek (1977), so that the risk-neutral process for rt is

                                                (           )
                                     drt = α r Q − rt dt + σ r dzr                                          (A.2)
where α measures the strength of mean reversion of rt to its unconditional mean, r , and                Q


the volatility σr is a constant. The risk-neutral unconditional mean
equals r Q = r + θσ r / α , where r is the interest rate’s physical unconditional mean and θ is
a market price of interest rate risk. The wage process and interest rate process may be
correlated, such that dzwdzr = ρdt. This model of the instantaneous-maturity interest rates
implies that the date t price of a zero-coupon bond that pays $1 at date t+τ is

                                      P ( rt ,τ ) = A (τ ) e − rt B(τ )                                     (A.3)
where A (τ ) ≡ exp ⎡⎣( B (τ ) − τ ) ( r Q − 12 σ r2 / α 2 ) ⎤⎦ and B (τ ) ≡ (1 − e −ατ ) / α . Applying Itô’s
lemma to equation (A.3) implies that the risk-neutral bond price process is



32
   One could introduce a termination date that differs from the date when the annuity begins, since our
framework already values individual cashflows that occur following retirement. Demographic data could
be used to estimate a worker’s probability of termination (or survival) during a maximum working horizon,
so that valuation would assign a probability of different horizon annuities for each worker. Valuation
would be particularly straightforward if termination probabilities were uncorrelated with interest rates and
wages.
33
   Pennacchi (1999) similarly models wages. His footnote 18 discusses how to estimate the parameter δ. If
wage growth has positive systematic risk, as is probable if it is positively correlated with stock returns, then
Geanakoplos and Zeldes (2010) correctly point out that expected future wages should be discounted at a
higher than the risk-free rate. Our risk-neutral valuation approach also accounts for this effect.
                                                                                                             34


                                                                 dP ( rt ,τ )
                                                                              = rt dt + σ p (τ ) dz p                                                                                         (A.4)
                                                                  P ( rt ,τ )
where σ p (τ ) ≡ σ r B (τ ) and dzp = - dzr.
       An employee is assumed to retire at date T and receive an annual annuity payment
for m years. Each annual payment is set to c ∑ n =0 wT − n ; that is, a proportion of the last N
                                               N −1



years of wages. 34 To value this annuity, we divide it into N annuities, each starting at
date T (with the first payment at date T+1) but set to a different year’s prior wage. The
value of the annuity linked to the wage wT-n is denoted VEn . Its value at date t < T-n is

                 ⎡ −                                                         ⎤
                                     T

           V = E ⎢e ∫t                           cwT − n ∑ i =1 P ( rT , i ) ⎥
              n       Q                  rs ds             m
             E       t
                 ⎣                                                           ⎦
                          ⎡ −                                    ∫t ( rs −α w − 12 σ w )ds +σ w ∫t                                                       ⎤
                                                  T                   T −n                                        T −n

                  = cwt E ⎢e ∫t                                                                                                ∑
                                                      rs ds +                        2

                                                                                                                                            P ( rT , i ) ⎥
                               Q                                                                                         dzw         m
                              t                                                                                                      i =1
                          ⎣                                                                                                                              ⎦
                             (                    )                         ⎡ − T rs ds +σ w ( zwT −n − zwt ) m Q ⎡ − ∫TT +i rs ds ⎤ ⎤
                                                                        EtQ ⎢e ∫T −n
                            − α w + 12 σ w2 (T − n −t )
                  = cwt e                                                                                    ∑ i =1 ET ⎢e          ⎥⎥
                                                                            ⎣                                          ⎣           ⎦⎦                                                         (A.5)
                             (                    )                         ⎡ σ z −z                        ⎡ − rs ds ⎤ ⎤
                                                                                                                T +i

                                                                        EtQ ⎢e w ( wT −n wt ) ∑ i =1 ETQ− n ⎢e ∫T −n ⎥ ⎥
                            − α w + 12 σ w2 (T − n − t )                                        m
                  = cwt e
                                                                            ⎣                               ⎣         ⎦⎦
                             (                    )
                            − α w + 12 σ w2 (T − n −t )
                                                                        EtQ ⎡e
                                                                                         σ w ( zwT −n − zwt )
                                                                                                                  ∑              P ( rT − n , i + n ) ⎤
                                                                                                                          m
                  = cwt e
                                                                            ⎣                                             i =1                        ⎦
                                 (                    )
                             − α w + 12 σ w2 (T − n −t )
                                                                          ∑
                                                          A ( i + n )EtQ ⎡e w ( wT −n wt ) T −n ( ) ⎤
                                                                           σ z       − z −r B i +n
                                                                                  m
                  = cwt e
                                                                         ⎣        i =1              ⎦
Given that rt satisfies equation (A.2), its discrete-time distribution is normal with mean
EtQ [ rT ] = rt e −α (T −t ) + r Q (1 − e −α (T −t ) ) and variance Vart [ rT ] = σ r 2 (1 − e −2α (T −t ) ) / ( 2α ) .
Therefore the risk-neutral expectation in (A.5) equals

                                                                σ w ( zwT −n − zwt ) − rT −n B ( i + n )
                                             EtQ ⎡ e                                                               ⎤
                                                 ⎣                                                                 ⎦
                                                          − ⎡ rt e
                                                            ⎢⎣
                                                                     − α (T − n−t )
                                                                                            (
                                                                                      + r Q 1− e (            )
                                                                                                − α T − n−t ) ⎤
                                                                                                                                                                    (
                                                                                                                B i + n ) + 12 σ w2 (T − n − t ) + 12 B ( i + n ) 2rα 1− e (
                                                                                                              ⎥⎦ (
                                                                                                                                                                 2σ 2     −2 α T −n−t )
                                                                                                                                                                                          )
                                             =e                                                                                                                                               (A.6)
                                                                                                         (
                                                             ρσ wσ r B ( i + n ) (T − n −t ) 1− e−2α (T −n−t ) / ( 2α )          )
                                                  ×e
                                                          − EtQ [ rT −n ] B ( i + n ) + 12 σ w2 (T − n − t ) +ψ ( i + n ,T − n − t )
                                             =e
where
              Ψ ( i + n, T − n − t ) ≡ 12 B ( i + n )
                                                                                                2 σ r2
                                                                                                   2α    (1 − e     −2α ( T − n − t )
                                                                                                                                        )
                                                                                                                                                                                              (A.7)
                                         + ρσ wσ r B ( i + n )                                    (T − n − t ) (1 − e −2α (T − n −t ) ) / ( 2α )

34
  Typically, annuity payments are computed as the product of years of service, average wages over the last
N years of service, and a conversion ratio. To value the plan’s accrued liabilities adjusted for likely wage
growth, the parameter c would equal the employee’s current years of service times the conversion ratio.
                                                                                      35


Substituting this result into (A.5):

                                          −α w ( T − n − t )
                                                               ∑ A (i + n) e [ ] ( ) ψ (           − EtQ rT −n B i + n +       i + n ,T − n −t )
                                                                  m
                       VEn = cwt e                                i =1
                                                                                                                                                             (A.8)
                                              −α w ( T − t − n )
                                                                 ∑ P ( E [ r ] , i + n ) eψ (                                  i + n ,T − n − t )
                                                                       m
                               = cwt e                                 i =1                t
                                                                                            Q
                                                                                                   T −n



The value of the entire annuity composed of those linked to each wage equals the sum:

              VE = ∑ n =0 VEn
                           N −1



                                                   ∑ eα ∑ A ( i + n ) e [ ] (                             − EtQ rT −n B i + n ) +ψ ( i + n ,T − n − t )
                                  −α w ( T − t )       N −1                   m
                      = cwt e                          n =0
                                                                  wn
                                                                              i =1
                                                                                                                                                             (A.9)

                                                   ∑ ∑ P ( E [ r ] , i + n ) eα
                                  −α w ( T − t   )     N −1        m                                                     w n +ψ   ( i + n ,T − n −t )
                      = cwt e                          n=0         i =1               t
                                                                                       Q
                                                                                                T −n

Equation (A.9) shows that the present value of the PBO obligation is a function of the
current wage rate, wt, various times until maturity (T - t + i where i = 0, 1,…,m), and the
current interest rate, rt, through the expectation
term EtQ [ rT − n ] = rt e −α (T − n −t ) + r Q (1 − e −α (T − n −t ) ) . Recognizing that the risk-neutral expected
rate of return on the employee’s benefit must equal rt and its risk-neutral and physical
volatilities are the same and given by Itô’s lemma, this risk-neutral process satisfies

                                                   dVE            1 ∂VE               1 ∂VE
                                                       = rt dt +        σ w wt dzw +        σ r dzr
                                                   VE            VE ∂wt              VE ∂rt
                                                                                                                                                          (A.10)
                                                         1 ∂VE
                                    = rt dt + σ w dzw +        σ r dzr
                                                        VE ∂rt
The partial derivatives with respect to the interest rate is

                                        m ∂P ( Et [ rT − n ] , i + n ) −α (T − n −t ) α w n +ψ ( i + n ,T − n −t )
                                                 Q
    ∂VE
                                ∑ n=0 ∑ i=1 ∂E Q [ r ] e
                 −α w ( T − t )   N −1
         = cwt e                                                                     e
     ∂rt                                           t    T −n                                                                                              (A.11)
             = −cwt e−α w (T −t ) ∑ n =0 ∑ i =1 P ( EtQ [ rT − n ] , i + n ) eα w n +ψ ( i + n ,T − n −t ) B ( i + n ) e −α (T − n −t )
                                             N −1         m




Dividing this derivative by VE,

                            1 ∂VE −∑ n =0 ∑ i =1 P ( Et [ rT − n ] , i + n ) e
                                                           N −1                w n + ( i + n ,T − n − t )                                                 α (T − n − t )
                                                                                                          B ( i + n ) e−
                                                       Q                  m                                                α        ψ

                                  =
                                           ∑ ∑ P ( EtQ [ rT −n ] , i + n ) eαwn+ψ (i+n,T −n−t )
                                                N −1
                           VE ∂rt                       m
                                                                              n =0              i =1

                                                    = −∑ n =0 ∑ i =1 ω B ( i + n ) e−α (T − n −t )
                                                                  N −1            m          n
                                                                                            i

                                                                                                                                                          (A.12)

where
                                                                 36


                             P ( EtQ [ rT − n ] , i + n ) e
                                                                α w n +ψ ( i + n ,T − n −t )

               ω ≡n
                                                                                                                          (A.13)
                      ∑ n=0 ∑ i =1 P ( EtQ [ rT −n ] , i + n ) e
                 i        N −1     m                                        α w n +ψ ( i + n ,T − n −t )


is a weight for the annuity payment having the horizon of i years linked to the wage wT-n.
Using (A.12), equation (A.10) can be rewritten as

                dVE
                    = rt dt + σ w dzw − ⎡ ∑ n =0 ∑ i =1 ωinσ r B ( i + n ) e (
                                            N −1   m                        −α T − n − t ) ⎤
                                                                                             dz
                VE                      ⎣                                                  ⎦ r
                                                                                                                          (A.14)
                         = rt dt + σ w dzw + ⎡ ∑ n =0 ∑ i =1 ω e                                   σ p ( i + n ) ⎤ dz p
                                                         N −1         m         n −α ( T − n − t )
                                             ⎣                                 i
                                                                                                                ⎦

        Equation (A.14) shows that the stochastic process for the PBO liability of a given
worker includes the same stochastic component as wage growth and a weighted average
of discounted stochastic components of zero-coupon bonds of various maturities.

        Equations (A.9) and (A.14) give the value and rate of return process, respectively,
of the PBO liability for a given worker. Next, consider the similar quantities for a retired
pension plan participant. The retiree’s annuity payment is known (in nominal terms if
there is no COLA and in real terms if there is a COLA). Let cr be the retiree’s annual
benefit that is to be paid for mr remaining years. Then the value of her annuity is

                                           VA = cr ∑ i =r1 P ( rt , i )
                                                             m
                                                                                                                          (A.15)
and its risk-neutral process satisfies

                                       dVA            1 ∂VA
                                           = rt dt +        σ r dzr                                                       (A.16)
                                       VA            VA ∂rt
where
                                           ∑      P ( rt , i ) B ( i )
                                                         m
                                  1 ∂VA
                                                r


                                        =−   i =1
                                                                                                                          (A.17)
                                 VA ∂rt     ∑ r P ( rt , i )
                                                  m
                                                             i =1

so that
                                         dVA
                                             = rt dt + ∑ i =r1 ωipσ p ( i ) dz p
                                                         m
                                                                                                                          (A.18)
                                         VA
where ωip ≡ P ( rt , i ) / ∑ i =r1 P ( rt , i ) is the value of annuity payment i relative to the value
                             m


of all remaining annuity payments.

       To determine the value and the rate of return process for the pension fund’s
aggregate liabilities, define V j , E ( t ) to be the date t value of current employee j’s annuity,
which reflects her particular retirement date, T, and wage level, c. Then if the pension
fund has NE eligible employees, the value of liabilities for all current employees is

                                         LEt = ∑ j =E1V j , E ( t )
                                                     N
                                                                                                                          (A.19)
                                                          37


Let γ j , E ≡ V j , E ( t ) / LEt be the value weight of employee j’s annuity to the value of all
employee annuities. Then the rate of return on the pension fund’s total employee
liabilities is

                                        dLEt                   dV j , E
                                             = ∑ j =E1 γ j , E
                                                 N
                                          E
                                                                                                                    (A.20)
                                         Lt                    V j ,E

                                                                          ∑
                                                                              NE
where dVj,E/Vj,E follows the process in (A.14). Since                         j =1
                                                                                     γ j , E = 1 , this implies that total
employee liabilities follow a risk-neutral process of the form

                        dLEt
                             = rt dt + σ w dzw + ∑ j =E1 γ i , E Ωi , E dz p
                                                   N
                           E
                                                                                       (A.21)
                         Lt
where Ωj,E is the term in square brackets in the last line of equation (A.14) that pertains to
employee j.

        Similar logic implies that the pension fund’s total liabilities for its NA retirees
satisfies:

                                          dLtA
                                               = rt dt + ∑ j =A1 γ i , AΩi , A dz p
                                                           N
                                            A
                                                                                                                    (A.22)
                                           Lt
where LtA = ∑ j =1V j , A ( t ) , γ j , A ≡ V j , A ( t ) / LtA , and Ωj,A is the term multiplying dzp in
                  NA



equation (A.18) that pertains to retiree j.

       Finally, let Lt = LEt + LtA be the pension fund’s total liabilities. The previous results
imply that its risk-neutral process satisfies

                   dLt            LE           ⎛ LE                       LA N                     ⎞
                        = rt dt + t σ w dzw + ⎜ t ∑ j =E1 γ i , E Ωi , E + t ∑ j =A1 γ i , AΩi , A ⎟ dz p
                                                        N
                                                                                                          (A.23)
                    Lt            Lt           ⎝ Lt                       Lt                       ⎠
Equation (A.23) shows that the pension fund’s liabilities have a standard deviation
associated with wage risk equal to the volatility of wage growth times the weight of
employee liabilities to total liabilities. The standard deviation associated with bond risk
is a linear combination of different maturity zero coupon bond standard deviations that
correspond to the times when employees’ and retirees’ benefits are to be paid. If these
standard deviations are approximately constant over time, so that the last two terms in
(A.23) can be written as σLwdzw + σLpdzp ≡ σLdzL then the physical process corresponding
to the risk-neutral process in (A.23) equals equation (1) in the text where
σ L2 = σ Lw
         2
            + σ Lp
                2
                   − 2 ρσ Lwσ Lp and α L = rt + θ Lσ L where θL is the market price of risk associated
with the Brownian motion dzL.

      Our empirical work approximates LEt / Lt = 1 − LtA / Lt by the pension fund’s
number of active participants to the total number of active participants and annuitants;
                                            38


that is, NE/(NE + NA). Also, we approximate the bond standard deviation term in
parentheses in equation (A.23) as ϕσp(15), where
                                                                  2
                                    NE           ⎛ NE ⎞
                   ϕ = 0.4 + 0.558 E    + 0.0425 ⎜ E  A ⎟
                                                                                   (A.24)
                                  N +NA          ⎝N +N ⎠
and σp(15) is the standard deviation of a nominal or real zero-coupon Treasury bond
having a maturity of 15 years. Note that when NE/(NE + NA) = 0, ϕ = 0.4 and the pension
fund’s bond standard deviation is approximately equal that of a bond with maturity 6
years, which Mercer (2010) states is the duration of a pension fund with all retirees.
When NE/(NE + NA) = 1, ϕ = 1.33 and the pension fund’s bond standard deviation is
approximately equal that of a bond with maturity 20 years, which Mercer (2010) states is
the duration of a pension fund with all active participants. Finally, when NE/(NE + NA) =
0.6657, which is the average for our sample of public pension funds, ϕ = 1 and the
pension fund’s bond standard deviation is approximately equal that of a bond with
maturity 15 years, which Mercer (2010) states is the duration of a “typical” pension fund.
                                            39



                                       References

Adams, J. and D. Smith (2009) Mind the Gap: Using Derivatives Overlays to Hedge Pension
      Duration, Financial Analysts Journal 65(4) July/August: 60-67.

Bader, L. and J. Gold (2007) The Case against Stock in Public Pension Funds, Financial
       Analysts Journal 63(1) January/February: 55-62.

Barro, R. (1974) Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?, Journal of Political Economy 82:
       1095-1117.

Benzoni, L., P. Collin-Dufresne, and R. Goldstein (2007) Portfolio Choice over the Life-
      Cycle when the Stock and Labor Markets are Cointegrated, Federal Reserve Bank of
      Chicago Working Paper 2007-11.

Black, F. (1989) Should You Use Stocks to Hedge Your Pension Liability?, Financial
       Analysts Journal January/February: 10-12.

Bodie, Z. (1990) The ABO, the PBO and Pension Investment Policy, Financial Analysts
       Journal (September-October): 27-34.

Brinson, G., L.R. Hood, and G. Beebower (1986) Determinants of Portfolio Performance,
       Financial Analysts Journal 42(4): 39–44.

Brinson, G., B. Singer, and G. Beebower (1991) Determinants of Portfolio Performance
       II: An Update, Financial Analysts Journal 47(3): 40–48.

Brown, J. and D. Wilcox (2009) Discounting State and Local Pension Liabilities, American
      Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings 99(2): 538-542.

Bulow, J. (1982) What Are Corporate Pension Liabilities?, Quarterly Journal of Economics
       97: 435-452.

Cardinale, M. (2003) Cointegration and the Relationship Between Pension Liabilities and
       Asset Prices, Watson Wyatt Technical Paper Series.

Chen, H. and G. Pennacchi (2009) Does Prior Performance Affect a Mutual Fund’s Choice
       of Risk? Theory and Further Empirical Evidence, Journal of Financial and
       Quantitative Analysis 44: 745-775.

Elmendorf, D. and N.G. Mankiw (1999) Government debt, in John Taylor and Michael
      Woodford, eds. Handbook of Macroeconomics 1(1): 1615-1669.
                                              40


Geanakoplos, J. and S. Zeldes (2010) Market Valuation of Accrued Social Security Benefits,
      in D. Lucas (ed.) Measuring and Managing Federal Financial Risk, Chicago:
      University of Chicago Press.

Gold, J. and N. Hudson (2003) Creating Value in Pension Plans (or, Gentlemen Prefer
        Bonds), Journal of Applied Corporate Finance 15(4): 51-57.

Gürkaynak, R., B. Sack, and J. Wright (2007) The U.S. Treasury Yield Curve: 1961 to
      the Present, Journal of Monetary Economics 54: 2291–2304.

Gürkaynak, R., B. Sack, and J. Wright (2008) The TIPS Yield Curve and Inflation
      Compensation, Finance and Economics Discussion Series working paper 2008-
      05, Federal Reserve Board.

Jermann, U. (1999) Social Security and Institutions for Intergenerational, Intragenerational,
      and International Risk Sharing: A Comment, Carnegie-Rochester Series on Public
      Policy 50: 205-212.

Lucas, D. and S. Zeldes (2006) Valuing and Hedging Defined Benefit Pension Obligations –
       The Role of Stocks Revisited, working paper Northwestern and Columbia
       Universities.

Lucas, D. and S. Zeldes (2009) How Should Public Pension Plans Invest?, American
       Economic Review 99(2): 527-532.

Lustig, H. and S. Van Nieuwerburgh (2008) The Returns on Human Capital: Good News on
        Wall Street is Bad News on Main Street, Review of Financial Studies 21(5): 2097-
        2137.

McDonald, R. (1983) Government Debt and Private Leverage: An Extension of the Miller
     Theorem, Journal of Public Economics 22: 303-325.

Mercer LLC (2010) Mercer Pension Discount Yield Curve and Index Rates, available at
       http://www.mercer.com/pensiondiscount .

Merton, R. (1980) On Estimating the Expected Return on the Market: An Exploratory
       Investigation, Journal of Financial Economics 8(4): 323-361.

Modigliani, F. and M. Miller (1958) The Cost of Capital, Corporation Finance and the
      Theory of Investment, American Economic Review 48 (3): 261–297.

Munnell, A., T. Calabrese, A. Monk, and J-P. Aubry (2010) Pension Obligation Bonds:
      Financial Crisis Exposes Risks, Boston College Center for Retirement Research
      Brief SLP 9.
                                             41


Munnell, A., R. Kopcke, J-P. Aubry, and L. Quinby (2010) Valuing Liabilities in State and
      Local Plans, Boston College Center for Retirement Research Brief SLP 11.

Munnell, A., K. Haverstick, S. Sass, and J-P. Aubry (2008) The Miracle of Funding by State
      and Local Pension Plans, Boston College Center for Retirement Research Brief SLP
      5.

Munnell, A. and M. Soto (2007) State and Local Pensions are Different from Private Plans,
      Boston College Center for Retirement Research Brief SLP 1.

Park, Y. (2008) Public Pension Plan Asset Allocations, Employee Benefit Research Institute
       Notes 30(4): 1-11.

Peng, J. (2009) State and Local Pension Fund Management, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL.

Pennacchi, G. (1999) The Value of Guarantees on Pension Fund Returns, Journal of Risk
      and Insurance 66: 219-237.

Peskin, M. (2001) Asset/Liability Management in the Public Sector, in Olivia Mitchell and
        Edwin Hustead, eds., Pensions in the Public Sector, Philadelphia: University of
        Pennsylvania Press.

Novy-Marx, R. and J. Rauh (2009) The Liabilities and Risks of State-Sponsored Pension
      Plans, Journal of Economic Perspectives 23(4): 191-210.

Ricardo, D. (1820) Essay on the Funding System, published posthumously in Encyclopaedia
       Britannica: Supplement (1824).

Ruthen, S. (2005) Defined Benefit Pension Plans’ Interest Rate Exposure at Record High,
       PIMCO Publication (February): 1-6.

Ryan, R. and F. Fabozzi (2002) Rethinking Pension Liabilities and Asset Allocation, Journal
       of Portfolio Management 28 (Summer): 1-9.

Steffen, K. (2001) State Employee Plans, in Olivia Mitchell and Edwin Hustead, eds.,
        Pensions in the Public Sector, Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.

Vasicek, O. (1977) An Equilibrium Characterization of the Term Structure, Journal of
       Financial Economics 5: 177-188.
                                                                                              42




                                                                                            Figure 1
                                            Portfolio Allocations of State and Local Government Pension Funds



          100
          90
                                        F ix e d I n c o m e
          80

          70

          60
Percent




          50
          40
                                                                                                           E q u it ie s
          30

          20
                                                                                                                                          O th e r
          10
                                                                                                          C ash
           0
           1952         1956         1960         1964 1968 1972                           1976     1980      1984 1988    1992   1996   2000 2004   2008
                                                                                                  Y ear
S ou r c e : F e d e r a l R e s er v e F low of F un d s A c c ou n ts T a ble L . 11 9
                                                                                                  43




                                                                                               Figure 2
                                                                            Distribution of Tracking Error Volatilities


                                                 0.14
Volatility of Tracking Error relative to Peers




                                                 0.12

                                                  0.1


                                                 0.08


                                                 0.06


                                                 0.04


                                                 0.02


                                                   0
                                                    0.07   0.08   0.09    0.1       0.11      0.12      0.13      0.14      0.15      0.16      0.17   0.18
                                                                     V o la tility o f T ra c k in g E rro r re la tiv e to R e a l L ia b ilitie s
                                                                               44



                                                                             Table 1

                                               Summary Statistics of Asset Returns and Wage Growth

                                 US        Non-US        US       Non-US       US-Real     Private     Hedge                   S&L       15-Year      15-Year
                               Equities    Equities     Fixed      Fixed        Estate     Equity      Funds        TIPS      Wage       Nominal       Real
                                                       Income     Income                                                      Growth      Bond         Bond

Rates of Return:
   Mean                         0.0533      0.0488      0.0727      0.0529      0.0858      0.1295     0.0815      0.0666      0.0293     0.0795      0.0795
   Standard Deviation           0.1714      0.1891      0.0885      0.0838      0.2447      0.1232     0.0512      0.0601      0.0107      0.1376      0.0971
   Minimum                     -0.1939     -0.2496     -0.0908     -0.0609     -0.3913     -0.1567    -0.0537     -0.0927      0.0010     -0.1466     -0.1285
   Maximum                      0.1007      0.1341      0.1072      0.0768      0.2841      0.1466    0.0501      0.0588       0.0196     0.1760      0.0976
Correlation Matrix:
US Equities                           1
Non-US Equities                 0.87091           1
US Fixed Income                 0.06412     0.11068          1
Non-US Fixed Income             0.04328     0.22146    0.49819           1
US-Real Estate                  0.57669     0.57607    0.17921     0.16747            1
Private Equity                  0.79986     0.73599   -0.20965    -0.17387      0.46705          1
Hedge Funds                     0.63777     0.69356    0.12148     0.02080      0.33082    0.74276           1
TIPS                            0.06630     0.14086    0.70857     0.49254      0.25107   -0.07349     0.15824           1
S&L Wage Growth                -0.27389    -0.29040    0.20711     0.14081     -0.00980   -0.25375    -0.21839     0.15864          1
15-Year Nominal Bond           -0.07907    -0.04836    0.94010     0.46061      0.02485   -0.29953    -0.01632     0.66265    0.25426           1
15-Year Real Bond               0.04059     0.11604    0.72275     0.49579      0.16940   -0.18294     0.14551     0.95675    0.18128     0.68908            1

Observations:                       159         159         159         159         159          52        159         159          52         159         159

Note: Summary statistics for rates of return on eight different asset categories: U.S. Equities; Non-U.S. Equities; U.S. Fixed Income; Non-U.S. Fixed Income;
U.S. Real Estate; Private Equity; Hedge Funds; and Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities (TIPS), as well as State and Local Employee Cost Index wage
growth and 15-Year Nominal and Real (TIPS) Bond returns. State and local employee wage growth and private equity returns are calculated based on quarterly
data from the second quarter of 1997 to the first quarter of 2010. All other statistics are calculated from monthly return data between February 1997 and April
2010. Means and standard deviations are annualized. Minimums and maximums for wage growth and private equity are one quarter rates while minimums and
maximums for the other series are one month rates.
                                                                             45



                                                                          Table 2

                               Correlations of Equity and Bond Returns with National Wage Growth, 1952- 2008


                                       Panel A: Correlation between National Wage Index Growth and S&P500 Return
                      Holding Period            Correlation            Observations            t-statistics                p-value
                         one-year                -0.0389                    57                   -0.2890                   0.7737
                        three-year                0.0246                    19                    0.1014                   0.9205
                         five-year               -0.4348                    11                   -1.4483                   0.1815
                       seven-year                -0.2860                     8                   -0.7312                   0.4922
                        nine-year                -0.4406                     6                   -0.9816                   0.3819

                                Panel B: Correlation between National Wage Index Growth and 20-year Treasury bond Return
                      Holding Period            Correlation            Observations           t-statistics             p-value
                         one-year                 -0.2163                  57                   -1.6427                 0.1061
                        three-year                -0.3201                  19                   -1.3932                 0.1815
                         five-year                -0.2645                  11                   -0.8228                 0.4319
                       seven-year                  0.0859                   8                    0.2113                 0.8397
                        nine-year                  0.2449                   6                    0.5053                 0.6399

                                 Panel C: Correlation between National Wage Index Growth and 10-year Treasury note Return
                      Holding Period             Correlation           Observations            t-statistics              p-value
                         one-year                  -0.1095                  57                   -0.8171                 0.4174
                        three-year                 -0.0961                  19                   -0.3979                 0.6957
                         five-year                 -0.0746                  11                   -0.2245                 0.8274
                       seven-year                   0.2753                   8                    0.7013                 0.5094
                        nine-year                   0.4752                   6                    1.0802                 0.3408

Note: National Wage Index is taken from the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. The returns on the S&P 500 Index, the 10-year Treasury note and the 20-year
Treasury bond were obtained from the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP).
                                                                                 46



                                                                              Table 3

                             Time Series of Average Asset Allocations, Tracking Error Volatilities, and Funding Ratio


                                                      2000       2001       2002        2003       2004       2005       2006       2007        2008       2009
 Asset Class Allocations:
 US Equities                                         0.3996     0.4174     0.3966     0.4261      0.4363     0.4322     0.4172      0.3957     0.3378     0.3299
 Non-US Equities                                     0.1231     0.1197     0.1303     0.1348      0.1497     0.1534     0.1743      0.1848     0.1802     0.1880
 US Fixed Income                                     0.2796     0.3258     0.3306     0.3162      0.2769     0.2757     0.2648      0.2629     0.2588     0.2486
 Non-US Fixed Income                                 0.0156     0.0144     0.0141     0.0122      0.0116     0.0114     0.0087      0.0085     0.0143     0.0090
 US-Real Estate                                      0.0314     0.0372     0.0418     0.0405      0.0396     0.0434     0.0520      0.0553     0.0647     0.0524
 Private Equity                                      0.0378     0.0427     0.0419     0.0456      0.0429     0.0432     0.0454      0.0499     0.0715     0.0659
 Hedge Fund                                          0.0000     0.0000     0.0000     0.0000      0.0002     0.0013     0.0089      0.0082     0.0115     0.0238
 Other                                               0.0091     0.0027     0.0037     0.0087      0.0269     0.0235     0.0286      0.0267     0.0342     0.0303

Tracking Error Volatilities for Benchmark:
Nominal Liabilities                                  0.1697     0.1661     0.1651     0.1691      0.1753     0.1756     0.1778      0.1779     0.1751     0.1755
Real Liabilities                                     0.1372     0.1338     0.1327     0.1363      0.1419     0.1421     0.1438      0.1437     0.1406     0.1406
Nominal Liabilities Demographically Adjusted         0.1687     0.1651     0.1634     0.1678      0.1742     0.1746     0.1761      0.1764     0.1732     0.1748
Real Liabilities Demographically Adjusted            0.1363     0.1329     0.1312     0.1351      0.1408     0.1410     0.1422      0.1423     0.1389     0.1396
Average Asset Allocation of Peers                    0.0195     0.0187     0.0185     0.0173      0.0157     0.0159     0.0163      0.0162     0.0171     0.0143

 Funding Ratio                                         1.0852    0.9226     0.7912     0.7775    0.8250     0.8454      0.8618      0.9336      0.7831    0.5832
 Return on Investments                                -0.0129 -0.0524 -0.0723 0.2093            0.1304     0.0807      0.1429      0.0678      -0.3067 0.1881
Note: Sample average over 125 state pension plans for eight different asset allocations, various tracking error volatilities, funding ratios (market value of assets
divided by actuarial value of liabilities), and return on investments. The returns on investments were estimated as the product of their asset-class allocation
weights and the returns earned by each of the asset classes.
                                                                         47




                                                                     Table 4

                                                Tracking Error Minimizing Allocations

                                        Nominal Liabilities                                             Real Liabilities
                                             No Private                                      No Private
                                             Equity &                                        Equity &                       No TIPS
                               No              Hedge          No Short            No           Hedge        No TIPS         and No       No Short
                            Constraints        Funds           Sales           Constraints     Funds                       Short Sales    Sales
US Equities                  -0.0886          -0.1259            0              0.0794        -0.1320        0.0094            0            0
Non-US Equities               -0.0109         -0.0285            0               0.1109       0.0669        -0.0160            0            0
US Fixed Income               1.5991          1.3586             1              -0.0005       0.1702         0.6048          0.6998      0.1367
Non-US Fixed Income           -0.0103         -0.1719            0              -0.1405       -0.1131        0.1814          0.2143         0
US-Real Estate                -0.0662         -0.0322            0              -0.0167       -0.0037        0.0395          0.0034         0
Private Equity                0.2442             -               0              -0.3460          -          -0.2021            0            0
Hedge Fund                    -0.6673            -               0              -0.0725          -           0.3830          0.0824         0
TIPS                             -               -               -               1.3859       1.0117            -               -        0.8633



Tracking Error Standard      0.04054          0.05004         0.06444           0.02945       0.06613       0.06444         0.06583      0.04436
Deviation

        Note: The entries are the pension asset portfolio weights that minimize a typical pension fund’s tracking error volatility.
             This typical fund’s liabilities have a 15-year duration and a ratio of active to total participants of 66.6%.
                                                                     48



                                                                 Table 5

                                                 Regression Variable Summary Statistics


Variable                                              Observations         Mean     Std. Dev.   Minimum   Maximum
Dependent Variable; Tracking Error Volatility:
Nominal Liabilities                                       1121            0.1726     0.0177      0.0658    0.2074
Real Liabilities                                          1121            0.1392     0.0142      0.0703    0.1725
Nominal Liabilities Demographically Adjusted              903             0.1712     0.0209      0.0746    0.2163
Real Liabilities Demographically Adjusted                 903             0.1380     0.0154      0.0741    0.1734
Average Asset Allocation of Peers                         1121            0.0171     0.0132      0.0026    0.1294

Primary Explanatory Variables:
Funding Ratio                                             1121            0.8528     0.1970     0.1908     1.7520
Return on Investments                                     1121            0.0345     0.1463     -0.3891    0.2529

Governance Variables:
Participants to Total Board Members                       921             0.5646     0.2227        0         1
Dummy for Separate Investment Council                     930             0.3839     0.4866        0         1
Dummy for Legal Restrictions                              930             0.3086     0.4622        0         1

Other Control Variables:
Natural log of Market Value of Assets                     1121            22.6602    1.3605     19.2661   26.2487
Payroll to Actuarial Liabilities                          1121             0.2360    0.2029      0.0085    2.6248
Discount Rate                                             1121             0.0801    0.0039       0.07      0.09
Dummy for Teachers Fund                                    930             0.5065    0.5002         0         1
Dummy for General State Fund                               930             0.6226    0.4850         0         1
Dummy for Police and Fire Fighters Fund                    930             0.4441    0.4971         0         1
                                                                                 49
                                                              Table 6 Tracking Error Regression Results
                                                                                               Dependent Variable: Tracking Error Volatility
              Tracking Error                                    Liabilities Unadjusted                      Liabilities Demographically Adjusted                        Average Asset
            Volatility Benchmark                    Nominal Liabilities        Real Liabilities              Nominal Liabilities       Real Liabilities               Allocation of Peers


 Lag Funding Ratio                                   -0.004     -0.0115      -0.0038      -0.0105            -0.0051       -0.0108      -0.0043      -0.0096           0.006        0.0167
                                                      (.29)       (.02)        (.25)       (.01)               (.20)         (.04)        (.20)        (.04)           (.04)         (.00)
 Lag Return Relative to Peer Average                -0.0942     -0.0975      -0.0804      -0.0807            -0.0923       -0.0997       -0.078      -0.0821           0.015        0.0289
                                                      (.00)       (.00)        (.00)        (.00)              (.00)         (.00)        (.00)        (.00)           (.07)         (.00)
 Lag of Ln Market Value of Assets                    0.0006      0.0079       0.0007       0.007              0.0005        0.0068       0.0008       0.0055         -0.0007       -0.0157
                                                      (.59)       (.09)        (.43)       (.10)               (.74)         (.18)        (.43)        (.22)           (.48)         (.00)
 Lag Discount Rate                                   1.3779     1.0515        1.1758       0.916             1.2486        1.2819       1.0842       1.0936          -0.2521        0.0088
                                                      (.00)       (.00)        (.00)       (.00)               (.00)         (.00)        (.00)        (.00)           (.11)         (.96)
 Lag Payroll to Actuarial Liabilities               -0.0062     -0.0023      -0.0058      -0.0024            0.0072        -0.0035      0.0036       -0.0039          0.0008        0.0004
                                                      (.22)       (.75)        (.16)        (.71)              (.19)         (.63)        (.41)        (.55)           (.86)         (.94)
 Participants to Total Board Members                 0.0125                   0.0107                          0.0192                     0.0152                      -0.0022
                                                      (.04)                    (.02)                           (.01)                      (.00)                        (.70)
 Dummy for Teachers Fund                             0.0016                    0.001                          0.0027                     0.0012                       0.0003
                                                      (.63)                    (.70)                           (.50)                      (.65)                        (.91)
 Dummy for General State Fund                       -0.0009                  -0.0008                          0.0004                    -0.0005                       0.0025
                                                      (.78)                    (.75)                           (.92)                      (.84)                        (.40)
 Dummy for Police and Fire Fighters Fund            -0.0039                  -0.0031                         -0.0036                    -0.0031                       0.0001
                                                      (.22)                    (.19)                           (.35)                      (.24)                        (.97)
 Dummy for Separate Investment Council              0.0000                    0.0002                         -0.0023                    -0.0012                       0.0021
                                                      (.99)                    (.91)                           (.51)                      (.61)                        (.43)
 Dummy for Legal Restrictions                        0.0013                   0.0009                          0.0028                    0.0017                       -0.0022
                                                      (.66)                    (.69)                           (.45)                      (.50)                        (.44)

 Fund Fixed Effects                                    No         Yes           No          Yes                 No           Yes           No          Yes             No            Yes
 N                                                    811         986          811          986                787           795          787          795             811           986
 R2                                                   0.34       0.089         0.36         0.1                0.28         0.079         0.32         0.13           0.064       0.000053
Note: Each regression includes time (year) fixed effects. Numbers in parenthesis are p-values. The dependent variable in all regressions is tracking error volatility. In columns (1)
and (2) tracking error volatility is constructed assuming 15-year duration nominal liabilities with no demographic adjustments. In columns (3) and (4) tracking error volatility is
constructed assuming 15-year duration real liabilities with no demographic adjustment. In columns (5) and (6) tracking error volatility is constructed assuming 15-year duration
nominal liabilities with demographic adjustment for the ratio of active to total participants. In columns (7) and (8) tracking error volatility is constructed assuming 15-year
duration real liabilities with demographic adjustment for the ratio of active to total participants. In columns (9) and (10) tracking error volatility is constructed assuming a
benchmark equal to the average sample asset allocation of peer public pension funds.
