NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE FUNDING STATUS OF RETIREE HEALTH PLANS IN THE PUBLIC SECTOR
Robert Clark
Melinda S. Morrill
Working Paper 16450
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16450

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2010

Funding for this research was provided by the Center for State and Local Government Excellence.
We would like to thank Christina Robinson for her research assistance on this project. Helpful comments
and suggestions on an earlier draft were provided by Jerrell Coggburn, Dennis Daley, Rick Kearney,
Kitty McCollum, Olivia Mitchell, Philip Peterson, and Andrew Stratton. In addition we would like
thank Joseph Newhouse and seminar participants at the NBER State and Local Pensions Conference.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Robert Clark and Melinda S. Morrill. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

The Funding Status of Retiree Health Plans in the Public Sector
Robert Clark and Melinda S. Morrill
NBER Working Paper No. 16450
October 2010
JEL No. H72,J26,J45
ABSTRACT
While no longer common in the private sector, most public sector employers offer retiree health insurance
(RHI) as a retirement benefit to their employees. While these plans are thought to be an important
tool for employers to attract, retain, motivate, and ultimately retire workers, they represent a large
and growing cost. This paper reviews what is currently known about RHI in the public sector, while
highlighting many important unanswered research questions. The analysis is informed by detailed
data from states on their liabilities associated with RHI, which were produced in accordance with the
2004 Government Accounting Standards Board Rule 45 (GASB 45). We consider the extent of the
unfunded liabilities states face and explore what factors may explain the variation in liabilities across
states. The importance and sustainability of RHI plans in the public sector ultimately depends on how
workers view and value this post-retirement benefit, yet little is known about how RHI directly impacts
the public sector labor market. We conclude with a discussion of the future of RHI plans in the public
sector.
Robert Clark
College of Management
North Carolina State University
Raleigh, NC 27695
robert_clark@ncsu.edu
Melinda S. Morrill
North Carolina State University
Department of Economics
Box 8110
Raleigh, NC 27695-8110
melinda_morrill@ncsu.edu

State and local governments have historically provided generous retirement benefits to
career employees. Most full-time public sector employees are eligible for employer-provided
health insurance in retirement, given that they have achieved some minimum years of service
requirements. This benefit can represent a significant fraction of the total compensation that an
employee receives. In general, retiree health insurance (RHI) plans in the public sector allow
retired employees to remain in the same health plan as active workers. From the public
employer’s perspective, RHI is an important benefit that helps to attract, retain, motivate, and
ultimately retire quality workers. However, the cost of these plans represents a large and
increasing percentage of total compensation in many states and localities.
The future of public sector retiree health insurance will depend on the ability of
governments to continue to provide this benefit in the face of rising costs and aging populations.
At the same time, determining how public sector employees view and value this benefit is
essential to understanding how public sector labor markets may respond to changes in retirement
benefits. Despite its significance, much is still unknown about the responses to the economic
incentives inherent in RHI plans in the public sector and the impact of providing RHI on the
financial status of state and local governments.
This paper examines the landscape of public sector retiree health plans in the United
States. Much of this discussion is based on the state-level actuarial reports produced in
accordance with GASB 45. We begin by describing the cost and funding status of state RHI
plans. The importance of the economic assumptions used in calculating the plans’ liabilities and
the implications of using prefunding versus pay-as-you-go systems are examined. The ways in
which the plans offered by state governments differ are described and the factors that are
associated with employers offering more generous plans are discussed. Drawing comparisons

1

with public sector pension plans, we ask why so few retiree health plans are prefunded when all
defined benefit pension plans are backed by trust funds.
We then conduct an analysis of how workers value this benefit and its role in the public
sector labor market. The paper concludes by considering the future of RHI provision in the
public sector. We consider how public employers might respond if health insurance costs
continue to rise faster than the general rate of inflation thus increasing the financial burden of
this benefit. Similarly, since all public RHI plans are linked to Medicare, future legislation that
reduces the generosity of Medicare or increases the age of eligibility for this national health plan
would directly increase the cost of RHI provided by state and local governments. In addition to
providing a review of the current state of research regarding public sector RHI, this paper
highlights several important issues that require further study.

I.

Reported Liabilities Associated with Retiree Health Plans in the Public Sector
While RHI coverage is declining in the private sector of the U.S. economy, all states and

many local governments provide some type of health insurance for their retired employees.1
State and local governments began extending health insurance to their retirees in the 1960s and
1970s, which coincides with the adoption of these plans by large, unionized firms in the private
sector following the establishment of Medicare in 1966. While Medicare provides public health
insurance to individuals age 65 and older, there is no stop loss feature so there is demand for
supplementary coverage for retirees that are Medicare-eligible. At the same time, earlier
retirements led to demand for health insurance coverage for retirees younger than age 65, a
population that has more significant health care needs than average. In part due to adverse
selection, individual supplemental plans and general health insurance plans for individuals under

2

age 65 tend to have high premiums. Thus, retiree health insurance has become a valuable benefit
for workers.2 Clark and Morrill (2010 forthcoming) describe the basic structure of retiree health
plans for state employees and the cost to the retiree of continued participation in the plan (also
see US GAO, 2007, 2009).
The Governmental Accounting Standards Board Statement No. 45 (GASB 45), which
was approved in 2004, requires public employers to produce an actuarial statement assessing the
financial status of retiree health programs using generally accepted accounting standards as set
forth by GASB. States must report the present discounted value of the future liability of health
care promises to current workers as these benefits are accrued along with the present value of
these promises to current retirees.3 Prior to this rule, the long term obligations of these promises
were not widely recognized.
GASB 45 statements include the actuarial accrued liabilities (AAL), the assets contained
in any dedicated trust fund, the unfunded actuarial accrued liabilities (UAAL), the annual
required contributions (ARC), and the current method of financing for these retiree health
insurance plans. The UAAL is the difference between AAL and any assets that the employer has
set aside in an irrevocable trust. If the plan is completely pay-as-you-go, the UAAL is equal to
the AAL. The ARC is the normal cost of the retiree health plan plus the amount needed to
amortize the existing unfunded liability over a 30 year period. It is important to remember that
public employers are not required, in any legal sense, to contribute the ARC. Instead, the ARC
indicates the annual contribution by the employer that is needed to move the plan toward full
funding. States can continue to use pay-as-you-go funding for these plans if they choose. ARCs
and UAALs have been growing over time in most states and are now a major public policy issue
for many states (e.g., see Legislative Analyst’s Office, California 2006).

3

The actuarial calculations conducted in accordance with GASB 45 are based on the
parameters of the RHI plan, the number of workers and retirees covered by the plan, and the
economic and demographic assumptions used by the actuaries regarding medical cost growth,
discount rates, enrollment rates, etc. Some states have established trust funds to facilitate the
pre-funding of future payments, which will reduce the fraction of the accrued liability that is
deemed unfunded. Over the past few years, a series of papers and reports have called attention
to the large and growing unfunded liabilities associated with public retiree health plans (Pew
Center on the States, 2007, 2010; Zion and Varshney, 2007; Standard & Poor’s, 2007; Goldman
Sachs, 2007). Using data from state Comprehensive Annual Financial Reports (CAFR), these
studies provided the public the first assessment of the hidden liabilities associated with retiree
health plans provided by state and local governments. Estimates of the unfunded liabilities
ranged from $500 billion to $1.5 trillion.
Clark and Morrill (2010 forthcoming) report figures taken directly from the actuarial
statements prepared by the states in compliance with GASB 45. By examining the actuarial
statements, one can note the assumptions imbedded in the projections, such as the discount rates
and the assumed inflation rates used in calculating liabilities. The total unfunded liabilities for
the states as reported in the GASB 45 actuarial statements is over $400 billion. Table 1 shows
the estimated UAALs and the ARCs for state plans as reported by the Pew Center on the States
(2010) and in Clark and Morrill (2010 forthcoming). These data reveal that the magnitude of the
unfunded liabilities associated with these programs varies substantially across the states ranging
from less than $50 million to over $60 billion.
[Table 1]

4

Differences between the values reported for the individual states in Pew (2010), which
uses the CAFRs data, and in Clark and Morrill (2010 forthcoming), which uses the individual
state actuarial reports, are possibly due to the authors using different years of data or to the
inclusion of additional RHI plans besides those for general state employees. Note that the data in
most studies of retiree health liabilities do not include the additional liabilities associated with
retiree health plans at the local level and many state plans also do not cover public school
teachers.4 A major limitation in determining the total unfunded liability of public sector RHI
plans is the lack of a national data base that includes all state, local, and teacher plans.

II.

Differences across States in Retiree Health Insurance Plans
To produce a report in accordance with the GASB 45 rule, public employers must

calculate the present value of their promise to pay RHI to all current and future retirees. The
present value of benefits based on current programs is determined by projecting the life
expectancy of all workers, both retired and active, and the retirement behavior of active
employees. These projections also incorporate the rising cost of health insurance provision. A
discount rate is used to convert the stream of payments over the subsequent thirty years to a
present value of the liabilities associated with the state retiree health plans. GASB 45 requires
that the actuarial statements assume that the current provisions of the retiree health plan will
remain in effect. The reports produced in compliance with GASB 45 include the actuarial
calculations based on these and additional assumptions.
The following discussion focuses on the state-level actuarial reports. To explore the
origins of the differences across states in liabilities, we combine the information gathered from
the actuarial reports, as reported in Table 1 and in Clark and Morrill (2010 forthcoming), with

5

some secondary sources to help better frame the relative liabilities. Table 2 reports the UAAL
again for reference and then includes a measure of UAAL per capita for each of the states.5
Comparing these two values clearly shows that even after adjusting for population size, there are
substantial differences across the states in their retiree health liabilities. For example, states with
the lowest UAAL per capita include North Dakota ($48), Indiana ($70), Arizona ($73), Iowa
($74), and South Dakota ($97). In comparison, states with the highest UAAL per capita are New
Jersey ($7,950), Hawaii ($7,635), Alaska ($4,689), Louisiana ($4,361), and West Virginia
($4,298). Thus, the UAAL per capita of the two highest states is 100 times the UAAL per capita
of the three lowest states.
[Table 2]
Table 2 also presents several other important aspects of the retiree health plans of the
various states that influence the accrued liabilities of the states. These factors are whether
teachers are included in the same plan that covers general state employees, the percent of the
premium paid by the employer, and the discount rate used to calculate the present value of future
insurance costs. Because many states report the sensitivity of the liability levels to the
assumptions used in the actuarial calculations, one can explore how significant these
assumptions are to the unfunded liability levels of individual states.
i.

Retiree Health Insurance Plan Coverage

An important component of RHI plans is the extent of coverage. Our discussion here
focuses on plans that cover general state employees. In many states, these same plans also cover
public school teachers. Column 3 of Table 2 indicates that 33 of these state plans include public
school teachers while the others do not. Some large states like New York, New Jersey, North
Carolina, and Louisiana include teachers while others such as California, Michigan, Texas, and

6

Ohio do not. Broader coverage should be associated with larger liabilities, all else equal. The
inclusion of teachers is one reason why some states have higher UAALs. For example, the New
Jersey amount includes teachers and local employees in addition to state employees, while the
California UAAL is based on a plan that does not cover these types of workers.
In addition to variation in the state policies regarding the inclusion of teachers and local
workers in the state plan, as described further below state plans also differ in their years of
service requirements, eligibility ages, and integration with federal health insurance plans. For
example, some public sector employers terminate the participation of retirees in the health plan
at age 65 when individuals become eligible for Medicare. In addition, all plans require that the
retiree enroll in Medicare as soon as they become eligible to do so (Clark and Morrill 2010
forthcoming; US GAO 2007, 2009).
Research Question 1. In evaluating the total RHI obligations of a state, should all local and
teacher plans be included? In other words, are the states ultimately responsible for the RHI
liabilities of teacher-only and other local government plans?
Research Question 2. Within states that have separate state, local, and/or teacher plans, how do
teacher-only and local government RHI plans compare to the RHI plans offered to state
employees in terms of generosity and funding levels?
ii.

Generosity of RHI across the States

The generosity of RHI plans can differ along several dimensions. For example, some
state plans require fewer years of service before an employee would be eligible for fully
subsidized health insurance.6 Plans also differ in the extent of subsidization (percent of the
premium paid by the state), as well as other forms of cost sharing such as the deductible and copayment requirements. At a minimum, though, all states allow retirees to buy into the state health
insurance plan. While there is a tremendous amount of variation in the characteristics of any
health plan offered by public employers, the percent of the premium that the state subsidizes is a

7

key characteristic determining the generosity of the plans due to the nature of how the present
value of benefits are calculated. The difference in the lifetime present value of health insurance
coverage at retirement with the retiree paying no premium compared to the retiree paying the
entire premium could be over $200,000 (Fidelity Investments, 2009).
GASB 45 identifies two types of subsidies, explicit and implicit. An explicit subsidy
occurs when the state pays some (or all) of the premium for the health insurance. An implicit
subsidy occurs when the risk pool used to determine the monthly premium for health insurance
for retirees includes both active and retired employees. Including active and retired employees
in one risk pool means that the premium charged to retirees is lower than the premium that
would be assessed if the plan included only retirees (while the cost for active workers is therefore
higher than it would otherwise be). The difference in cost between the blend premium and the
retiree-only premium is an implicit subsidy. Under GASB 45, this type of implicit subsidy must
be reported as a liability of the retiree health plan. Thus, even those employers that require the
retiree to pay 100 percent of the premium will have some liability associated with allowing
retirees to purchase health insurance as part of their general health insurance plan.
In addition to higher per person costs, employers with more generous RHI benefits must
assume a higher “take-up” rate when making calculations of future costs. More generous plans
will be more attractive relative to those in the private health insurance market or insurance plans
offered through a spouse’s employer. Therefore, a generous health plan not only costs states
more per retiree that claims the benefit, but the AAL will also reflect the higher number of
retirees expected to utilize the plan. GAO (2007) divides the states into four categories: states
that pay the entire insurance premium, states that pay 50 to 99 percent of the premium, states that
pay 1 to 49 percent of the premium, and states that require the retiree to pay the entire premium.

8

This assessment ignores the implicit subsidy associated with these plans. This measure of the
generosity of each state plan is presented in Column 4 of Table 2.7
The impact of state paid premiums is clearly shown in Figure 1 which illustrates the
mean UAAL per capita for states in the each of four generosity categories shown in Table 2.
States that require retirees to pay the entire premium only have liabilities associated with the
implicit subsidy. The mean UAAL per capita for these states is only $170 million. States that
pay a small proportion of the premium (1 to 49 percent) have a mean UAAL per capita that is
very similar to those states requiring the retiree to pay the entire premium. In stark comparison,
the mean UAAL per capita is $1,998 for those states paying 50 to 99 percent of the premium and
$2,781 for the states that pay 100 percent of the premium. This figure illustrates the importance
of this generosity parameter in determining the liabilities associated with state retiree health
plans.
[Figure 1]
Research Question 3. Are there other dimensions of RHI plan generosity besides the
subsidization of the premium that significantly influence the magnitudes of AALs? What
aspects of the RHI plans themselves may be altered to make costs for public sector employers
more manageable?
Research Question 4. Why have some states chosen to pay the entire RHI premium while other
states simply allow retirees access to their health plans?
iii.

Assumed Trends in Medical Inflation

In the actuarial statements, the health care cost trend rate is typically defined as the rate
of change in per capita health claims costs over time as a result of factors such as medical
inflation, utilization of health care services, plan design, and technological developments. The
rate of assumed increase in the per capita cost of medical care is another determinant of the
projected future cost of providing RHI. Over the past few years, the total cost for employer9

provided health care has been increasing at annual rates in excess of 10 percent.8 Virtually all of
the actuarial reports for state RHI plans assume that the medical cost rate will decline from its
current level of 10 to 14 percent per year to a rate of around five percent. Of course, lower
assumed rates of inflation result in lower liabilities and annual required contributions thus
making the state’s financial position look rosier.
As with the sensitivity of estimates to discount rates, some of the actuarial statements
illustrate the impact of variations in the rate of increase in per capita medical costs. These
figures are presented in Table 3. For example, Hawaii reports a UAAL of 9.7 billion dollars
using an assumption that the current rate of medical cost inflation falls from the current 11
percent to only 5 percent in 2113. Then, the report states that an increase of one percentage point
in the health care inflation rate would raise the UAAL to $11.6 billion, an increase of almost 20
percent. The other states that report the results of such an exercise have similar patterns.
Therefore, we must conclude that if the rate of inflation for health care were to continue at its
current rate, all projections of state UAALs and ARCs would be significantly higher. Since all
the reports have adopted similar assumptions on medical care inflation, this assumption should
not affect the relative values of UAAL across the states. However, the UAALs calculated based
on lower health care inflation rates will underestimate the size of the true liabilities if health care
costs continue to rise at their current rates.
[Table 3]
Research Question 6. What is a reasonable assumption concerning the rate of medical price
increase that should be assumed in the actuarial reports? Should actuaries be required to show
sensitivity to medical price inflation in these reports?
iv.

Assumed Discount Rates

10

GASB 45 allows public employers to use a discount rate that is consistent with the return
on the “investments that are expected to be used to finance the payment of benefits.” For states
that do not prefund their retiree health plans, the assumed discount rate should approximate the
yield on the portfolio of the state’s general assets from which funds are drawn to pay for the
health benefits for retirees. However, if the state establishes an irrevocable trust to partially or
wholly finance its RHI, a rate consistent with the return on these investments can be used in the
actuarial reports. The GASB standards allow partially funded plans to adopt a blended rate
between four and seven to nine percent to calculate their accrued liabilities. The final column of
Table 2 indicates the discount rate used by each state in calculating their UAAL. In comparison
to public pension plans, most states are currently using lower discount rates for determining the
liabilities associated with their RHI plans, and this follows from the funding strategy chosen by
the state. The actuarial reports of seventeen states are based on a discount rate of 4.5 percent,
another eleven states use 4.0 to 4.25 percent, and four states adopted discount rates of 3.0 to 3.85
percent.
Table 4 indicates the states that have existing funds and the funding ratio for these plans.
Based on their actuarial statements all other states do not have any assets set aside for the
payment of RHI. Thus, most of these plans are funded on a pay-as-you-go basis using current
revenues to pay current premiums for health insurance for retired workers. This is a substantially
different funding strategy compared to that used by the states to fund their pension plans.
[Table 4]
Many of the state actuarial statements show the impact of assuming a higher discount
rate. This sensitivity analysis is most often included in the reports of states considering the
establishment of a trust fund or where there are specific proposals concerning prefunding. The

11

reduction in UAAL and ARC associated with using a higher rate is discussed in the reports as
being an advantage of establishing a trust for these plans and a beginning to funding future health
care costs. These alternative calculations are shown in Table 5 for all of the states that reported
the sensitivity of the UAAL to changes in the discount rate. Typically, the statements report the
UAAL using a discount rate of four to five percent which is consistent with the current pay-asyou-go status of these plans. The consultants often illustrate the impact of a movement toward
full funding by incorporating a discount rate of approximately 8 percent into the calculations.
[Table 5]
Since most public employers do not have dedicated trust funds for these health plans,
they tend to use discount rates of between 3.5 and 5.0 percent. Thus, in general, estimated
liabilities for RHI are likely to be more realistic than the comparable estimates for public pension
plans. However, a reading of the actuarial statements prepared in response to GASB 45 shows
that many of the statements indicate that if the government were to begin funding their plan they
could use a higher discount rate and reduce their reported liabilities and annual required
contribution.9 The impression is clearly given that if only the state were to move toward
funding, their health liabilities would be dramatically reduced.
In the pension literature, there is currently a debate on the appropriateness of using these
higher discount rates (see papers in Anderson and Mitchell, 2009, Novy-Marx and Rauh, 2010,
and Munnell et al., 2010). This debate is primarily between the actuaries who use GASB
guidelines and economists who favor using real market interest rates.10 Financial economists
argue that a more realistic approach to determining the present value of pension liabilities would
be to use the rate of return to bonds, a rate closer to four percent. The basic argument is that the
liabilities associated with retirement benefits should be considered a form of public debt and are

12

similar to a bond. Thus, their value (in this case the present value of future health care costs)
should be determined using the interest rates on bonds offered by the government, i.e., the
current yield on state bonds. Following this line of reasoning, the appropriate discount rate
would be in the range of four percent whether or not the state chose to prefund their RHI.
Similar arguments could be made concerning the discount rates used to value RHI. Although a
major difference between RHI and pension plans is the limited use of trust funds to support RHI
plans.
Research Question 5. What is the appropriate discount rate to use in evaluating retiree health
insurance plans? Should the type of funding matter in the evaluation of liabilities?
v.

Multivariate Regression Analysis

Economic theory and political economy suggest that the total cost of RHI plans and their
generosity will be influenced by state-level environmental factors such as the population size, the
size of the state budget, the absolute and relative size of the public sector in a state, the level of
unionization, the commitments to other employee benefits, and the earnings of state employees.
In addition, reported liabilities will be directly affected by the plan characteristics and
methodological assumptions, whether the teachers are included in the plans, and the proportion
of the premium paid by the state. Results of a multivariate regression model of UAAL per capita
are presented in Table 6.
[Table 6]
Larger states will have greater accrued liabilities simply due to having more employees
and retiree, so the dependent variable considered here is the UAAL per capita, that is, UAAL
divided by the state population.11 However, larger states may also benefit from economies of
scale in the provision of health insurance, so we include an estimate of the state budget in 2005

13

from the state and local government sourcebook.12 The budget is a measure of the overall size of
the state government and it is anticipated that this would be positively correlated with RHI
liabilities, but would not necessarily influence the cost per capita of these programs. We find no
relationship between UAAL per capita and log state budget in the regression, indicating that
larger states face greater RHI liabilities for their retiree health plans but population adjusted
liabilities are unaffected by the size of the state and its budget. Note that instead considering
population rather than state budget yields a similar conclusion, and that population size and state
budget are too collinear to include both in the regression model.
The share of workers in the public sector might also affect plan costs as states with more
public sector employees will have higher labor costs compared to similar states with fewer
government workers. In addition, the voting power of this larger government workforce may
result in the state providing more generous benefits. A higher degree of unionization among
public sector employees could also result in more generous employee benefits. Our empirical
results are consistent with both of these predictions showing positive and significant coefficients
on share of labor force in the public sector and public sector unionization.13
The regression also includes a measure of the average salary of state employees.14 Also
included in the model is a measure of the funding status of the pension plan for state employees
in order to determine whether states that prudently fund their pension plans also have taken steps
to have low unfunded liabilities associated with their retiree health plans. Neither of these
variables is found to be significantly related to UAAL per capita.
Next, we consider how plan characteristics and calculation assumptions predict relative
UAAL per capita. The discount rate has the expected negative impact on the measure of
liability. The coefficient implies that an increase of one percentage point in the discount rate

14

used to estimate accrued liabilities is associated with a 21 percent lower UAAL per capita. In
addition to the mechanical effect of the discount rate discussed above, this coefficient may also
reflect the increased incentive of states with high levels of unfunded liabilities to report the lower
liability levels associated with using higher discount rates. The indicator variable for whether
the state includes teachers in the calculation of the liability has the anticipated positive sign but is
not statistically significant.
The states are sorted into the four categories by the proportion of the insurance premium
paid by the state. Figure 1 demonstrated that those states that pay 50 to 99 percent and those that
pay 100 percent of the premium have much higher retiree health liabilities relative to states that
pay less than 50 percent of the premium. In Table 6, we see that states that pay 100 percent of
the premium have a 274 percent higher UAAL per capita than those states that require the retiree
to pay 100 percent of the premium. Similarly, states that pay 50 to 99 percent of the premium
have around 242 percent higher UAAL per capita.
Although the regression results are consistent with predictions and clearly indicate a large
and important role for the health plan generosity in determining the burden of retiree health
insurance liabilities, many important questions remain. The considerable variation in plan
liabilities across states cannot be explained solely by differences in population, public sector
labor force characteristics, or assumptions made in calculating the future liabilities. The choices
that state governments make regarding the characteristics of their RHI plan are a key component
to understanding why liabilities and costs differ so dramatically across states.
Research Question 7. Many states are facing substantial unfunded liabilities associated with
retiree health plans, while other states appear to have smaller, more manageable UAALs. Why
are there such striking differences in the size of unfunded liabilities? Why do the characteristics
of the RHI plans differ so much across the states, especially in comparison to other forms of
compensation such as pensions and salary?

15

III.

Is RHI a Liability or a Promise?
Given the high levels of liabilities some states face, it is natural to consider whether states

must truly fulfill the promise of future health insurance for retirees, or whether they may reduce
benefits at some future time. The US GAO (2008) reports that all states have legal protections
for their retirement plans that limit the ability of a legislature to substantially alter the generosity
of the pension plan for state employees. The majority of states have constitutional provisions
that describe how their retirement plans are to be “funded, protected, managed, or governed” (US
GAO 2008, p. 60). However, RHI plans are not accorded similar status. Reductions in or the
elimination of retiree health benefits may be constrained by collective bargaining contracts but in
general, legislatures have more flexibility to reduce and modify retiree health benefit plans for
public sector employees. For example, the Ohio 2007 Comprehensive Annual Financial Report
asserts that “unlike pensions, the health care benefits OPERS (Ohio Public Employee Retirement
System) provides (with the exception of Medicare B reimbursement) are not a guaranteed
benefit….OPERS continues to make changes to the plan design of the health care benefits…”
(Ohio 2007, p. 32).
Many states have been amending their health plans for active workers and retirees in
response to rising health care costs. Changes include higher premiums, higher deductibles,
higher co-payments, and more years of service to qualify for retiree health plans. The ability to
modify retiree health plans provides states with some options to moderate their projected costs
and thus reduce the UAAL and ARC presented in these actuarial statements.
Research Question 8. If RHI can be made less generous for current and/or future retirees, what
weight should be placed on these liabilities in planning for the future?

16

IV.

Retiree Health Insurance and Pensions

Economists have devoted substantial resources in trying to explain the variation in
pension plans across private sector employers. Other studies have examined how changes in the
economic and regulatory environment have altered the structure of these retirement plans, and
how pension plan characteristics affect work and saving behavior.15 In contrast, very little
attention has been paid to similar issues concerning RHI plans. Perhaps the lack of research on
RHI is due to the rapid decline in the incidence of these plans in the private sector since the
establishment of new reporting standards for employers by the Financial Accounting Standards
Board in 1989 (FASB 1989).16 However, RHI plans cover virtually all full-time public sector
employees and represent a significant component of labor cost to state and local governments.
The dearth of research on the effects of RHI may be due to the lack of recognition of the
importance of retiree health plans and the true liabilities associated with retiree health plans in
the public sector. Until recently, there was very little data on the cost and characteristics of these
plans.
Since both RHI and pensions are deferred compensation and provide benefits in
retirement, we might consider both of these plans human resource tools that have the same
objectives: attracting, retaining, and retiring quality workers. We know of no study that has
considered the joint use of RHI and pension plans to achieve the same HR objectives. As a first
attempt to assess the relationship of RHI and pension, we divide states into four groups based on
the percent of the premium paid as reported in Table 2. To approximate pension plan generosity,
we use the replacement rate for a state employee who retirees at age 60 with 30 years of service
in each state. These replacement rates are based on the benefit formula that was in effect in each
state in 2006.17 The mean pension replacement rate for each group is presented in Figure 2. We

17

see that pension generosity, as approximated by replacement rates, and RHI generosity, as
approximated by percent of the premium paid, are positively related. The mean pension
replacement rate in the most generous RHI group (61%) is a statistically significant 6 percentage
points higher than the mean in the least generous RHI group (55%). The fact that states with
more generous pensions also have more generous RHI plans implies that states are not shifting
their benefits from one type of delayed compensation to another. It also means that separately
investigating the impact of RHI from pensions will be challenging, since the generosity of these
plans positively covary.
[Figure 2]
Understanding the relationship between RHI and pension plans is of practical importance
for a public sector employer’s fiscal planning. For example, a more generous RHI plan should
make workers on the margin more responsive to the retirement incentives imbedded in pension
plans. On the other hand, if employees do not have access to affordable health care in
retirement, they may choose to postpone retirement until eligible for Medicare. When public
sector employers make choices regarding the structure and generosity of one type of postretirement benefit, it is essential for them to consider potential repercussions on the effectiveness
and take-up rate of other post-retirement benefits offered by the employer.
Research Question 9. How are RHI plan and pension plan designs related in practice? Do states
with more generous pension plans also offer more generous retiree health plans?
Research Question 10. If the value or generosity of RHI plans were decreased due to program
changes (such as an increase in the percent of the premium the retiree must pay), how might that
affect retirement ages and other employee post-retirement benefits?

18

V.

Value to Employees

In order to better model the public sector labor market, economists need to develop a
more detailed understanding of the role of RHI plans as a component of total compensation and
how it affects job tenure and retirement decisions. The value of RHI depends on factors such as
the employee’s years of service, the employee’s age of retirement, and the generosity of the plan.
Having employer-provided RHI also reduces the need for income compared to workers who
expect to purchase health insurance in retirement. The reduction in funds needed to purchase
health insurance in retirement might affect lifetime saving, in particular, participation in and
contributions to supplemental retirement plans offered by the employer.
However, benefits are not free to workers; instead they are purchased by the employees
because they accept lower wages as a quid pro quo for the employer providing the benefits.
Benefits are compensation in-kind and are hard to trade for other forms of consumption. In other
words, it is impossible to accept health insurance, sell it to others, and then use these monies to
purchase food and clothing. In addition, the concept of vesting for RHI benefits is less clear and
the legal guarantee of future benefits is less secure compared to pension plans. Thus, it may be
that the employer offers more benefits than the worker desires. In this case, the reduction in
wages associated with the benefit might lower the total value of employment for some workers.
Benefits like pensions and retiree health plans typically have the greatest value to workers who
stay for many years and provide much less value to those that remain with the employer for only
a few years. Because worker preferences differ, employers can develop and offer compensation
packages that appeal to the types of employees they seek to hire. Thus, retirement benefits may
help recruit workers, reduce quit rates, and ultimately assist public sector employers in achieving
an orderly retirement of its workers.

19

Given the eligibility requirements for these RHI plans and the value of being able to
remain in the state health plan, we should expect public sector employees to be more likely to
remain with the employer in order to meet the needed years of service. This effect should be
especially strong as the worker approaches the qualifying number of years of service. Once
sufficient tenure has been achieved, workers should be more likely to retire. In conjunction with
pension plans, the economic incentives imbedded in retiree health plans help to explain lower
turnover rates, longer job tenures, and earlier retirements among public sector workers. We
know of no studies that tried to estimate the influence of retiree health plans in the public sector
on job tenure and retirement decisions. Empirically it is difficult to isolate the effects of RHI
separately from those of pensions and other employee benefits. With large datasets one could
potentially identify employees’ retirement behavior relative to discrete jumps in the value of
plans that do not exactly coincide with other retirement incentives. In addition, given the
variation in RHI plan characteristics, such as generosity and eligibility, state-level variation
could be fruitfully exploited.
There are numerous studies by economists estimating the impact of employer pensions on
job tenure and the timing of retirement but only a few have examined the role of RHI on
retirement decision (for example, Rogowski and Karoly, 2000; Blau and Gilleskie, 2001;
Robinson 2009, Strumpf, 2009). Economists have examined the role of health insurance for
active workers on job mobility (for example, Gruber and Madrian, 1997, 2004) but these studies
typically do not extend the analysis to potential coverage in retirement. Most of these studies
have focused on the general labor force or specific plans of private sector employers.
It is interesting to note that relatively few states have adopted automatic enrollment for
supplemental retirement savings accounts and many public employers do not offer to match

20

employee contributions. In contrast, most private sector employers, who do not offer retiree
health plans, do offer employer matches and increasingly employers are adopting automatic
enrollment in these plans. RHI plans are a valuable benefit and may represent significant cost
savings in retirement. As such, workers in the public sector may not require the same level of
retirement savings relative to their private sector counterparts. Public sector workers may
already be ‘saving’ for retirement in the sense that they are forgoing higher salary now for a
future stream of payments in the form of more generous employer-provided benefits in
retirement.
A better understanding of the value of retiree health insurance would help public
employers develop a more comprehensive approach to their retirement policies. For example,
should a governmental employer that provides a 100 percent health insurance subsidy to retirees
offer a less generous pension plan or avoid offering supplemental retirement savings plans that
include automatic enrollment or an employer match?
Research Question 11. Do employees recognize, understand, and value their retiree health
insurance benefit? How valuable are RHI plans to different types of workers such as primary
versus secondary earners, early versus mid-career workers, or high versus low wage workers?
Research Question 12. How does RHI affect turnover rates in the public sector? Does the
provision of RHI encourage earlier retirement for public sector workers? Do public sector
workers covered by more generous plans respond more strongly to the incentives imbedded in
the plans?
Research Question 13. Do workers covered by RHI save less than comparable workers whose
employers do not offer such a plan? Are workers covered by retiree health plans less likely to
enroll in supplemental retirement plans and if the participation do their contribute less to these
plans? Are public sector employees covered by RHI more likely to opt out of automatic
enrollment in supplemental pension plans?

21

VI. Future of Public Sector Retiree Health Insurance
Analysis of the actuarial statements for RHI plans offered by states indicates that some
states face substantial future liabilities associated with these programs, that relatively few states
have enacted legislation establishing trust funds to help finance these future costs of retiree
health plans, and that even fewer are making use of laws that allow funding. These substantial
liabilities pose a serious financial problem for many states. These unfunded liabilities will
confront policy makers with difficult choices in the future. In 2006, the annual cost to state and
local governments for retiree health plans averaged about two percent of employee salaries. If
public sector employers continue to pay for these benefits on a pay-as-you-go basis, the cost of
RHI is projected to rise to five percent of payroll in 2050 (GAO, 2008). As annual costs rises,
the ability to finance RHI programs may cause other priorities to be unmet and the overhang of
billion dollar retiree health insurance liabilities may influence future bond ratings.18
In the near future, states with high unfunded liabilities will need to either increase
revenues to meet these costs or they must reduce the benefits they provide to retired workers.
There are many options that public employers can adopt to accomplish either of these challenges.
Increasing revenues can be achieved by raising any of a variety of taxes or through the sale of
public assets. If such financing is used in conjunction with an irrevocable trust, new funds
deposited into such a trust can yield returns on investments that can reduce the need for future
tax increases. 19 New revenues to support RHI can also be generated by reducing other
government expenditures and transferring these unused funds into the trust for retiree health
insurance.
Alternatively, states and other public employers can attempt to reduce expenditures on
retiree health plans by reducing their generosity or shifting the cost from the employer to

22

workers and retirees through higher premiums, co-payments, and deductibles. Employers can
also increase the years of service required for eligibility in these programs, thus reducing the
number of eligible participants. States and local governments might also consider the total
elimination of retiree health plans, as was seen in the private sector. Another option for states
might be to shift from defined benefit type plans to retirement saving account plans where
workers can contribution to a fund that could be used for health care expenses in retirement.
However, recall that some state governments may face constitutional and statutory restrictions on
eliminating these plans altogether, which may further complicate the strategy of reducing
liabilities by restricting the benefits provided. 20
Finally, states may adopt various methods to address the actual cost of health benefits.
Such techniques include more effective delivery of health care to retirees, proper and efficient
coordination with Medicare and the use of health improvement programs such as wellness
programs to reduce the utilization of medical care by their retirees. In response to GASB 45 and
the financial pressures associated with health insurance promises, states are considering many of
these options. Thus, policy changes within states may limit the actual future cost of retiree
health plans in the public sector. Along the same lines, national health care reform could directly
affect state RHI plans through reductions in the cost (or cost growth) of health care. Expansions
of Medicare coverage and/or generosity should also impact public sector RHI plans by shifting
some costs from states to the federal government. On the other hand, a policy change such as an
increase in the age of eligibility for Medicare to match the new Social Security normal retirement
ages could negatively affect state and local governments who would then need to cover retirees
under their RHI plans for longer time periods.

23

As one example, in the 2010 health reform law one provision gives individuals that are
under age 65 and living in households at 400 percent or below the federal poverty level
eligibility for subsidies to purchase health insurance after 2014.21 If the health care reform does
lead to the development of health insurance exchanges or other sources of affordable individual
health insurance, this may reduce the pressure on public sector employers as some individuals
(although perhaps those with the lowest costs) will opt not to use their employer-provided RHI.
How this and other provisions of the health care reform ultimately affects the retiree health
insurance liabilities faced by state and local governments remains to be seen.

Research Question 14. How will any national health care reforms, such as the 2010 legislation,
affect public sector RHI?
Research Question 15. Will rising RHI plan costs hinder governments’ abilities to provide goods
and services to their citizens at some point in the future?
VII.

Conclusions
Throughout this analysis of RHI in the public sector, we have posed a series of important

economic and policy questions. Unfortunately, the data necessary to answer these questions is
not readily available. Relatively few nationally representative data sets contain sufficient
number of state and local employees to address these questions and surveys often lack important
details of these plans, such as the cost to the retiree of remaining in the plan and the eligibility
conditions of continued enrollment in the health insurance plan. One method of assessing the
importance of RHI might be to obtain data from individual state systems and compare turnover
rates and retirement ages under a system where the employer pays the entire insurance premium
to retirees to a system that only provides access to the health plan.

24

As employers of a relatively large number of workers, state and local governments must
develop optimal human resource management policies that enable them to hire, retain, motivate,
and ultimately retire high quality workers. Public sector employers need to maintain a workforce
that can produce and deliver the goods and services demanded by their citizens at a cost that
taxpayers are willing to pay. Historically, this has been achieved by public employers offering
more generous retirement benefits than comparable private sector workers receive. Virtually all
full-time state and local employees are covered by both a pension plan and a retiree health plan
while coverage rates are much lower in the private economy. Economists have devoted
considerable resources toward trying to understand the role of employer pensions with most of
these studies focusing on private sector plans. In contrast, economic analysis of retiree health
plans is virtually nonexistent. New empirical and theoretical research is needed to assist public
managers in developing optimal retirement policies and reforming current systems.
It is also important for policy makers, managers, and researchers to consider the joint
effects of pension and retiree health plans. From an administrative standpoint, these two
important and costly benefits are often overseen by separate governmental units when a
coordinated policy is needed. Changes in pension policies that affect turnover rates and
retirement decisions will also affect the utilization of retiree health insurance. Under pressure
from rising costs, public managers and policy makers must be aware of labor market responses to
modifications in retirement plans. Additional research is needed to help governmental leaders
make the most appropriate choices in designing and modifying their RHI plans going forward.

25

REFERENCES
Anderson, Gary and Olivia Mitchell. 2009. The Future of Public Retirement Systems, Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Blau, David M. and Donna B. Gilleskie. 2001. “Retiree Health Insurance and The Labor Force
Behavior of Older Men In The 1990s.” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 83(1): 64–80.
Buchmueller, Thomas, Richard W. Johnson, and Anthony T. Lo Sasso. 2006. “Trends in Retiree
Health Insurance, 1997-2003,” Health Affairs, 25(6): 1507-1516.
Chernew, Michael E., Richard A. Hirth, and David M. Cutler. 2009. "Increased Spending on
Health Care: Long Term Implications for the Nation," Health Affairs, 28(5): 1253-1255.
Clark, Robert. 2010. “Retiree Health Plans for Public School Teachers After GASB 43 and 45,”
Education Finance and Policy, forthcoming.
Clark, Robert, Linda Ghent, and Alvin Headen. 1994. "Retiree Health Insurance and Pension
Coverage: Variations by Firm Characteristics," Journal of Gerontology, 49: 2, pp 53-61.
Clark, Robert and Ann McDermed. 1990. The Choice of Pension Plans in a Changing
Regulatory Environment. Washington, DC: American Enterprise Institute.
Clark, Robert and Melinda Sandler Morrill. 2010 forthcoming. Retiree Health Plans in the
Public Sector: Is There a Funding Crisis? Northhampton, MA: Edward Elgar.
Clark, Robert, Lee Craig, and John Sabelhaus. 2011 forthcoming. Public Sector Pension Plans
in the United States, Northhampton, MA: Edward Elgar.
Fidelity Investments. 2009. “Fidelity Investments Estimates $240,000 Needed To pay Health
Care Costs in Retirement,” March 26.
http://content.members.fidelity.com/Inside_Fidelity/fullStory/1,,7692,00.html
Financial Accounting Standards Board. 1989. Employers' Accounting for Post Retirement
Benefits Other Than Pensions. Norwalk, CT: FASB.
Fronstin, Paul. 2005. "The Impact of the Erosion of Retiree Health Benefits on Workers and
Retirees," EBRI Issue Brief No. 279. Washington, DC: EBRI.
Fronstin, Paul. 2010. “Implications of Health Reform for Retiree Health Benefits,” Employee
Benefit Research Institute Issue Brief No. 338, Washington, DC: EBRI.
Goldman Sachs. 2007. The Trillion Dollar Question: What is your GASB 45 number? New
York: Goldman Sachs.

26

Governmental Accounting Standards Board. 2004a. Statement No. 43. Financial Reporting for
Post-employment Benefit Plans Other than Pension Plans.
www.gasb.org/st/summary/gtsm43.html
Governmental Accounting Standards Board. 2004b. Statement No. 45. Accounting and Financial
Reporting by Employers for Post-employment Benefits Other Than Pensions (OPEB)
http://www.gasb.org/st/index.html
Governmental Accounting Standards Board. 2010. Preliminary Views of the Governmental
Accounting Standards Board: Plain-Language Supplement. June 16.
http://www.gasb.org/cs/ContentServer?c=Document_C&pagename=GASB%2FDocument_C%2
FGASBDocumentPage&cid=1176156938146
Gruber, Jonathan, and Brigitte Madrian. 1997. “Employment Separation and Health Insurance
Coverage,” Journal of Public Economics, pp. 349-382
Gruber, Jonathan, and Brigitte Madrian. 2004. “Health Insurance, Labor Supply, and Job
Mobility: A Critical Review of the Literature,” in Catherine McLaughlin, ed., Health Policy and
the Uninsured, Washington, D.C.: Urban Institute Press, pp. 97-178.
Gustman, Alan and Thomas Steinmeier. 1992. “The Stampede towards Defined Contribution
Plans,” Industrial Relations, pp. 361-69.
Hirsch, Barry T., and David A. Macpherson. 2003. “Union Membership and Coverage database
from the Current Population Survey: Note,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 56,
No. 2, January 2003, pp. 349-354.
Ippolito, Richard. 1995. “Towards Explaining the Growth of Defined Contribution Plans,”
Industrial Relations, pp. 1-20.
Kaiser Family Foundation and Health Research and Educational Trust. 2006. Employer Health
Benefits 2006 Summary of Findings.
Legislative Analyst’s Office, California. 2006. Retiree Health Care: A Growing Cost for
Government. www.lao.ca.gov/2006/ret_hlthcare/retiree_healthcare_021706.htm
Moody’s Investors Service. July 2005. Other Post-Employment Benefits (OPEB): New
Accounting Requirements to Shed Light on Cost of State and Local Retiree Health Benefits;
Funding Pressures Expected to Vary Widely.
Munnell, Alicia, Kelly Haverstick, and Maurici Soto. 2007. “Why Have Defined Benefit Plans
Survived in the Public Sector.” Issue Brief, Center for Retirement Research at Boston College.
Munnell, Alicia, Richard Kopcke, Jean-Pierre Aubry, and Laura Quinby. 2010. Valuing
Liabilities in State and Local Plans.Center for State & Local Government Excellence Issue
Brief, June.
27

Novy-Marx, Robert and Joshua Rauh. 2010. “Estimating Pension Liabilities,” paper presented at
State and Local Pension Finance, August.
Ohio Public Employees Retirement System. 2007. The Comprehensive Annual Financial
Report.
Pew Center on the States. 2007. Promises with a Price: Public Sector Retirement Benefits. Pew
Charitable Trusts.
Pew Center on the States. 2010. The Trillion Dollar Gap.
http://downloads.pewcenteronthestates.org/The_Trillion_Dollar_Gap_final.pdf
Robinson, Christina. 2009. “Retiree Health Insurance and Disengagement from a Career Job,”
Ph.D. dissertation, North Carolina State University.
Rogowski, Jeannette and Lynn Karoly. 2000. “Health Insurance and Retirement Behavior:
Evidence from the Health and Retirement Survey.” Journal of Health Economics, 19(4): 529–
539.
Sanzillo, Thomas. January 2007. “Testimony From First Deputy Comptroller Thomas Sanzillo
Regarding GASB 45 Accounting Change,” News From the Office of the New York State
Comptroller.
Standard & Poor’s. November 2007. U.S, States Are Quantifying OPEB Liabilities and
Developing Funding Strategies As the GASB Deadline Nears. New York: Standards & Poor’s.
Strumpf, Erin. 2009. “Employer-Sponsored Health Insurance for Early Retirees: Impacts on
Retirement, Health, and Health Care.” International Journal of Health Care Finance and
Economics, Online first.
U.S General Accounting Office. 2007. State and Local Government Retiree Benefits: Current
Status Benefit Structures, Protections, and Fiscal Outlook for Funding Future Costs. GAO-071156. September.
U.S General Accounting Office. 2008. State and Local Government Retiree Benefits: Current
Funded Status of Pension and Health Benefits. GAO-08-223. January.
U.S. General Accounting Office. 2009. State and Local Government Retiree Health Benefits:
Liabilities Are Largely Unfunded, but Some Governments Are Taking Action. GAO-10-61.
Zion, David and Amit Varshney. March 22, 2007. You Dropped a Bomb on Me, GASB. Credit
Suisse.

28

UAAL Per Capita (Dollars) by Percent of Premium Paid
$2,781

$0

Mean UAAL Per Capita
$1,000
$2,000

$3,000

Figure 1: Average UAAL per Capita (measured in dollars) by the Percent of
Premium Paid by the State.

$1,998

$170

$148

None

1-49%

50-99%

100%

Sources: UAAL calculations from data gathered from state actuarial reports. The population figures are
from 2005 Census population estimates. The percent of the premium paid is from the 2007 GAO report
with the exception of Washington and West Virginia, which we modified to be 50-99. There are 49 states
represented in these data.

Figure 2: The Relationship between Pension Replacement Rates and RHI Percent of the
Premium Paid
61%
58%
55%

55%

None

1-49%

0%

20%

40%

Mean Pension Replacement Ratio

60%

Relationship between Pension and RHI Generosity

50-99%

100%

RHI Percent of the Premium Paid

Sources: The percent of the premium paid is from the 2007 GAO report with the exception of Washington
and West Virginia, which we modified to be 50-99. Replacement rates are calculated using the pension
benefit formula for a person retiring at age 60 with 30 years of service. Due to missing information on
replacement rates, N = 47.

29

Table 1. State Liabilities for Retiree Health Insurance, Summary Information

State
Alabama
Alaska
Arizona
Arkansas
California
Colorado
Connecticut
Delaware
Florida
Georgia
Hawaii
Idaho
Illinois
Indiana
Iowa
Kansas
Kentucky
Louisiana
Maine
Maryland
Massachusetts
Michigan
Minnesota
Mississippi
Missouri
Montana
Nebraska
Nevada
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New Mexico
New York
North Carolina
North Dakota
Ohio
Oklahoma
Oregon
Pennsylvania
Rhode Island
South Carolina
South Dakota
Tennessee
Texas
Utah
Vermont
Virginia
Washington
West Virginia
Wisconsin
Wyoming

Source: Clark and Morrill (2010);
Individual State Actuarial Reports
UAAL
ARC
Date of
(millions $)
(millions $)
Report
3,104
1,173
2006
3,139
N/A
2007
438
104
2007
1,224
167
2008
47,878
3,593
2007
1,033
71
2006
21,681
1,597
2006
3,100
286
2005
3,082
201
2008
15,035
1,262
2007
9,679
705
2007
362
34
2007
24,210
1,743
2008
442
46
2008
220
23
2006
293
34
2008
4,833
397
2007
19,609
2069
2007
4,756
356
2007
14,543
1,114
2007
13,287
1,062
2006
13,925
3,364
2007
565
56
2006
570
43
2008
2,186
159
2006
449
58
2008
N/A
N/A
2,295
273
2007
2,859
235
2007
2007
5,840
68,834
2007
383
4,110
49,663
3,810
2006
23,786
2,390
2005
31
4
2007
18,723
2,046
2007
814
87
2007
264
34
2007
8,659
720
2008
480
41
2005
10,048
777
2006
76
9
2008
2,146
187
2007
17,675
1,482
2007
569
54
2007
1,419
113
2006
1,616
123
7,495
634
2007
7,761
824
2007
1,473
162
2008
72
6
2005

30

Source: Pew (2010); Comprehensive
Annual Financial Reports (CAFR)
UAAL
ARC
Date of
(millions $)
(millions $)
Report
15,549
1,314
2007 or 2008
4,032
558
2007 or 2008
808
146
2007 or 2008
1,822
170
2007 or 2008
62,463
5,179
2007 or 2008
1,127
82
2007 or 2008
26,018
1,719
2007 or 2008
5,410
465
2007 or 2008
3,082
201
2007 or 2008
18,322
1,583
2007 or 2008
10,791
822
2007 or 2008
489
45
2007 or 2008
39,947
1,192
2007 or 2008
442
46
2007 or 2008
404
43
2007 or 2008
317
16
2007 or 2008
11,660
1,051
2007 or 2008
12,543
1168
2007 or 2008
4,348
164
2007 or 2008
14,723
1,086
2007 or 2008
15,032
839
2007 or 2008
39,879
3,946
2007 or 2008
1,011
110
2007 or 2008
570
44
2007 or 2008
2,852
262
2007 or 2008
632
59
2007 or 2008
N/A
N/A
2007 or 2008
2,211
287
2007 or 2008
3,054
269
2007 or 2008
68,900
5,022
2007 or 2008
2,946
267
2007 or 2008
56,286
4,133
2007 or 2008
28,742
2,459
2007 or 2008
81
6
2007 or 2008
27,026
2,717
2007 or 2008
360
48
2007 or 2008
610
67
2007 or 2008
9,957
824
2007 or 2008
788
46
2007 or 2008
8,638
762
2007 or 2008
76
9
2007 or 2008
1,747
168
2007 or 2008
28,612
2,237
2007 or 2008
673
54
2006
1,615
108
2007 or 2008
2,621
541
2007 or 2008
7,902
683
2007 or 2008
6,108
175
2007 or 2008
1,700
205
2006
174
19
2007 or 2008

Table 2. Information Acquired from State Actuarial Reports
State
Alabama
Alaska
Arizona
Arkansas
California
Colorado
Connecticut
Delaware
Florida
Georgia
Hawaii
Idaho
Illinois
Indiana
Iowa
Kansas
Kentucky
Louisiana
Maine
Maryland
Massachusetts
Michigan
Minnesota
Mississippi
Missouri
Montana
Nebraska
Nevada
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New Mexico
New York
North Carolina
North Dakota
Ohio
Oklahoma
Oregon
Pennsylvania
Rhode Island
South Carolina
South Dakota
Tennessee
Texas
Utah
Vermont
Virginia
Washington
West Virginia
Wisconsin
Wyoming

UAAL
(millions
of dollars)
(1)
3,104
3,139
438
1,224
47,878
1,033
21,681
3,100
3,082
15,035
9,679
362
24,210
442
220
293
4,833
19,609
4,756
14,543
13,287
13,925
565
570
2,186
449
0
2,295
2,859
68,834
4,110
49,663
23,786
31
18,723
814
264
8,659
480
10,048
76
2,146
17,675
569
1,419
1,616
7,495
7,761
1,473
72

UAAL Per
Capita
(dollars)
(2)
683
4,689
73
441
1,330
221
6,218
3,688
173
1,650
7,635
253
1,903
70
74
106
1,158
4,361
3,624
2,609
2,066
1,377
110
196
377
479
0
952
2,193
7,950
2,144
2,578
2,740
48
1,633
230
72
700
449
2,361
97
358
773
227
2,289
213
1,195
4,298
265
142

31

Teachers
Included
in Plan
(3)
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X

% Premium
Paid By
Employer
(4)
50-99
100
1-49
50-99
100
50-99
50-99
50-99
1-49
50-99
100
0
100
0
0
0
100
50-99
100
50-99
50-99
50-99
0
0
50-99
0
0
50-99
100
100
100
50-99
100
1-49
100
1-49
0
100
100
50-99
0
50-99
100
50-99
50-99
1-49
50-99^
50-99^
0
0

Discount
Rate Used in
Report
(5)
5.0
8.25
8.0
5.25
4.5
8.5
4.5
8.0
4.0
6.0
5.0
5.0
4.5
4.5
4.5
3.85
4.5
4.0
4.5
4.25
4.5
4.0
4.25
4.5
4.5
4.25
N/A
4.0
4.5
4.5
5.0
4.155
4.25
5.0
6.5
3.5
4.5
8.5
8.25
4.5
3.0
4.5
6.0
8.0
3.75
7.5
4.5
4.5
4.0
4.0

Sources: Authors’ calculations from data gathered from state actuarial reports. Population figures are from 2005
Census population estimates and percent premium paid is from the 2007 GAO report. The discount rate is for the
state plan covering general state employees.
^ The percent premium paid for Washington and West Virginia was modified to be 50-99.

Table 3. Sensitivity of UAAL to Inflation Rate
-1 Percent
Florida
2,659
Hawaii
8,187
Idaho
302
Maryland
13,128
Massachusetts
11,282
North Dakota
28
Oklahoma
745
Source: Actuarial reports of various states

UAAL (in millions of dollars)
Baseline Inflation Rate
3,082
9,679
362
14,543
13,287
31
814

+1 Percent
3,613
11,597
432
16,226
15,884
34
895

Table 4. Assets and Funding Ratios of State Retiree Health Plans
State

Actuarial Accrued
Liabilities

Plan
Assets

Unfunded
Liabilities

1,605,000,000
6,300,795,000
522,900,000
30,748,000,000
1,247,950,000
5,706,198,036
1,813,158,000
4,264,180,967

1,167,000,000
3,161.956,000
258,600,000
12,025,000,000
214,816,000
872,708,414
197,514,000
154,538,668

438,000,000
3,138,839,000
264,300,000
18,723,000,000
1,033,134,000
4,833,489,622
1,616,000,000
4,109,642,299

Funding
Ratio
(percent)
72.7
50.2
49.5
39.1
17.2
15.3
10.9
6.6

North Carolina
23,925,138,742
139,174,878
Delaware
3,132,000,000
26,000,000
Source: Actuarial reports of various states and author calculations.

23,785,963,864
3,106,000,000

0.6
0.01

Arizona
Alaska
Oregon
Ohio
Colorado
Kentucky
Virginia
New Mexico

32

Table 5. UAAL by Discount Rate
Discount Rate (Percent)
UAAL (in millions of dollars)
4.5
47,878
6.125
38,242
7.75
31,282
Connecticut
4.5
21,681
4.7
20,877
6.08
16,362
8.5
11,369
Florida
4.0
3,082
7.75
1,918
Georgia
4.5
19,559
6.0
15,035
Hawaii
5.0
9,678
8.0
6,270
Idaho
5.0
362
7.25
251
Indiana
4.5
442
7.5
283
Maine
4.5
4,756
7.5
3,234
Maryland
4.25
14,543
7.75
9,002
Massachusetts
4.5
13,287
8.25
7,562
Michigan
4.0
13,000
8.0
8,000
Missouri
4.5
2,185
8.5
1,225
Mississippi
4.5
570
8.0
430
New Hampshire
4.5
2,859
8.5
1,550
New Jersey
4.5
68,834
8.25
37,307
North Dakota
5.0
31
8.0
24
Oklahoma
3.5
815
7.5
586
Oregon
4.5
309
7.5
238
Rhode Island
5.0
696
7.0
550
8.25
480
South Carolina
4.5
10,048
6.0
7,599
7.25
6,446
Utah
6.0
670
8.0
569
Vermont
3.75
1,419
8.0
402
Wyoming
4.0
72
8.5
41
Source: Actuarial reports of various states. Values in bold are the values used in the report.
California

33

Table 6: Factors Associated with High Levels of Unfunded Actuarially Accrued Liabilities
Per Capita
Dependent variable: Log UAAL Per Capita, Mean $1,622
Log UAAL Per Capita
0.043 [0.149]

Log State Budget

10.497 [3.560]**

Share of Labor Force in State and Local Gov.
Share of Pub Employees in Collective Bargaining Unit

1.761 [1.021]+

Pension Funding Ratio

-0.005 [0.008]

Avg. Monthly Salary Full-Time State Employees (thousands)

0.060 [0.307]
-0.210 [0.083]*

Discount Rate (%)
Teachers Included Dummy

0.382 [0.242]

Pay 1-49% Premium

0.263 [0.445]

Pay 50-99% Premium

2.419 [0.311]**

Pay 100% Premium

2.741 [0.364]**
2.866 [1.778]

Constant

49

Observations

0.790

R-squared

Notes: ** indicates significance at the 1% level, * at the 5% level, and + at the 10% level.

34

ENDNOTES

1

See, for example, Fronstin (2005, 2010) and Buchmueller, Johnson, and Lo Sasso (2006). Clark, Ghent,
and Headen (1994) provide an early assessment of the key determinants of the decline in the incidence of
RHI in the private sector.

2

We would like to thank Joseph Newhouse for providing information on how the structure of Medicare
led to the development of retiree health insurance as a post-retirement benefit for employees.

3

Details of the approved accounting standards for retiree health insurance plans are contained in GASB
(2004 a, b).

4

An exception is Clark (2010) which surveys the retiree health plans for teachers in each of the states.

5

UAAL per capita is defined as the UAAL divided by the state population. Population figures are from
2005 Census population estimates available at: http://www.census.gov/popest/states/tables/NSTEST2007-01.xls, [accessed February 27, 2009].
6

Many states have a graded level of premium subsidies with more years of service being associated with
a greater percentage of the premium being paid by the state. For example, in California, employees with
under 10 years of service pay the entire RHI premium. For retirees with 10 years of service, the state
pays 50 percent of the RHI premium. The state-paid portion of the premium increases by 5 percent for
each additional year of service up to 20 years of service. The state pays 100 percent of the premium for
retirees with 20 or more years of service.

7

Note that the percent premium paid for Washington and West Virginia was modified from the original
GAO (2007) classification to be 50-99 upon a close reading of the actuarial report. See Clark and Morrill
(2010 forthcoming) for further discussion.

8

Chernew et al. (2009) argue that health care spending and Medicare spending are not likely to continue
to grow at their current rate since this would effectively leave little room for growth in non-health care
consumption.

9

Of course a lower UAAL also implies a lower ARC. Deputy Comptroller of New York State, Thomas
Sanzillo (2007) testified before the New York State Assembly that the liability of the state (including
SUNY) associated with its retiree health plans was approximately $47 billion and that the annual required
contribution was $3.7 billion if the state continued with no pre-funding. However, he then reported that if
the state committed to fully fund its retiree health obligations, the ARC would be only $2.4 billion based
on using a discount rate of 8.0 percent. This latter value represented $1.1 billion to support current
benefits payable and $1.3 billion in contributions to a fund to support future benefits.

10

GASB (2010) has established a study commission to consider amending its standards concerning the
appropriate discount rate to use for public pensions.
11

Population figures are from 2005 Census population estimates available at:
http://www.census.gov/popest/states/tables/NST-EST2007-01.xls, [accessed February 27, 2009].
12

The state budget is calculated by taking the state share of state and local expenditure from
http://sourcebook.governing.com/subtopicresults.jsp?ind=696 and multiplying that by the total state and
local expenditure in 2005 from http://sourcebook.governing.com/subtopicresults.jsp?ind=695, [accessed
February 27, 2009].
13

The share of workers in the public sector is provided by Hirsch and Macpherson (2003). Our measure
of unionization is also derived from Hirsch and Macpherson (2003).

35

14

This variable is calculated by dividing the state’s 2007 March payroll number by the total number of
state employees, both from the Census of State Governments, http://www.census.gov/govs/state/
[accessed January 22, 2009].
15

Clark and McDermed (1990), Gustmann and Steinmeier (1992), and Ippolito (1995) examine the
determinants of the shift from defined benefit plans to defined contribution plans while Munnell et al
(2007) discuss why defined benefit plans continue to be the norm in the public sector. In a series of
papers, Laibson and Madrian and their colleagues have examined the impact of defaults and the framing
of choices of saving behavior (see their paper at this conference and references therein).
16

Fronstin (2005, 2010) and Buchmueller, et al. (2006) report trends in coverage of retiree health
insurance plans.
17

For more details on the calculation of the pension replacement ratio, see Clark, Craig, and Sabelhaus
(2011 forthcoming).

18

Moody’s Investors Service (2005) states on page 1, “Moody’s does not anticipate that the liability
disclosures will cause immediate rating adjustments of a broad scale” and that “Moody’s therefore will
exclude OPEB liabilities from calculations of state or local debt burdens, but include them as a factor in
the overall credit assessment of an issuer. This practice is consistent with Moody’s approach to municipal
pension liabilities.”

19

Standard & Poor’s (2007) discusses the possibilities of a different prefunding strategy, the use of OPEB
obligation bonds.
20

After the Financial Accounting Standard Boards required private employers to report retiree health
insurance liabilities in the same manner as GASB 45, there was been a sharp decline in the proportion of
employers offering retiree health plans. The Kaiser Family Foundation (2006) reports that in 1988 before
the adoption of the FASB standards, 66 percent of employers with 20 or more employees offered retiree
health plans. After the standards were issued the proportion of private employers offering such plans
dropped to 46 percent in 1991 and further to 36 percent in 1993.
21

We would like to thank Joseph Newhouse for bringing this provision to our attention.

36

