                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            HOW DOES THE U.S. GOVERNMENT FINANCE FISCAL SHOCKS?

                                             Antje Berndt
                                            Hanno Lustig
                                            Sevin Yeltekin

                                        Working Paper 16458
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16458


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2010




We would like to thank seminar participants at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Federal Reserve
Bank of Cleveland, Harvard University, LSE, NYU-Stern, Rice University, University of Warwick
and Wharton for comments. We are grateful to George Hall for sharing his data with us. Batchimeg
Sambaliat provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Antje Berndt, Hanno Lustig, and Sevin Yeltekin. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
How Does the U.S. Government Finance Fiscal Shocks?
Antje Berndt, Hanno Lustig, and Sevin Yeltekin
NBER Working Paper No. 16458
October 2010
JEL No. E44,E62,G12

                                           ABSTRACT

We develop a method for identifying and quantifying the fiscal channels that help finance government
spending shocks. We define fiscal shocks as surprises in defense spending and show that they are more
precisely identified when defense stock data are used in addition to aggregate macroeconomic data.
Our results show that in the postwar period, over 9% of the U.S. government's unanticipated spending
needs were financed by a reduction in the market value of debt and more than 73% by an increase
in primary surpluses. Additionally, we find that long-term debt is more effective at absorbing fiscal
risk than short-term debt.


Antje Berndt                                      Sevin Yeltekin
Carnegie Mellon University                        Northwestern University
Tepper School of Business                         Kellogg School of Management
5000 Forbes Avenue                                2001 Sheridan Road, 5th Floor
Pittsburgh, PA 15213                              Evanston, IL 60208
aberndt@andrew.cmu.edu                            sevin@andrew.cmu.edu

Hanno Lustig
UCLA Anderson School of Management
110 Westwood Plaza, Suite C413
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and NBER
hlustig@anderson.ucla.edu
       In this paper we explore the dynamic adjustment of the U.S. government’s fiscal bal-
ances to expenditure shocks. We identify the different fiscal adjustment channels that help
stabilize the U.S. government’s balances and develop a method for quantifying the use of
each channel in the postwar era. To do so, we make use of the government’s intertemporal
budget constraint. The government’s budget constraint dictates that surprise increases in
spending must be financed through either an increase in primary surpluses or a reduction in
returns on the government’s bond portfolio. We refer to the first channel of adjustment as
the surplus channel and the second as the debt valuation channel.
       The surplus channel operates through an increase in contemporaneous and expected
future surplus growth when the news about higher expenditures are revealed whereas the
debt valuation channel operates through a decline in contemporaneous and expected future
debt returns. In normative models of fiscal policy, adjustments through the debt valuation
channel are referred to as “fiscal insurance”. Standard models in this literature feature a
benevolent government that minimizes the excess burden of taxation by varying its debt
returns. The extent to which it can do this is determined by the asset market structure it
faces. In complete-market models, a decline in debt returns absorbs the surprise increase in
spending needs, allowing the government to maintain a constant excess burden of taxation.
In incomplete-market models, however, interstate financing of fiscal shocks, hence fiscal
insurance through bond markets, is limited.1
       Several authors have used the implications of these normative models and the empirical
behavior of tax rates and debt levels to assess the incompleteness of debt markets.2 The
empirical evidence uncovered and documented in these papers suggests that debt markets are
incomplete and hence do not provide full insurance against fiscal shocks. However, the prior
literature does not quantify how much fiscal insurance the government does achieve through
bond markets in practice.3 Our main contribution is to develop a framework that not only
identifies fiscal adjustment channels, but more importantly, provides quantitative estimates
   1
     See Section 1.2 for references and a more thorough discussion of normative models.
   2
     See, inter alia, Barro (1979), Gourinchas and Rey (2007), Scott (2007) and Marcet and Scott (2009).
   3
     One exception is Faraglia, Marcet, and Scott (2008a), who report covariances between deficit shocks and
value of debt for a select group of OECD countries between 1970 and 2000.


                                                     2

                      Electronic copy available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1354699
of fiscal insurance. This is accomplished by using the intertemporal budget constraint of the
government only, and hence without taking an a priori stance on market incompleteness or
government preferences.
       To quantify the degree of fiscal adjustment through each channel, we proceed in three
steps. The first step involves a particular log-linearization of the government’s budget con-
straint which permits a tractable decomposition of the response to fiscal shocks into news
about current and future surplus growth and news about current and future debt returns.
Motivated by Ramey (2009)’s discussion that defense spending accounts for almost all of the
volatility of government spending, we identify fiscal shocks as news to current and future
defense spending growth.
       In the second step, we carefully construct holding returns on government debt and use
unstructured VARs to obtain empirical measures of the news variables. In the third step, we
utilize the constructed news variables to estimate the fiscal adjustment betas that describe
the response of expected surpluses and of expected returns to fiscal shocks. The budget
constraint decomposition we use maps these fiscal adjustment betas directly into the fraction
of fiscal shocks financed through the surplus and debt valuation channels. Our estimate
of the fiscal adjustment beta for the surplus channel is 2.80, implying that a one-percent
shock to defense spending growth induces, on average, a 2.80 percentage point unexpected
increase in current and future non-defense surplus growth. It implies that the surplus channel
has absorbed a significant portion, more than 73%, of fiscal shocks in the postwar era.
Our estimate for the fiscal adjustment beta for the debt valuation channel is -0.37, which
implies that innovations to real returns on government debt decrease by 37 basis points when
innovations to defense spending growth increase by one percent. This translates into 9.6% of
fiscal risk absorbed through the debt valuation channel. These results indicate that the U.S.
government has achieved a limited, but non-negligible degree of fiscal insurance through the
bond markets since 1946.4
   4
    In a related paper, Giannitsarou and Scott (2006) investigate the response of various fiscal variables and
aggregate output to temporal variation in the relationship between government liabilities and deficits. In
contrast, we focus on channels that absorb shocks to government spending, not general variations in deficit
to debt ratios that may or may not stem from unexpected changes in spending. This allows us to directly


                                                      3
    The debt valuation channel has two components: (i) return variations that are contem-
poraneous with fiscal news and the focus of much of the normative literature on fiscal policy,
and (ii) variations in future returns following fiscal news. We find that only 1.8%, about 20%
of the fiscal adjustment through the debt valuation channel, is achieved through variation in
current returns. Variations in future bonds returns, on the other hand, have absorbed about
7.8% of the fiscal risk in the postwar era. This latter result does not have an analogue in the
normative literature where the focus is on the contemporaneous returns, but it is a robust
feature of the data.
    The debt valuation channel estimates reflect the response of value weighted returns on
the government debt portfolio to fiscal shocks. This leads to the question of whether debt
of different maturities is equally effective at delivering fiscal insurance. The second contri-
bution of our paper is to provide empirical evidence that long-term debt, mainly through
adjustments to future returns, is more effective in absorbing fiscal shocks than short-term
debt.5 The fraction of fiscal risk absorbed by debt of 1-year maturity is about 8%, whereas
this fraction is more than double of that amount at 18% for debt of 20-year maturity. The
total amount of fiscal insurance depends on the actual maturity composition of government
debt. The value weighted maturity of government debt in the postwar period is 3.1 years,
delivering an overall fiscal insurance of 9.6% as previously stated. While our framework is
not designed to provide a policy recommendation on the maturity structure of government
debt, the relationship between debt maturity and fiscal insurance we uncover is relevant for
models of optimal debt management.
    The robustness of our fiscal adjustment results relies on the precision of our fiscal shock
estimates. There is potentially an important caveat associated with using aggregate spending
data to estimate these shocks, as documented by Ramey (2009). The problem is the possible
quantify fiscal insurance.
    5
      In the normative fiscal literature, two papers display the use of long-term debt to absorb fiscal shocks.
One is Lustig, Sleet, and Yeltekin (2008), who show that the long-term debt helps the government smooth
distortions from costly unanticipated inflation in a dynamic model of optimal fiscal and monetary policy with
nominal rigidities, and nominal non-contingent debt of various maturities. The other is Angeletos (2002),
who argues that if the maturity structure of public debt is carefully chosen ex ante, the ex post variation
in the market value of outstanding long-term debt may offset the contemporaneous variation in the level of
fiscal expenditures.


                                                      4
failure of aggregate data to respond to defense spending surprises in a timely manner. Our
third contribution is to propose a novel approach that addresses this issue within the VAR
framework. Specifically, we include information embedded in the stock returns of companies
in the defense industry as additional explanatory variables. Our logic is straightforward. In
so far as defense companies’ profits and dividends are tied to defense spending, defense stock
return variables should respond contemporaneously to news about future defense spending
growth. The results from the augmented VAR confirm our intuition: defense spending
growth is indeed predicted more precisely. Reassuringly, the estimate for fiscal risk absorbed
by the debt valuation channel remains above 9.5%.
     The paper proceeds as follows. Section 1 log-linearizes and decomposes the budget con-
straint, and formally defines fiscal shocks and our fiscal adjustment channels. Section 2
presents our benchmark VAR model and reports the empirical results from this benchmark
case. Section 3 discusses the link between debt maturity and the degree of fiscal insurance.
Section 4 introduces the VAR model augmented with defense stock variables and reports the
associated results. Section 5 concludes.


1.    Government Budget Constraint and Fiscal Adjustment

     In this section we explore the implications of the government’s intertemporal budget
constraint and identify the fiscal adjustment channels that help finance expenditure shocks.
The dynamic period-by-period version of the government’s budget constraint is given by:


                                           b
                                   Bt+1 = Rt+1 (Bt − St ) ,


where Bt denotes the time-t real market value of government debt outstanding at the be-
ginning of the period. St denotes the federal government’s real primary surplus. It is equal
                                                                          b
to receipts Tt , inclusive of seignorage revenue, less expenditures Gt . Rt+1 denotes the gross
real return paid on the government’s bond portfolio between t and t + 1. This equation can
be re-arranged to yield the following expression for the growth rate of government debt as a


                                              5
function of the return on this debt and the primary surplus to debt ratio:

                                                      
                                    Bt+1    b       St
                                         = Rt+1 1 −      .                                  (1)
                                     Bt             Bt

      Our goal is to measure the impact of news about current and future spending on the
budget constraint. In other words, to what extent is this impact offset by contemporaneous
and subsequent declines in the market value of outstanding debt and increases in future
primary surpluses? To accomplish this task, we first separate the various components of the
budget constraint by log-linearizing Equation (1). The log-linearization of the government’s
budget constraint follows a similar procedure to the log-linearization of the household budget
constraint in Campbell (1993) and the country external budget constraint of Gourinchas and
Rey (2007). Campbell’s focus is asset pricing, whereas Gourinchas and Rey’s is international
adjustment to large trade or asset imbalances. Our main focus on the other hand is on the
channels that stabilize the U.S. fiscal balance following expenditure shocks.

1.1    Log-linearizing the budget constraint

      Campbell’s linearization of the household budget constraint treats labor income as the
return on human capital and, hence, part of the return on the household’s overall portfolio.
The constraint is then re-expressed as a function of household wealth (inclusive of human
capital) and consumption, both of which are taken to be positive. In contrast, we treat
government income from taxation as a part of the surplus flow rather than as a return on
a government asset. The fact that the surplus may be either positive or negative creates
difficulties for the log-linearization of (1). We circumvent these issues by expanding around
both the average log receipts to debt and log spending to debt ratios and then constructing
a weighted log primary surplus.
      The log-linearization procedure is valid under the following assumptions regarding spend-
ing, receipt and surplus to debt ratios. First, we assume that for all t, the market value of
outstanding government debt, Bt , is positive and larger than the primary surplus, St . Sec-
ond, we assume that the logarithm of the receipts to debt ratio, log(Tt /Bt ), and the logarithm

                                                6
of the spending to debt ratio, log(Gt /Bt ), are stationary around their average values τ b and
gb, respectively. Lastly, we suppose that exp(τ b) − exp(gb) lies between 0 and 1.
       We have verified that our assumptions are supported by the data for our sample period of
1946.I to 2008.III. Figure 1 displays the time series of log(Tt /Bt ) and log(Gt /Bt ).6 Optimiz-
ing the Bayesian Information Criterion proposed by Schwarz (1978), we find an optimal lag
length of one for both time series.7 The associated Augmented Dickey-Fuller test statistics
reveal that the unit-root hypothesis can be rejected for both log(Tt /Bt ) and for log(Gt /Bt )
at the 5% level.8


                                           [Figure 1 about here.]


       Throughout, our notational convention is to use lower cases to denote log variables and
∆ to denote a difference, so that bt = log Bt , ∆bt+1 = log Bt+1 − log Bt , and so on. Let nst
denote the weighted log primary surplus:


                                              nst = µτ τt − µg gt .                                            (2)


The weights are derived from the log-linearization of Equation (1) detailed in Appendix A,
and are given by
                                          µτ b                             µgb
                               µτ =                    and      µg =              ,                            (3)
                                      µτ b − µgb                       µτ b − µgb

where µτ b = exp(τ b) and µgb = exp(gb). In Appendix A, we also show that under the above
assumptions, and ignoring unimportant constants, the log-linearization yields the following
approximation for the law of motion for debt:

                                                           
                                               b          1
                                   ∆bt+1 =    rt+1   + 1−     (nst − bt ),                                     (4)
                                                          ρ
   6
      Details of the fiscal data used to construct T and G can be found in the appendix.
   7
      The Akaike Information Criterion (AIC), based on Akaike (1974), penalizes the number of parameters
less severely and as a result suggests that including two (log(Tt /Bt )) or five (log(Gt /Bt )) lags is optimal. In
any case, the AIC test statistics were fairly flat for one to ten lags, for both time series.
    8
      The ADF(0) test statistic is -3.0879 for log(Tt /Bt ) and -3.1182 for log(Gt /Bt ), each with a 5% critical
value of -2.8418. See Said and Dickey (1984) for details.



                                                        7
where µsb = µτ b − µgb and ρ = (1 − µsb ) ∈ (0, 1).
   Equation (4) implies the first-order difference equation:


                                       b
                          nst − bt = ρrt+1 − ρ∆nst+1 + ρ(nst+1 − bt+1 ).                            (5)


Solving (5) forward and imposing the tail condition limj→∞ Et ρj (nst+j −bt+j ) = 0, we obtain
the following expression for the weighted log surplus to debt ratio, nst − bt :

                                               ∞
                                               X
                                                         b
                                                     ρj rt+j
                                                                     
                               nst − bt = Et                 − ∆nst+j .                             (6)
                                               j=1


The expression in (6) implies that if the log surplus to debt ratio fluctuates, it has to be
due to either a change in expected future returns on outstanding debt, or a change in
expected surplus growth. The log surplus to debt ratio reveals deviations from the long-run
relationship between surpluses and debt. If it is negative, the surplus is small relative to the
market value of debt. In this case, we expect low future returns on government debt or high
future surplus growth. If the log surplus to debt ratio is positive, we anticipate high future
returns on debt or low future surplus growth.
   In a related paper, Giannitsarou and Scott (2006) derive a log-linearized budget con-
straint similar to Equation (6) to assess fiscal sustainability in a number of countries.9 The
authors use a variance-covariance decomposition of a weighted log deficit to total government
liabilities ratio to examine the channels through which governments achieve fiscal sustain-
ability. Our focus on the other hand is on adjustments to exogenous fiscal shocks. Temporal
variations in nst − bt may or may not be anticipated and hence cannot be used to measure
shocks. Therefore, we do not base our estimation strategy on Equation (6), but transform
it into a relationship between innovations to the variables in the budget constraint.
   To express Equation (6) in terms of innovations, we compute the difference between
                                                                                 b        b
expectations at time t+1 in (6) minus those at time t, and move bt+1 −Et bt+1 = rt+1 −Et rt+1
   9
     A recent paper related to Giannitsarou and Scott (2006) is Chung and Leeper (2009), which imposes a
version of Equation (6) on an identified VAR to study its implications for fiscal financing.



                                                     8
to the right-hand side. This yields the following expression:

                                             ∞
                                             X                                  ∞
                                                                                X
           nst+1 − Et nst+1 = (Et+1 − Et )         ρj rt+j+1
                                                       b
                                                               − (Et+1 − Et )         ρj ∆nst+j+1 .
                                             j=0                                j=1


Since nst+1 − Et nst+1 = (Et+1 − Et )∆nst+1 , we have:

                                              ∞
                                              X                                  ∞
                                                                                 X
          (Et+1 − Et )∆nst+1 = (Et+1 − Et )         ρj rt+j+1
                                                        b
                                                                − (Et+1 − Et )         ρj ∆nst+j+1 .   (7)
                                              j=0                                j=1


      In what follows, we refer to (Et+1 − Et )Xt+1 as innovations, news, shocks to Xt+1 for
any process X. Equation (7) then states that a positive shock to the (weighted log) surplus
growth must correspond either to a positive shock to returns on government debt or to a
negative shock to surplus growth. As a corollary, we can infer news about surplus growth
from news about returns on government debt.
      Ultimately, we are interested in finding out how much the government uses each of the
two channels, lower bond returns or higher future surpluses, to finance its unanticipated
spending needs. Therefore, we decompose Equation (7) further to isolate the component of
the government’s budget that we identify with expenditure shocks.

1.2    Fiscal shocks and fiscal adjustment channels

      The presence of active fiscal policy and its associated implementation lags complicate
the timing and extraction of news to government expenditures from aggregate government
spending data. Ramey (2009) advocates using defense spending data to identify fiscal shocks.
She argues that fluctuations in defense spending account for almost all of the fluctuations in
total government spending relative to its trend and that non-defense spending accounts for
most of the trend in government spending. Ramey also shows evidence that suggests most
non-defense spending is done by state and local governments rather than the federal gov-
ernment, undermining the ability of empirical estimations relying on aggregate expenditure
data to capture unanticipated changes to government spending.
      Motivated by Ramey, we define exogenous shocks to government spending, i.e. fiscal


                                                    9
shocks, as innovations to defense spending growth. We do not argue that all defense spend-
ing is exogenous, but rather that innovations to defense spending are a measure of shocks
to government expenditures. To identify these fiscal shocks, we first separate government
spending into defense and non-defense components. We then re-derive the log-linearization
                                                                            St
of the budget constraint in Appendix A by expanding log(1 +                 Bt
                                                                               )      in (A.2) around three
components: the average log receipt to debt ratio, τ b, the average log non-defense spending
                 ndef                                                           def
to debt ratio, gb       , and the average log defense to debt ratio, gb               . We can then redefine
nst as:
                                  nst = µτ τt − µndef
                                                 g    gtndef − µdef def
                                                                g gt ,                                   (8)

where µτ is defined as before, and

                                  µndef
                                   gb                                           µdef
                                                                                 gb
              µndef
               g      =                             and    µdef
                                                            g     =                             ,        (9)
                          µτ b − µndef
                                  gb   − µdef
                                          gb                          µτ b − µndef
                                                                              gb   − µdef
                                                                                      gb

                  ndef                   def 
with µndef
      gb   = exp  gb      and µ def
                                gb  = exp  gb     . We denote the weighted log surplus
excluding defense spending with nsndef
                                  t    = µτ τt − µndef
                                                  g    gtndef . This implies that:


                                   ∆nst+1 = ∆nsndef   def def
                                               t+1 − µg ∆gt+1 ,



        def
where ∆gt+1 denotes the growth in defense spending. Substituting the last equation into (7),
and rearranging produces the following relation between news about defense spending growth,
news about government debt returns and news about non-defense surplus growth:

                          ∞                                               ∞
                                                                                            !
                          X           def            1                    X
           (Et+1 − Et )          ρj ∆gt+j+1 = −            (Et+1 − Et )         ρj rt+j+1
                                                                                    b

                           j=0                      µdef
                                                     g                    j=0
                                                                          ∞
                                                                                                !
                                                     1                    X
                                                +          (Et+1 − Et )         ρj ∆nsndef
                                                                                      t+j+1 ,           (10)
                                                    µdef
                                                     g                    j=0

                                                   
where ρ is now computed as 1 − µτ b − µndef
                                       gb   − µ def
                                                gb    .
   Equation (10) is central to our analysis and guides our empirical strategy. It identifies


                                                    10
two main channels for stabilizing the government’s fiscal balances following an expenditure
shock. It implies that a positive shock to defense expenditure growth has to coincide with one
of two things: a negative shock to returns on debt, and/or a positive shock to non-defense
surplus growth. We refer to the first of these adjustments as the debt valuation channel,
and the second as the surplus channel. To quantify the relative importance of each of these
channels, we first develop a framework to construct these news variables and then measure
the empirical relationship between them.
       The normative fiscal theory refers to the debt valuation channel, specifically the current
return component of the debt valuation channel, as fiscal insurance. Standard models in
the normative literature feature a benevolent government that minimizes the welfare losses
arising from variation in marginal tax rates over time and states. If the tax system is
sufficiently constrained, then the government will wish to smooth inter-state marginal tax
rates and the excess burden of taxation by varying the return it pays on its debt.10 The
extent to which it can do this is determined by the asset market structure it faces.
       In complete market models, there are no restrictions on the government’s ability to insure
against shocks through return variations.11 At the other extreme, if the government can trade
only one period real non-contingent debt, then optimal policy entails intertemporal rather
than interstate smoothing of taxes and the excess burden.12 Intermediate cases in which
fiscal insurance is possible, but costly, deliver intermediate results. In these scenarios, the
government optimally responds to shocks with a mixture of interstate and intertemporal
smoothing of taxes and the excess burden.13
  10
      If the government has access to lump sum taxation, then Ricardian Equivalence implies that it need
make no recourse to bond markets. If it can tax private assets without inducing any contemporaneous
distortion, then asset taxation can substitute for variations in debt returns. Lastly, if the government can
flexibly adjust both consumption and income tax rates in response to shocks, then again debt is redundant
as a fiscal insurance mechanism (see Correia, Nicolini, and Teles (2008)). On the other hand, if the tax
system is sticky or if the government is constrained to adjust income tax rates in the aftermath of shocks,
then debt’s essential role as a fiscal insurance instrument is reinstated.
   11
      Scott (2007) shows that when markets are complete, the government maintains the excess burden of
taxation—the shadow value of the future primary surplus stream—at a constant level. Labor tax rates
still vary to the extent that the compensated labor supply elasticity varies. However, these variations are
typically dampened relative to an incomplete-market setting.
   12
      See Barro (1979) and Aiyagari, Marcet, Sargent, and Seppala (2002).
   13
      One example is Lustig, Sleet, and Yeltekin (2008). There, a government trades nominal non-contingent


                                                    11
      Several contributors, beginning with Barro (1979), have used normative models of the
sort described above to assess fiscal policy empirically. Early analysis found evidence of
persistence in tax rates consistent with incomplete-market models.14 More recent work
by Scott (2007) and Marcet and Scott (2009) has obtained and empirically assessed the
implications of complete and incomplete markets optimal policy models. These two papers
provide further evidence of persistence in debt levels and tax rates relative to allocations,
suggestive of incomplete-market models and hence limited access to fiscal insurance through
bond markets. We, on the other hand, do not take any ex-ante stance on the degree of market
completeness or on the preferences of the government. That is, we do not distinguish between
the government’s inability or unwillingness to engage in fiscal insurance. Our framework
relies only on the intertemporal budget constraint of the government, which is consistent with
all dynamic fiscal models. Our goal is to develop a method for quantifying fiscal adjustments
to expenditure shocks, and apply this method to postwar U.S. data. More specific theoretical
mechanisms can be introduced into our framework and tested as restrictions. However, they
will have to be consistent with the two channels of adjustment and their relative quantitative
importance. Our findings can provide useful information to guide the theoretical fiscal
management literature.
      We now describe how we use Equation (10) to quantify the debt valuation and surplus
adjustments to fiscal shocks.

1.3    Quantifying fiscal adjustments

      The debt valuation channel operates through a decline in contemporaneous and expected
future returns on the government’s debt portfolio when news about higher defense spending
growth is revealed, whereas the surplus channel operates through an increase in contempora-
neous and expected future non-defense surplus growth. When the government is fully insured
debt of various maturities. Costly contemporaneous or expected future inflations allow it to hedge fiscal
shocks. Another example is Sleet (2004) who requires fiscal policy to satisfy incentive compatibility restric-
tions.
   14
      See, for example, Sahasakul (1986), Bizer and Durlauf (1990) and Hess (1993). However, as Bohn (1998)
and Scott (2007) point out, the unit root tests used in this literature have low power against the alternative
of optimal policy in an environment with complete markets and persistent shocks.


                                                     12
against spending shocks, the negative shock to expected returns completely offsets the sur-
prise increase in expected defense spending growth. If fiscal shocks are not financed through
the debt valuation channel fully, then the government will have to run larger surpluses now
or in the future. Before we quantify the relative importance of these two channels, we in-
troduce the following pieces of notation. We denote news about current and future defense
spending growth by
                                                         ∞
                                                         X            def
                          ht+1 (g def ) = (Et+1 − Et )           ρj ∆gt+j+1 ,
                                                           j=0

news about current and future returns on government debt by

                                                         ∞
                                                         X
                                    b
                             ht+1 (r ) = (Et+1 − Et )            ρj rt+j+1
                                                                     b
                                                                           ,
                                                           j=0


and news about current and future non-defense surplus growth by

                                                           ∞
                                                           X
                        ht+1 (ns ndef
                                        ) = (Et+1 − Et )         ρj ∆nsndef
                                                                       t+j+1 .
                                                           j=0


   With these pieces of notation in place, we can also formally define fiscal insurance in our
framework to be a negative covariance between innovations to current and future defense
spending growth and innovations to current and future returns:


                                cov ht+1 (g def ), ht+1 (rb ) < 0.
                                                             



To assess how much of the spending shocks is absorbed by debt returns and by future
surpluses, we regress both the news about returns and the news about surplus growth on
innovations to defense spending growth separately:


                            ht+1 (rb ) = β0r + β1r ht+1 (g def ) + εrt+1 ,               (11)

                        ht+1 (nsndef ) = β0ns + β1ns ht+1 (g def ) + εns
                                                                      t+1 .              (12)




                                                 13
      If β1r is equal to minus one, the total decline in innovations to current and future debt
returns is one percent when the innovations to current and future defense expenditure growth
rises by one percent. According to Equation (10), we can map this beta directly into a
                                                                            1
fraction of total fiscal risk financed by the debt valuation channel. If   µdef
                                                                                β1r   is minus one, the
                                                                            g

government is obviously fully fiscally insured and does not require any adjustment through
                                          1
the surplus channel. Analogously, if     µdef
                                              β1ns   is one, the surplus channel fully absorbs the
                                          g

fiscal shocks.


2.     Benchmark VAR Results

      This section presents our estimation results. We start by setting up a benchmark VAR
model to construct innovations to defense spending growth, to government debt returns and
to non-defense surplus growth. These news variables are then used to estimate the fraction
of fiscal shocks financed by each adjustment channel.

2.1    Estimating the news variables

      We use unrestricted VARs to forecast future government debt returns, defense spend-
ing and non-defense surplus growth, and construct estimates of their innovations from the
forecasts. Our sample consists of quarterly data and covers the postwar years from 1946 to
2008. The state vector, zt , includes variables that help estimate the terms in Equation (10).
We make the assumption that there are no relevant innovations to slow-moving trends for
any of the three variables in Equation (10). This allows us to remove the slow-moving trend
components of debt returns, defense spending growth and non-defense surplus growth in or-
der to estimate their innovations more precisely. If there are, however, any sudden changes
to trends, then the detrended time series would not capture these innovations and affect
the precision of our findings. Therefore, we exercise great caution by providing a number
of robustness checks on our detrending procedure. We now explain the construction of the
news variables, their relevant data sources and our detrending procedure.
      Real holding returns on government debt, rtb , are central to our analysis and need to be
carefully constructed, so that their temporal variation is preserved. Therefore, we do not rely

                                                 14
on aggregate fiscal data as in Chung and Leeper (2009), nor on average price and maturity
data as in Giannitsarou and Scott (2006) and Faraglia, Marcet, and Scott (2008a). Instead
we employ a multi-step procedure that computes the holding returns for each maturity in
order to obtain a value weighted return on total government debt. We start our procedure
by employing the Nelson and Siegel (1987) technique to extract the time-t nominal zero-
coupon yield curve using CRSP Treasury bill and coupon-bond price data.15 This enables us
to compute nominal discount rates, which are converted to real terms using the Consumer
Price Index (CPI). Let Ptk denote the real price of a synthetic zero-coupon government bond
that matures at time t + k, for k = 1, . . . , 120, where k represents quarters. The time-t real
                                                                                                  Ptk−1 −Pt−1
                                                                                                           k
holding return on government debt maturing at t+k can then be computed as rtk =                        k
                                                                                                      Pt−1
                                                                                                              .
We obtain rtb by forming the value weighted average of the quarterly real holding returns rtk ,
across all maturities k:

                                                     120
                                                     X
                                           rtb   =          k
                                                           wt−1 rtk ,
                                                     k=1


       k
where wt−1 is the weight for maturity k measured at time t − 1. It is defined as:


                                        k
                                                               k
                                                       skt−1 Pt−1
                                       wt−1      = P120                   .
                                                       l=1   slt−1 Pt−1
                                                                     l



    In the above equation skt denotes the number of time-(t + k) dollars the government
has promised to deliver as of time t. The series skt is determined from the CRSP Monthly
Treasury database going back to 1960 and from the Treasury Bulletins, the Wall Street
Journal and the New York Times for the years 1946 to 1960. These files contain monthly
data on the maturity and face value of outstanding publicly held debt, plus coupon-rate
data on virtually all negotiable direct obligations of the U.S. Treasury. We unbundle each
outstanding bond at time t into its principal and coupon payments, and then construct
  15
     To facilitate the yield-curve extraction, we clean the price data so that it contains only straight bonds
with a maturity of at least one year plus T-bills with 30-days or longer until maturity. We also remove all
bonds with 1.5% coupon rates, as they have been documented to contain large spurious errors. For details,
see pg. 27 of the CRSP Monthly Treasury U.S. Database Guide.



                                                     15
skt by accumulating, across all bonds, the notional amounts due in k periods.16 A similar
accounting technique is used in Hall and Sargent (1997) for computing the government’s real
cost of borrowing.17 Figure 2 shows the times series of rtb for our sample period of 1946.I to
2008.III. The average return is close to zero at 0.34%, but the series displays considerable
variation with a standard deviation of 2.34%.


                                         [Figure 2 about here.]


       We do not find any significant trend component in government debt returns. We do,
however, observe a sudden upward shift in the average level of returns around 1981.18 We
do not view this increase as part of a slow moving trend but rather as an innovation to
government debt returns, which we would like to capture. It is possible that this shift in the
average returns is related to Volcker disinflation starting in the early 1980’s. We therefore
include inflation as a state variable in our VAR analysis, but do not detrend rtb .
       To construct nsndef
                      t    , we first compute µτ , µndef
                                                    g    and µdef
                                                              g   from the sample averages of
the log receipts to debt, log non-defense spending to debt and log defense spending to
debt ratios. For our sample period of 1946.I to 2008.III, these weights are µτ = 10.877,
µndef
 g    = 6.064 and µdef
                   g   = 3.813. Receipts include current federal tax revenues, contributions
for social insurance, income receipts on other assets, current transfer receipts and seignorage
revenue. Non-defense spending includes all federal expenditures excluding national defense
spending, g def , and excluding interest on debt. Most data are obtained from NIPA tables.
The monetary base for calculating the seignorage revenue is obtained from the St. Louis
FRED. The computation of the seignorage revenue and the details of the fiscal data are
  16
     Note that CRSP does not report the face value of Treasury bills held by the public, and that these data
are obtained from table FD-5 of the monthly Treasury Bulletins.
  17
     The Treasury reports the interest cost of total government debt, calculated by summing up all the
principal and coupon payments the government has promised to deliver at t + k as of time t. The Treasury’s
methodology makes no distinction between coupon payments and principal payments, and hence mismeasures
the cost of funds.
  18
     Between 1946 and 1980, real holding returns rtb fluctuate around zero, but starting in 1981, the average
return level increases to 1.2%.




                                                     16
explained further in Appendix B. The debt in question is Bt calculated as:

                                             120
                                             X
                                    Bt =           skt−1 Ptk−1 .
                                             k=1


Therefore Bt measures the time-t real market value of bonds outstanding at the end of t − 1/
beginning of t.
   We detrend ∆gtdef and ∆nsndef
                            t    using a one-sided Hodrick and Prescott (1997) (HP) filter.
The one-sided HP filter uses only past values to estimate the trend and hence preserves the
temporal ordering of data. In detrending the two series, we use a smoothing factor of 8330,
which tends to cut out frequencies corresponding to periods above 15 years. We choose 15
years as our benchmark because that is the average time between consecutive increases in
defense spending, as documented by Ramey (2009) and displayed in Figure 3. The figure
includes real defense spending and the Ramey dates for our sample period. The latter are
(1941.I,) 1950.III, 1965.I, 1980.I, and 2001.III. For completeness, we do provide results from
a variety of cycles, including the standard cycle length of 9.9 years, employed by the business
cycle literature.


                                    [Figure 3 about here.]


   The state vector zt for the benchmark VAR also includes two additional variables known
to predict real bond returns: quarterly inflation, πt , computed as the quarterly rate of change
of the CPI and the quarterly Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005) risk factor, CPt . This leaves us
with a five-dimensional state vector:

                                                            
                            zt = rtb πt ξtns,ndef CPt ξtg,def ,


where ξtns,ndef and ξtg,ndef are the detrended ∆nsndef and ∆g def series, respectively. All
variables, except inflation and CP , are deflated using the CPI. We demean all the variables




                                              17
and impose a first-order structure on the VAR:


                                          zt+1 = Azt + εt+1 .


Table 1 reports the GMM estimates with their t-statistics. Our results show that this simple
specification does reasonably well in predicting the returns on government debt. The R2 on
the return equation is 13.5%, with significant coefficients for CP and inflation. Our results
also indicate that, as one would expect, none of the variables are significant in predicting
the non-defense surplus growth or in predicting defense spending growth.


                                        [Table 1 about here.]


      We calculate the news about current and future defense spending growth from the bench-
mark VAR estimates as:
                                   ht+1 (g def ) = e5 (I − ρA)−1 εt+1 ,

where ei represents a row vector of dimension five, with one in the i’th position and zero
                                                                                         
                                                                               ndef   def
everywhere else and εt+1 represent the VAR residuals. We set ρ = 1 − µτ b − µgb − µgb
equal to its postwar sample value of 0.9855. We obtain news about current and future
government debt returns via:


                                    ht+1 (rb ) = e1 (I − ρA)−1 εt+1 .


In a similar fashion, we also compute innovations to current and future non-defense surplus
growth as follows:
                               ht+1 (nsndef ) = e3 (I − ρA)−1 εt+1 .

2.2    Fiscal adjustment results

      We now report our empirical fiscal adjustment results and implement a number of ro-
bustness checks.



                                                   18
2.2.1   Empirical correlations

   Table 2 reports the correlations between the news variables on its off diagonals, whereas
the diagonals contain the standard deviations of these variables. We make the following ob-
servations. First, news about current and future defense spending growth are strongly neg-
atively correlated with news about current and future returns on government debt (−0.72),
providing strong evidence of fiscal insurance in the postwar period. Second, innovations to
current and future defense spending growth have twice the volatility of government debt
returns. Third, innovations to current and future defense spending growth are positively
correlated with innovations to non-defense surplus growth, providing evidence for fiscal ad-
justment through the surplus channel. The news to non-defense surplus growth is very
volatile, with a standard deviation roughly seven times that of news to defense spending
growth and 15 times that of news to government debt returns. Finally, there is a moderate
negative correlation (−0.42) between news to debt returns and news to non-defense surplus
growth, indicating that the interaction between the surplus and the debt valuation channels
increases the total amount of fiscal shocks absorbed, rather than counteracting either of the
channels.

                                   [Table 2 about here.]

2.2.2   Fiscal adjustment betas

   Table 3 reports the betas from the fiscal adjustment regressions and maps these betas
into the fraction of fiscal shocks absorbed by the debt valuation and surplus channels. The
fiscal adjustment beta for the debt valuation channel (Line 3) is -0.37, implying that a one-
percent shock to defense spending growth induces, on average, a 37 basis points unexpected
drop in returns on outstanding public debt. This implies that a sizable degree of government
spending risk was born by bond holders in the postwar era: 9.61% of expenditure shocks
were absorbed by an unanticipated decline in current and future bond returns. Over this
period, innovations to current and future defense spending growth have accounted for 52%
of the total variation in innovations to current and future holding returns on the federal
government’s outstanding portfolio of bonds.

                                             19
                                      [Table 3 about here.]


   The fiscal adjustment beta for the surplus channel (Line 4) is 2.80, implying that a
one-percent shock to defense spending growth induces, on average, a 2.80 percentage point
unexpected increase in current and future non-defense surplus growth. It implies that the
surplus channel has absorbed a significant portion, 73.34%, of fiscal shocks in the postwar era.
Over this period, innovations to current and future defense spending growth have accounted
for 16% of the total variation in innovations to current and future surplus growth. These
results imply that over the sample period, adjustments in bond returns and non-defense
surpluses together have financed about 83% of fiscal shocks.
   Table 3 also reports fiscal adjustment betas for two components of the debt valuation
channel: adjustments to current returns and adjustments to future returns. The current
fiscal adjustment beta is obtained by regressing the first term in ht+1 (rb ), which is hct+1 (rb ) =
             b
(Et+1 − Et )rt+1 , on ht+1 (g def ). According to our estimates, this beta, although statistically
significant, is only -0.069. It implies that between 1946 and 2008, only 1.81% of spending
shocks were absorbed by a surprise decline in contemporaneous debt returns. Most of the
adjustment to debt returns after a fiscal shock has come in the form of a decline in future
debt returns. The future fiscal adjustment beta, obtained by regressing hft+1 (rb ) = (Et+1 −
Et ) ∞     j b                  def
    P
      j=1 ρ rt+j+1 , on ht+1 (g     ), is -0.30, which corresponds to 7.80% of the fiscal shocks
financed. The normative literature on fiscal policy emphasizes the role of contemporaneous
adjustment to returns in providing fiscal insurance. Our results show that adjustments to
future returns play an important role and help absorb more of the expenditure shocks. This
suggests an additional fiscal adjustment channel for normative models to explore.

2.2.3   Robustness checks

   The fiscal adjustment estimates reported in Table 3 are sensitive to the smoothing pa-
rameter we use in our HP filter. Our benchmark smoothing factor is 8330, corresponding to
15-year cycles. In Table 4 we report fiscal adjustment betas and the fraction of expenditure
risk absorbed by the debt valuation and surplus channels for a variety of smoothing pa-


                                                 20
rameters corresponding to shorter and longer cycles. Our findings suggest that as the cycle
length increases, three things happen. First, the fraction of fiscal shocks financed by the
debt valuation channel decreases, while the opposite is true for the surplus channel. Second,
the fiscal adjustment betas are more precisely estimated. Third, the total expenditure risk
absorbed by the two channels increases.19 The results also indicate that regardless of the
cycle length, the U.S. government has achieved some degree of fiscal insurance through the
bond markets during the postwar era.


                                          [Table 4 about here.]


3.      Debt Maturity and Fiscal Insurance

       The previous section documented that in the postwar era, the U.S. government financed
part of its surprise spending needs through the bond markets. The normative fiscal theory
proposes two ways to deliver fiscal insurance in the absence of real state-contingent debt.
One is through surprise increases in inflation in the presence of nominal non-contingent debt
(e.g., Bohn (1988)), the other is by a careful choice of the maturity structure when only
real non-contingent debt is available (e.g., Angeletos (2002)). The latter suggests that the
composition of the government’s debt portfolio plays an important role in the degree of
financing through the debt valuation channel.20 In this section, we take a closer look at
the composition of government debt and identify the maturities that are more effective in
delivering fiscal insurance. We begin by showing some summary statistics. Table 5 displays
the average quarterly real holding return and its standard deviation for bonds of different
maturities.


                                          [Table 5 about here.]
  19
      The sum of β1r /µdef
                         g   and β1ns /µdef
                                        g   can differ from one since Equation (10) is an approximation derived
from the intertemporal budget constraint, and hence need not hold with equality. We do not impose any
restrictions on the size of the betas, nevertheless our empirical estimates show that their sum is reasonably
close to one.
   20
      Inflation is included in our state space for the benchmark VAR. Therefore, our fiscal insurance estimates
represent adjustments to real returns after controlling for inflation.



                                                      21
   Table 5 shows that real holding returns on long-term debt are significantly more volatile
than returns on short-term debt. The higher volatility of returns to long-term debt has led
to arguments for shortening the maturity structure, both in the normative tax literature and
in other related work. Campbell (1995) argues that a cost-minimizing government should
respond to a steeply sloped nominal yield curve by shortening the maturity structure since
high yield spreads tend to predict high expected bond returns in the future. Barro (1997)
emphasizes tax smoothing considerations. He argues that governments can reduce their risk
exposure and better smooth taxes by shortening the maturity structure when the inflation
process becomes more volatile and persistent.
   While our framework is not designed to provide a policy recommendation on the matu-
rity structure of government debt, it can be used to uncover some stylized facts about the
relationship between debt maturity and fiscal insurance. In particular, it allows us to quan-
titatively assess the effectiveness of different maturities of debt in financing fiscal shocks.
We proceed by modifying our benchmark VAR to include the real holding returns on zero-
coupon bonds of k-year maturity, rtk for each k ∈ {1, 5, 10, 15, 20}, in addition to all the
variables in the benchmark VAR. The new VAR is:


                        k
                       zt+1 = Ak ztk + εkt+1 ,        for k = 1, 5, 10, 15, 20.           (13)


The state vector ztk now includes six variables:

                                                                    
                        ztk =        rtb πt ξtns,ndef CPt ξtg,def rtk .


   For each maturity k, we re-estimate Equation (13) and compute the news about current
and future government returns, ht+1 (rk ), by:


                               ht+1 (rk ) = e6 (I − ρAk )−1 εkt+1 .




                                                 22
As before, we then regress the news variable ht+1 (rk ) on innovations to current and future de-
fense spending growth, ht+1 (g def ), for each k. The resulting fiscal adjustment beta estimates,
β1r,k , are reported in Table 6.21


                                        [Table 6 about here.]


       The top panel shows the fiscal adjustment betas on, and the fraction of fiscal shocks
absorbed by, current and future returns on debt with maturities of 1, 5, 10, 15 and 20 years.
All of the estimated betas are significantly negative at the five percent level. The beta for
20-year debt, -0.67, is more than double of the beta for 1-year debt, -0.29. Correspondingly,
the fraction of expenditure shocks financed increases with maturity, from 7.68% for 1-year
debt to 17.69% for 20-year debt. The sizable increase in the estimated betas suggests that
long-term debt is more effective in absorbing fiscal shocks than short-term debt. However,
the decline in the associated t-statistics prevents us from rejecting the null of constant betas
across maturities.
       In earlier results (see Table 3), we document that the fiscal adjustment beta for the debt
valuation channel is more precisely estimated for future returns than for current returns.
This suggests that future returns may be more suitable for finding a significant link between
maturity of debt and absorption of fiscal risk. We therefore estimate the betas using only
innovations to future returns and report them for each maturity in the middle panel of
Table 6. All of the betas are significantly negative and, as anticipated, they are more
precisely estimated compared to the betas reported in the top panel. We can now reject
the null hypothesis of constant betas across maturities. Our results show that long-term
debt, through adjustments to future returns, is more effective in absorbing fiscal shocks than
short-term debt. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first empirical documentation of
the role of long-term debt as an effective fiscal insurance instrument for the government.22
  21
     The VAR estimates are not included for space considerations, but are available upon request.
  22
     Lustig, Sleet, and Yeltekin (2008) analyze the structure of optimal debt management in an environment
with non-contingent nominal debt of various maturities. They show that when costly contemporaneous or
expected future inflations allow the government to hedge fiscal shocks, optimal debt management calls for
issuing long-term debt only, due to its superior performance in financing expenditure shocks.


                                                   23
The relationship between debt maturity and fiscal insurance that we uncover has important
implications for modeling optimal debt management. In particular, our findings can help
mitigate concerns raised by Campbell (1995) and Barro (1997) about the costs of using
long-term debt.
      Finally, we report the fiscal adjustment betas using innovations to current returns for
each maturity in the bottom panel of Table 6. These betas are generally not significant,
with one exception: the beta for 1-year debt. It absorbs 2.01% of the total 7.68% fiscal
insurance provided by debt of 1-year maturity.

3.1    Actual maturity structure of government debt

      Table 6 shows that the fraction of fiscal adjustment provided by value weighted returns,
9.61%, falls between the fraction of fiscal risk absorbed by 1-year bonds, 7.68% and 5-year
bonds, 11.04%. This suggests that the value weighted maturity of U.S. government debt
over the sample period is between 1 and 5 years. Figure 4 displays the face value weighted
and market value weighted maturity structure of U.S. government debt between 1939.I and
2008.III. Both maturity series fluctuate substantially at low frequencies. At the end of the
WWII, the value weighted maturity was around eight years, declining to less than two years
by the mid-seventies. The face value weighted maturity shows a similar pattern, rising above
8.5 years after WWII and declining to 2.5 years in the mid-seventies. Both maturity series
start to increase again in the eighties and stay close to or above three years for the value
weighted and above four years for the face value weighted maturity until the end of the
sample. Since we use value weighted returns to quantify the debt valuation channel, we
focus on the market value weighted maturity. As anticipated, the average value of this series
for our regression sample period, between 1946.I and 2008.III, is 3.1 years. This average,
combined with the maturity by maturity fiscal insurance results in Table 6, is consistent
with our benchmark results for the debt valuation channel.


                                     [Figure 4 about here.]




                                               24
       In a related paper, Faraglia, Marcet, and Scott (2008a) investigate the role of debt man-
agement in providing insurance against budget shocks. They propose a battery of tests to
assess the quality of debt management in OECD countries for the sample period 1970 to
2000. They have two findings that are related for our results. First, the various covariance
measures used suggest that the amount of fiscal insurance achieved for the U.S. through bond
markets between 1970 and 2000 is limited, i.e. well below the complete markets model’s im-
plications of full insurance. Our findings confirm this, albeit for a longer sample period, and
with a different methodology.
       Their second result concerns the link between debt structure (maturity and indexation)
and fiscal insurance. Faraglia, Marcet, and Scott (2008a) assert that this link is weak, and
because yields show little variation, complete fiscal insurance can only be achieved through
extreme portfolio positions or alternative forms of contingent securities.23 We, on the other
hand, are able to show empirically that long-term debt is more effective at absorbing fiscal
risk than short-term debt. There are multiple differences between our approach and theirs,
contributing to the differences in the importance of maturity of debt in absorbing expenditure
risk. First, our sample period is different, as it extends back to 1946. We identify fiscal shocks
as innovations to defense spending growth, whereas Faraglia, Marcet and Scott identify them
as innovations to deficits. We quantify the amount of fiscal insurance by estimating fiscal
adjustment betas and mapping them into the fraction of fiscal risk absorbed by current and
future return variations, whereas they quantify fiscal insurance by the negative covariance
between deficit shocks and the current market value of debt. Faraglia, Marcet and Scott
approximate the market value of debt from average coupon and maturity numbers whereas
we unbundle, price and rebundle every outstanding bond to construct this value, preserving
not only the volatility of the market value of debt, but more importantly the volatility
of holding returns at each maturity. We do not, however, explore the maturity structure
  23
    In a second paper, Faraglia, Marcet, and Scott (2008b) provide numerical examples of such portfolios (see
also Buera and Nicolini (2004)). They argue that the volatile, extreme positions needed to replicate complete
markets allocations in an environment with non-contingent debt of various maturities are compelling reasons
to abandon the complete markets approach to debt management. The authors advocate using incomplete
markets models to study optimal debt management.



                                                     25
necessary to replicate full fiscal insurance, as this is not our focus.


4.      Defense Shocks and Defense Stocks

       For our measures of the debt valuation and surplus channels to be precise, it is important
that we estimate innovations to defense spending growth well. These innovations represent
any changes to the information set expectations are conditioned on. These changes stem
from previously expected but eventually unrealized movements in defense spending growth,
and/or from previously unanticipated yet realized movements in defense spending growth.
Two factors potentially complicate the extraction of such forecasts from macroeconomic data.
First, agents may learn about political and/or military events driving future defense spending
growth in advance of this growth occurring or affecting other aggregate variables. Second,
macroeconomic data may dilute the new information on defense spending growth during
aggregation. Thus, VARs relying exclusively on such aggregate data may fail to identify the
true date of the shock.24 We propose a novel VAR specification that addresses these issues.
More specifically, we augment our benchmark VAR specification with information embedded
in the stock returns of companies in the defense industry. Our logic is straightforward. In so
far as defense companies’ profits and dividends are tied to defense spending, defense stock
return variables should immediately capture any new information about defense spending
growth. If our intuition is correct, then defense stock returns will help identify fiscal shocks
more precisely.

4.1     Defense stocks: Excess returns

       First, we consider augmenting the benchmark VAR with excess returns on defense stocks,
rtdef , relative to the market return, rtm , and their price to dividend ratios as additional
forecasting variables. Defense stocks are identified as firms with SIC codes between 3760-
3769 (Guided missiles and space vehicles), 3795-3795 (Tanks and tank components) and
3480-3489 (Ordnance & accessories). This is identical to the Fama-French definition of the
  24
   See Ramey (2009) for a discussion of the causes and implications of mis-timing shocks when using the
VAR approach.


                                                  26
“Guns” industry in their 49 industry portfolios.25 We use CRSP cum-dividend returns for all
defense stocks to compute quarterly value weighted portfolio returns for the defense industry.
In addition, we also compute price dividend ratios at the portfolio level, using CRSP data on
dividend cash amount (data item DIVAMT). The market return is measured as the return
on the value weighted CRSP market portfolio. The inclusion of these additional variables is
motivated by the Campbell and Shiller (1988) expression for the dividend to price ratio:

                                                    ∞
                                                    X
                                                              s
                                                          ρj rt+j
                                                                         
                                     dt − pt = Et                 − ∆dt+j ,
                                                    j=1


where d is the log dividend, p is the log price, rs is the holding return and ∆d is the dividend
growth rate of a stock. All variables are in real terms. Campbell and Shiller argue that a
high log dividend to price ratio implies high expected future holding returns or low expected
future dividend growth. For our case, this means that excess returns and dividend to price
ratios on defense stocks may contain information about current and future dividend growth
in the defense industry and hence information on current and future defense spending growth.
A preliminary analysis of the VAR augmented with these two variables revealed that the
dividend to price ratio did not contribute to or alter any of our results. Therefore we omit
it from our subsequent estimations and report results from the VAR augmented only with
excess returns on defense stocks. The state space for the augmented VAR is:

                                                                        
                                                             def
                               zt = rtb πt ξtns,ndef CPt ξtg     rtdef −m ,                 (14)


where rdef −m = rtdef − rtm .
       Table 7 reports the estimation results using the VAR specification (14). Our results indi-
cate that the excess returns on defense stocks help predict future defense spending growth;
the coefficient of excess returns in the defense spending equation is positive and significant.
This provides empirical evidence that defense stock returns do indeed contain new infor-
mation about future defense spending growth. The variation in defense spending growth
  25
       For details, see Kenneth French’s online data library.


                                                          27
is explained better compared to our benchmark VAR: the R2 improves to 13.5%. Addi-
tionally, (14) proves to be a slightly better specification for explaining the variation in real
holding returns on government debt—the R2 moves up to 14.2%.


                                       [Table 7 about here.]


      Table 8 reports the fiscal adjustment betas and the fraction of fiscal risk absorbed through
the debt valuation and the surplus channels, using the innovations estimated by our aug-
mented model. All of the estimated beta coefficients are significant at the five percent level
and quantitatively very close to our estimates from the benchmark model. The debt valu-
ation beta is -0.36, implying that a one percent increase in innovations to defense spending
growth leads to a 36 basis points decrease in innovations to returns and hence to 9.54% of
fiscal shocks absorbed through the debt valuation channel. Of that, only 1.84 percentage
points are financed by a drop in current bond returns and the remaining 7.70 percentage
points by a decline in future bond returns. The surplus beta is 2.81. It implies that 73.68%
of the fiscal risk were absorbed by the surplus channel in the postwar years.


                                       [Table 8 about here.]


4.2     Defense stocks: Abnormal returns

      The excess returns used in the VAR specification (14), rtdef −m , measure movements in
defense returns in excess of overall market returns. They may, however, still be correlated
with the market return or other systematic risk factors that affect stock returns. We explore
the extent to which the industry-specific component of defense stock returns helps predict
defense spending growth. Therefore, we replace rtdef −m with abnormal returns that control
for the known systematic stock market factors.
      We construct abnormal returns on defense stocks by regressing the difference between
the returns, rtdef , and the three-month riskfree rate, rtRF , on the following four factors: the
excess return on the market portfolio, MKT, the Fama and French (1993) size and book-to-
market factors, SMB and HML, and the Jegadeesh and Titman (1993) momentum factor,

                                                 28
UMD. Specifically, we estimate abnormal returns on defense stocks using rolling regressions
on moving windows of three years. That is, at time t we only use information from the last
three years, and hence exclude observations that are not in the agent’s information set.26
Our model for the returns on the defense industry is:


                  rtdef − rtRF = α + βM KT MKTt + βSM B SMBt + βHM L HMLt

                                      + βU M D UMDt + εdef
                                                       t .                                            (15)


The model is estimated using quarterly data. We refer to the residuals in regression (15) as
the abnormal defense stock returns, and denote them by rtdef,abn . The new state space for
the VAR is:
                                                                     
                           zt = rtb πt ξtns,ndef CPt ξtg,def rtdef,abn .                              (16)

       Table 9 reports our estimation results using the alternative augmented VAR specification
(16). The variation in defense spending growth explained moves up from our benchmark
estimate of 12.6% to 15.4%. A one standard deviation increase in abnormal returns increases
future defense spending growth by 0.88%, while a one standard deviation increase in excess
returns results in a smaller increase of 0.49%. This is computed from multiplying the sample
standard deviations for abnormal returns (5.15%) and excess returns (8.84%) with their
respective coefficient estimates. In Table 9, the coefficient associated with abnormal returns
in the defense spending equation is positive and significant at the ten percent level. We
interpret it as providing additional empirical evidence that defense stock returns do indeed
contain new information about future defense spending growth. Once again, the augmented
model proves to be a slightly better specification for explaining the variation in real holding
returns on government debt—the R2 is 14.2%. Table 10 shows that the fraction of fiscal risk
absorbed through the debt valuation and the surplus channels remain virtually unchanged
at 9.40% and 72.15%, respectively.
  26
     As an alternative, one could use all prior information to estimate abnormal returns as of time t, but
this would imply putting less and less weight on recent observations. A moving window of fixed size assigns
equal weight to the last three years.


                                                    29
                                    [Table 9 about here.]


                                    [Table 10 about here.]


     We have verified the robustness of our earlier results about the links between debt ma-
turity and fiscal insurance. We re-estimated the augmented VAR specification (14) after
adding the real holding returns on 1-year, 5-year, 10-year, 15-year or 20-year zero-coupon
bonds. The fiscal adjustment beta for the debt valuation channel more than doubles from
-0.29 at the 1-year maturity to -0.66 at the 20-year maturity. This translates into 7.62%
and 17.43% fiscal risk absorbed by 1-year debt and 20-year debt respectively. We have also
estimated the betas using only innovations to future returns and have confirmed that long-
term debt, mainly through adjustments to future returns, provides significantly better fiscal
insurance relative to short-term debt.


5.    Conclusion

     The U.S. government’s finances, especially in times of high spending such as wars, have
been and continue to be a topic of importance for researchers, policymakers and the tax-
paying public. There is, however, limited empirical work on quantifying the adjustment
channels that help stabilize the government’s fiscal balances following expenditure shocks.
Our main contribution is to develop a novel framework that links innovations to government
spending to innovations to debt returns and innovations to surpluses, and provides a direct
measure of fiscal insurance. This framework does not rely on any particular fiscal model,
nor does it require taking a stance on asset market completeness or government preferences.
We make use of the government’s intertemporal budget constraint only, a common feature
of all dynamic fiscal models. We show that our log-linearized version of the government’s
intertemporal budget constraint implies the following. Surprise spending needs must be
financed either through surprise increases in primary surpluses or through a surprise decline
in the market value of government debt. We use unstructured VARs to obtain empirical
estimates of fiscal shocks, innovations to primary surpluses and innovations to holding returns

                                              30
on government debt. We then use these estimates to quantify the response of primary
surpluses and debt returns to fiscal shocks. Our estimates show that in the postwar era,
the U.S. government has financed more than 73% of its surprise spending needs by running
primary surpluses and over 9% of its surprise spending needs by delivering real capital losses
to bond holders. The latter result indicates that the U.S. government was able to achieve a
limited, but non-negligible degree of fiscal insurance through bond markets.
   Our second contribution concerns the link between debt maturity and the degree of fiscal
insurance. We provide empirical evidence that long-term debt, mainly through adjustment
to future returns, is a better instrument for absorbing fiscal risk compared to short-term
debt. We show that the fraction of fiscal risk absorbed by debt of 1-year maturity is al-
most 8%, whereas this fraction is more than double of that amount at about 18% for debt
of 20-year maturity. These results have important implications for models concerning ac-
tive management of government debt. Specifically, the effectiveness of long-term debt in
absorbing fiscal shocks may help mitigate concerns about the costs of using such debt.
   Our third contribution is a novel VAR specification that estimates fiscal shocks more
precisely and helps resolve the “timing” issue associated with using only aggregate data to
identify these shocks. In this novel specification, we include returns on defense stocks as
an additional explanatory variable. Defense stock returns respond contemporaneously to
news about defense spending growth and hence predict future defense spending growth. Our
approach has already been adopted by Fisher and Peters (2009), who use similar defense stock
variables in their VAR to identify government spending shocks and estimate the response
of consumption, real wages, hours and other real macroeconomic variables to such shocks.
Our emphasis is on fiscal adjustment channels. The augmented VAR specification confirms
our earlier results: the U.S. government has made some use of bond markets to finance its
surprise spending needs in the postwar era. More than 9% of fiscal shocks were absorbed by
a drop in current and future returns.




                                             31
References

Aiyagari, R., A. Marcet, T. Sargent, and J. Seppala, 2002, “Optimal taxation without state
  contingent debt,” Journal of Political Economy, 110, 1220–1254.
Akaike, H., 1974, “A new look at the statistical model identification,” IEEE Transactions
  on Automatic Control, 19, 716–723.
Angeletos, G., 2002, “Fiscal policy with non-contingent debt and the optimal maturity
 structure,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117, 1105–1131.
Barro, R., 1979, “On the determination of the public debt,” Journal of Political Economy,
  87, 940–971.
          , 1997, “Optimal management of indexed and nominal debt,” NBER working paper
  6197.
Bizer, D., and S. Durlauf, 1990, “Testing a positive theory of government finance,” Journal
  of Monetary Economics, 26, 123–141.
Bohn, H., 1988, “Why do we have nominal debt?,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 21,
  127–140.
       , 1998, “The behavior of public debt and deficits,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  113, 949–963.
Buera, F., and J. Nicolini, 2004, “Optimal maturity of government debt without state con-
  tingent bonds,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 51, 531–554.
Campbell, J., 1993, “Asset pricing without consumption data,” American Economic Review,
  83, 487–512.
       , 1995, “Some lessons from the yield curve,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 9,
  129–152.
Campbell, J., and R. Shiller, 1988, “The dividend price ratio and expectations of future
  dividends and discount factors,” Review of Financial Studies, 1, 195–227.
Chung, H., and E. Leeper, 2009, “What has financed government debt?,” NBER working
  paper 13425.
Cochrane, J., and M. Piazzesi, 2005, “Bond risk premia,” American Economic Review, 95,
  138–160.
Correia, I., J. Nicolini, and P. Teles, 2008, “Optimal fiscal and monetary policy: Equivalence
  results,” Journal of Political Economy, 116, 141–170.
Fama, E., and K. French, 1993, “Common risk factors in the returns on stock and bonds,”
  Journal of Financial Economics, 33, 3–56.
Faraglia, E., A. Marcet, and A. Scott, 2008a, “Fiscal insurance and debt management in
  OECD economies,” Economic Journal, 118, 363–386.


                                             32
       , 2008b, “In search of a theory of debt management,” UFAE and IAE working papers
  743.08.
Fisher, J., and R. Peters, 2009, “Using stock returns to identify government spending
  shocks,” Working paper, Chicago Federal Reserve Bank.
Giannitsarou, C., and A. Scott, 2006, “Inflation implications of rising government debt,” in
  NBER International Seminar on Macroeconomics, ed. by L. Reichlin, and K. West, pp.
  393–442, Cambridge, MA. MIT Press.
Gourinchas, P., and H. Rey, 2007, “International financial adjustment,” Journal of Political
 Economy, 115, 665–703.
Hall, G., and T. Sargent, 1997, “Accounting for the Federal government’s cost of funds,”
  Economic Perspectives, 21, 18–28.
Hess, G., 1993, “A test of the theory of optimal taxes for the United States 1869-1989,”
  Review of Economics and Statistics, 75, 712–716.
Hodrick, R., and E. Prescott, 1997, “Post-war U.S. business cycles: An empirical investiga-
 tion,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 29, 1–16.
Jegadeesh, N., and S. Titman, 1993, “Returns to buying winners and selling losers: Impli-
  cations for stock market efficiency,” Journal of Finance, 48, 65–91.
Lustig, H., C. Sleet, and S. Yeltekin, 2008, “Fiscal hedging with nominal assets,” Journal of
  Monetary Economics, 55, 710–727.
Marcet, A., and A. Scott, 2009, “Debt and deficit fluctuations and the structure of bond
 markets,” Journal of Economic Theory, 144, 473–501.
Nelson, R., and F. Siegel, 1987, “Parsimonious modeling of yield curves,” Journal of Busi-
  ness, 60, 473–489.
Ramey, V., 2009, “Identifying government spending shocks: It’s all in the timing,” NBER
  working paper 15464.
Sahasakul, C., 1986, “The U.S. evidence on optimal taxes over time,” Journal of Monetary
  Economics, 18, 251–275.
Said, E., and D. Dickey, 1984, “Testing for unit roots in autoregressive moving average
  models of unknown order,” Biometrika, 71, 599–607.
Schwarz, G., 1978, “Estimating the dimension of a model,” Annals of Statistics, 6, 461–464.
Scott, A., 2007, “Optimal taxation and OECD labor taxes,” Journal of Monetary Economics,
  54, 925–944.
Sleet, C., 2004, “Optimal taxation with private government information,” Review of Eco-
  nomic Studies, 71, 1217–1239.




                                             33
A.    Log-linearization of the Government Budget Constraint

     We start with the dynamic budget constraint of the government. All variables are ex-
pressed in real terms. Let Bt denotes the time-t real market value of government debt
outstanding at the beginning of the period. The government budget constraint is given by:


                                           b
                                   Bt+1 = Rt+1 (Bt − St ) ,


       b
where Rt+1 is the gross real return on government debt between t and t+1. The government’s
real primary surplus, St = Tt − Gt , is computed as the difference between receipts Tt and
expenditures Gt . Tt also includes seignorage revenue. The growth rate of government debt
can be stated simply as the gross return times one minus the primary surplus to debt ratio:

                                                     
                                   Bt+1    b       St
                                        = Rt+1 1 −      .                                 (A.1)
                                    Bt             Bt

We assume that Bt > 0 and Bt > St , for all t. Additionally, we assume that the log receipts
to debt ratio, log(Tt /Bt ), and the log spending to debt ratio, log(Gt /Bt ), are stationary
around their respective average values τ b and gb, and that exp(τ b) − exp(gb) is between 0
and 1. Using lower case letters to denote logs, Equation (A.1) may be rewritten as:

                         
                          rb + log(1 − exp(st − bt )),       if St > 0
                            t+1
               ∆bt+1   =
                          rb + log(1 + exp(d − b )),         if Dt = −St > 0,
                             t+1               t   t



where we distinguish between the case in which the government is running surpluses and
the case in which it is running deficits. If the government only ran surpluses, then we could
expand the right-hand side of the log budget constraint as a function of st − bt around
sb = log SB:

                                                            exp(sb)                 
          log(1 − exp(st − bt )) ≈ log(1 − exp(sb)) −                 (st − bt ) − sb .
                                                          1 − exp(sb)

     Since governments do run deficits, an alternative expansion is required. We rewrite

                                             34
log(1 − St /Bt ) as log(1 − exp(τt − bt ) + exp(gt − bt )) and expand around (τ b, gb). We obtain:

                     
                   St
           log 1 −      ≈ log(1 − exp(τ b) + exp(gb))
                   Bt
                                                                              !
                                   µsb µτ b τt − bt − τ b − µgb gt − bt − gb
                               −
                                 1 − µsb                  µsb
                                                                           
                                  µsb        µτ b             µgb
                           = K−                     τt −             gt − bt ,                           (A.2)
                                1 − µsb µτ b − µgb        µτ b − µgb

where K absorbs unimportant constants. The weights are defined as µsb = µτ b − µgb , with
µτ b = exp(τ b) and µgb = exp(gb).
   The approximation in (A.2) implies the following law of motion for debt:

                                                      
                                          b          1
                            ∆bt+1 =      rt+1   + 1−     (nst − bt ),
                                                     ρ

where ρ = 1 − µsb . Rearranging terms produces:


                                   b
                      nst − bt = ρrt+1 − ρ∆nst+1 + ρ (nst+1 − bt+1 ) .


This is a first-order difference equation that can be solved by repeated substitution for the
weighted log surplus to debt ratio. Taking conditional expectations and imposing the tail
condition limj→∞ Et ρj (nst+j − bt+j ) = 0, we obtain:

                                                ∞
                                                X
                                                      ρj rt+j
                                                          b
                                                                      
                            nst − bt = Et                     − ∆nst+j .                                 (A.3)
                                                j=1


   Equation (A.3) implies:

                                                        ∞
                                                        X                                   ∞
                                                                                            X
nst+1 − bt+1 − Et (nst+1 − bt+1 ) = (Et+1 − Et )               ρj rt+j+1
                                                                   b
                                                                           − (Et+1 − Et )         ρj ∆nst+j+1 .
                                                         j=1                                j=1




                                                  35
              b         b
Substituting rt+1 − Et rt+1 for bt+1 − Et bt+1 yields:

                                            ∞
                                            X                                 ∞
                                                                              X
         nst+1 − Et nst+1 = (Et+1 − Et )           ρj rt+j+1
                                                       b
                                                             − (Et+1 − Et )         ρj ∆nst+j+1 .
                                             j=0                              j=1


B.    Fiscal Data

     The source for most of our fiscal budget data is NIPA Table 3.2, Government Current
Receipts and Expenditures, seasonally adjusted and measured in billions of dollars. Govern-
ment expenditures G include current expenditures (Line 41), gross government investment
(Line 42), and capital transfer payments (Line 43). We subtract consumption of fixed capi-
tal (Line 45) and debt interest payments (Line 29) from current expenditures. We separate
total government expenditure into two components: defense spending, Gdef and non-defense
spending, Gndef . National defense spending data are from NIPA Table 3.9.5., Line 11 (na-
tional defense expenditures). They are seasonally adjusted and measured in billions of dol-
lars. We adjust Gdef by subtracting the proportion of consumption of fixed capital that’s
attributable to defense spending (as a percentage of total spending). We compute Gndef by
subtracting Gdef from total expenditures G.
     We calculate government receipts, T , by taking total receipts (Line 37 of NIPA Table 3.2),
which includes current tax receipts, contributions for social insurance, income receipts on
other assets and current transfer receipts, and adding on seignorage revenue. We compute
                                    Mt −Mt−1
seignorage revenue at time t as      CP It
                                             ,   where Mt is the monetary base at time t and
CP It is the price level defined by the consumer price index at t. Therefore real seignorage
revenue includes the “inflation tax”, the resources generated from adjusting the real value
of the existing monetary base, and the real value of revenues from a change in the monetary
base. The monetary base data are the St. Louis Adjusted Monetary Base (AMBSL) series,
seasonally adjusted and measured in billions of dollars.




                                                   36
                                  Table 1: Benchmark VAR Estimates
This table reports the results of the benchmark VAR estimation. The benchmark VAR includes
five variables, one lag and uses quarterly data. T-statistics for the GMM estimates are reported in
parentheses. We use the Newey-West variance-covariance matrix with four lags as the weighting
matrix. The last column reports the R-squared. The sample period is 1946.I-2008.III.

                         b                      ns,ndef                  g,def
                        rt−1         πt−1      ξt−1         CPt−1       ξt−1        R2
          rtb          -0.0999      -0.3784     -0.0019     1.9802      -0.0051 0.1353
                      (-0.9935)    (-2.1090)   (-0.7394)   (4.5360)    (-0.2569)
          πt           0.0220        0.5195     0.0019      -0.1504     -0.0031    0.2541
                      (0.6618)      (6.1524)   (1.2353)    (-0.8226)   (-0.2749)
          ξtns,ndef    0.0557        4.1801     0.0848      -8.3343     -0.3712    0.0196
                      (0.0261)      (0.7321)   (0.5727)    (-0.6256)   (-0.6302)
          CPt          0.0073        0.0221     -0.0002      0.9154     0.0002     0.8763
                      (0.8683)      (2.0545)   (-1.3978)   (33.4974)   (0.2663)
          ξtg,def      -0.0276       0.8138     0.0061      -2.7649     0.0873     0.1260
                      (-0.1906)     (1.6801)   (0.5760)    (-1.5209)   (0.4327)




                                                  37
                           Table 2: Correlations between Innovations
This table reports the standard deviations (diagonals) and the correlations (off-diagonals) of the
news variables constructed from the benchmark VAR. The sample period is 1946.I-2008.III.

                                       ht+1 (rb )    ht+1 (g def )   ht+1 (nsndef )
                      ht+1 (rb )        0.04
                      ht+1 (g def )     -0.72            0.08
                      ht+1 (nsndef )    -0.42            0.40            0.58




                                                    38
                                  Table 3: Fiscal Adjustment Results
This table reports the results from regressing ht+1 (rb ), its components hct+1 (rb ) and hft+1 (rb ), and
ht+1 (nsndef ) on ht+1 (g def ), as described in Equations (11) and (12). The first two columns show the
intercept and the fiscal adjustment beta, with their t-statistics in parentheses. The third column
reports the R-squared, and the final column shows the fraction of expenditure shocks financed by
each channel. Innovations are computed from the benchmark VAR. The sample period is 1946.I-
2008.III.

                                        β0           β1          R2     Fraction
                       hc (rb )       0.0003      -0.0690     0.0671      0.0181
                                     (0.2179)    (-2.2625)
                       hf (rb )       0.0017      -0.2973     0.5620      0.0780
                                     (1.0098)    (-5.2064)
                       h(rb )         0.0020      -0.3663 0.5200          0.0961
                                     (0.8841)    (-4.8947)
                       h(nsndef )    -0.0001       2.7962     0.1586      0.7334
                                    (-0.0035)     (5.2112)




                                                   39
                                  Table 4: Fiscal Adjustment Betas
This table reports the results from regressing ht+1 (rb ) and ht+1 (nsndef ) on ht+1 (g def ), as described
in Equations (11) and (12). The first column shows the fiscal adjustment betas, with their t-
statistics in parentheses. The second column reports the R-squared, and the final column shows
the fraction of expenditure shocks financed by each channel. We report results for several smoothing
parameters for the HP filter. Innovations are computed from the benchmark VAR. The sample
period is 1946.I-2008.III.

                          HP cycle                β1          R2      Fraction
                          9.9-year*     β1r     -0.4297     0.4892     0.1127
                                               (-4.2723)
                                        β1ns    2.1389      0.0800     0.5610
                                               (4.9075)
                          15-year       β1r     -0.3663     0.5200     0.0961
                                               (-4.8947)
                                        β1ns    2.7962      0.1586     0.7334
                                               (5.2112)
                          20-year       β1r     -0.3111     0.5658     0.0816
                                               (-5.7880)
                                        β1ns    3.3756      0.2786     0.8854
                                               (7.3987)
                          30-year       β1r     -0.2489 0.5885         0.0653
                                               (-6.6415)
                                        β1ns    3.9009   0.4409        1.0232
                                               (12.1334)
                          50-year       β1r     -0.2204 0.5960         0.0578
                                               (-7.0654)
                                        β1ns    4.1550   0.5249        1.0898
                                               (15.9570)
*This cycle is actually 9.93 years, corresponding to a HP filter smoothing factor of 1600, the smoothing
factor used in business cycle analysis.




                                                    40
                        Table 5: Real Bond Holding Returns by Maturity
This table reports the average quarterly real holding returns (in percentage terms) on bonds of
different maturities (in years). Standard deviations are reported in parentheses. Zero-coupon yield
curves are constructed from CRSP data. The sample period is 1946.I-2008.III.

                    Maturity          1        5       10       15       20
                    Mean (%)        0.30     0.43     0.48     0.46     0.38
                    Std dev (%)    (1.52)   (3.58)   (5.74)   (9.78)   (18.05)




                                                41
                       Table 6: Fiscal Adjustment Betas for Each Maturity
The top panel of this table reports the results from regressing ht+1 (rk ) on ht+1 (g def ), maturity by
maturity (in years). The first two columns show the intercept and the beta, with their t-statistics in
parentheses. The third column reports the R-squared, whereas the final column shows the fraction
of fiscal shocks financed. The middle and bottom panel report similar results from regressing,
for each maturity, innovations to future returns and innovations to current returns on ht+1 (g def ),
respectively. Innovations are computed from the VAR in (13). The sample period is 1946.I-2008.III.

                       Maturity         β0         β1r,k           R2      Fraction
                                                             b
                                                       h(r       )
                       1             0.0016      -0.2927          0.5717   0.0768
                                    (0.9411)    (-5.6089)
                       5             0.0023      -0.4208         0.4229    0.1104
                                    (0.7721)    (-4.4156)
                       10            0.0029      -0.4872         0.2919    0.1278
                                    (0.6851)    (-3.4240)
                       15            0.0034      -0.5599         0.1822    0.1469
                                    (0.5173)    (-2.6632)
                       20            0.0036      -0.6745         0.0974    0.1769
                                    (0.3238)    (-2.0437)
                                                      hf (rb )
                       1             0.0012      -0.2163 0.5731            0.0567
                                    (1.0098)    (-5.2890)
                       5             0.0021      -0.3479 0.5751            0.0913
                                    (1.0050)    (-5.7485)
                       10            0.0029      -0.4770 0.5290            0.1251
                                    (0.9959)    (-5.1699)
                       15            0.0033      -0.5540 0.5244            0.1453
                                    (0.9916)    (-5.4019)
                       20            0.0030      -0.5038 0.5018            0.1321
                                    (0.9661)    (-5.8498)
                                                      hc (rb )
                       1             0.0003      -0.0764 0.2047            0.0201
                                    (0.3850)    (-4.3061)
                       5             0.0003      -0.0729 0.0314            0.0191
                                    (0.1347)    (-1.3395)
                       10            0.0001      -0.0102 0.0002            0.0027
                                    (0.0203)    (-0.1178)
                       15            0.0000      -0.0059 0.0000            0.0016
                                    (0.0066)    (-0.0388)
                       20            0.0006      -0.1707 0.0063            0.0448
                                    (0.0565)    (-0.5809)
                                                  42
                Table 7: Augmented VAR Estimates: Excess Returns on Defense Stocks
This table reports the results of the augmented VAR estimation. The augmented VAR includes the
five variables from the benchmark VAR plus the excess returns on the Fama and French “Guns”
portfolio, rdef −m . It has one lag and uses quarterly data. T-statistics for the GMM estimates are
reported in parentheses. We use the Newey-West variance-covariance matrix with four lags as the
weighting matrix. The last column reports the R-squared. The sample period is 1946.I-2008.III.

                     b                    ns,ndef                      g,def       def −m
                    rt−1       πt−1      ξt−1             CPt−1       ξt−1        rt−1        R2
    rtb           -0.1100     -0.3874     -0.0018         1.9822      -0.0039     0.0213     0.1416
                 (-1.1188)   (-2.1251)   (-0.7148)       (4.4558)    (-0.1893)   (1.3103)
    πt             0.0248     0.5220      0.0019          -0.1509     -0.0035     -0.0060    0.2563
                  (0.7289)   (6.0505)    (1.1931)        (-0.8042)   (-0.3017)   (-0.6843)
    ξtns,ndef     -0.1391     4.0050      0.0855          -8.2952     -0.3476     0.4101     0.0249
                 (-0.0656)   (0.6784)    (0.5684)        (-0.6141)   (-0.5756)   (1.1291)
    CPt            0.0072     0.0220      -0.0002          0.9154     0.0002      0.0002     0.8763
                  (0.8425)   (1.9985)    (-1.3566)       (32.6842)   (0.2749)    (0.2376)
    ξtg,def       -0.0541     0.7900      0.0062          -2.7595     0.0905      0.0558     0.1348
                 (-0.3655)   (1.6001)    (0.5830)        (-1.4908)   (0.4399)    (2.0732)
    rtdef −m      -0.2368     -0.5145     -0.0003         2.0267      0.1312      0.0565     0.0266
                 (-0.6912)   (-0.7083)   (-0.0220)       (1.4655)    (2.6914)    (0.7673)




                                                    43
              Table 8: Fiscal Adjustment Results: Excess Returns on Defense Stocks
This table reports the results from regressing ht+1 (rb ), its components hct+1 (rb ) and hft+1 (rb ), and
ht+1 (nsndef ) on ht+1 (g def ), as described in Equations (11) and (12). The first two columns show the
intercept and the fiscal adjustment beta, with their t-statistics in parentheses. The third column
reports the R-squared, and the final column shows the fraction of expenditure shocks financed by
each channel. Innovations are computed from the augmented VAR in Table 7. The sample period
is 1946.I-2008.III.

                                        β0           β1         R2      Fraction
                       hc (rb )       0.0003      -0.0702 0.0704         0.0184
                                     (0.2351)    (-2.3066)
                       hf (rb )       0.0018      -0.2934 0.5480         0.0770
                                     (1.0169)    (-5.1858)
                       h(rb )         0.0021      -0.3636 0.5158         0.0954
                                     (0.9090)    (-4.9286)
                       h(nsndef )     0.0002      2.8089      0.1604     0.7368
                                     (0.0046)    (5.3221)




                                                   44
              Table 9: Augmented VAR Estimates: Abnormal Returns on Defense Stocks
This table reports the results of the augmented VAR estimation. The augmented VAR includes the
five variables from the benchmark VAR plus the abnormal returns on the Fama and French “Guns”
portfolio, rdef,abn . It has one lag and uses quarterly data. T-statistics for the GMM estimates are
reported in parentheses. We use the Newey-West variance-covariance matrix with four lags as the
weighting matrix. The last column reports the R-squared. The sample period is 1946.I-2008.III.

                    b                     ns,ndef                      g,def       def,abn
                   rt−1        πt−1      ξt−1             CPt−1       ξt−1        rt−1        R2
    rtb           -0.0963     -0.3604     -0.0014         1.9695      -0.0064     0.0380     0.1421
                 (-0.9465)   (-1.9834)   (-0.5538)       (4.3969)    (-0.3057)   (1.2780)
    πt            0.0210      0.5143      0.0018          -0.1473     -0.0027     -0.0110    0.2566
                 (0.6055)    (6.0028)    (1.1241)        (-0.7954)   (-0.2350)   (-0.6824)
    ξtns,ndef     0.0487      4.1453      0.0839          -8.3137     -0.3686     -0.0737    0.0197
                 (0.0221)    (0.7249)    (0.5356)        (-0.6048)   (-0.6021)   (-0.1027)
    CPt           0.0073      0.0222      -0.0002          0.9153     0.0002      0.0003     0.8763
                 (0.8498)    (1.9988)    (-1.3200)       (32.4777)   (0.2428)    (0.1768)
    ξtg,def       -0.0114     0.8944      0.0081          -2.8125     0.0815      0.1706     0.1540
                 (-0.0801)   (1.8818)    (0.8119)        (-1.5296)   (0.4100)    (1.9671)
    rtdef,abn     -0.2935     -0.1915     0.0004          1.0532      0.1178      0.0288     0.0580
                 (-1.8407)   (-0.4259)   (0.0554)        (1.2770)    (4.1135)    (0.3958)




                                                    45
         Table 10: Fiscal Adjustment Results: Abnormal Returns on Defense Stocks
This table reports the results from regressing ht+1 (rb ), its components hct+1 (rb ) and hft+1 (rb ), and
ht+1 (nsndef ) on ht+1 (g def ), as described in Equations (11) and (12). The first two columns show the
intercept and the fiscal adjustment beta, with their t-statistics in parentheses. The third column
reports the R-squared, and the final column shows the fraction of expenditure shocks financed by
each channel. Innovations are computed from the augmented VAR in Table 9. The sample period
is 1946.I-2008.III.

                                        β0           β1          R2     Fraction
                       hc (rb )       0.0003      -0.0736     0.0793      0.0193
                                     (0.2390)    (-2.4640)
                       hf (rb )       0.0017      -0.2846     0.5329      0.0746
                                     (0.9969)    (-5.1066)
                       h(rb )         0.0020      -0.3582 0.5205          0.0940
                                     (0.9077)    (-4.9918)
                       h(nsndef )    -0.0003       2.7509     0.1588      0.7215
                                    (-0.0079)     (5.6460)




                                                   46
Figure 1: Government Receipts and Spending. This plot shows the logarithm of the receipts
to debt ratio, log(Tt /Bt ), and the logarithm of the spending to debt ratio, log(Gt /Bt ). The sample
period is 1946.I-2008.III.


                                                                             log(T/B)
              −1                                                             log(G/B)



            −1.5



              −2



            −2.5



              −3



            −3.5
                   1950       1960       1970         1980     1990       2000




                                                 47
Figure 2: Real Holding Returns on Government Debt. This plot shows the time series of
value weighted real holding returns on the government debt portfolio, rtb . The sample period is
1946.I-2008.III.

                     8

                     6

                     4

                     2

                     0
         percent




                   −2

                   −4

                   −6

                   −8

                   −10

                         1950   1960   1970        1980    1990       2000




                                              48
Figure 3: Real Defense Spending. This plot shows the time series of real defense spending from
1939 to 2008, as well as the Ramey (2009) defense shock dates (vertical lines).


              5

             4.5

              4

             3.5

              3

             2.5

              2

             1.5

              1

             0.5

              1940      1950      1960      1970      1980      1990      2000




                                                49
Figure 4: Maturity Structure of Publicly Held Debt. This plot shows the face value weighted
and market value weighted maturity (in years) of publicly held debt between 1939.I-2008.III. The
vertical dotted line marks 1946.I, the beginning of the sample period for our empirical analysis.

                   9
                                                             Face value weighted
                                                             Market value weighted
                   8


                   7


                   6
           years




                   5


                   4


                   3


                   2


                   1940   1950    1960     1970      1980      1990      2000




                                               50
