                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        ON THE TIMING AND PRICING OF DIVIDENDS

                                        Jules H. van Binsbergen
                                          Michael W. Brandt
                                           Ralph S.J. Koijen

                                         Working Paper 16455
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w16455


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2010




We are grateful to Ravi Bansal, Robert Battalio, Alessandro Beber, John Campbell, John Cochrane,
George Constantinides, Zhi Da, Peter DeMarzo, Joost Driessen, Darrell Duffie, Pengjie Gao, John
Heaton, Xavier Gabaix, Nicolae Garleanu, Lars Hansen, Otto van Hemert, Mark Hendricks, Dirk Jenter,
Martin Lettau, Lars Lochstoer, Hanno Lustig, Pascal Maenhout, Toby Moskowitz, Christian Mueller-Glissmann,
Stefan Nagel, Stavros Panageas, Dimitris Papanikolaou, Lubos Pastor, Monika Piazzesi, Lasse Pedersen,
Francisco Perez-Gonzalez, Anamaria Pieschacon, Sergio Rebelo, Ken Singleton, Rob Stambaugh,
Sheridan Titman, Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, Adrien Verdelhan, Pietro Veronesi, Rob Vishny, Evert
Vrugt, Jessica Wachter, Jeff Wurgler, Amir Yaron, Motohiro Yogo and seminar participants APG
Investments, AQR Capital, Berkeley Haas, Boston College, Brigham Young University, CEPR Gerzensee
meetings, Chicago Booth, EFA 2010 meetings, Maastricht University, NBER Asset Pricing Meetings,
Notre Dame, SITE 2010 meetings, Stanford GSB, Tilburg University, UT Austin, and the Empirical
Asset Pricing Retreat at the University of Amsterdam for useful comments and discussions. We thank
the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP) for generous financial support. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Jules H. van Binsbergen, Michael W. Brandt, and Ralph S.J. Koijen. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
On the Timing and Pricing of Dividends
Jules H. van Binsbergen, Michael W. Brandt, and Ralph S.J. Koijen
NBER Working Paper No. 16455
October 2010
JEL No. E32,G0,G12

                                              ABSTRACT

We recover prices of dividend strips on the aggregate stock market using data from derivatives markets.
The price of a k-year dividend strip is the present value of the dividend paid in k years. The value of
the stock market is the sum of all dividend strip prices across maturities. We study the properties of
strips and find that expected returns, Sharpe ratios, and volatilities on short-term strips are higher than
on the aggregate stock market, while their CAPM betas are well below one. Short-term strip prices
are more volatile than their realizations, leading to excess volatility and return predictability.


Jules H. van Binsbergen                              Ralph S.J. Koijen
Kellogg Graduate School of Management                University of Chicago
Northwestern University                              Booth School of Business
2001 Sheridan Road                                   5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Evanston, IL 60201                                   Chicago, IL 60637
and Stanford GSB                                     and NBER
and also NBER                                        ralph.koijen@chicagobooth.edu
j-vanbinsbergen@kellogg.northwestern.edu

Michael W. Brandt
Fuqua School of Business
Duke University
Box 90120
One Towerview Drive
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
mbrandt@duke.edu
   A central question in economics is how to discount future cash flows to obtain today’s
value of an asset. For instance, total wealth is the price of a claim to all future consumption
(Lucas (1978)). Similarly, the value of the aggregate stock market equals the sum
of discounted future dividend payments (Gordon (1962)). The majority of the equity
market literature has focused on the dynamics of the value of the aggregate stock market.
However, in addition to studying the value of the sum of discounted dividends, exploring
the properties of the individual terms in the sum, also called dividend strips, provides us
with a lot of information about the way stock prices are formed. Analogously to zero-
coupon bonds, which contain information about discount rates at different horizons for
fixed income securities, having information on dividend strips informs us about discount
rates of risky cash flows at different horizons. Studying dividend strips can therefore
improve our understanding of investors’ risk preferences and the endowment or technology
process in macro-finance models. This paper is the first to empirically measure the prices
of dividend strips. Our approach only requires no-arbitrage relations and does not rely
on a specific model.
   With this approach, we shed new light on the composition of the equity risk premium.
The equity premium puzzle, identified by Mehra and Prescott (1985), Hansen and
Singleton (1982) and Hansen and Singleton (1983), states that, for plausible values of the
risk aversion coefficient, the difference of the expected rate of return on the stock market
and the riskless rate of interest is too large, given the observed small variance of the growth
rate in per capita consumption. When decomposing the index into dividend strips, a
natural question that arises is whether dividends at different horizons contribute equally
to the equity risk premium or whether either short or long-term dividends contribute
proportionally more than the other. We find that short-term dividends have a higher
risk premium than long-term dividends, whereas leading asset pricing models predict the
opposite.
   More specifically, we decompose the S&P500 index, which is a broad US equity index,
into a portfolio of short-term dividend strips, which we call the short-term asset, and a
portfolio of long-term dividend strips, which we call the long-term asset. The short-term
asset entitles the holder to the realized dividends of the index for a period of up to three
years. Our main focus is to compare the properties of the short-term asset to those of the
index, both empirically and theoretically.

   In the absence of arbitrage opportunities, there exists a stochastic discount factor Mt+1
that can be used to discount future cash flows. More formally, the value of an equity index




                                              1
St is given by the discounted value of its dividends (Dt+i )∞
                                                            i=1 :

                                              ∞
                                              X
                                       St =         Et (Mt:t+i Dt+i ) ,
                                              i=1

                 Qi
where Mt:t+i =    j=1 Mt+j       is the product of stochastic discount factors. We can decompose
the stock index as:
                          T                                        ∞
                                                                   X
                          X
                                 Et (Mt:t+i Dt+i )                         Et (Mt:t+i Dt+i )
              St =                                          +     i=T +1                       ,
                          |i=1        {z            }             |            {z         }
                      price of the short-term asset             price of the long-term asset

where the short-term asset is the price of all dividends up until time T , and the long-term
asset is the price of the remaining dividends. To compute the price of the short-term
asset, we use a newly-constructed data set on options and futures on the S&P500 index.
   We document five properties of the short-term asset in comparison with the aggregate
stock market. First, expected returns, volatilities, and Sharpe ratios on the short-term
asset are on average higher. Second, the slope coefficient (or beta) in the Capital Asset
Pricing Model (Sharpe (1964) and Lintner (1965)) of the short-term asset is 0.5. Third,
the CAPM alpha of short-term asset returns is 9% per year, which suggests that the
short-term asset has a substantially higher expected return than predicted by the CAPM.
Fourth, the prices of the short-term asset are more volatile than their realizations, pointing
to excess volatility. Fifth, the returns on the short-term asset are strongly predictable.
   Our results have several important additional implications for empirical and theoretical
asset pricing. First, since Shiller (1981) pointed out that stock prices are more volatile
than subsequent dividend realizations, the interpretation has been that discount rates
fluctuate over time and are persistent. The long duration of equity makes prices very
sensitive to small persistent movements in discount rates, thereby giving rise to excess
volatility in prices and returns. We show, however, that the same phenomenon arises for
the short-term asset. This suggests that a complete explanation of excess volatility must
be able to generate excess volatility both for the aggregate stock market and for the short-
term asset. The excess variation in prices also suggests that discount rates fluctuate, and
we should therefore find that prices, normalized by some measure of dividends, forecast
returns on the short-term asset. We show that this is indeed the case, leading to the fifth
property. Second, the first four properties we document, combined with the fact that the
CAPM alphas are virtually unaffected if we include additional well-known asset pricing
factors such as size or value, suggest that short-term assets are potentially important new

                                                        2
test assets that may be useful in cross-sectional asset pricing tests.1
   To provide a theoretical benchmark for our results, we compute dividend strips in
several leading asset pricing models. Recent consumption-based asset pricing models
have made substantial progress in explaining many asset pricing puzzles across various
markets. Even though such models are not often used to study the pricing of dividend
strips, they do have theoretical predictions about the values of these securities, which
we explore in this paper.2 We focus on the external habit formation model of Campbell
and Cochrane (1999), the long-run risks model of Bansal and Yaron (2004), and the
variable rare disasters model of Gabaix (2009), which builds upon the work of Barro
(2006) and Rietz (1988). We find that both the long-run risks model and the external
habit formation model predict that expected returns, volatilities, and Sharpe ratios of
short-term dividend strips are lower than those of the aggregate market. Further, the risk
premium on short-term dividend strips in those models are near zero. In the rare disasters
model, the volatilities and Sharpe ratios of short-term dividend strips are lower than the
aggregate market. Expected returns on the other hand are equal across all maturities of
dividend strips, and therefore also equal to those on the aggregate market. Our results
suggest that risk premia on the short-term asset are higher than predicted by leading
asset pricing models.
   Our paper relates to Lettau and Wachter (2007) and Croce, Lettau, and Ludvigson
(2009). Lettau and Wachter (2007) argue that habit formation models as in Campbell
and Cochrane (1999), generate higher expected returns for long-term dividend strips as
shocks to the discount factor are priced. Firms with long-duration cash flows have a high
exposure to such shocks and should therefore have a higher risk premium than firms with
short-duration cash flows. If one adheres to the view that value firms have short-duration
cash flows and growth firms have long-duration cash flows, this implies that there is a
growth premium, not a value premium (see also Santos and Veronesi (2006)). Lettau and
Wachter (2007) propose a reduced-form model that generates higher expected returns for
short-term dividend strips. They illustrate the correlation structure between (un)expected
cash flow shocks and shocks to the price of risk and stochastic discount factor that is
sufficient to generate a value premium in their model. Croce, Lettau, and Ludvigson
(2009) argue that the long run risk model as proposed by Bansal and Yaron (2004) also
generates higher risk premia for long-term dividend strips. However, Croce, Lettau, and
Ludvigson (2009) also show that if the agents cannot distinguish between short-term and
   1
     Lewellen, Nagel, and Shanken (2009) argue that the standard set of test assets has a strong factor
structure, and that it would be valuable to have new test assets.
   2
     Notable exceptions are Lettau and Wachter (2007) and Croce, Lettau, and Ludvigson (2009).



                                                  3
long-term shocks, risk premia on short-term dividend strips can be higher.
   Studying the properties of short-term assets is not only interesting from an academic
perspective. Recently, dividend strips, futures, and swaps have received a lot of attention
in the practitioners’ literature.3 First, several banks offer dividend swaps on a range of
stock indices. With such a contract, the dividend purchaser pays the market-implied
dividend level (the fixed leg). The counterparty, with a long position in the equity index,
pays the realized dividend level (the variable leg). Secondly, for the S&P500, Standard and
Poor’s has introduced the S&P500 Dividend Index, which is a running total of dividend
points. The index is reset to zero after the close on the third Friday of the last month of
every calendar quarter, to coincide with futures and options expirations. It measures the
total dividend points of the S&P500 index since the previous reset date and is used by
derivative traders to hedge their dividend positions. Third, from 1982 to 1992, investors
could invest in derivatives at the American Stock Exchange (AMEX) that split the total
return on individual stocks into a price appreciation part and a dividend yield part. Also
in the UK, split-capital funds offered financial instruments that separate investment in
a fund’s price appreciation and its dividend stream in the late 90s. Finally, Wilkens
and Wimschulte (2009) discuss the European market of dividend futures that started
mid-2008.


1         The market for dividends
There are two ways to trade dividends in financial markets. First, dividend strips can
be replicated using options and futures data, which is the approach we follow in this
paper. In 1990, the Chicago Board Options Exchange (CBOE) introduced Long-Term
Equity Anticipation Securities (LEAPS), which are long-term call and put options. The
owner of a call (put) option has the right to purchase (sell) the stock index at maturity
at a predetermined price X. LEAPS have maturities up to three years. The maximum
maturity of LEAPS for the sample period in our data set is displayed in Figure 1. The
set of maturities of these claims is not constant and varies depending on the issuing cycle.
On average, there are around six maturities greater than three months available at any
particular time, spaced closer together for shorter maturities, and further apart for longer
maturities.
        To compute dividend strip prices from options data, we only require the absence of
arbitrage opportunities. Under this condition, put-call parity for European options holds
    3
        See for example Brennan (1998), Manley and Mueller-Glissmann (2008) and Barclays Capital (2008).



                                                     4
(Stoll (1969)):

                           ct,T + Xe−rt,T (T −t) = pt,T + St − Pt,T ,                      (1)

where pt,T and ct,T are the prices of a European put and call option at time t, with maturity
T , and strike price X. rt,T is the interest rate between time t and T . We use the symbol
Pt,T to denote the value of the short-term asset, which we defined in the introduction as:

                                            T
                                            X
                                   Pt,T ≡         Et (Mt:t+i Dt+i ) .                      (2)
                                            i=1


We can rewrite (1) to obtain the price of the short-term asset:

                           Pt,T = pt,T − ct,T + St − Xe−rt,T (T −t) .                      (3)

This parity relation shows that purchasing the short-term asset is equivalent to buying a
put option, writing a call option, buying the stocks in the index, and borrowing cash.
      A second way to synthetically create the short-term asset is by using futures contracts.
The owner of the futures contract agrees to purchase the stock index for a predetermined
price, Ft,T , at maturity. Absence of arbitrage opportunities implies the cost-of-carry
formula for equity futures:

                                 Pt,T = St − e−rt,T (T −t) Ft,T .                          (4)

Hence, buying the short-term asset is the same as buying the stock index and selling a
position in a futures contract. In both cases, the key insight we exploit is that payoffs of
derivatives contracts are based on the ex-dividend price, which allows us to recover the
price of the short-term asset.
      In addition to computing the prices of short-term asset using equity derivatives, it is
also possible to trade dividends directly via dividend derivatives such as dividend swaps,
dividend futures, and options on dividends. Most of these transactions take place in over-
the-counter (OTC) markets, but several exchange-traded products have been introduced
recently. For instance, the CBOE introduced options on S&P500 index dividends in
May 2010. This development follows the introduction of an array of dividend derivatives
at the Eurex. In June 2008, the Eurex introduced dividend futures on the Dow Jones
EURO STOXX 50 Index,4 and in February 2010, futures are available on five different
  4
    See http://www.eurexchange.com/download/documents/publications/index dividend swaps 1 en.pdf
for more information.

                                                    5
indices.5 In addition, the Eurex now introduced dividend futures on the constituents of
the Dow Jones EURO STOXX 50 in January 2010. As measured by open interest, the
size of the market for index dividend futures is already 20% of the size of the market for
index futures, illustrating the rapid developments of dividend trading.6 The advantage of
dividend derivatives is that the maturities available are longer (up to 15 years).


2       Dividend prices in a Lucas economy
To illustrate how dividend prices can be understood in an equilibrium asset pricing model,
we compute the k-period short-term asset, which is the sum of the first k dividend
strips, in the consumption CAPM of Lucas (1978). In Section 5, we extend these
results to more recent consumption-based asset pricing models. Consumption growth,
∆ct = log Ct − log Ct−1 , is assumed to be i.i.d.:

                          ∆ct+1 = g + εt+1 , εt+1 ∼ N(0, σ 2 ),                         (5)

where g is the constant average growth rate and σ the growth rate volatility. The
representative agent has time-separable Constant Relative Risk Aversion (CRRA) utility:

                                       ∞
                                                            !
                                                 1−γ
                                              s Ct+s
                                       X
                                  Et        β                   ,                       (6)
                                        s=0
                                                1−γ

where beta is the subjective discount factor and γ is the coefficient of relative risk
aversion, which for CRRA utility is equal to the inverse of the intertemporal elasticity of
substitution. The one-period stochastic discount factor is in this case given by:
                                                       −γ
                                                 Ct+1
                                 Mt+1 = β                           ,                   (7)
                                                  Ct

and the k−period stochastic discount factor equals:
                                                           −γ
                                             k       Ct+k
                                Mt:t+k = β                              .               (8)
                                                      Ct

Assuming that the aggregate dividend equals aggregate consumption, Ct = Dt , the price
of the k−period short-term asset, which is the sum of the first k dividend strips, is given
    5
     A more detailed description can be found at:
http://www.eurexchange.com/download/documents/publications/Eurex Produkte 2010 en.pdf.
   6
     The dollar volume averages to $33.4 Billion in 2009, see:
http://www.reuters.com/article/idUSLDE60A1OO20100111.


                                                 6
by:

                             k                                        
                             X                            s
                  Pt,t+k =       exp s log β + s(1 − γ)g + (1 − γ)2 σ 2 .                          (9)
                             s=1
                                                          2


3       Data and dividend strategies
3.1     Data sources
We measure dividend prices using put-call parity in equation (1), which is a no-arbitrage
relationship. To compute dividend prices as accurately as possible, we record each of
the components in equation (1) within the same minute of the last trading day of each
month. To this end, we use data from four different sources. First, we use a new data set
provided by the CBOE containing intra-day trades and quotes on S&P500 index options
between January 1996 and October 2009. The data contains information about all option
contracts for which the S&P500 index is the underlying asset. Second, we obtain minute-
level data between January 1996 and October 2009 of the index values and futures prices
of the S&P500 index from Tick Data Inc. Third, the interest rate is calculated from a
collection of continuously-compounded zero-coupon interest rates at various maturities
and provided by IvyDB (OptionMetrics). This zero curve is derived from LIBOR rates
from the British Bankers’ Association (BBA) and settlement prices of Chicago Mercantile
Exchange (CME) Eurodollar futures.7 For a given option, the appropriate interest rate
corresponds to the zero-coupon rate that has a maturity equal to the option’s expiration
date. We obtain these by linearly interpolating between the two closest zero-coupon rates
on the zero curve.8 Fourth, to compute daily dividends, we obtain daily return data with
and without distributions (dividends) from S&P index services. Cash dividends are then
computed as the difference between these two returns, multiplied by the lagged value of
the index.


3.2     Data selection and matching
As mentioned before, our data allows us to match call and put option prices and index
values within a minute interval.9 We therefore select option quotes for puts and calls
    7
     We use data from Bloomberg to replicate the OptionMetrics yield curves and obtain very similar
results.
   8
     Alternative interpolation schemes give the same results at the reported precision.
   9
     Using closing prices from OptionMetrics for all quantities does not guarantee that the index value
and option prices are recorded at the same time and induces substantial noise in our computations,
see also Constantinides, Jackwerth, and Perrakis (2009)). For instance, the options exchange closes 15
minutes later than the equity exchange, which leads to much wider bid-ask spreads in options markets

                                                  7
between 10am and 2pm that trade within the same minute, and match these quotes with
the tick-level index data, again within the minute. Changing the time interval to either
10am to 11am or 1pm to 2pm has no effect on our results, as we demonstrate in Section 6.

    We compute dividend prices at the last trading day of the month. For a given strike
price and maturity, we collect all quotes on call option contracts and find a quote on a
put option contract, with the same strike price and maturity, that is quoted closest in
calendar time. Of the resulting matches, we keep the matches for each strike and maturity
that trade closest to each other in time. This typically results in a large set of matches for
which the quotes are recorded within the same second of the day, making the matching
procedure as precise as possible. For each of these matches, we use the put-call parity
relation to calculate the price of the dividend strip. We use mid quotes, which are the
average of the bid and the ask quotes. We then take the median across all prices for a
given maturity, resulting in the final price we use in our analysis. By taking the median
across a large set of dividend prices, we mitigate potential issues related to measurement
error or market microstructure noise.
    To illustrate the number of matches we find for quotes within the same second, Figure 2
reports the average number of quotes per maturity during the last trading day of the
month in a particular year. We focus on option contracts with a maturity between 1 and
2 years. The number of quotes increases substantially over time, presumably as a result
of the introduction of electronic trading. However, even in the first year of our sample,
we have on average nearly a thousand matches per maturity on a given trading day for
options with maturities between 1 and 2 years.


3.3     Dividend strategies
Holding a long position in the short-term asset has the potential disadvantage that a long
position in the index is required (see equations (1) and (4)). As index replication is not
costless, we also consider investing in a so-called dividend steepener. This asset entitles
the holder to the dividends paid out between period T1 and T2 , T1 < T2 . The price of the
dividend steepener is given by:

           Pt,T1 ,T2 = Pt,T2 − Pt,T1
                                                                                          
                     = pt,T2 − pt,T1 − ct,T2 + ct,T1 − X e−rt,T2 (T2 −t) − e−rt,T1 (T1 −t) .        (10)
during this period. OptionMetrics reports the last quote of the trading day, which is likely to fall in
this 15-minute interval. We reproduced our results using OptionMetrics data, and find similar results for
average returns, but the volatility of prices and returns is substantially higher.



                                                   8
This strategy can be interpreted as buying the first T2 periods of dividends and selling
the first T1 periods of dividends, which results in a long position in the dividends paid out
between periods T1 and T2 . This strategy does not involve any dividend payments until
time T1 . Replicating this asset does not require a long position in the index and simply
involves buying and writing two calls and two puts, in addition to a cash position. The
dividend steepener is also interesting to study as a macro-economic trading strategy, as it
can be used to bet on the timing of a recovery of the economy following a recession. During
severe recessions, firms slash dividends and increase them when the economy rebounds.
By choosing T1 further into the future, investors bet on a later recovery.10
  By applying the cost-of-carry formula for equity index futures to two different
maturities T1 and T2 , where T1 < T2 , the price of the dividend steepener can also be
computed as:

                          Pt,T1 ,T2 = ert,T1 (T1 −t) Ft,T1 − ert,T2 (T2 −t) Ft,T2 .

In this case, the steepener only involves two futures contracts and does not require any
trading of the constituents of the index. By no-arbitrage, the prices implied by equity
options and futures need to coincide. Since LEAPS have longer maturities than index
futures, we rely on options for most of our analysis. For the maturities for which both
futures and options data is available, we show in Section 6.2 that the prices obtained from
both markets are close, and our main findings are unaffected by using either options or
futures.
      Apart from reporting dividend prices, we also implement two simple trading strategies.
The first trading strategy goes long in the short-term asset. The monthly return series
on this strategy is given by:

                                                    Pt+1,T −1 + Dt+1
                                       R1,t+1 =                      .                          (11)
                                                           Pt,T

The monthly returns series on the second trading strategy, which is the dividend steepener,
is given by:
                                                     Pt+1,T1 −1,T2 −1
                                         R2,t+1 =                     ,                         (12)
                                                        Pt,T1 ,T2
which illustrates that this trading strategy does not return any dividend payments until
time T1 . Further details on the implementation of these strategies can be found in
Appendix A.
 10
      See also “Dividend Swaps Offer Way to Pounce on a Rebound,” Wall Street Journal, April 2009.



                                                        9
4     Main empirical results
In this section, we document the properties of the prices and returns on the short-term
asset. First, we study dividend prices in Section 4.1. In Section 4.2, we study the
properties of dividend returns. In the remaining subsections, we study excess volatility
of dividend strip prices, and the predictability of the return series that we compute.


4.1    Properties of dividend prices
Figure 3 displays the prices of the first 6, 12, 18, and 24 months of dividends during
our sample period. To obtain dividend prices at constant maturities, we interpolate
over the available maturities. For instance, in January 1996, the price of the dividends
paid out between that date and June 1997 is $20. As expected, the prices monotonically
increase with maturity. Violations of this condition would imply the existence of arbitrage
opportunities. Further, the dividend prices for all maturities, drop during the two NBER
recessions in our sample period, which occur between March and November 2001 and
between December 2007 and June 2009. This is to be expected, as during recessions
expected growth of dividends drops and discount rates on risky cash flows are likely to
increase. This effect is more pronounced for the 24-month price. The 6-month price is
less volatile.

    As dividend prices are non-stationary over time, it is perhaps more insightful to scale
dividend prices by the value of the S&P500 index. In Figure 4, we plot the prices of the
first 6, 12, 18, and 24-month dividend prices as a fraction of the index value. The ratios
are highly correlated. They drop between 1997 and 2001, and slowly increase afterwards.
When comparing Figure 4 with Figure 3, one interesting observation is that during the
recession of 2001, both the ratio and the level of dividend prices drop, whereas for the
recent recession the level of dividend prices drops, but not by as much as the index level.
This leads to an increase in the ratio. One interpretation of this finding is that the most
recent recession has a longer-lasting impact than the recession in 2001. The index level
is more sensitive to revisions in long-term cash flow (dividend) expectations and discount
rates than the short-term asset, see Shiller (1981) and Lettau and Wachter (2007). A more
severe recession can therefore lead to a decline in the index value that is proportionally
larger than the decline in the price of the short-term asset.




                                            10
4.2    Properties of dividend returns
We now report the return characteristics of the two investment strategies. Figure 5 and
Figure 6 plot the time series of monthly returns on the two trading strategies. Figure 7
and Figure 8 display the histogram of returns. The two trading strategies are highly
positively correlated, with a correlation coefficient of 92.1%. Panel A of Table 1 lists
the summary statistics alongside the same statistics for the S&P500 index for the full
sample period. Both dividend strategies have a high monthly average return equal to
1.16% (annualized 14.8%) for trading strategy 1 and 1.12% (annualized 14.3%) for trading
strategy 2 (the steepener). Over the same period, the average return on the S&P500 index
was 0.56% (annualized 6.93%). The higher average returns also come with a higher level
of volatility than the S&P500 index, with monthly return volatilities of 7.8% for strategy
1 and 9.6% for strategy 2. Over the same period the monthly volatility of the return
on the S&P500 index equals 4.7%. Despite the higher volatility, the dividend strategies
result in substantially higher Sharpe ratios, defined as the ratio of the average monthly
excess returns and the volatility of the excess returns (Sharpe (1966)). The Sharpe ratios
of the dividend strategies are about twice as high as the Sharpe ratio of the S&P500
index. Duffee (2010) shows that Sharpe ratios are lower for Treasury bonds with longer
maturities. We document a similar property in equity markets; Sharpe ratios are higher
for dividend claims with shorter maturities.
   We find that the volatility of dividend returns is lower in the second part of our sample.
To further analyze the volatility of dividend returns, we estimate a GARCH(1,1) model
(Bollerslev (1986)) for each return series and for the returns on the S&P500 index. As
the returns on the dividend strategies are predictable (see Section 4.4), we include an
AR(1)-term in the mean equation. In Figure 9, we show that the volatility of dividend
returns and the index broadly follow the same pattern. The correlation between the
volatility of the dividend returns of strategy 1 and the S&P500 index is 0.55. Table 2
reports the estimates of the GARCH(1,1)-specification, illustrating that the parameters
of the volatility equations are very similar as well.
   To further assess the difference in volatility between the early and the late part of
our sample, Table 1 also presents summary statistics for the period before January 2003
(Panel B) and for the period afterwards (Panel C). We are mostly interested in the
average return and volatility of the dividend strategies relative to the same statistics of
the S&P500 index. Consistently across both sample periods, the average return and the
volatility on the dividend strategies is higher than the average return and volatility of
the S&P500 index. The volatility of the dividend strategies is high in both sub-periods,
even though the volatilities in the more recent sample are closer to the levels of volatility

                                             11
that we record for the index. The Sharpe ratios of the dividend strategies are comparable
across subperiods, and always higher than the ones of the S&P500 index. Overall, the
conclusions we draw from the full sample are consistent with our findings in both sub-
samples.
   The high average returns on short-maturity dividend strips may be due to exposures
to systematic risk factors that are priced in financial markets. To verify whether well-
known empirical asset pricing models, such as the CAPM and the Fama and French
three-factor model (Fama and French (1993)), can explain the average returns on short-
maturity dividend strips, we regress excess returns of both strategies on (i) the excess
return on the market (mktrf) and (ii) on Fama and French’s three factors (mktrf, hml
and smb). The three Fama French factors are (i) the excess returns on the market (mktrf),
(ii) the returns on a portfolio that goes long in stocks with a high book-to-market ratio,
also called value stocks, and short in stocks with a low book-to-market ratio, also called
growth stocks (hml), and (iii) the returns on a portfolio that goes long in small stocks
and short in large stocks (smb). See Fama and French (1993) for further details.
   Table 3 presents OLS regressions of the returns of the two trading strategies in excess
of the one-month short rate on a constant and the market portfolio’s returns in excess
of the one-month short rate (the CAPM). We find that both dividend strategies have a
CAPM beta (or slope) of around 0.5. Secondly, R2 values of the regression are rather
low. The intercept (also called CAPM alpha) of the regression equals 0.73% for the first
dividend strategy and 0.69% for the second strategy (the steepener), which in annualized
terms corresponds to 9.1% and 8.6% respectively. Despite these economically significant
intercepts, the results are not statistically significant at conventional levels due to the
substantial volatility of these two return strategies and the rather short time series that
is available for dividend returns. Generally the p-values vary between 10% and 20%,
using Newey-West standard errors. When including an AR(1) term in the regression, to
account for the negative autocorrelation (predictability) in returns, the standard errors
are somewhat smaller.
   In Table 4 we repeat the analysis of Table 3, but instead of using excess returns on
the aggregate market, we use as the regressor the excess returns on the S&P500 index.
The table shows that the results are nearly identical to those of Table 3, with betas of
around 0.5 and monthly intercepts (alphas) of around 0.7%.
   Table 5 presents regression results for the three-factor model, in which we also include
the AR(1) term in the second and fourth column. The market beta, that is the slope
coefficient on mktrf, is unaffected by the additional factors and is estimated between 0.48


                                            12
and 0.60, depending on the strategy and specification. We find positive loadings on the
value factor (hml), which seems consistent with duration-based explanations of the value
premium. An important element of this theory is that the portfolio of value firms have
cash flows that are more front-loaded than the cash flows of the portfolio of growth firms.
As such, this theory suggests that the short-term asset loads more on value firms than on
growth firms, which corresponds to a positive coefficient on the book-to-market factor.
The coefficient on the size portfolio switches sign depending on the specification, and has
very low significance.

    Perhaps most interestingly, the intercepts (or alphas) are hardly affected by including
additional factors; monthly alphas are estimated between 0.53% and 0.68%. These
results suggest that the short-term asset has rather high expected returns that cannot
be explained easily by standard empirical asset pricing models. As a comparison, the
monthly value premium, which is defined as the average return on the hml factor, over
our sample equals 0.35% which corresponds to 4.3% annualized. As the alphas cannot
be explained by the Fama French model, the high expected returns that we find for our
dividend strategies are not (solely) driven by value firms or smaller firms in the S&P500
index.
   In Table 6 we repeat the analysis of Table 5, but instead of using the three Fama
and French factors (that are based on all firms in the CRSP database), we compute the
three factors (labeled sp500rf, hml-sp500 and smb-sp500) using firms in the S&P500 index
only. To construct the three S&P500 factors, we follow the same construction procedure
as Fama and French.11 The results are very comparable to the results in Table 5, with the
exception that the link between our return strategies and the value factor (hml-sp500) is
somewhat stronger and statistically significant at conventional significance levels. That
said, the value spread over the sample period that we consider (1996:1 through 2009:10)
for hml-sp500 is a mere 0.16% per month (1.9% annualized). As argued above, this
suggests that the high expected returns that we find for our dividend strategies are not
(solely) driven by value firms (or small firms) in the S&P500 index.
   The high monthly alphas compensate investors for the risk in the dividend strategies
that cannot be explained by other priced factors. Our results become even more striking,
however, if we account for the fact that dividend growth rates are, to some extent,
predictable, see for instance Lettau and Ludvigson (2005), Ang and Bekaert (2007), Chen,
Da, and Priestley (2009), and Binsbergen and Koijen (2010). To illustrate the degree of
dividend growth predictability in the S&P500 during various sample periods, we follow the
  11
     We refer to http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/Data Library/f-f factors.html
for the construction of the Fama and French factors.


                                                 13
approach developed in Binsbergen and Koijen (2010) to obtain an estimate of expected
dividend growth rates. They combine standard filtering techniques with a present-value
model as in Campbell and Shiller (1988) to forecast future returns and dividend growth
rates. The approach is summarized in Appendix B.
   The estimation results are presented in Table 7. We provide parameter estimates for
three data periods, the post-war period, starting in 1946, the period for which monthly
data on the index is available, starting in 1970, and the period for which daily data
is available, starting in 1989. Consistent with Binsbergen and Koijen (2010), we find
that both expected returns and expected dividend growth rates are predictable, with R2 -
values for returns varying between 8.5% and 14.3%, and R2 -values for dividend growth
rates varying between 26.6% and 47.3%, depending on the sample period. Further, both
expected returns and expected dividend growth rates have a persistent component, but
expected returns are more persistent than expected dividend growth rates.
       This high level of dividend growth predictability combined with the high volatility
of the returns on the short-term dividend claim seems rather puzzling. The volatility
of annual dividend growth rates is only 7%, but a substantial part of the variance can
be explained by simply predictor variables. As such, it would seem that to correctly
price claims on the S&P500 index, we need a model that generates a downward sloping
term structure of expected returns and volatilities, and which generates, or allows for,
a non-trivial degree of dividend growth predictability. Investors thus seem to require a
large compensation for the risk associated with the unpredictable part of dividend growth.
This illustrates how studying dividend strips can improve our understanding of investors’
risk preferences and the endowment or technology process in macro-economic models.


4.3       Excess volatility of short-term dividend claims
Shiller (1981) points out that prices are more volatile than subsequent dividends, which
is commonly known as “excess volatile.” One explanation has been that discount rates
fluctuate over time and are persistent. The long duration of equity makes prices very
sensitive to small movements in discount rates, thereby giving rise to excess volatility.
    Since we study short-term claims, we can directly compare prices to subsequent
realizations. Figure 10 plots the price of the next year of dividends and the realized
dividends during the next year.12 We shift the latter time series such that the price and
  12
    At the end of 2004, Microsoft paid a one-time large dividend. Even though this dividend payment
substantially increased the dividend yield on Microsoft stock, Microsoft’s weight in the S&P500 index
was (and is) less than 2%. As a consequence this dividend does not substantially affect the aggregate
dividend series.


                                                 14
subsequent realization are plotted at the same date to simplify the comparison. This
illustrates that the high volatility of dividend returns is mostly coming from variation
in dividend prices as opposed to their realizations. This points to “excess volatility”
of the short-term asset. An explanation of the excess volatility puzzle therefore ideally
accounts for both the excess volatility of the equity index as well as that of the short-term
asset. If dividend growth is i.i.d., persistent and slow-moving discount rates that produce
sufficient excess volatility of the index value, will induce much less “excess volatility” for
the short-term asset.


4.4     Predictability of dividend returns
The previous section shows that prices are more variable than subsequent realizations.
This suggests that discount rates fluctuate over time, which in turn implies that we need
to be able to uncover a predictable component in the returns on the dividend strategies
(Shiller (1981)). Some of this evidence is already present in Table 3, which shows that
dividend returns are to a certain extent mean-reverting. We extend this evidence by
regressing monthly dividend returns from trading strategy 1 on the lagged log price-
dividend ratio of the short term asset.13 We compute this price-dividend ratio, denoted
by PDt , by taking the 1.5 year dividend strip price at time t, and dividing it by the sum
of the past 12 realized dividends:

                                                     Pt,t+18
                                          PDt =       t
                                                                                                    (13)
                                                     P
                                                          Ds
                                                   s=t−11


The results are presented in the second column of Table 8. We find that PDt forecasts
dividend returns with a negative sign, and is highly significant. This suggests that when
the price of the short-term asset is high relative to the past 12 months of realized dividends,
the expected return on dividend strategy 1 is low. We use both OLS standard errors
(between parentheses) and Newey-West standard errors (between brackets) to determine
the statistical significance of the predictive coefficient. For both sets of standard errors, the
results are significant at conventional significance levels. To mitigate concerns regarding
measurement error in the predictor variable, we perform two additional regressions. First,
we use as the regressor ln(PDt−2 ), that is the log price-dividend ratio from the end of
the previous quarter, instead of the previous month. Second, we take an average over the
  13
    See, among others, Fama and French (1988), Campbell and Shiller (1988), Cochrane (1991), Cochrane
(2008), Lettau and Van Nieuwerburgh (2008), Wachter and Warusawitharana (2009), and Binsbergen and
Koijen (2010) for the predictability of returns by the price-dividend ratio or the dividend yield for the
aggregate market.


                                                   15
past three price-dividend ratios and use this predictor variable instead.14 More formally,
the smoothed price-dividend ratio, PD t , is given by:

                                           PDt + PDt−1 + PDt−2
                              ln(PDt ) =                                                        (14)
                                                   3

The results are reported in the third and fourth column of Table 8 and are comparable
to the first column: the price-dividend ratio enters with a negative sign and is significant
at conventional levels.
    To further illustrate the strength of these predictability results, we present in columns
six through eight the same regressions, but now for the S&P500 index. We regress
monthly returns on the index (including distributions) on the lagged log price-dividend
ratio, computed as the ratio of the index level at time t and the sum of the past twelve
realized dividends. Also in this case, the sign on the price-dividend ratio is negative,
implying that a high price-dividend ratio is indicative of low expected returns. However,
over this sample period, both the R-squared and the statistical significance for the index
are substantially lower than for the dividend strategy.


5     Comparison with asset pricing models
To provide a theoretical benchmark for our results, we compute dividend strips in several
leading asset pricing models in this section. Recent consumption-based asset pricing
models have made substantial progress in explaining many asset pricing puzzles across
various markets. Even though such models are not often used to study the pricing of
dividend strips, they do have theoretical predictions about their values. We consider the
Campbell and Cochrane (1999) external habit formation model, the Bansal and Yaron
(2004) long-run risk model, the Barro-Rietz rare disasters framework (Barro (2006)) as
explored by Gabaix (2009) and Wachter (2010). We focus on the calibration of Gabaix
(2009) in this case.
   The habit model and the long-run risk model imply that the risk premium and
volatility on long-term dividend claims are higher. The risk premium on the short-term
asset is virtually zero and lower than on the aggregate stock market, which is contrary to
what we measure in the data. In the rare disasters model, expected returns are constant
across maturities, but the volatilities are higher for long-term dividend claims than for
short-term claims. To generate these results, we use the original calibrations that are
  14
     See Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005) for a similar treatment of measurement error in the forecasting
variable of, in their case, bond returns.


                                                 16
successful in matching facts about the aggregate stock market. It is important to keep in
mind though that such models have a relatively simple shock structure and have not been
calibrated to match prices of dividend strips. It may be possible to consider alternative
calibrations or model extensions that do match the features of the dividend strip prices
we report.
      We also consider the model of Lettau and Wachter (2007) who exogenously specify
the joint dynamics of cash flows and the stochastic discount factor to match the value
premium. In their model, expected returns and volatilities of the short-term asset are
higher than on the aggregate stock market, and the CAPM beta of the short-term asset
is below one, resulting in a substantial CAPM alpha. These features of their model are
in line with our empirical findings.

   For all models, we describe the intuition and main results below. In Appendix C -
F, we summarize the key equations necessary to compute the returns on dividend strips
within the models.


5.1       External habit formation model
In the external habit formation model of Campbell and Cochrane (1999), the consumption
dynamics are the same as in the Lucas model of Section 2. As in the Lucas model, dividend
growth is assumed to be i.i.d., but shocks to dividend growth rates have a correlation
of 20% with shocks to consumption growth rates. Furthermore, the agent is assumed to
have external habit formation preferences. The habit level is assumed to be a slow-moving
and heteroscedastic process. The heteroscedasticity of the habit process, the sensitivity
function, is chosen so that the real interest rate in the model is constant.15 Further details
can be found in Appendix C.
  We use the same calibrated monthly parameters as in Campbell and Cochrane (1999).
We simulate from the model and compute for each dividend strip with a maturity of n
months the average annualized excess return (risk premium), the annualized volatility,
and the Sharpe ratio. The results are plotted in Figure 12 for the first 480 months (40
years). The graph shows that the term structure of expected returns and volatilities is
upward sloping and the Sharpe ratio is upward sloping as well. The early dividend strips
have a low annual average excess return equal to 1%.
      The intuition behind these results can be summarized as follows. A positive dividend
shock is likely to go together with a positive consumption shock due to the positive
 15
      Wachter (2006) considers an extension to also match the term structure of interest rates.



                                                    17
correlation between consumption and dividend growth. A positive consumption shock
moves current consumption away from the habit level, which in turn lowers the effective
risk aversion of the representative agent. The lower degree of risk aversion implies that
risk premia fall and future dividends are discounted at a lower rate. As a result, prices of
dividend strips increase. This effect is more pronounced for dividend strips with longer
maturities as they are more sensitive to discount rates. Since dividend prices are likely
to increase in case of a positive consumption shock, they earn a positive risk premium.
This effect is more pronounced for long-maturity dividend strips, explaining the upward-
sloping curves for risk premia and volatilities. We find that the effect on risk premia is
quantitatively stronger, which implies that Sharpe ratios also increase with maturity.


5.2       Long-run risks model
We next consider a long run risks model. We use the model and monthly calibration by
Bansal and Yaron (2004).16 This model departs from the Lucas model in Section 2 in
two important ways. First, the CRRA preferences are generalized to Epstein and Zin
(1989) preferences to separate the coefficient of relative risk aversion from the elasticity of
inter-temporal substitution. Second, the dynamics of consumption and dividend growth
are modified in two ways. Both growth rates have a small predictable component that
is highly persistent. This implies that even though consumption risk may seem rather
small over short horizons, it gradually builds up over longer horizons. In addition to
the predictable component, Bansal and Yaron (2004) introduce stochastic volatility in
the dynamics of consumption and dividend growth. Further details on the model can be
found in Appendix D.
   We compute dividend strips in the same manner as described in the previous
subsection, and we compute the average annualized excess return, volatility, and Sharpe
ratio. The results are plotted in Figure 13. Interestingly, the results are very similar to
the habit formation model. The terms structure of expected returns and volatilities is
upward sloping and the Sharpe ratio is upward sloping as well.

   The intuition behind these results can be summarized as follows. Good states of
the economy are states in which the predictable component of growth rates is high and
where the stochastic volatility is low. Prices of dividends, however, increase in case of
higher growth rates, and fall in case of higher uncertainty. In the model, higher stochastic
volatility increases discount rates, which leads to a contemporaneous decline in dividend
prices. Both effects imply that dividend strips earn a positive risk premium. Long-
 16
      We obtain comparable results by using the model and calibration by Bansal and Shaliastovich (2009).


                                                    18
maturity dividend strips are more sensitive to fluctuations in the predictable component
of growth rates and the stochastic volatility process, which explains the upward-sloping
curves for risk premia and volatilities.


5.3       Variable rare disasters model
We then consider the variable rare disasters model by Gabaix (2009). In this model,
the representative agent has CRRA preferences as in the Lucas model in Section 2.17
The consumption and dividend growth process are generalized to allow for rare disasters.
In case of a disaster, both consumption and dividends decline by large amounts. The
probability of a rare disasters is assumed to fluctuate over time, which induces time
variation in risk premia. However, since shocks to the probability of a rare disaster are
independent of shocks to consumption growth, discount rate shocks do not affect risk
premia, but they do affect the volatility of dividend strips. See Appendix E for further
details.
       The results for the variable rare diasters model are summarized in Figure 14. In this
model, the term structure of expected returns is flat. The reason is that strips of all
maturities are exposed to the same risk in case of a disaster. Further, the return volatility
is increasing with maturity. The reason is that longer maturity strips have a higher
volatility because they are more sensitive to the time variation in disaster probabilities.
As a result, the Sharpe ratio is downward sloping.


5.4       Lettau and Wachter (2007) model
We finally consider the model by Lettau and Wachter (2007), which is designed to generate
a downward-sloping term structure of expected returns. We use their quarterly calibration
and compute dividend strips using the essentially affine structure of the model.18 For more
details on the calibration and the computation of dividend strips within their model, we
refer to Lettau and Wachter (2007) and Appendix F.
    As before, we report for each dividend strip n the average annualized excess return
(risk premium), the annualized volatility, and the Sharpe ratio. The results are plotted
in Figure 15. The term structure for the risk premium is downward sloping and the term
structure of volatilities is initially upward sloping up until 8 years, and downward sloping
thereafter. The Sharpe ratio is downward-sloping as well.
  17
    See Wachter (2010) for an extension to Epstein and Zin (1989) preferences.
  18
    We apply a similar method to compute the dividend strips in the long run risk model as described
in appendix B.


                                                19
    The model of Lettau and Wachter (2007) specifies an exogenous stochastic discount
factor. Dividend growth is assumed to have a predictable component. In this model,
unexpected dividend growth is priced, and the price of risk fluctuates over time. Shocks
to the price of risk are assumed to be independent of the other shocks in the model.
An important feature of the model is that shocks to expected and unexpected dividend
growth are negatively correlated. This implies that long-maturity dividend claims are on
a per-period basis less risky than short-horizon claims as, for instance, a negative dividend
shock today is partially offset by higher expected growth rates going forward.

    The model implies a downward-sloping term structure of risk premia and Sharpe ratios.
It also results in CAPM alphas of short-maturity dividend claims that are about 10% per
annum and in CAPM betas that are below one. These aspects of the model are consistent
with the properties of dividend strips that we measure directly in the data. Lettau and
Wachter (2010) show to extend the model to also fit important properties of the term
structure of interest rates. However, as also pointed out by Lettau and Wachter (2010),
the model is not a full-fledged equilibrium model and an important next step is to think
of the micro foundations that can give rise to this specification of the technology and the
stochastic discount factor.


6       Robustness
In this section, we perform several robustness checks of our empirical results.


6.1       Alternative selection criteria
In constructing the prices of dividend strips, we take the median across all matches of
put and call contracts with the same maturity and strike price, for a given maturity and
for which the prices are quoted within the same second. We select the time frame from
10am to 2pm. We now consider five alternative procedures to construct dividend prices.
In all cases, we report the summary statistics of dividend returns for strategy 1, and the
CAPM alpha and beta.19 For Alternative 1, we first minimize the time difference between
contracts with the same maturity and strike price, we then select the moneyness that is
closest to one (at-the-money) for a given maturity, and if multiple matches are found, we
take the median across the matches for that particular maturity. For Alternative 2, we first
minimize the time difference between contracts with the same maturity and strike price,
we then select the smallest bid-ask spread for a given maturity, and if multiple matches
 19
      The results for dividend steepener are highly comparable and are not reported for brevity.



                                                    20
are found, we take the median across the matches for that particular maturity. In case of
Alternative 3, we use the same matching procedure as in the benchmark case, but narrow
the time frame to 10am to 11am, and in case of Alternative 4, we consider the time frame
from 1pm to 2pm. We exclude the lunch period for the latter two alternative matching
procedures, which might be a period of lower liquidity. Finally, in case of Alternative 5,
we consider all matches between put and call contracts for a given maturity and strike
price, but instead of minimizing over the time difference first, we take the median right
away. The advantage is that we take the median across a larger set of contracts, but the
time difference between the quotes might not be zero, which introduces noise. In practice,
there are so many quotes that the difference time stamps of quotes is in most cases small.
   The results are presented in Table 9, in which Ai corresponds to Alternative i. Even
though the numbers change slightly across different matching procedures, which is not
unexpected, none of our main results are overturned for any of the alternatives. The
dividend strategy earns high average returns, has a relatively high volatility, has a modest
CAPM beta, and, as a consequence, a substantial CAPM alpha. It seems challenging to
construct an argument based on microstructure issues that explains all empirical facts of
dividend strategies, and is robust to all matching procedures we consider.


6.2    Dividend prices implied by futures contracts
As an alternative robustness check, we consider a different market to synthetically
construct dividend prices. Instead of relying on options markets, we use we data on
index futures. As discussed above, index futures do not have as long maturities as index
options, but we have access to maturities up to one year. Figure 11 displays the dividend
prices for a 6-month and 1-year contract implied by either futures data or options data.
To make both series stationary, we scale the price series by the level of the S&P500 index.
The relative price series clearly have the same level and are highly correlated; the full-
sample correlation equals 94% for the 6-month contract and 91% for the 1-year contract.
As such, explanations of our findings must also be able to explain the same phenomenon
in futures markets. As argued before, explanations for all facts solely based on market
microstructure features are therefore, in our view, less convincing as index futures markets
are among the most liquid asset markets available.


6.3    Sensitivity to interest rates
To explore the sensitivity to the LIBOR rates that we use, we perform the following
sensitivity analysis. We recompute the dividend prices for both strategies, changing the


                                            21
interest rate by δ, where we let δ vary between -50 and +50 basis points. This leads to
the following dividend prices:

                         Pt,T = pt,T − ct,T + St − Xe−(rt,T +δ)(T −t) ,                       (15)

In case of the dividend steepener, we compute:

      Pt,T1 ,T2 = Pt,T2 − Pt,T1
                                                                                            
               = pt,T2 − pt,T1 − ct,T2 + ct,T1 − X e−(rt,T2 +δ)(T2 −t) − e−(rt,T1 +δ)(T1 −t) . (16)

For each value of δ we recompute the dividend returns and compute the time-series average
of R1,t+1 and R2,t+1 . This allows us to assess what increase in interest rates we would
need to drive the average return on both strategies to zero. The results are summarized
in Table 10. We find that the average return for strategy 1 (E[R1,t+1 ]) is zero when
δ = +45bp. Regardless of whether one considers this number to be small or large, more
importantly, this increase in the interest rate does not drive the average return on the
dividend steepener to zero. The reason is that δ enters twice in equation (16), so the two
terms offset each other. As such, within the range of values that we consider, there is
no value for δ for which the average return on the dividend steepener can be driven to
zero. Further, the baseline case (δ = 0) appears to provide a lower bound on the expected
return on the dividend steepener and leads to the smallest difference in expected returns
between the two return strategies.


7     Further applications
In this section, we briefly two other applications that can be explored using the dividend
strips we compute in this paper.


7.1    Stochastic discount factor decompositions
Building on Bansal and Lehman (1997), Hansen, Heaton, and Li (2008) and Hansen
and Scheinkman (2009) show how to decompose the pricing kernel into a permanent and
temporary component. These decompositions are useful for various reasons. Alvarez
and Jermann (2005) for instance show that the ratio of the variance of the permanent
component to the overall variance is equal to one minus the ratio of the long-term bond
risk premium to the maximum risk premium across all securities. This insight can be used
to identify pricing factors and to generate additional restrictions for general equilibrium


                                               22
asset pricing models.20 In addition, these decompositions are useful to understand how
future dividend prices respond to a shock to a macro-economic state variable today, see
Borovicka, Hansen, Hendricks, and Scheinkman (2009). Borovicka, Hansen, Hendricks,
and Scheinkman (2009) largely use these results to point out differences across asset
pricing models, but there is no empirical counterpart yet to which these models can
be compared. The methods we develop in this paper might be useful to advance our
understanding of the decomposition of the stochastic discount factor.


7.2     Market-implied expected returns and expected growth rates
Binsbergen and Koijen (2010) show how to use filtering methods to estimate expected
returns and expected growth rates. Filtering methods are required as the price-dividend
ratio is an affine function of expected returns and expected growth rates (see also
Section 5), which are both latent. However, if we use exactly the same model to price
dividend strips, it follows immediately that all dividend strips are affine in the same
two state variables, but with different loadings. Assuming that the model is correctly
specified, this implies, reminiscent to the term structure literature, that we can invert any
two dividend strips to recover market-implied expected returns and growth rates.


8      Conclusion
We use data from options and futures markets to recover the prices of dividend strips on
the aggregate stock market. The price of a k-year dividend strip is the present value of
the dividend paid in k years. The value of the stock market is the sum of all dividend
strip prices across maturities. We study the asset pricing properties of strips and find
that expected returns, Sharpe ratios, and volatilities on short-term strips are higher than
on the aggregate stock market, while their CAPM betas are well below one. Prices of
short-term strips are more volatile than their realizations, leading to excess volatility and
return predictability.
   We shed new light on the composition of the equity risk premium. When decomposing
the index into dividend strips, a natural question that arises is whether dividends at
different horizons contribute equally to the equity risk premium or whether either short or
long-term dividends contribute proportionally more than the other. We find that short-
term dividends have a higher risk premium than long-term dividends, whereas leading
asset pricing models predict the opposite.
  20
    See for instance Koijen, Lustig, and Van Nieuwerburgh (2009) and Koijen, Lustig, Van Nieuwerburgh,
and Verdelhan (2010).

                                                 23
References
Alvarez, F., and U. Jermann (2005): “Using Asset Prices to Measure the Measure the
  Persistence of the Marginal Utility of Wealth.,” Econometrica, (4), 1977–2016.

Ang, A., and G. Bekaert (2007): “Stock Return Predictability: Is it There?,” Review of
 Financial Studies, 20(3), 651–707.

Bansal, R., and B. N. Lehman (1997): “Growth Optimal Portfolio Restrictions on Asset
  Pricing Models,” Macroeconomic Dynamics, 1, 333–354.

Bansal, R., and I. Shaliastovich (2009): “Risk and Return in Bond, Currency and Equity
  Markets,” Unpublished paper, Duke University.

Bansal, R., and A. Yaron (2004): “Risks for the Long-Run: A Potential Resolution of Asset
  Pricing Puzzles,” Journal of Finance, 59(4), 1481–1509.

Barclays Capital, R. (2008): “Dividend Swap Indices: Access to equity income streams
  made easy,” Research Report, Barclays Capital.

Barro, R. (2006): “Rare Disasters and Asset Markets in the Twentieth Century,” Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, August.

Binsbergen, J. H. v., and R. S. Koijen (2010): “Predictive Regressions: A Present-Value
  Approach,” Journal of Finance, 65, 1439–1471.

Bollerslev, T. (1986): “Generalized Autoregressive Conditional Heterskedasticity,” Journal
 of Econometrics, 31, 307–327.

Borovicka, J., L. P. Hansen, M. Hendricks, and J. A. Scheinkman (2009): “Risk Price
 Dynamics,” Working Paper.

Brennan, M. J. (1998): “Stripping the S&P 500 Index,” Financial Analyst Journal, 54(1),
  12–22.

Campbell, J. Y., and J. H. Cochrane (1999): “By Force of Habit: A Consumption-Based
  Explanation of Aggregate Stock Market Behavior,” Journal of Political Economy, 107, 205–
  251.

Campbell, J. Y., and R. J. Shiller (1988): “The Dividend-Price Ratio and Expectations
  of Future Dividends and Discount Factors,” Review of Financial Studies, 1, 195–227.

Chen, L., Z. Da, and R. Priestley (2009): “Dividend Smoothing and Predictability,”
  Working Paper.

Cochrane, J. H. (1991): “Explaining the Variance of Price-Dividend Ratios,” Review of
 Financial Studies, 5(2), 243–280.

        (2008): “The Dog That Did Not Bark: A Defense of Return Predictability,” Review of
  Financial Studies, 21(4), 1533–1575.

Cochrane, J. H., and M. Piazzesi (2005): “Bond Risk Premia,” American Economic Review,
 95, 138–160.



                                           24
Constantinides, G., J. Jackwerth, and S. Perrakis (2009): “Mispricing of S&P 500
 Index Options,” Review of Financial Studies, 22, 1247–1277.

Croce, M., M. Lettau, and S. C. Ludvigson (2009): “Investor Information, Long-Run
  Risk, and the Duration of Risky Cash-Flows,” Working paper, UC Berkeley.

Duffee, G. (2010): “Sharpe ratios in term structure models,” Working Paper.

Epstein, L., and S. Zin (1989): “Substitution Risk Aversion and the Temporal Behavior of
  Consumption and Asset Returns: A Theoretical Framework,” Econometrica, 57, 937–968.

Fama, E. F., and K. R. French (1988): “Dividend Yields and Expected Stock Returns,”
  Journal of Financial Economics, 22, 3–27.

        (1993): “Common Risk Factors in the Returns on Stocks and Bonds,” Journal of
  Financial Economics, 33, 3–56.

Gabaix, X. (2009): “Variable Rare Disasters: An Exactly Solved Framework for Ten Puzzles
 in Macro-Finance,” Working paper, NYU.

Gordon, M. (1962): The Investment, Financing, and Valuation of the Corporation. Irwin,
 Homewood, IL.

Hansen, L. P., J. C. Heaton, and N. Li (2008): “Consumption Strikes Back? Measuring
 Long-Run Risk,” Journal of Political Economy, 116 (2), 260–302.

Hansen, L. P., and J. A. Scheinkman (2009): “Long-Term Risk: An Operator Approach,”
 Econometrica, 77, 177 – 234.

Hansen, L. P., and K. Singleton (1982): “Generalized Instrumental Variables Estimation
 of Nonlinear Rational Expectations Models,” Econometrica, 50(5), 1269–86.

        (1983): “Stochastic Consumption, Risk Aversion, and the Temporal Behavior of Asset
  Returns,” Journal of Political Economy, 91, 249–65.

Koijen, R., H. Lustig, and S. Van Nieuwerburgh (2009): “The Cross-Section and Time-
 Series of Stock and Bond Returns,” Working Paper.

Koijen, R., H. Lustig, S. Van Nieuwerburgh, and A. Verdelhan (2010): “Long-Run
 Risk, the Wealth-Consumption Ratio, and the Temporal Pricing of Risk,” Forthcoming,
 American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings.

Lettau, M., and S. C. Ludvigson (2005): “Expected Returns and Expected Dividend
  Growth,” Journal of Financial Economics, 76, 583–626.

Lettau, M., and S. Van Nieuwerburgh (2008): “Reconciling the Return Predictability
  Evidence,” Review of Financial Studies, 21(4), 1607–1652.

Lettau, M., and J. A. Wachter (2007): “Why is Long-Horizon Equity Less Risky? A
  Duration-Based Explanation of the Value Premium,” Journal of Finance, 62, 55–92.

        (2010): “The Term Structures of Equity and Interest Rates,” Journal of Financial
  Economics, forthcoming.



                                           25
Lewellen, J., S. Nagel, and J. Shanken (2009): “A Skeptical Appraisal of Asset Pricing
  Tests,” Forthcoming, Journal of Financial Economics.

Lintner, J. (1965): “The Valuation of Risk Assets and the Selection of Risky Investments in
  Stock Portfolios and Capital Budgets,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 47, 13–37.

Lucas, R. (1978): “Asset Prices in an Exchange Economy,” Econometrica, 46, 1429–1446.

Manley, R., and C. Mueller-Glissmann (2008): “The Market for Dividends and Related
 Investment Strategies,” Financial Analyst Journal, 64(3), 17–29.

Mehra, R., and E. C. Prescott (1985): “The Equity Premium Puzzle,” Journal of Monetary
 Economics, 15, 145–161.

Rietz, T. A. (1988): “The Equity Risk Premium: A Solution?,” Journal of Monetary
  Economics, 22(1), 117–131.

Santos, T., and P. Veronesi (2006): “Habit Formation, the Cross Section of Stock Returns
  and the Cash Flow Risk Puzzle,” Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.

Sharpe, W. (1964): “Capital Asset Prices: A Theory of Market Equilibrium under Conditions
  of Risk,” Journal of Finance, 19, 425–444.

Sharpe, W. F. (1966): “Mutual Fund Performance,” Journal of Business, 39(1), 119–138.

Shiller, R. J. (1981): “Do Stock Prices Move Too Much to be Justified by Subsequent Changes
  in Dividends?,” American Economic Review, 71, 421–436.

Stoll, H. R. (1969): “The Relationship between Put and Call Option Prices,” Journal of
  Finance, 24, 801–824.

Wachter, J. (2005): “Solving Models with External Habit,” Finance Research Letters, 2,
 210–226.

Wachter, J., and M. Warusawitharana (2009): “Predictable Returns and Asset
 Allocation: Should a Skeptical Investor Time the Market?,” Journal of Econometrics, 148,
 162–178.

Wachter, J. A. (2006): “A Consumption-based Model of the Term Structure of Interest
 Rates,” Journal of Financial Economics, 79, 365–399.

          (2010): “Can Time-varying Risk of Rare Disasters Explain Aggregate Stock Market
  Volatility?,” Working Paper.

Wilkens, S., and J. Wimschulte (2009): “The Pricing of Dividend Futures in the European
 Market: A First Empirical Analysis,” Unpublished paper, University of Regensburg.




                                            26
                               Panel A: Full sample 1996:2 - 2009:10

                                               R1,t        R2,t      S&P500


                           Mean             0.0116     0.0112          0.0056
                           Median           0.0079     0.0148          0.0106
                           Std. Dev.        0.0780     0.0965          0.0469
                           Sharpe ratio     0.1124     0.0872          0.0586

                           Observations         165        165            165

                            Panel B: First half sample 1996:2 - 2002:12

                           Mean             0.0159     0.0139          0.0065
                           Median           0.0117     0.0231          0.0093
                           Std. Dev.        0.0986     0.1212          0.0514
                           Sharpe ratio     0.1242     0.0843          0.0456

                           Observations          83         83              83

                           Panel C: Second half sample 2003:1 - 2009:10

                           Mean             0.0072     0.0086          0.0046
                           Median           0.0058     0.0086          0.0118
                           Std. Dev.        0.0494     0.0630          0.0422
                           Sharpe ratio     0.1060     0.1044          0.0615

                           Observations          82         82              82

Table 1: Summary Statistics
The table presents descriptive statistics of the monthly returns on the two trading strategies described
in the main text. As the volatility in the second half of the sample is lower than in the first half of the
sample, we also present descriptive statistics for two subsamples: 1996:2-2002:12 and 2003:1-2009:10.




                                                      27
                 Dep. Var.                    R1,t+1           R2,t+1         RSP 500,t+1

                 Mean equation
                 c                              0.0074           0.0085         0.0070
                                              (0.0047)         (0.0042)        (0.0038)
                 AR(1)                         -0.2682          -0.3668         0.0898
                                              (0.0973)         (0.1056)        (0.0958)

                 Variance equation
                 c                        1.5 x 10−4         2.4 x 10−4       7.2 x 10−5
                                         (7.4 x 10−5 )      (1.4 x 10−4 )    (6.6 x 10−5 )
                 squared residual           0.1138             0.1724           0.1859
                                           (0.0347)           (0.0536)         (0.0722)
                 GARCH(1)                   0.8773             0.8287           0.8056
                                           (0.0263)           (0.0536)         (0.0639)

Table 2: Estimates of the GARCH(1,1) Model
The top panel provides the estimates of the mean equation; the bottom panel displays the estimates of
the variance model. The first two columns report the results for the dividend return strategies, and the
third column provides the results for the S&P500.




           Dep. Var.                R1,t+1 − Rf,t                          R2,t+1 − Rf,t


           c              0.0088       0.0073        0.0073      0.0084       0.0069        0.0068
                         (0.0050)     (0.0051)      (0.0046)    (0.0056)     (0.0054)      (0.0049)

           mktrf             -         0.4721        0.5006         -         0.4847        0.5127
                             -        (0.1612)      (0.1517)        -        (0.1850)      (0.1768)
                                                                    -
           AR(1)             -            -          -0.2889        -            -          -0.2904
                             -            -         (0.1088)        -            -         (0.1164)

           R2                -         0.0877       0.1709          -         0.0604        0.1153


Table 3: Monthly Returns on the Two Trading Strategies and the Market Portfolio.
The table presents OLS regressions of the returns on trading strategies 1 and 2 (dependent variables) on
the market portfolio. Newey-West standard errors in parentheses. When an AR(1) term is included, the
intercept is adjusted by one minus the AR(1) coefficient, such that the intercept is comparable to the
regressions without AR(1) term.




                                                       28
                        Dep. Var.          R1,t+1 − Rf,t         R2,t+1 − Rf,t


                        c              0.0075        0.0075     0.0071       0.0070
                                      (0.0051)      (0.0047)   (0.0054)     (0.0050)

                        sp500rf        0.4488        0.4766     0.4863       0.5142
                                      (0.1667)      (0.1575)   (0.1859)     (0.1761)

                        AR(1)              -         -0.2857      -          -0.2880
                                           -        (0.1110)      -         (0.1185)

                        R2             0.0725       0.1542     0.0556       0.1100


Table 4: Monthly Returns on the Two Trading Strategies and the S&P500 Index.
The table presents OLS regressions of the returns on trading strategies 1 and 2 (dependent variables) on
the excess returns on the S&P500 index. Newey-West standard errors in parentheses. When an AR(1)
term is included, the intercept is adjusted by one minus the AR(1) coefficient, such that the intercept is
comparable to the regressions without AR(1) term.




                    Dep. Var.       R1,t+1 − Rf,t                R2,t+1 − Rf,t

                    c                0.0065       0.0068          0.0053       0.0057
                                    (0.0045)     (0.0042)        (0.0048)     (0.0044)

                    mktrf            0.4880       0.5086          0.5712       0.5915
                                    (0.1485)     (0.1396)        (0.1610)     (0.1529)

                    hml              0.1393       0.1136          0.3744       0.3530
                                    (0.1900)     (0.1813)        (0.2202)     (0.2322)

                    smb              0.0751       0.0862          -0.0279      -0.018
                                    (0.1522)     (0.1517)        (0.1735)     (0.1745)

                    AR(1)              -          -0.2876             -        -0.2806
                                       -         (0.1098)             -       (0.1144)

                    R2              0.0915       0.1739           0.0811       0.1334


Table 5: Monthly Returns on the Two Trading Strategies and the Three Factor Model.
The table presents OLS regressions of the returns on trading strategies 1 and 2 (dependent variables) on
the Fama French three factor model. Newey-West standard errors in parentheses. When an AR(1) term
is included, the intercept is adjusted with the AR(1) coefficient, so that the intercept is comparable to
the regressions without AR(1) term.


                                                     29
                             Dep. Var.   R1,t+1 − Rf,t         R2,t+1 − Rf,t

                             c              0.0061                0.0066
                                           (0.0043)              (0.0048)

                             sp500rf        0.3972                0.4137
                                           (0.1809)              (0.1884)

                             hml-sp500      0.1526                0.5668
                                           (0.1651)              (0.1838)

                             smb-sp500      0.3043                -0.0528
                                           (0.2780)              (0.3180)

                             R2             0.1000                0.1011


Table 6: Monthly Returns on the Two Trading Strategies and the Three S&P500 Factors.
The table presents OLS regressions of the returns on trading strategies 1 and 2 (dependent variables) on
the Fama French three factor model, where the three factors are constructed using S&P500 firms only.
Newey-West standard errors in parentheses.




                      Sample period      1946-2009 1970-2009 1989-2009


                      δ0                     0.0757         0.0488          0.0448
                      δ1                     0.9174         0.9315          0.7866
                      γ0                     0.0489         0.0302          0.0281
                      γ1                     0.5306         0.7263          0.6496
                      σµ                     0.0204         0.0191          0.0432
                      σg                     0.0569         0.0510          0.0644
                      σD                     0.0056         0.0087          0.0098
                      σ gµ                   0.4515         0.5313          0.4831
                      σ µD                   0.8877         0.8464          0.8739

                       2
                      RRet                   0.1091         0.0852          0.1435
                       2
                      RDiv                   0.2666         0.4743          0.4509


Table 7: Maximum-Likelihood Estimates
We present the estimation results of the latent variables present-value model as proposed by Binsbergen
and Koijen (2010), using S&P500 index prices and dividends. The model is estimated by conditional
maximum likelihood using data over three different sample periods, 1946-2009, 1970-2009, 1989-2009 on
cash-invested dividend growth rates and the corresponding price-dividend ratio.



                                                  30
 Dep. Var.                    R1,t+1                                               RSP 500,t+1


 Constant        0.0752   0.0455   0.0585                Constant        0.0635   0.0793   0.0773
                (0.0144) (0.0153) (0.0157)                              (0.0622) (0.0634) (0.0638)
                [0.0218] [0.0203] [0.0221]                              [0.1052] [0.0924] [0.1006]

 ln(PDt )        -0.1683         -            -           ln(P Dt )      -0.0142         -            -
                (0.0351)         -            -                         (0.0152)         -            -
                [0.0491]         -            -                         [0.0253]         -            -

 ln(PDt−2 )         -         -0.0903         -          ln(P Dt−2 )        -        -0.0181          -
                    -        (0.0370)         -                             -       (0.0155)          -
                    -        [0.0459]         -                             -       [0.0221]          -

 ln(PDt )           -            -        -0.1249         ln(P Dt )         -            -        -0.0176
                    -            -       (0.0385)                           -            -       (0.0156)
                    -            -       [0.0505]                           -            -       [0.0241]


 R2              0.1235       0.0356      0.0614             R2          0.0053       0.0084      0.0078


Table 8: Return predictability
Column 2 shows the regression results of the monthly returns of trading strategy 1, R1,t+1 , on the price-
dividend ratio of the short-term asset at time t (a lag of 1 month), computed as the ratio of the 1.5-year
dividend strip price at time t, denoted by Pt,t+18 , and the sum of dividends paid out over the past twelve
months. In column 3, we redo the analysis of column 2, but now lag the price-dividend ratio by two
more months (one quarter in total). In Column 4, we use as the regressor the smoothed price-dividend
ratio of the short-term asset computed as the equal-weighted average over periods t, t − 1 and t − 2.
OLS standard errors are in parentheses, and Newey-West standard errors are in brackets. In columns
6 through 8, we repeat the analysis of columns 2 through 4 for the S&P500 index. We take monthly
returns on the S&P500 index (RSP 500,t+1 ) and regress those on various lags of the price-dividend ratio
of the S&P500 index, computed as the index value at time t, dividend by the sum of dividends paid out
over the past twelve months.




                                                    31
                              Benchmark           A1       A2         A3         A4        A5
          Mean                  0.0116          0.0122   0.0142     0.0114     0.0106    0.0116
          Median                0.0079          0.0137   0.0058     0.0101     0.0073    0.0070
          St. Dev.              0.0780          0.1026   0.1313     0.0755     0.0735    0.0778
          Sharpe ratio          0.1124          0.0910   0.0866     0.1136     0.1063    0.1130

          CAPM Alpha             0.0073         0.0079 0.0089 0.0070 0.0064 0.0073
          CAPM Beta              0.4721         0.4464 0.7736 0.4962 0.4427 0.4757


Table 9: Alternative selection criteria
The table presents the summary statistics of dividend strategy 1 for five alternative selection criteria (A1
to A5), which are described in the main text. The table also reports the CAPM alpha and beta.




 δ            -50bp   -40bp    -30bp    -20bp    -10bp     0bp      10bp     20bp    30bp    40bp    50bp


 E[R1,t+1 ]   0.053   0.037    0.0278   0.021    0.016    0.012     0.008    0.005   0.003   0.001   -0.001
 E[R2,t+1 ]   0.017   0.021    0.0152   0.013    0.011    0.011     0.012    0.012   0.013   0.015    0.016


Table 10: Sensitivity to interest rates
The table presents the sensitivity analysis to interest rates. We add a constant δ to our LIBOR interest
rates and recompute the sample averages of the returns for values of δ varying between -50bp and +50bp.
For δ = 0, our baseline results are obtained (in bold).




                                                    32
Figure 1: Maximum Maturity of LEAPS
The graph displays the maximum maturity of LEAPS contracts in years that is available at each point
of the sample. The sample period is January 1996 up to October 2009.


                      4
                  x 10
            3.5


              3


            2.5


              2


            1.5


              1


            0.5


              0
             1996         1998     2000       2002        2004       2006       2008       2010




Figure 2: Average Number of Matches
The graph shows the average number of matches of put and call contracts with strike prices and maturities
that coincide, and for which the quotes are provided in the same second during the last trading day of
the month. We focus on contracts with a maturity between 1 and 2 years, and average the number of
matches within a year. The sample period is January 1996 up to October 2009.


                                                     33
               70
                        0.5 year
               60       1.0 year
                        1.5 year
                        2.0 year
               50


               40


               30


               20


               10


                 0
                1996       1998      2000          2002        2004   2006      2008       2010




Figure 3: Price Dynamics of the Short-Term Assets (Cumulative)
The graph shows the prices of the first 0.5, 1, 1.5 and 2 years of dividends. The sample period is January
1996 up to October 2009.




              0.06


                                        0.5 year
              0.05                      1.0 year
                                        1.5 year
                                        2.0 year
              0.04


              0.03


              0.02


              0.01


                 0
                1996       1998      2000          2002        2004   2006      2008       2010




Figure 4: Present Value of Dividends as a Fraction of the Index Value (Cumulative)
The graph shows the net present value of the first 0.5, 1, 1.5 and 2 years of dividends as a fraction of the
index value as computed. The sample period is January 1996 up to October 2009.




                                                          34
          0.5

          0.4

          0.3

          0.2

          0.1

           0

         −0.1

         −0.2

         −0.3

         −0.4
           1996     1998     2000     2002        2004   2006     2008      2010




Figure 5: Monthly Returns on Strategy 1 as Defined in (11): 1996:2-2009:10: line graph.




          0.6


          0.4


          0.2


           0


         −0.2


         −0.4


         −0.6
           1996    1998      2000     2002        2004   2006     2008     2010




Figure 6: Monthly Returns on Strategy 2 as Defined in (12: 1996:2-2009:10: line graph.




                                             35
          60


          50


          40


          30


          20


          10


           0
          −0.4    −0.3   −0.2          −0.1   0        0.1         0.2   0.3         0.4   0.5




Figure 7: Monthly Returns on Strategy 1 as Defined in (11): 1996:2-2009:10: histogram.




          50

          45

          40

          35

          30

          25

          20

          15

          10

           5

           0
                 −0.4           −0.2          0              0.2               0.4         0.6




Figure 8: Monthly Returns on Strategy 2 as Defined in (12): 1996:2-2009:10: histogram.




                                                  36
        0.35

                                                                                    σt(R1,t+1)
         0.3
                                                                                    σt(R2,t+1)

        0.25                                                                        σt(RSP500,t+1)


         0.2


        0.15


         0.1


        0.05


           0
          1996      1998          2000         2002          2004         2006         2008          2010




Figure 9: Volatility of Dividend Returns and Returns on the S&P500 Based on a
GARCH(1,1) Model.




          35
                 Price of 1−year Dividend Claim on the S&P500 Index
                 Annual Realized Dividends on the S&P500 Index (Lagged 12 months)
          30


          25


          20


          15


          10


           5
          1996      1998          2000         2002          2004         2006         2008          2010




        Figure 10: Prices and Realizations of Dividend Claims: 1996:2-2009:08.




                                                      37
           0.03
                                         Futures 0.5 year
                                         Options 0.5 year
          0.025                          Futures 1.0 year
                                         Options 1.0 year

           0.02


          0.015


           0.01


          0.005


              0
             1996       1998      2000          2002        2004   2006      2008       2010




Figure 11: Short-Term Asset Prices Implied by Futures and Options
The graph shows the price of the short-term assets implied by futures and option markets as a fraction
of the index. The maturity of the short-term asset equals either 0.5 year or 1 year.




                                                       38
                                           0.2




                            Risk premium
                                           0.1


                                            0
                                             0    50   100   150    200     250     300     350     400     450


                                           0.4
                              Volatility


                                           0.2

                                            0
                                             0    50   100   150    200     250     300     350     400     450


                                           0.4
                         Sharpe ratio




                                           0.2

                                            0
                                             0    50   100   150    200     250     300     350     400     450
                                                                          Months




Figure 12: Term Structure of the Risk Premium, Volatility, and Sharpe Ratio for Habits
The graph shows the term structures of the risk premium, the volatility, and the Sharpe ratio for the
Campbell and Cochrane (1999) habit formation model. The graph plots the first 480 months of dividend
strips, which corresponds to 40 years.




                                           0.1
                      Risk premium




                                     0.05


                                            0
                                             0    50   100   150   200     250     300    350     400     450     500

                                           0.2
                      Volatility




                                     0.15


                                           0.1
                                              0   50   100   150   200     250     300    350     400     450     500

                                           0.4
                            Sharpe ratio




                                           0.2


                                            0
                                             0    50   100   150   200     250     300    350     400     450     500
                                                                          Months




Figure 13: Term Structure of the Risk Premium, Volatility and Sharpe Ratio for the Long
Run Risk Model
The graph shows the term structures of the risk premium, the volatility, and the Sharpe ratio for the
long run risk model of Bansal and Yaron (2004). The graph plots the first 480 months of dividend strips,
which corresponds to 40 years.



                                                                          39
                                        0.2




                         Risk premium
                                        0.1


                                         0
                                               50    100   150   200     250     300    350     400     450

                                        0.2
                      Volatility

                                   0.15


                                        0.1
                                           0    50   100   150   200    250     300    350    400     450     500

                                        0.6
                         Sharpe ratio




                                        0.4


                                        0.2
                                           0    50   100   150   200    250     300    350    400     450     500




Figure 14: Term Structure of the Risk Premium, Volatility, and Sharpe Ratio for the
Variable Rare Disasters Model
The graph shows the term structures of the risk premium, the volatility and the Sharpe ratio for the
variable rare disasters model of Gabaix (2009). The graph plots the first 480 months of dividend strips,
which corresponds to 40 years.




                                        0.2
                         Risk premium




                                        0.1


                                         0
                                          0           50         100            150           200             250

                                        0.4
                         Volatility




                                        0.2


                                         0
                                          0           50         100            150           200             250

                                         1
                         Sharpe ratio




                                        0.5


                                         0
                                          0           50         100            150           200             250
                                                                       Months




Figure 15: Term Structure of the Risk Premium, Volatility, and Sharpe Ratio for the Lettau
Wachter (2007) Model
The graph shows the term structures of the risk premium, the volatility, and the Sharpe ratio for the
Lettau Wachter (2007) model. The graph plots the first 120 quarters of dividend strips, which corresponds
to 40 years.



                                                                       40
          *** APPENDIX: NOT FOR PUBLICATION ***

A      Details dividend returns
The two trading strategies described in Section 3.3 can be implemented for different
maturities T . The specific maturities we follow for trading strategy 1 vary between 1.9
years and 1.3 years. To be precise, for trading strategy 1, we go long in the 1.874 year
dividend claim on January 31st 1996, collect the dividend during February and sell the
claim on February 29th 1996 to compute the return. The claim then has a remaining
maturity of 1.797 years. We buy back the claim (or alternatively, we never sold it), go
long in the 1.797 year claim, collect the dividend, and sell it on March 29th 1996. We
follow this strategy until July 31st 1996 at which time the remaining maturity is 1.381
years. On this date a new 1.881 year contract is available so we restart the investment
cycle at this time. We continue this procedure until October of 2009, which is the end of
our sample.
    For trading strategy 2, we follow the same maturities, apart from the fact that we go
long in the 1.874 year dividend claim and short in the 0.874 dividend claim on January
31st 1996. On July 31st 1996 the remaining maturities are 1.381 years and 0.381 years at
which point we restart the investment cycle in the 1.881 year contract and the 0.881 year
contract available at that time.


B      Forecasting returns and dividend growth rates
We follow Binsbergen and Koijen (2010) and use filtering techniques to predict future
dividend growth rates and returns. Let rt+1 denote the total log return on the index:
                                                              
                                              St+1 + Dt+1
                             rt+1 ≡ log                            ,                (17)
                                                   St

where let P Dt denote the price-dividend ratio:

                                                 St
                                     P Dt ≡         ,
                                                 Dt

and let ∆dt+1 denote the aggregate log dividend growth rate:
                                                          
                                                    Dt+1
                               ∆dt+1 ≡ log                     .
                                                     Dt


                                               41
We model both expected returns (µt ) and expected dividend growth rates (gt ) as an AR(1)
process:

                             µt+1 = δ 0 + δ 1 (µt − δ 0 ) + εµt+1 ,                          (18)
                              gt+1 = γ 0 + γ 1 (gt − γ 0 ) + εgt+1 ,                         (19)

where µt ≡ Et [rt+1 ] and gt ≡ Et [∆dt+1 ]. The distribution of the shocks εµt+1 and εgt+1
is specified below. The realized dividend growth rate is equal to the expected dividend
growth rate plus an orthogonal shock:

                                     ∆dt+1 = gt + εD
                                                   t+1 .


Defining pdt ≡ log(P Dt ), we can write the log-linearized return as:

                            rt+1 ≃ κ + ρpdt+1 + ∆dt+1 − pdt ,

                                                                exp(pd)
with pd = E [pdt ], κ = log 1 + exp pd − ρpd and ρ =             1+exp(pd)
                                                                             , as in Campbell and
Shiller (1988). If we iterate this equation, and using the AR(1) assumptions (18)-(19), it
follows that:

                          pdt = A − B1 (µt − δ 0 ) + B2 (gt − γ 0 ) ,

           κ
with A = 1−ρ  + γ1−ρ
                 0 −δ 0          1
                        , B1 = 1−ρδ 1
                                                   1
                                      , and B2 = 1−ργ   . The log price-dividend ratio is linear
                                                      1
in the expected return µt and the expected dividend growth rate gt . The loading of the
price-dividend ratio on expected returns and expected dividend growth rates depends on
the relative persistence of these variables (δ 1 versus γ 1 ). The three shocks in the model,
which are shocks to expected dividend growth rates (εgt+1 ), shocks to expected returns
(εµt+1 ), and realized dividend growth shocks (εdt+1 ), have mean zero, covariance matrix
                                                       
                               εgt+1         σ 2g σ gµ σ gD
                    Σ ≡ var  εµt+1  =  σ gµ σ 2µ σ µD  ,
                                                       

                               εdt+1        σ gD σ µD σ 2D

and are independent and identically distributed over time. Further, in the maximum
likelihood estimation procedure, we assume that the shocks are jointly normally
distributed.
   We subsequently perform unconditional maximum likelihood estimation to obtain
estimates for all the parameters and obtain filtered series for µt and gt . The R2 values

                                               42
are computed as:
                                                          
                                2            ˆ rt+1 − µFt
                                            var
                               RRet    = 1−                 ,                           (20)
                                                var
                                                 ˆ (rt )
                                                             
                                2            ˆ ∆dt+1 − gtF
                                            var
                               RDiv    = 1−                    ,                        (21)
                                               var
                                                ˆ (∆dt+1 )

where varˆ is the sample variance, µFt is the filtered series for expected returns (µt ) and
gtF is the filtered series for expected dividend growth rates (gt ).


C     Dividend strips in the external habit formation
      model
We first summarize some of the key equations of the Campbell and Cochrane (1999) habit
formation model. The stochastic discount factor is given by:

                                Mt+1 = δG−γ e−γ(st+1 −st +vt+1 ) ,                      (22)

where G represents consumption growth, γ is the curvature parameter, vt+1 is unexpected
consumption growth, and st is the log consumption surplus ratio whose dynamics are given
by:
                          st+1 = (1 − φ)s̄ + φst + λ(st )vt+1 ,                     (23)

where λ(st ) is the sensitivity function which is chosen such that the risk free rate is
constant, see Campbell and Cochrane (1999) for further details. Dividend growth in the
model is given by:
                                           ∆dt+1 = g + wt+1 .                           (24)
                                                                                          (n)
We solve the model using the solution method described in Wachter (2005). Let Dt
denote the price of a dividend at time t that is paid n periods in the future. Let Dt+1
denote the realized dividend in period t + 1. The price of the first dividend strip is simply
given by:                                                        
                        (1)                                  Dt+1
                       Dt     = Et (Mt+1 Dt+1 ) = Dt Et Mt+1        .                   (25)
                                                              Dt
The following recursion then allows us to compute the remaining dividend strips:

                                       (n)              n−1
                                                            
                                      Dt     = Et Mt+1 Dt+1   .                         (26)




                                                  43
The return on the nth dividend strip is given by:

                                                       (n−1)
                                                    Dt+1
                                         Rn,t+1 =       (n)
                                                               .                                    (27)
                                                       Dt

D        Dividend strips in the long-run risks model
The technology processes are given by:

                               xt+1 = ρx xt + εx,t+1 ,
                             ∆ct+1 = µc + xt + εc,t+1 ,
                             ∆dt+1 = µd + φxt + εd,t+1 ,
                                                        
                              σ 2t+1 = µσ + ρσ σ 2t − µσ + εσ,t+1 ,

and we define εt+1 ≡ (εc,t+1 , εx,t+1 , εσ,t+1 , εd,t+1 )′ . We assume:

                                       εt+1 | Ft ∼ N (0, Σt ) ,

where:
                                         Σt = Σ0 + Σ1 σ 2t .

For the return on total wealth, we have:

                               c         Wt+1
                              Rt+1 =
                                       Wt − Ct
                                        exp (wct+1 )
                                     =                exp (∆ct+1 ) ,
                                       exp (wct ) − 1

and thus:

   c
  rt+1 = wct+1 + ∆ct+1 − ln (exp (wct ) − 1)
                                                                     exp (E (wct ))
         ≃ wct+1 + ∆ct+1 − ln (exp (E (wct )) − 1) −                                  (wct − E (wct ))
                                                                   exp (E (wct )) − 1
         = κc0 + ∆ct+1 + wct+1 − κc1 wct ,

implying:

                         κc0 = − ln (exp (E (wct )) − 1) + κc1 E (wct ) ,                           (28)
                                 exp (E (wct ))
                         κc1 =                     > 1.                                             (29)
                               exp (E (wct )) − 1


                                                  44
The stochastic discount takes the form:

                           mt+1 = cm    m          m           c
                                   0 + c1 ∆ct+1 + c2 (wct+1 − κ1 wct ) ,


where:

                                wct = Ac0 + Ac1 xt + Ac2 σ 2t ,
                                                γ−1
                                cm
                                 0  = −κc0 −             (ln δ + κc0 ) ,
                                              1 − 1/ψ
                                cm
                                 1  = −γ,
                                        γ − 1/ψ
                                cm
                                 2  = −            .
                                         1 − 1/ψ

To compute (κc0 , κc1 , Ac0 , Ac1 , Ac2 ), we start from the Euler condition:

                                                       c
                                                             
                                        Et exp mt+1 + rt+1        = 1,

       c
where rt+1 = ln (Wt+1 / (Wt − Ct )), which can be rewritten as:

                     1                 c
                                            1    c
                                                                      c
                                                                           
         Et (mt+1 ) + Vt (mt+1 ) + Et rt+1  + Vt rt+1   + Covt mt+1 , rt+1   = 0.
                     2                       2

The five terms in this equation can be computed explicitly:
                                                  c 2                        c 2
                                                                                    
Et (mt+1 ) = Et cm    m          m  c    c                    c  c    c
                 0 + c1 ∆ct+1 + c2 A0 + A1 xt+1 + A2 σ t+1 − κ1 A0 + A1 xt + A2 σ t

             = cm    m       m c                  m c        c
                0 + c1 µc + c2 A2 (1 − ρσ ) µσ + c2 A0 (1 − κ1 )

                 +cm       m c         c
                   1 xt + c2 A1 (ρx − κ1 ) xt
                                     2
                 +cm  c        c
                   2 A2 (ρσ − κ1 ) σ t




mt+1 − Et (mt+1 ) = cm           m c            m c
                     1 εc,t+1 + c2 A1 εx,t+1 + c2 A2 εσ,t+1

                       ≡ σ ′m εt+1 ,
        Vt (mt+1 ) = σ ′m Σt σ m ,
                
             c
        Et rt+1    = κc0 + µc + Ac2 (1 − ρσ ) µσ + Ac0 − κc1 Ac0 + xt + Ac1 (ρx − κc1 ) xt + Ac2 (ρσ − κc1 ) σ 2t ,
  c          c
                
 rt+1 − Et rt+1    = εc,t+1 + Ac1 εx,t+1 + Ac2 εσ,t+1 ,
                       ≡ σ ′rc εt+1 ,
             c
                   
         Vt rt+1       = σ ′rc Σt σ rc ,
             c
                   
Covt mt+1 , rt+1       = σ ′m Σt σ rc .


                                                   45
This results in:

    cm      m         m c                      c                    m c          c m m c       c
     0 + c1 µc + c2 A2 (1 − ρσ ) µσ + A2 (1 − ρσ ) µσ + c2 A0 (1 − κ1 ) + c1 xt + c2 A1 (ρx − κ1 ) xt +
                        2    1 ′
    cm   c          c                          c
     2 A2 (ρσ − κ1 ) σ t + σ m Σt σ m + κ0 + µc + xt + A0 − κ1 A0
                                                                   c      c c
                             2
                                                 1
    Ac1 (ρx − κc1 ) xt + Ac2 (ρσ − κc1 ) σ 2t + σ ′rc Σt σ rc + σ ′m Σt σ rc = 0.
                                                 2

By matching the coefficients on the constant, xt , and σ 2t , we find the solutions for Ac0 , Ac1 ,
and Ac2 :

                                                                         1 ′
         0 = cm       m              m    c                 m c     c
              0 + c1 µc + (1 + c2 ) A2 (1 − ρσ ) µσ + c2 A0 (1 − κ1 ) + σ m Σ0 σ m
                                                                         2
                c             c   1 ′              ′              c   c
             +κ0 + µc + A0 + σ rc Σ0 σ rc + σ m Σ0 σ rc + (1 − κ1 ) A0 ,
                                  2
         0 = cm
              1 +   c m c
                      2 A1 (ρx  − κ c          c        c
                                    1 ) + 1 + A1 (ρx − κ1 ) ,
                                   1 ′                          1 ′
         0 = cm   c          c                       c        c               ′
              2 A2 (ρσ − κ1 ) + σ m Σ1 σ m + A2 (ρσ − κ1 ) + σ rc Σ1 σ rc + σ m Σ1 σ rc .
                                   2                            2

We solve this system numerically for (Ac0 , Ac1 , Ac2 ), where we impose:

                                     E (wct ) = Ac0 + Ac1 µσ ,

in (28) and (29).

    The price of dividend strips can be computed recursively and are exponentially-affine
in the state variables:
                                     d(n)   d(n)     d(n)
                             pdnt = A0 + A1 xt + A2 σ 2t .

For a one-period strip, we have:

                               P Dt1 = Et (exp (mt+1 + ∆dt+1 )) ,

where:

                                       Et (∆dt+1 ) = µd + φxt ,
                                        Vt (∆dt+1 ) = e′4 Σt e4 ,
                              Covt (∆dt+1 , mt+1 ) = e′4 Σt σ m ,

with e4 denotes the fourth unit vector. We then have:

           1                       1                                    d(1) d(1)  d(1)
Et (mt+1 )+ Vt (mt+1 )+Et (∆dt+1 )+ Vt (∆dt+1 )+Covt (∆dt+1 , mt+1 ) = A0 +A1 xt +A2 σ 2t ,
           2                       2

                                                46
leading to:

                                                                                                         2
    cm     m        m c                 m c           c     m    m c          c        m c         c
     0 + c1 µc + c2 A2 (1 − ρσ ) µσ + c2 A0 (1 − κ1 ) + c1 xt + c2 A1 (ρx − κ1 ) xt + c2 A2 (ρσ − κ1 ) σ t +
    1 ′                      1                          d(n)  d(1)       d(1)
      σ m Σt σ m + µd + φxt + e′4 Σt e4 + e′4 Σt σ m = A0 + A1 xt + A2 σ 2t ,
    2                        2

and thus:

                     d(1)                                        1 ′
                 A0         = cm     m       m c
                               0 + c1 µc + c2 A2 (1 − ρσ ) µσ + σ m Σ0 σ m
                                                                 2
                                      1 ′
                              +µd + e4 Σ0 e4 + e′4 Σ0 σ m + cm   c      c
                                                             2 A0 (1 − κ1 ) ,
                                      2
                     d(1)
                 A1         = cm     m c         c
                               1 + c2 A1 (ρx − κ1 ) + φ,
                     d(1)                       1 ′            1 ′
                 A2         = cm  c        c                                ′
                               2 A2 (ρσ − κ1 ) + σ m Σ1 σ m + e4 Σ1 e4 + e4 Σ1 σ m .
                                                2              2

The general recursion follows from:
                                                         
                                                 n−1 Dt+1
                             P Dtn   = E Mt+1 P Dt+1
                                                      Dt
                                                                   
                                     = Et exp mt+1 + ∆dt+1 + pdn−1
                                                               t+1    .

We first compute the moments of ∆dt+1 + pdn−1
                                          t+1 :

                                                                   d(n−1)
                            Et ∆dt+1 + pdn−1
                                         t+1            = µd + A2             (1 − ρσ ) µσ + φxt
                                                                d(n−1)         d(n−1)               d(n−1)
                                                             +A0           + A1         ρx xt + A2           ρσ σ 2t ,
                                                                          d(n−1)                d(n−1)
    ∆dt+1 + pdn−1                n−1
              t+1 − Et ∆dt+1 + pdt+1                    = εd,t+1 + A1               εx,t+1 + A2           εσ,t+1
                                                        ≡ σ n′
                                                            pd εt+1 ,
                                                    
                            Vt ∆dt+1 + pdn−1
                                         t+1            = σ n′      n
                                                            pd Σt σ pd ,
                                                    
                        Covt σ n′          ′
                               pd εt+1 , σ m εt+1       = σ n′
                                                            pd Σt σ m .


This implies:

     cm     m       m c                  m c           c
      0 + c1 µc + c2 A2 (1 − ρσ ) µσ + c2 A0 (1 − κ1 ) +
                                                      2  1 ′
     cm       m c         c         m c         c
      1 xt + c2 A1 (ρx − κ1 ) xt + c2 A2 (ρσ − κ1 ) σ t + σ m Σt σ m +
                                                         2
               d(n−1)                               d(n−1)       d(n−1)               d(n−1)            1
     µd + A2            (1 − ρσ ) µσ + φxt + A0              + A1         ρx xt + A2           ρσ σ 2t + σ n′      n      n′
                                                                                                           pd Σt σ pd + σ pd Σt σ m
                                                                                                        2
       d(n)       d(n)          d(n) 2
  = A0        + A1       xt + A2    σt ,




                                                        47
implying for the coefficients:

           d(n)                                                             1 ′
         A0       = cm     m         m c       c      m c
                     0 + c1 µc + c2 A0 (1 − κ1 ) + c2 A2 (1 − ρσ ) µσ + σ m Σ0 σ m + µd
                                                                            2
                        d(n−1)                 d(n−1)   1 n′
                    +A2        (1 − ρσ ) µσ + A0      + σ pd Σ0 σ npd + σ n′
                                                                          pd Σ0 σ m ,
                                                        2
           d(n)                                    d(n−1)
         A1       = cm     m c           c
                     1 + c2 A1 (ρx − κ1 ) + φ + A1        ρx ,
           d(n)                          1 ′           d(n−1)       1
         A2       = cm   c         c
                     2 A2 (ρσ − κ1 ) + σ m Σ1 σ m + A2         ρσ + σ n′ Σ1 σ npd + σ n′
                                                                                      pd Σ1 σ m .
                                         2                          2 pd

Finally, the one-period risk-free rate is given by:

                                1
              −rt = Et (mt+1 ) + Vt (mt+1 )
                                2
                  = c0 + c1 µc + cm
                     m    m          c                 m c        c
                                  2 A2 (1 − ρσ ) µσ + c2 A0 (1 − κ1 )
                                                                        2  1 ′
                      +cm       m c          c        m c         c
                        1 xt + c2 A1 (ρx − κ1 ) xt + c2 A2 (ρσ − κ1 ) σ t + σ m Σt σ m
                                                                           2
                                         2
                    = −r0 − rx xt − rσ σ t ,

where

                                                                       1 ′
              r0 = −cm      m        m c               m c        c
                     0 − c1 µc − c2 A2 (1 − ρσ ) µσ − c2 A0 (1 − κ1 ) − σ m Σ0 σ m ,
                                                                       2
              rx = −cm
                     1 −  c m c
                            2 A1 (ρx − κ c
                                         1 ) ,
                                        1
              rσ = −cm  c          c         ′
                     2 A2 (ρσ − κ1 ) − σ m Σ1 σ m .
                                        2

In the model of Bansal and Yaron (2004) it is assumed that:

                         Σt = Σ0 + Σ1 σ 2t
                                                                         
                                0 0 0            0          1 0 0       0
                                                                         
                               0 0 0            0        0 ϕ2e 0     0   σ2.
                            = 
                               0 0 σ2
                                                   +
                                                                               t
                                         w      0  
                                                          0    0    0 0  
                                0 0 0            0          0    0    0 ϕ2d

E        Dividend strips in the rare disasters model
The setup of the Barro-Rietz rare disasters model as presented by Gabaix (2009) is as
follows. Let there be a representative agent with utility given by:21
                                               "∞                #
                                                X        C 1−γ
                                          E0         e−ρt t                                         (30)
                                               t=0
                                                         1−γ
 21
      We thank Xavier Gabaix for providing us with this derivation.

                                                     48
At each period consumption growth is given by:
                               (
                 Ct+1                1        if there is no disaster at time t+1
                      = eg ×                                                                   (31)
                  Ct                Bt+1      if there is a disaster at time t+1

The pricing kernel is then given by:
                                (
                Mt+1                 1          if there is no disaster at time t+1
                     = e−δ ×         −γ                                                        (32)
                Mt                  Bt+1        if there is a disaster at time t+1

where δ = ρ + g. The dividend process for stock i takes the form:
                                     (
        Di,t+1                             1         if there is no disaster at time t+1
               = egiD 1 + εD
                           i,t+1 ×                                                             (33)
         Dit                               Fi,t+1     if there is a disaster at time t+1

                                                                           2
where εD i,t+1 > −1 is an independent shock with mean 0 and variance σ D , and Fi,t+1 > 0
is the recovery rate in case a disaster happens. The resilience of asset i is defined as:
                                                −γ             
                                   Hit = pt EtD Bt+1 Fi,t+1 − 1

where the superscript D signifies conditioning on the disaster event.                 Define Ĥit =
Hit − Hi∗ , which follows a near-AR(1) process given by:

                                            1 + Hi∗ −φH
                               Ĥi,t+1 =            e   Ĥit + εH
                                                                i,t+1
                                            1 + Hit
                                                              2
where εH                                                               H          D
        i,t+1 has a conditional mean of 0 and a variance of σ H , and εi,t+1 and εi,t+1 are
uncorrelated with the disaster event. Under the assumptions above, the stock price is
given by:                                                                 !
                                     Dit                 e−δi −hi∗ Ĥit
                             Pit =                    1+
                                   1 − e−δi              1 − eδi −φH

where

                                       δ i = δ − giD − hi∗
                                      hi∗ = ln Hi∗

Gabaix (2009) shows that the price at time t of a dividend paid in n periods is given by:
                                                                             
                             (n)             −δ i T          1 − eφH n
                            Dit     = Dit e               1+           Ĥit
                                                                φH


                                                      49
and that the expected return on the strip, conditioning on no disaster is given by:
                                                      "      (n−1)
                                                                     #
                                                           Dt+1
                         Et [ln Rn,t+1 ] = Et ln              (n)
                                                                         ≈ δ − Hit
                                                            Dt

The expected return is the same across maturities, because strips of all maturities are
exposed to the same risk in a disaster.

    The volatility of the linearized return is given by:
                                       s                                2
                                                          1 − e−φH n
                             σ n,t =       σ 2D   +                           σ 2H
                                                             φH

which is increasing with maturity, due to the fact that higher duration cash flows are more
exposed to discount rate shocks than short duration cash flows. Given that the expected
return is constant across maturities and the volatility is increasing with maturity, the
Sharpe ratio is decreasing with maturity.


F       Dividend strips in the Lettau and Wachter model
In the model of Lettau and Wachter (2007), the stochastic discount factor is assumed to
be of the form:
                                                1
                            Mt+1 = exp(−rf − x2t + xt εd,t+1 )                     (34)
                                                2
where xt drives the price of risk and follows an AR(1) process:

                             xt+1 = (1 − φx )x̄ + φx xt + σ x εt+1                    (35)

where εt+1 is a 3x1 vector of shocks and σ x is 1x3 vector. Dividend growth is predictable
and given by:
                                  ∆dt+1 = g + zt + σ d εt+1 ,                         (36)

where
                                       zt+1 = ρz zt + σ z εt+1 .                      (37)

Lettau and Wachter (2007) derive the prices of dividend strips in their model.




                                                      50
