NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PREVENTING A NATIONAL DEBT EXPLOSION
Martin S. Feldstein
Working Paper 16451
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16451

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2010

The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Martin S. Feldstein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Preventing a National Debt Explosion
Martin S. Feldstein
NBER Working Paper No. 16451
October 2010
JEL No. E6,H6
ABSTRACT
The projected path of the U.S. national debt is the major challenge facing American economic policy.
Without changes in tax and spending rules, the national debt will rise from 62 percent of GDP now
to more than 100 percent of GDP by the end of the decade and nearly twice that level within 25 years.
This paper discusses three strategies that, taken together, could reverse this trend and reduce the ratio
of debt to GDP to less than 50 percent. The first strategy, which focuses on the current decade, would
reduce the Administration’s proposed spending increases and tax reductions that would otherwise
add $3.8 trillion to the national debt in 2020. The second strategy would augment the tax-financed
benefits for Social Security, Medicare and Medicaid with investment based accounts would permit
the higher future spending on health care and pensions with a relatively small increase in saving for
such accounts. The third strategy focuses on “tax expenditures,” the special features of the tax law
that reduce revenue in order to achieve effects that might otherwise be done by explicit outlays. Tax
expenditures now result in an annual total revenue loss of about $1 trillion; reducing them could permanently
reduce future deficits without increasing marginal tax rates or reducing the rewards for saving, investment,
and risk taking. The paper concludes with a discussion of how the high debt to GDP ratio after World
War II was reversed and how the last four presidents ended their terms with small primary deficits
or primary budget surpluses.
Martin S. Feldstein
Professor of Economics, Harvard University
President Emeritus, NBER
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138-5398
msfeldst@nber.org

Preventing a National Debt Explosion
Martin Feldstein1
The United States now faces two unprecedented fiscal problems: an exploding
long-term deficit driven by the promised pension and health care benefits for
older Americans and a nearer-term increase in the national debt caused by a
persistent gap between spending and revenue throughout the current decade.
Failure to address these two problems could substantially weaken the U.S.
economy and threaten our national security. The longer we wait to take remedial
action, the harder it will be to limit those future deficits.
Several near-term actions could prevent the debt explosion without raising tax
rates or enacting new taxes, policies that could themselves do substantial
damage to the economy.
This paper explores the economic consequences of three strategies that together
could reduce future budget deficits and stabilize the ratio of national debt to GDP
at the current level (62 percent) or bring it back to its historic ratio of about 40
percent or less.2 Here, very briefly are the three strategies that will be examined
in this paper:3
(1) Stop digging. There is a saying that if you are in a deep hole and want to get
out, the first step is to stop digging. In the current context, this paper will explore
the implications of revising the budget proposals that President Obama submitted
in February 2010. Doing so could prevent very large budget deficits during the
remainder of the decade.
(2) Mixed Financing. Shifting the financing of Social Security, Medicare and the
long-term care component of Medicaid from pure tax finance (the way that these
programs are currently financed) to a mixture of tax finance and individual
investment based accounts could prevent the projected explosion of deficits or of
tax rates without reducing the projected retirement income or health benefits for
older Americans.4

1

Professor of Economics, Harvard University. This paper was prepared for the NBER conference on Tax
Policy and the Economy in Washington, DC on September 23, 2010. I am grateful to Mark Shepard for
assistance with this paper and to Jeffrey Brown and Jeffrey Liebman for comments on an earlier draft.
2
In keeping with the NBER tradition, these are presented as options and not as proposals. The current
paper should not be interpreted as making specific policy recommendations.
3
For an extensive analysis of many individual changes in spending and taxes that could reduce future
deficits, see CBO (2009).
4
I discussed this approach to reforming Social Security and Medicare in Feldstein (2005a)
1

(3) Tax Expenditures. It is possible to reduce de facto government spending and
simultaneously raise revenue by eliminating or reducing the government
spending that is now done through the tax code. Government spending through
tax expenditures is now much larger than the non-defense discretionary
spending done through ordinary budget outlays. Tax expenditures could be
reduced enough to avoid any increase from the tax rates of 2010 or even to
reduce rates further. A similar trade-off of lowering rates and eliminating tax
expenditures was important in the Tax Reform Act of 1986.
This paper begins with a brief summary of the fiscal outlook and a reminder of
the risks that it entails for the U.S. economy and for our national security. The
first section also discusses very briefly the potential economic consequences of
some proposed tax increases that have been suggested to reduce fiscal deficits.
Section two then discusses the “stop digging” strategy of eliminating or reducing
some of the proposals in the Obama administration’s February 2010 budget that
would otherwise increase the multiyear fiscal deficit. To avoid the debate about
using those policies to stimulate the weak economy, the analysis focuses on the
period beginning in 2013, after which the administration and the CBO forecast
that the economy will have returned closer to a full employment condition (CBO
2010e).
The third section discusses the use of a mixed financing strategy -- combining
existing pay-as-you-go taxes and individual investment based accounts -- to
finance not only future Social Security benefits but also the cost of Medicare.
The analysis extends earlier work on Social Security with Andrew Samwick
(Feldstein and Samwick, 1998, 2001) to develop estimates of the contributions to
a Health Retirement Account that would make it possible to finance the projected
Medicare outlays without any increase in the 3.6 percent of GDP in taxes that is
now used to finance Medicare.
Section four explains how reducing tax expenditures could make a major
contribution to shrinking future deficits without raising tax rates. It emphasizes
that this strategy could appeal to Republicans who want to see reductions in
government spending and to Democrats who want to see increased revenue as
part of any overall deficit reduction plan. These tax expenditures are primarily
equivalent to program spending on payments to individuals that would otherwise
be in the budget as part of non-defense outlays. Other tax expenditures are
subsidies to businesses. The Reagan-O’Neill bipartisan agreement that led to
the Tax Reform Act of 1986 cut annual tax expenditures by more than three
percent of GDP.

2

The fifth section provides additional background information on how the deficits
and national debt have behaved since 1980, looking first at how the large fiscal
deficits in the Reagan administration were reduced and then examining the
behavior of the national debt under subsequent administrations. A striking fact is
that the Reagan and George H.W. Bush presidencies ended with cyclicallyadjusted primary deficits of just 0.2 percent of potential GDP. The Clinton
presidency ended with a corresponding surplus of 3.4 percent of potential GDP.
The presidency of George W. Bush ended with a cyclically adjusted primary
deficit of 1.4 percent of potential GDP in the economic crisis of 2008 but had a
surplus of 0.5 percent of potential GDP in 2007 before the crisis began.
An appendix discusses how the national debt was reduced after World War II
from 109 percent of GDP in 1946 to 46 percent of GDP in 1960 by an equal
combination of higher real GDP and a higher price level. Key to that reduction in
the relative size of the debt was the policy of not allowing any sustained increase
in the nominal debt for 15 years, in effect an application of the idea of not digging
when you are already in a deep hole.
There is also a brief concluding section.
1. The Risks that We Face

According to recent estimates by the Congressional Budget Office (June 2010),
the ratio of federal government debt to GDP is likely to rise from 62 percent in
2010 to 87 percent in 2020. These CBO estimates are based on what they
describe as their “Alternative Fiscal Scenario,” an estimate of the effect of the
current law and the legislative changes that they believe are likely to be enacted
between now and 2020. These assumptions are similar to their March 2010
estimates for the President’s Budget (CBO, 2010b) in which they concluded that
the debt in 2020 under the President’s policies would be 90 percent of GDP and
the deficit in that year would be 5.6 percent of GDP. While longer term
projections are inherently difficult, the CBO projects a debt to GDP ratio in 2035
of 185 percent. These estimates are consistent with private estimates by experts
like Auerbach and Gale (2010).
Unless policies are changed, these CBO estimates are likely to understate future
deficits and debt because the calculations assume that the unprecedented debt
levels would not have a significant impact on the interest rates on government
debt. The CBO’s calculations assume that the net interest would be 4.4 percent
of the outstanding debt in 2020 and 4.7 percent in 2025 despite the rise in the

3

debt from 87 percent of GDP to 185 percent of GDP.5 If the real interest rate
were just 1 percent higher, the direct impact would be to raise the deficit by
nearly 1 percent of GDP in 2020 and nearly 2 percent of GDP in 2035. These
larger deficits would lead to even higher debt ratios along the path to 2035.
But even if we assume “only” the debt to GDP ratios projected by the CBO, the
risks to our nation’s future would be enormous. There are four types of such
risks.
Reduced capital accumulation. The most obvious risk is the effect of government
borrowing on capital accumulation and growth. The nation’s private saving is
now about 7.5 percent of GDP, with about 4.5 percent of GDP coming from
households and unincorporated businesses and about 3 percent of GDP coming
from corporations. State and local governments typically have approximately
balanced budgets, since the state constitutions require states to balance their
annual operating budgets.6 If the federal government has a deficit of between 5
percent and 6 percent of GDP, the federal borrowing would absorb almost all of
the private sector saving. The implication would be a national saving rate of less
than two percent of GDP.
Financing the net business investment in plant and equipment that is required to
keep up with a growing labor force and the new residential construction needed
for a rising number of households would therefore depend on a substantial inflow
of funds from abroad. The capital inflow from the rest of the world is equal to our
current account deficit, the sum of our trade deficit and the net balance on
investment income and unilateral transfers. The current account deficit is now
about three percent of GDP, down from a high of six percent in 2006. Limiting
our total net investment to this combination of national saving (2 percent of GDP)
and capital inflow (3 percent of GDP) would imply a substantial reduction in
growth and in the creation of new housing.
There is moreover the risk that the current volume of foreign lending to the U.S.
and foreign investment in the United States will not continue to be available.
China, the largest source of capital inflow to the United States, is trying to reduce
its trade and current account surpluses, in part to satisfy pressure from the
United States. In addition, all of the countries that now have large current
account surpluses -- including China, the oil producing nations, and others -- are
also likely to want to diversity their investments away from heavy dependence on
the United States and the dollar.
5

The CBO’s calculations assume that the real interest rate on government debt in the long run will be 2.7
percent, despite the extreme borrowing needs.
6
Since future pension obligations are not counted as part of current operating budgets, some states have
reduced current salary outlays by agreeing to larger future pensions.
4

The result is likely to be lower investment in the United States and higher interest
rates. Those higher interest rates will increase the fiscal deficits even further.
The lower rate of investment will mean slower growth of real incomes and
therefore lower tax collections, further compounding the fiscal problem.
The economic burden of debt service. The fiscal deficits are now projected to
increase year after year in future decades with no limit in both real terms and as
a share of GDP. But even if the fiscal deficits were brought to an end after 25
years with the CBO’s projected debt of 185 percent of GDP, servicing that debt
would have a substantial negative effect on the U.S. economy through the
burden of higher tax rates and the need to transfer resources to foreign owners
of the national debt.
If the increase in the size of the debt raises the average nominal interest rate in
2035 on U.S. government debt to 6 percent7, the government’s annual interest
bill would be about 11 percent of GDP, up from 1.4 percent of GDP in 2010. That
would be on top of the 26 percent of GDP non-interest outlays in 2035 projected
by the CBO (2010c).
If the government’s goal in 2035 is to stabilize the size of the debt, it would have
to collect taxes equal to 11 percent of GDP just to pay the interest bill in addition
to the 26 percent of GDP needed to pay for the projected non-interest spending.
The combined federal government tax bill would be 37 percent of GDP, about
double what taxes have averaged over the past several decades.
Since personal and corporate income taxes together have averaged about 11
percent of GDP, those tax revenues would have to be doubled just to pay the
interest bill. Since higher tax rates would cause taxpayers to take actions that
reduce the size of the tax base, the future tax rates would have to more than
double.
Stabilizing the size of the national debt in 2035 would therefore be an unrealistic
goal if the debt were allowed to get to 185 percent of GDP by that date. A
somewhat easier goal to meet in 2035 would be to stabilize the real value of the
debt by allowing the nominal debt to increase at the rate of inflation. In effect, the
government would pay only the real interest on the debt and borrow the rest. If
inflation is two percent and the real interest rate is then 4 percent, the interest bill
that would have to be financed by taxes would be 7.4 percent of GDP. Because
higher tax rates cause the tax base to shrink, the personal and corporate tax
7

The CBO estimates interest cost in 2035 of “only” 8.7 percent of GDP, an implausibly low implicit
interest rate of 4.7 percent, almost the same implicit rate as the 4.4 percent projected for 2020 when the
debt to GDP ratio is projected to be 87 percent of GDP. See footnote 5 above.
5

rates that now bring in revenue of about 11 percent of GDP would have to rise
by between 70 percent and 100 percent to bring in that extra revenue.8 While it
is possible to imagine raising the 15 percent rate to 25 percent or even the 28
percent rate to 48 percent, it would not be possible to raise the 35 percent
corporate tax rate to 60 percent or the top personal rate of nearly 40 percent to
almost 70 percent without losing more revenue from behavioral responses than
would be gained by the higher rates. So raising revenue to finance such an
enormous debt would require shifting more of the debt burden to lower income
taxpayers. And that would be on top of the tax increase needed to finance the
non-interest spending.
A yet more “modest” goal would be to stabilize the ratio of debt to GDP after
2035, allowing the debt to rise with nominal GDP at 4 percent a year. Even if
taxes were raised to finance the 26 percent of GDP non-interest spending, the
annual net interest burden that would remain to be financed would imply raising
personal and corporate tax rates by nearly 4.0 percent of GDP.9 Even that 4.0
percent of GDP would imply raising the existing personal and corporate income
tax rates that now produce revenue of 11 percent of GDP by between 36 percent
and 50 percent, depending on the size of the taxpayer reaction to higher tax
rates. With an across the board tax increase, the current 25 percent rate would
go to about 35 percent while the 40 percent rate would go to at least 55 percent.
Further increases would of course be needed to pay the increase in non-interest
spending.
The higher tax rates would be not only a direct burden on all future taxpayers but
also the source of a substantial increase in the deadweight burden of the tax
system. Defenders of budget deficits once argued that the national debt imposed
no burden because “we only owe it to ourselves.” That ignored the reduction in
the GDP that results because government borrowing crowds out productive
business investment. It also ignored the loss of real incomes implied by the
deadweight loss of the increased marginal tax rates.
But in addition to those two conceptual errors there is now the fact that nearly
half of the national debt is owned by foreign investors. That fraction is almost
sure to rise substantially over the next 25 years because of the high ratio of
annual budget deficits to U.S. domestic saving. But even with 50 percent held by
8

Estimates using the NBER TAXSIM model imply that an across the board rise in all income tax rates
would raise revenue by only about two-thirds of the “static” estimate.
9
This assumes a nominal interest rate of 6 percent and a nominal GDP growth rate of 4 percent, as
projected for the long term by the CBO. With a nominal growth rate of 4 percent and a stable debt to GDP
ratio of 1.85, the allowable deficit would be 7.4 percent of GDP. An interest rate of 6 percent on the
national debt of 1.85 times GDP would imply an interest bill of 11.1 percent of GDP. Reducing that to the
allowable 7.4 percent of GDP would leave an interest deficit of 3.7 percent of GDP.
6

foreign investors, there are two further costs of a large national debt: the transfer
of resources and the adverse change in the terms of trade.
First, because the United States borrows from foreigners to finance fiscal deficits
and to supplement the low level of national saving, we will have to reduce our
future consumption and transfer future U.S.-produced goods and services to the
foreign investors. If the national debt in 2035 is 185 percent of GDP, the foreign
holding of U.S. government debt would then be at least 100 percent of US GDP
and the interest payment on that debt would be six percent of US GDP. Paying
that interest on that debt means transferring abroad six percent of US GDP in the
form of goods and services in excess of the amount that Americans export to pay
for the goods and services imported from abroad.10
One possible alternative would be to pay the real interest on that foreign-owned
debt, borrowing enough to stabilize the real value of the debt. This would imply a
transfer of four percent of GDP. If part of the interest bill were financed by
borrowing from foreign investors in this way, the effect would be to lower the
2035 transfer of goods and services to the rest of the world but to increase the
amount to be transferred in future years.
This direct resource transfer is just part of the cost of financing our foreign debt.
To induce foreign households and businesses to buy the American made goods
and services, the prices of those products to foreign buyers must be lower than
they would otherwise be. This deterioration of our terms of trade means that we
get less from the rest of the world for the products that we send them.
More specifically, if the accumulation of foreign debt means that we have to
increase our net exports in 2035 and beyond by 4 percent of GDP, a rough
calculation suggests that the dollar must decline on a real trade weighted basis
by about 40 percent. That means that the US would give up 40 percent more of
US product for every unit of goods that we import from the rest of the world. With
imports now at about 15 percent of GDP, this would mean a fall in our real
standard of living of an additional 6 percent of GDP.
A potential financial crisis. A gradual reduction in the inflow of capital and the
resulting rise in U.S. interest rates would be a serious problem but need not be a
crisis. But a “sudden stop,” i.e., a very rapid reduction in the willingness of
10

The obligation of the United States to foreign investors is of course more than the government debt.
Foreign investors buy private securities and investment in businesses and other real property in the
United States while Americans invest in similar foreign assets. The inflow from abroad equals the current
account deficit. A growing government deficit means less U.S. national saving and therefore more capital
inflow from the rest of the world, only some of which takes the form of purchases of government debt. In
2009 the foreign purchases of Treasury debt totaled $617 billion, exceeding the US current account
deficit of $378 billion during that period.
7

foreigners and even of Americans to lend to the U.S. government, could
precipitate a financial crisis (CBO 2010d; Reinhart and Rogoff, 2009.)
The most likely reason for such a sudden end to credit flows to the U.S. would be
a fear of some form of default by the U.S. government. Foreign investors now
own nearly 50 percent of the U.S. government debt that is not held in U.S.
government accounts, up from the 34 percent of the corresponding share of debt
that they owned in 2000. The rise in government debt from 62 percent of the
current GDP to 87 percent of the GDP in 2020 implies a $10 trillion increase in
the total debt. While it is not clear how much of that $10 trillion of additional debt
would be bought by foreign investors, it is almost certain to increase their share
of the U.S. government obligations.
With foreign investors holding nearly half of U.S. government debt now and an
even larger share in the future, they might well worry whether the U.S. would try
to reduce that debt in a way that burdens foreign holders but not Americans or
even that burdens all holders but thereby relieves the future debt service burden
on American taxpayers. Such an action need not be an outright default but could
be a plan to substitute low interest very long-dated securities when bonds
become due and to pay interest with such obligations rather than with cash. Or
they might worry that the U.S. could decide to withhold tax on the interest on
bonds, crediting those taxes against obligations of U.S. taxpayers but leaving
foreign debt holders with a lower net yield. The recent events in Europe and the
resulting financial market expectations of a possible default (or rescheduling) by
Greece and other eurozone members probably increase investors’ subjective
probability of a US default at some time in the future.
The usual reason why governments are reluctant to default in any way is the
concern that they will be unable to borrow again in international capital markets.
But the experience with Latin American and Asian defaults in the past three
decades shows that the market’s memory is short and defaulters are soon able
to borrow again.
This is not to suggest that the U.S. government will actually contemplate such
action. But it is only necessary for potential foreign investors to worry enough
about such action for it to lead to a sharp fall in credit availability and an increase
in interest rates.
Reduced National Security. Defense Secretary Robert Gates recently spoke of
the risk that large fiscal deficits will lead politically to reductions in defense
spending: “My greatest fear is that in economic tough times people will see the
defense budget as the place to solve the nation’s deficit problems, the place to
find money for other parts of the government.” (Wall Street Journal, August 10,
8

2010). A similar view was expressed by Admiral Mike Mullen, Chairman of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff, in June when he said “our national debt is our biggest
national security threat." (Huffington Post, June 24) To limit Congressional and
Administration cuts in defense spending, Secretary Gates took the initiative to cut
defense spending programs and to cancel the Joint Forces Command.
Although it is difficult to determine the optimal size of the military budget, it is
clear that the U.S. now faces a more complex set of adversaries than we did in
the past. Although we have relatively cordial relations with both Russia and
China, we are aware that both countries have large nuclear arsenals that could
be a threat in the future. The U.S. also faces threats from rogue states like North
Korea and Iran and from a variety of terrorist groups. The defense budget has
nevertheless declined from 9 percent of GDP under President Kennedy to 3.5
percent in the decade through 2009. President Obama’s budget calls for annual
defense spending to decline by $50 billion and to remain below four percent of
GDP.
The size of the military budget and the nature of our military capability affects our
ability to deter hostile acts. In addition, the safety of shipping on the seas,
including the transportation of oil and other critical products, depends on the U.S.
navy. The cooperation of our allies and others around the world reflects their
belief that they can count on the U.S. support in future times of trouble.
Potential allies look ahead in judging our future military capability and our
willingness to assist them when they need it. Their willingness to cooperate with
us now depends on their perceptions of our future willingness to maintain global
military capability. Potential adversaries also look ahead when deciding on their
own strategies relative to the United States and to our allies.
Cyberterrorism poses a major new threat to U.S. national security. Foreign
powers, including both nations and individuals, can attack the infrastructure of
the United States. A small number of sophisticated computer hackers could
disable such key facilities as the electricity grid, a city’s water supply, and the air
traffic system. Similarly, cyber terrorists could shut down corporate control
systems and destroy financial records. The full range of potential dangers is
unknown and the ability to prevent such cyberterrorism is just being developed.
The government’s recent creation of a new military command (the
Cybercommand) in parallel to the traditional military commands reflects the
significance of this potential threat.
Against the background of these four risks, I will consider the three basic options
that I indicated above. Explicitly omitted from this list is the proposal to raise
additional taxes on the “super rich” (i.e., a millionaire surcharge on incomes over
9

$1 million) and the proposal to introduce a value added tax. Before turning to the
three options that I develop in detail, I comment briefly on these ideas for raising
taxes.
A millionaire tax surcharge
In 2007, the latest year for which full tax data are available11 and the year before
taxable income was distorted by the recession that began in December 2007,
there were 391,000 taxpayers with adjusted gross incomes over $1 million. Their
total taxable income was $1,245 billion of which about $391 billion is less than $1
million per taxpayer. The surcharge would therefore apply to $854 billion. A 10
percent surcharge would produce a “static” revenue increase of $85 billion or
about 0.5 percent of GDP.
Under the proposed tax rates in the administration’s 2011 budget, the marginal
tax rate of these taxpayers will be 40 percent or more, depending on the
taxpayer’s state and city of residence. A further 10 percent rise in the tax on
incomes over $1 million would reduce the net of tax share that the taxpayer
keeps from 60 percent to 50 percent, a 16.7 percent decline. Assuming an
uncompensated elasticity of taxable income to the net of tax rate of 0.4, taxable
income would decline by 6.7 percent, a fall of $83 billion from $1245 billion to
$1162 billion. The revenue loss on this reduced taxable income would all be at
the enlarged 50 percent marginal rate, reducing the $85 billion static revenue
gain to just $44 billion or about 0.3 percent of GDP.
The increase in the standard deadweight loss caused by this tax increase can be
approximated as 0.5 * E * (.25 - .16) (taxable income) / (1-.4) where .25 is the
square of the final marginal tax rate, .16 is the square of the initial marginal tax
rate, E is the compensated elasticity of taxable income with respect to the net of
tax rate, and the term (1-.4) in the denominator reflects the modification of the
basic deadweight loss formula when dealing with an increase from an initial
positive marginal tax rate of 0.4. If E is 0.5, this implies an increased deadweight
loss of 0.0375 times taxable income or $47 billion. This traditional measure of
deadweight loss excludes any long-term effects that would work through changes
in saving, risk taking, and entrepreneurship.
In short, a ten percentage point millionaire surcharge would produce at most only
$44 billion of extra revenue and would cause a deadweight loss of more than $47
billion or one dollar of pure waste for every extra dollar that is transferred from
the millionaires to the Treasury. A smaller surcharge of three percentage points

11

The figures discussed in this paragraph are from the IRS publication “Statistics of Income, 2010”
10

would produce a “static” revenue estimate of only 0.15 percent of GDP and
actual revenue of less than 0.1 percent of GDP.
A Value Added Tax
Adding a value added tax to the existing income and payroll taxes is frequently
proposed as a way of dealing with the future budget deficits. A value added tax
is in effect equivalent to a national sales tax on all consumer spending. Since
consumer spending is 70 percent of GDP, a comprehensive value added tax with
a 10 percent rate could in principle raise 7 percent of GDP. Because of the
difficulty of taxing the imputed income of owner-occupied housing and the
reluctance of governments to tax necessities like medical care, the revenue of a
10 percent VAT would be less than 7 percent of GDP. In addition, the increased
cost of living caused by such a value added tax would lead to increased
government outlays in programs like Social Security that are designed to
maintain standards of living. Foreign experience with value added taxes indicate
that there is also substantial tax evasion, implying even less net revenue.
The economic advantage of a value added tax relative to our traditional income
tax is that, as a tax on consumption, it does not distort the timing of consumption
between spending early in life and later in life in the way that a tax on interest
income or a comprehensive income tax does. It also avoids the many distortions
that would come from increasing the corporate income tax.12
But a value added tax does increase the effective tax rate on additional earnings
in much the same way as an income tax. Since individuals work in order to buy
goods and services, the consumption tax distorts the choice between
consumption and leisure, inducing individuals to work less, in the same way as
our current income tax does. It also provides an incentive to substitute forms of
compensation that are not considered to be taxable consumption (e.g., fringe
benefits of all kinds). And it induces more work in the underground economy
(illegal) and more “home production” (legal but inefficient). In this paper I will not
consider the VAT option further.
I turn therefore to the three options mentioned above.

12

For a recent discussion of the distorting effects of the corporate income tax, see President’s Economic
Recovery Advisory Board (2010)
11

2. “Stop Digging”

The rise in the national debt that is projected to occur during the remainder of the
current decade reflects the tax and spending policies enacted by previous
administrations and by the Obama administration as well as the substantial loss
of revenue and increase in transfer payments that result from the very deep
recession that began in December 2007.
But the projected doubling of the national debt between 2010 and 2020 also
reflects to a great extent the legislation proposed in President Obama’s Budget
for Fiscal Year 2011. The Congressional Budget Office (2010b) estimates that
those proposals would, if enacted, raise the projected 10 year deficit by $3.8
trillion or more than 60 percent of the baseline ten year deficit through 2020. It
would also raise the projected national debt in 2020 to 90 percent of GDP, up
from the current 62 percent of GDP. Without that $3.8 trillion rise in the national
debt, the national debt would be 73 percent of GDP. Thus 60 percent of the
projected rise in the national debt from the current GDP share to the 90 percent
projected in 2020 is due to new proposals contained in the Obama 2011 budget
proposals.
The $3.8 trillion increase in the national debt reflects a combination of $5 trillion
of deficit increases (from both increased spending and lower tax payments by
middle and lower income taxpayers) offset in part by $1.3 trillion of tax increases,
primarily on taxpayers with incomes over $250,000.
Although there is a rationale for every aspect of that $5 trillion, eliminating that $5
trillion of incremental deficits would cut the 2020 national debt by nearly 25
percent of GDP, from the 90 percent of GDP projected for that year by the
Congressional Budget Office to 68 percent of GDP. That would bring it close to
the 62 percent of GDP projected for the end of 2010. It would also reduce the
government’s 2020 projected interest bill of $916 billion dollars by more than
$200 billion, thereby slicing more than a trillion dollars from the 2025 national
debt.
Before looking at some of the details of the $3.8 trillion of increased net deficits
that President Obama’s budget proposals would add to the national debt during
the next decade, I should make four clarifying points:
First, the fiscal deficit of $1.4 trillion in 2009 included $471 billion of accounting
charges for the expected present value of the future losses of Fannie Mae,

12

Freddy Mac and the Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP).13 These accounting
charges did not actually represent current spending and would not occur after
2009. Because of this form of accounting recognition, actual future losses would
not add to the deficit in the years when they occur. Excluding these one-time
accounting losses in order to focus on the real current deficit would reduce the
initial 2009 deficit by 33 percent.
Second, the CBO’s projections of the President’s budget are required to treat the
proposed legislation literally even if experts would not regard those proposals as
legislatively plausible. It is significant therefore that the CBO’s more recent Long
Term Budget Outlook (CBO 2010c) reaches a very similar fiscal deficit in 2020
when it substitutes its best judgments to predict what it calls its “Alternative FIscal
Scenario.”14
Third, the current high level of unemployment and fragile overall economic
outlook raise the question of whether it would be advisable to tighten fiscal policy
before 2013. The end of the 2009 fiscal stimulus package (the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009) and of the specific targeted fiscal
stimulus plans (the Cash for Clunkers and the First Time Home Buyer’s tax
credit) imply a rapid withdrawal of the fiscal stimulus between 2010 and 2012.
Postponing the “stop digging” strategy by delaying any changes in the
President’s proposals until after 2012 would increase the decade’s fiscal deficits
by $751 billion or one-fifth of the full deficits projected for the period through 2020
(CBO 2010b). But even with this postponement, the “stop digging” strategy
would reduce the budget deficit during the coming decade by more than $3
trillion. That would cut in half the rise in the projected deficit from the current 62
percent to 77 percent rather than 90 percent of GDP.
Fourth, the CBO’s analysis of the President’s budget proposals almost certainly
underestimates the amount of future discretionary government spending (i.e,
spending that requires Congressional appropriation in contrast to the so-called
“mandatory” spending like Social Security benefits that continues unless there is
Congressional action to change the benefits) that will occur during the next
decade. The level of non-defense discretionary spending is projected to rise only
five percent in nominal terms between 2010 and 2020, not enough to keep up
with the rise of the price level, and allowing no room for new discretionary
programs or expansion of existing programs or even for spending to increase
13

When the government transferred Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac to government “conservator” status,
the CBO required adding the present actuarial value of anticipated future losses of the existing portfolios
of these organizations to the current year’s deficit. That was estimated to be $291 billion. The CBO also
required recording a similar allowance for anticipated losses in the Troubled Asset Relief Program
(TARP), estimated by the CBO at that time to be $180 billion.
14
With the Alternative Fiscal Scenario, the national debt in 2020 is predicted to be 87 percent of GDP,
very close to the 90 percent projected based on a literal interpretation of the President’s budget.
13

with population.15 The annual level of defense spending is projected to decline
relative to the baseline of currently projected levels by about $50 billion in each
year after 2012, a very optimistic view of US military needs in the decade ahead.
The increases in “mandatory” spending (relative to the baseline budget that
reflects current law) in the President’s budget add $1.85 trillion to the national
debt between 2010 and 2020.16 Because these are mandatory spending
programs, they represent changes in spending rules that will continue to add to
deficits in future years as well. More than 85 percent of this increased spending
is projected to occur after 2012.
The largest component of the increased spending is the cost of expanding health
coverage (the “Obamacare” package) totaling $593 billion with more than 100
percent of this occurring after 2013 (because of some projected spending
reductions in the first few years). This large increase in health care outlays was
packaged with large tax increases in the Obamacare legislation so that the
combined legislation could be scored by the CBO as, in the President’s words,
“not adding a dime to the national debt.” An additional health care part of the
projected rise in budget outlays is the repeal of a scheduled reduction in
physicians’ Medicare fees at a total cost of $286 billion, of which only $39 billion
occurs in the first three years. The total increased government outlays for health
care is thus $879 billion.
The other major spending outlays with a total cost of $401 billion are a variety of
transfers to lower income households. These result from expanding tax credits in
excess of the households‘ tax liabilities and refunding the excess in cash, a form
of spending that the CBO correctly classifies as outlays even though it is the
result of a tax credit. These refundable credits include the earned income credit,
the child credit, Making Work Pay (a transfer based on the first few thousand
dollars of earnings), etc. Only $60 billion of the total occurs before 2013.
The final significant outlay change is an expansion of the means-tested Pell
education grants. The Obama budget proposal shifts what is now a mixture of
discretionary and mandatory components into a purely mandatory program,
raising the mandatory outlays by $374 billion and reducing discretionary outlays
by $177 billion. Putting all of the Pell grants in the mandatory category makes it
more difficult to reduce this spending in the future since it would take a deliberate
15

One reason for the lack of nominal growth of the projected nondefense discretionary outlays is that the
discretionary portion of Pell education grants would be shifted to mandatory spending, taking $177 billion
from discretionary spending over the decade. Even if that were included in domestic discretionary
spending, the rise from 2010 to 2020 in nominal outlays would still be only one percent a year, implying a
decline in real outlays.
16
This amount and the detailed components are from CBO (2010b).
14

legislative act to cut the grants rather than just not continuing the existing
program. It also causes the non-defense discretionary outlays to remain virtually
unchanged in nominal terms during the decade (a cumulative deficit of only $10
billion.)
The revenue changes in the President’s budget plan include $1.35 trillion of
revenue increases and $2.8 trillion of tax reductions for a net revenue decline
during the decade of $1.45 trillion.
The $1.35 trillion of increases in tax revenue do not include the automatic
increases that result from the ending of the 2001 and 2003 tax reductions
(EGTRRA and JGTRRA) that occurs at the end of 2010.17 The largest of the
proposed revenue increases is the collection of tax increases specified in the
administration’s health bill and expected to raise revenue by $743 billion over the
period to 2020. Higher taxes on foreign source profits of U.S. corporations
would raise $127 billion. A proposal to reduce the revenue cost of tax
deductions by high income taxpayers by limiting the tax rate against which such
deductions apply to 28 percent would raise an additional $289 billion.18
Almost all of the revenue loss comes from keeping the benefits of the 2001 and
2003 tax reductions for middle and lower income taxpayers. The scheduled
increase in the 25 percent tax bracket (to 28 percent) and in the 28 percent rate
to 31 percent are eliminated. The 33 percent rate rises to 36 percent only for
taxpayers with incomes above $250,000. These modifications in tax rates involve
a revenue loss of $1.2 trillion over the 10 years, only $166 billion of which
happens before 2013. Modifying the marriage penalty reduces revenue by $306
billion. Additional revenue loss of $120 billion comes from keeping the $1,000
child tax credit and expanding the refundable portion. Indexing the AMT to
reduce its potential application to middle class taxpayers adds $577 billion to the
ten year deficit. The rationale for all of these changes, costing about $2.2 trillion,
is redistribution rather than reductions in deadweight losses or macroeconomic
stimulus.19

17

That automatic end occurs because the original tax bills were passed using the “reconciliation” process
that allowed passage with only 51 votes (avoiding the need for 60 votes to stop a filibuster) but subjecting
the legislation to the Byrd rule that precludes using reconciliation to alter federal revenue for more than 10
years.
18
There is also a proposal to substitute direct subsidies to state and local governments that issue taxable
“Build America Bonds” for the revenue loss that results when those governments issue bonds that pay
interest that is not subject to federal income taxes. The subsidy is set so that these bonds appeal to tax
exempt investors like pension funds while denying tax free interest to individual investors in the highest
tax brackets. The result is an outlay of $88 billion and reduced tax revenue of $80 billion.
19
For a further discussion of this issue, see Feldstein (2010).
15

Some additional proposed changes are designed to improve the taxation of
investment income with the aim of increasing investment and long-term growth.
The tax rate on capital gains and dividends would be limited to 20 percent and
the estate tax would be modified by increasing the exclusion and lowering the
maximum tax rate. These modifications cost $491 billion over 10 years.
A case can be made for all of these tax reductions. But the advantages must be
weighed against the $2.8 trillion of deficits that they create and the higher taxes
that will be needed in the future to deal with the increased debt.
3. Mixed Financing of Social Security and Medicare

The “stop digging” strategy can significantly reduce the dramatic rise in debt that
is projected to occur between now and 2020. But even if that were fully
implemented, the fiscal deficits will continue to rise sharply in the years after
2020. The primary driver of those out-year deficits is the spending for Social
Security, Medicare, and Medicaid. Taken together the cost of these programs is
expected to rise from 8.4 percent of GDP in the most recent decade (followed by
10.3 percent of GDP in 2010, a year of depressed GDP) to 12.4 percent of GDP
in 2020, 17.1 percent of GDP in 2035 and 26.4 percent of GDP in 2084, the last
year of the CBO’s 75 year analysis (CBO 2010c).
The 7 percent of GDP rise in this spending as a share of GDP between now and
2035 is equal to 70 percent of current total personal and corporate taxes as a
share of GDP. Even if the payroll tax revenue is included, the total personal and
corporate revenue would be about 18 percent of GDP, implying that the extra
cost of these programs would require raising all tax rates by more than 50
percent.20 The amounts in 2084 would have to be much larger.
This large financing gap can be closed without raising taxes only by slowing the
growth of the government outlays for Social Security and for Medicare. But doing
so need not mean reducing retiree incomes or the health care of older Americans
if the current tax financed system is broadened to a mixture of the tax financed
and investment based benefits. I consider first the possibility of doing so for
Social Security and then turn to the more complex issue of Medicare.

20

Substantially more than 50 percent because the higher tax rates would cause taxpayer actions that
substantially shrink the tax base, requiring higher tax rates to collect the same amount of revenue.
16

Social Security
Social Security benefits are not means tested but are paid to individuals who
reach retirement age under a formula that relates their benefit to their previous
earnings. Under current law, Social Security benefits at the time of retirement
automatically rise in a way that causes the benefits of a worker who has had
average earnings all his life to equal about 40 percent of his immediate preretirement income. As real earnings in the economy rise through time, the
benefits of the median earner rise in proportion. Individuals with higher lifetime
earnings have lower replacement rates but the corresponding real benefits also
rise as average real incomes rise.
Some analysts have suggested that preventing financial hardship in old age does
not require a continually rising standard of living for all retirees of the type now
provided by Social Security. But many others object to that view, noting that the
principle of rising real benefits has been a feature of the Social Security program
since its beginning and that Social Security benefits for lower and middle income
retirees are still quite low. The annual benefit in 2009 of a new retiree who has
had median earnings all his life was only $17,800. While total program costs
could be reduced somewhat by slowing the growth of benefits for those with
much higher than average incomes, the amount that can realistically be saved in
this way is quite limited. A new retiree in 2009 whose income in every year of his
working life was at the maximum taxable level under Social Security ($106,800 in
2009) would receive an annual benefit of less than $28,000.
The rising retirement incomes implied by current law can be achieved in future
years for all retirees without raising taxes if the existing tax financed benefits are
supplemented by a system of universal investment based annuities. Andrew
Samwick and I (Feldstein and Samwick, 1997, 2001) developed a specific plan to
do that. While maintaining the existing benefit formula with the current tax
financed program alone would require raising the payroll tax rate for Social
Security from the current 12 percent to nearly 20 percent, the Feldstein-Samwick
analysis showed that the same level of retirement income could be achieved in a
mixed system by supplementing the 12 percent payroll tax with out-of-pocket
contributions to personal retirement accounts of just 1.5 percent of the taxable
payroll (an amount equivalent to just 0.6 percent of GDP.)
More specifically, the Feldstein-Samwick analysis showed how reduced growth
of the pay-as-you-go benefits could be offset by the available annuity payments
from the personal retirement accounts in such a way that the combination of the
two remained as large as the currently projected pay-as-you-go benefits. The
payroll tax would remain unchanged at the current 12.4 percent of wages and

17

salaries.21 This implies that the tax financed benefit would eventually be reduced
to 60 percent of the benefit specified in current law. In each year, the gap
between the financeable pay-as-you-go benefit and the benefit projected in
current law would be filled by the annuity provided by the personal retirement
account.
The funds accumulated in the personal retirement accounts are assumed in the
Feldstein-Samwick analysis to be invested in a mixture of 60 percent equities
and 40 percent debt that provides a real yield of 5.5 percent per year, less than
the historic average for such a mixed portfolio. The accumulated fund is
converted at age 67 into a variable annuity based on the same investment mix.
In subsequent studies, I and others examined the rate of return risks associated
with such mixed strategies and concluded that mixed plans could achieve the
projected benefits with near certainty by an investment strategy that combines
Treasury inflation protected securities and equities.(Campbell and Feldstein,
2001; Feldstein 2005b)
The key to achieving this mixed financing of retirement is to have all employees
enrolled in personal retirement accounts. If that is done, subsequent legislation
can respond to the shrinking of the Social Security trust fund by slowing the
growth of future benefits. Although the majority of current workers do have
employment based plans (401k and 403b plans) or IRAs, such coverage is not
universal. The Obama administration has proposed legislation that would require
any employer above a small minimum size that does not already offer an
employment based saving plan to offer automatic enrollment in an individual
retirement account.22 Individuals would have the option of withdrawing their
funds from these accounts but substantial corporate experience with automatic
enrollment plans indicates that almost all employees continue to participate even
if there is no employer subsidy.
Medicare and Medicaid
Although the aging of the population that raises the cost of Social Security also
contributes to the higher cost of Medicare and Medicaid, the cost of the Medicare
program rises much more rapidly than that of the Social Security pension. It does
so for two reasons. First, the average cost of Medicare benefits per beneficiary
21

The portion of the 12.4 percent tax that is now used to finance disability benefits would continue to be
subtracted for this purpose.
22
For more details on how such legislation would work, see the Pew Trust Report Retirement Security -Auto IRA and the legislative proposals in HR6099 and S3760. Rahm Emanuel, currently White House
chief of staff and a former member of the Democratic leadership in the Congress, proposed universal
accounts as a way of dealing with the long-term Social Security problem in a 2007 Wall Street Journal
article.
18

rises in every year with the age of the beneficiary. The average age of those over
65 is rising because of increased survival rates in that demographic group,
driving up the costs per Medicare participant. Second, the cost of the Medicare
benefits for participants at every age also rises faster than GDP, reflecting a
combination of new medical technologies and increases in the cost of the
existing methods of care.
The CBO’s “alternative fiscal scenario” (CBO,2010d) projects that Medicare and
the other “mandatory” health programs (primarily Medicaid) will go from 5.5
percent of GDP in 2010 to 7.2 percent in 2020, 10.9 of GDP in 2035 and 20.1
percent in 2084 at the end of the CBO’s 75 year long-term forecast. According to
the CBO calculations, under current law about 55 percent of the increased
spending for the federal health programs by 2035 will be due to this faster growth
of health costs relative to GDP and the remaining half to the aging of the
population. This demographic factor (i.e., the relative aging of the Medicare
population) causes costs to rise until 2035, after which the age structure is
assumed to stabilize. The CBO’s analysis also assumes that the “excess cost
growth” (i.e., the faster growth of the health costs relative to the growth of GDP)
will be 1.70 percent a year in 2020 and will then decline linearly to a 1.0 percent
a year excess cost growth in 2084. As already noted, this implies that the cost of
Medicare and Medicaid rises from 5.5 percent of GDP now to 10.9 percent in
2035 and 20.1 percent in 2084.
Much of the policy discussion about Medicare financing focuses on what can be
done to reduce the rate of increase of Medicare costs, particularly to reduce the
“excess cost growth”. The 2010 health care legislation23 created a high level
federal committee (the Independent Payment Advisory Board) with the mandate
to reduce future Medicare costs. The legislation also commits the administration
to reduce Medicare spending relative to current projections by about $450 billion
by 2019, an amount that is reflected in the CBO’s cost “scoring” of the legislation.
There is of course no reason to pay for health care that is not effective or that
costs more than an equally effective alternative treatment. Moreover, Medicare,
like all other health insurance, increases the demand for health care and leads to
inefficiently high levels of health care spending, i.e., spending at a level at which
the cost of producing the marginal unit of care exceeds its value to the patient.
Nevertheless, bureaucratic controls on health spending do not provide a way of
reflecting the variety of individual patient preferences about the tradeoffs
between cost and risk.24 While everyone wants good health, individuals differ in
23

The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act.
For further discussion of this issue and a confession of why I changed my earlier views on the
application of cost benefit analysis to health care, see Feldstein (1995).

24

19

their willingness to adopt lifestyles that prolong expected life and reduce the risks
of ill health. For the same reason, individuals with the same income differ in their
willingness to spend for diagnosis and for treatments with uncertain benefits. An
“engineering” approach to finding the “right” way to treat a patient with particular
symptoms fails to recognize these important differences in preferences.
In a society with rising incomes there is also no reason why health care spending
should not consume a rising share of incomes for a very long period of time.
Even if Medicare costs rise at the rate projected by the CBO, the income
remaining for everything else will still continue to rise rapidly.
To be specific, note that the CBO assumes that GDP will rise at 2.0 percent a
year in the long run, consisting of 1.3 percent a year growth of real GDP per
capita and population growth of 0.7 percent a year (CBO, July 2010). This
implies average per capita GDP will rise by some 163 percent over the next 75
years. If Medicare and related government health spending that now absorbs 5.5
percent of GDP is allowed to rise to 20.1 percent of GDP in 2084, the remaining
GDP that is not absorbed by those federal health programs goes from 94.5
percent of GDP now to 79.9 percent of GDP in 2084. But with that future per
capita GDP equal to 263 percent of today’s per capita GDP, the 79.9 percent
available for everything else would be equal to 211 percent of today’s GDP. If the
share of GDP for Medicare and related health programs were instead
constrained to 5.5 percent of GDP, the per capita GDP available for everything
else in 2084 would be 94.5 percent of 2.63 times today’s GDP or 248 percent of
today’s GDP. Therefore, preventing any increase at all in the GDP share for
government health programs would allow per capita income available for
everything else to rise by 148 percent from today’s level instead of by 111
percent. There is no reason to think that the future public would sacrifice the
higher quality of health care in old age to have a 148 percent rise in other
spending rather than a 111 percent rise.
In short, allowing Medicare and Medicaid outlays to rise at the full rate projected
by the CBO still leaves an enormous rise in income for other purposes. With the
possibilities that medical science is likely to offer to older persons during the
coming decades, it is hard to argue that this is an unwise use of the future
increase in incomes.
The problem therefore is not the rising future amount of health care spending on
older Americans but the tax rate consequences of doing so through tax finance.
Financing 20.1 percent of GDP rather than 5.5 percent through taxes would
require an additional 14.6 percent of GDP in taxes. This would be on top of the
taxes needed to pay for other spending and for interest on the national debt.

20

It is however not necessary to increase tax rates by a large amount if future
Medicare costs (and the portion of Medicaid costs associated with long term care
for those who were previously not poor) could be financed by supplementing the
existing payroll tax revenue with personal health retirement accounts analogous
to the personal retirement accounts described above to supplement traditional
Social Security.
Consider how this might be applied to Medicare.25 There are a variety of ways in
which individual accounts could be used. The simplest would be for the
government to require everyone to have such an account that could be used at
age 65 to fill the financing gap that results between the cost of Medicare and the
amount that can be financed by taxation at the same 3.6 percent of GDP that
exists today. More complex arrangements would allow individuals to select
different health plans at retirement age, with lower premiums associated with
higher co-payments or with health maintenance organization type arrangements.
Those lower premiums would accrue to the individuals who select them as
additional cash pensions. Alternatively, the government could indicate that the
tax financed health benefits for the aged would become less comprehensive or
have substantial co-payments and encourage (rather than require) everyone to
have a Personal Health Retirement Account in which funds accumulate tax free.
The Social Security analysis described above shows how a mixed system with
individual accounts could be structured. For simplicity, the Medicare calculations
that I have done for this paper assume a single government account, although I
discuss in Feldstein (2000) the advantages of financing through individual
accounts instead of a single common fund.
More specifically, under the option that I have analyzed, the government funds
future Medicare by a combination of a 3.6 percent of GDP tax (the current tax
share of GDP used for Medicare) and withdrawals from a Medicare Accumulation
Fund. The fund pays out the difference between the cost of Medicare in each
future year and the 3.6 percent of GDP tax revenue.
My calculations show that this can be done if the fund receives 3.0 percent of
GDP each year from the population under age 65, starting in the current year.
The fund is invested to earn a real return of 5.5 percent, a lower return than a
portfolio of 60 percent equities and 40 percent high grade debt has produced
over the past 50 years.26

25

This could in principle be extended to the Medicaid programs for the aged but the data for doing so is
not separately available.
26
Because of the potential long-term risks of such a portfolio, alternative risk mitigation strategies should
be explored along the lines discussed in Feldstein (2005b).
21

These calculations use the CBO (2010d) assumptions about the evolution of
Medicare costs. The CBO projects specific annual Medicare costs for the years
2010 through 2020 and then assumes rules for cost growth in later years. More
specifically, the Medicare cost growth relative to GDP consists of a demographic
component to reflect population aging until 2035 (after which there is no
demographic addition) and an excess health cost component that grows at 1.7
percent in 2020 and decreases linearly until it reaches 1.0 percent in 2084.
The Medicare Accumulation Fund therefore evolves according to
(1)

A(t) = 1.055 A(t-1) + 0.03 * GDP(t) - MC(t)* GDP(t) + 0.036 GDP(t)

where the annual Medicare cost projections are those presented by the CBO for
2010 through 2020 and then evolve according to
(2) MC(t) = MC(t-1) * (1 + d(t)) (1 + c(t))

where 1+ d(t) is the demographic feature equal to 1.03 percent from 2020 to
2035 and 1.0 after that while the excess cost growth factor is c(t) = 0.017 in 2020
and declines linearly to c(t) = 0.010 in 2084.
Explicit calculation shows that the resulting Medicare Accumulation Fund
remains positive through 2084. That means that the full projected Medicare cost
can be financed with a combination of the existing 3.6 percent of GDP tax and a
new 3.0 percent of GDP saving deposit, a total of 6.6 percent of GDP, instead
of having costs rise from 3.6 percent of GDP now to 7.0 percent in 2035 and 13.4
percent in 2084.
It would be useful to see whether this can be developed using individual
accounts with each cohort having enough funds from the combination of the tax
payments (3.6 percent of GDP) and the payouts available from their own
account. It would also be instructive to see how this can be done with a gradual
increase in the required saving rate rather than starting with the full 3 percent.
4. Reducing Tax Expenditures

Avoiding the rapid growth of the national debt between now and the end of the
decade without raising tax rates requires reductions in government spending.
But most federal non-defense spending, other than Social Security, Medicare
and Medicaid, is now done through special tax rules rather than by direct cash
outlays. While spending for non-defense discretionary programs through regular
budget outlays costs 4.8 percent of GDP in 2010, the tax expenditures for the
22

same purposes cost more than 6.8 percent of GDP. Significant reductions in
federal domestic spending will therefore require Congressional action to limit tax
expenditures.27
Tax expenditures are features of the tax code that reduce tax revenue in order to
achieve effects that might otherwise be done by explicit outlays. Some examples
will indicate the nature of tax expenditures.
The Child Credit. The child credit pays $1,000 per child under 18 to taxpayers
with incomes under $110,000 (and then phasing out above that). This transfer
might alternatively be achieved as a direct payment from the government to
couples with children under 18. The Joint Committee on Taxation estimates for
2008 (the most recent year for which disaggregated data are available) that 32
million taxpayers claimed this credit with a total revenue loss of $48 billion of
which half was refundable.
The Mortgage Deduction. Taxpayers who itemize their deductions (instead of
claiming the standard deduction) may deduct payments for interest on mortgage
balances that total up to $1 million on one or two homes. For 2008, the 37 million
taxpayers who itemized mortgage interest expenses reduced their tax payments
by $85 billion dollars.
The Health Insurance Exclusion. The largest of the tax expenditures is the
subsidy for employer provided health insurance. Employer payments for the
health insurance of employees is tax deductible by the employer just like any
other form of compensation. But unlike cash compensation, employees do not
have to pay tax on this benefit. In 2008, an estimated 176 million employees
benefited from this tax expenditure that cost the Treasury $149 billion in lost
income tax revenue.
As these examples show, tax expenditures may be credits (like the child credit),
deductions (like the mortgage deduction), or exclusions from taxable income (like
the exclusion of employer payments for health insurance). Exclusions have the
additional cost to the Treasury of not being subject to the payroll tax used to
finance Social Security and Medicare. The Treasury Department has estimated
(Office of Management and Budget, 2010, p 213) that the lost amount of payroll
tax revenue associated with the health insurance was $97 billion in 2009,
bringing the total lost revenue for the health insurance exclusion for the year
2009 to about $246 billion.

27

The idea of tax expenditures was originally introduced by Surrey and McDaniel (1985).
23

While all taxpayers are eligible to benefit from exclusion type benefits and from
tax credits, only taxpayers who itemize their deductions benefit from deductions
like the deduction for mortgage interest or local property taxes. In 2008, only 33
percent of all taxpayers itemized their deductions.
Adding up the costs of all of the tax expenditures identified by the Office of
Management and Budget for 2009 implies a total loss of income tax revenue (i.e.,
not counting the loss of payroll tax revenue) of about $1 trillion.28 The three
largest categories of personal tax expenditures were housing (revenue loss $185
billion), health ($168 billion revenue loss) and education and training ($108
billion), totaling $481 billion for 2009 alone. But there are more than one hundred
other tax expenditures including a $500 million annual subsidy for the
rehabilitation of historic houses and a $4 billion annual subsidy for employer paid
transportation benefits.
The administration’s 2011 budget proposed to limit tax deductions by high
income taxpayers to the 28 percent tax rate, i.e., a taxpayer who takes a
deduction for $1000 would only reduce his tax bill by $280 even if he is in a
higher tax bracket. According to the CBO, (2010b) this would increase tax
revenue relatively little, raising $289 billion over 10 years or less than 3 percent
of the total tax expenditures over this period.29
Political Economy of Tax Expenditures
Tax expenditures change the political economy of income taxation in three ways.
First, the use of tax expenditures of various types eliminates the income tax
liabilities of millions of households that would otherwise pay income tax (Internal
Revenue Service, 2010). In 2007 (the latest year for which there are such IRS
data) there were 46 million tax filers who paid no income tax and received a
refund of any taxes withheld during the year. Those individuals file only because
they are required to file or in order to receive cash refunds. When a tax credit is
refundable, the taxpayer receives cash from the Treasury equal to the value of
their ”refundable” tax credits to the extent that those credits exceed the
individual’s pre-credit tax liability. Exempting these individuals from paying any
income tax is likely to reduce their political resistance to increases in tax rates on
28

There is a problem with simply adding up all of the individual tax expenditures since some are mutually
exclusive. For example, a taxpayer who takes one of the education credits may not take another. A
careful analysis of the problem by Burman, Toder and Geissler (2008) found that this distorts the effect of
eliminating all tax expenditures by less than 10 percent.
29
This limit on the tax rate used for tax deductions would increase the net cost of charitable contributions
from 60 cents per dollar of gift to 72 cents for individuals in the 40 percent marginal tax bracket. Because
of the sensitivity of charitable giving to the net of tax cost, the administration’s proposal would have the
effect of reducing the amount received by the charitable organizations by the same as the amount of
extra revenue collected by the Treasury. See Feldstein (2009)
24

the rest of the population. This would not be the same if the individuals paid
income taxes and received cash benefits.
The second political effect of using tax expenditures is that it converts domestic
discretionary expenditures that would be subject to annual Congressional
appropriation to features of the tax code that are likely to be permanent once
passed unless Congress takes deliberate steps to change the tax code. That
has the effect of making these spending decisions more permanent than they
would otherwise be.
Third, the shift from outlays to tax expenditures distorts the description of the
fiscal system. Tax revenue in 2009 was 14.8 percent of GDP and nondefense
discretionary outlays were 4.1 percent of GDP. If the tax expenditures equal to
6.9 percent of GDP were more correctly classified as spending, the full size of
the tax burden (before these tax expenditures) would be seen as 21.7 percent of
GDP and the non-defense discretionary spending would be 11.0 percent of GDP.
Raising both taxes and spending by equal amounts would not change the size of
the deficit but it would show the much larger size of both taxes and spending
than our current measurements indicate.
Although individual members of Congress have proposed eliminating or reducing
certain tax expenditures, neither political party has focused on controlling this
type of spending. Democrats are reluctant to cut programs that provide a form of
spending that they favor and that do so in a way that does not require new
annual authorizations but that stay on the books unless they are repealed.
Income limits on the taxpayers who can benefit from these tax expenditures
allows Congress to target these benefits to lower income groups. Moreover,
many tax expenditures are refundable, causing the government to send a check
to the individual if he owes no tax.
Many Republicans are reluctant to cut these tax perks because they regard the
additional revenue that would be collected by the federal government as a “tax
increase” even though the increased revenue is really the effect of a de facto
spending cut. A Republican member of Congress who would vote to cut or
eliminate an ordinary spending program may therefore be reluctant to do so if it is
packaged as a tax benefit.
But eliminating tax expenditures does not increase marginal tax rates or reduce
the reward for saving, investment, and risk-taking. Eliminating tax expenditures
would also increase the efficiency of the overall tax system by removing
incentives that distort private spending decisions. And eliminating some of the
large number of overlapping tax-based subsidies would also greatly simplify tax

25

filing.30 In short, eliminating tax expenditures is not at all like other ways of
raising revenue.
With more than $1 trillion a year of revenue loss due to tax expenditures, a
substantial reduction in future deficits could be achieved even if many of the tax
expenditures were retained and others reduced only partially (e.g., reducing the
allowable deduction by 50 percent or limiting the exclusion of certain fringe
benefits to 50 percent of the cost.) These changes could also be phased in
gradually, e.g., by reducing the allowable deductibility or the exclusion by 10
percent in the first year, 20 percent in the second year, etc..
An important part of the Reagan tax reform of 1986 was a reduction of tax
expenditures from more than 9 percent of GDP to 6 percent of GDP. These
included several tax expenditures that affected individual taxpayers as well as
others that affected businesses. Those affecting individuals included changes in
deductibility of various personal expenses (including nonbusiness state and local
taxes and consumer credit interest) and various exclusions (including the
exclusion of unemployment insurance benefits and certain employer pension
contributions).31
The Treasury Department projects that the current tax expenditures of 6.8
percent of GDP will rise to 7.6 percent of GDP by 2015. Cutting that 7.6 percent
to 5 percent would reduce the deficit in that year by 2.5 percent of GDP without
any increase in tax rates. That reduction in tax expenditures beginning in 2015
would reduce the national debt in 2020 by more than 12 percent of GDP.
5. Lessons of the Past

Despite temporary deficit surges during the past three decades, the cyclically
adjusted primary deficit (i.e., the deficit excluding net interest) in the last year of
each presidency was just 1.4 percent of GDP or less. The largest of these was in
2008 when the economy was in sharp decline. If we stop the analysis with 2007,
the cyclically adjusted primary balance in that year was a surplus of 0.5 percent
of potential GDP. The Ronald Reagan and George H.W. Bush presidencies
ended with cyclically adjusted primary deficits of just 0.2 percent of potential GDP
while the last year of the Clinton presidency saw a primary surplus of 3.4 percent
of potential GDP.
30

For extensive discussions of the tax simplification that would be achieved by eliminating or
consolidating some of the large numbers of tax expenditures, see Commission on Tax Reform (2006) and
President’s Economic Recovery Advisory Board (2010).
31
See Neubig and Joulfaian (1988) for a detailed analysis.
26

In contrast, the CBO estimates of the Obama administration’s 2011 budget imply
that the primary fiscal deficit would be 3.9 percent of GDP in 2012 and 1.6
percent of GDP in 2016 when the unemployment rate is predicted to be just 5.0
percent of GDP.
This section reviews the fiscal records of the four presidencies between 1980
and 2008 to understand how these administrations reduced fiscal deficits and
achieved primary balance or surpluses. I use Congressional Budget Office data
to analyze the changes in actual and cyclically adjusted deficits, decomposing
these changes into movements of revenue and of the major components of
spending.
An appendix analyzes the decline in the relative size of the budget deficits after
World War II. The deficit fell from 109 percent of GDP in 1946 to 46 percent in
1960. This reflected a successful “stop digging” strategy that caused the nominal
debt to be the same in 1960 as it was in 1946. The rise in real GDP and in the
price level were then each responsible for approximately equal reductions in the
ratio of debt to nominal GDP.
Ronald Reagan.32
A deep recession brought about by Federal Reserve tightening caused the
cyclical deficit to surge at the beginning of the Reagan presidency. The Reagan
administration also increased the deficit by sharp reductions in tax rates and
large increases in defense spending. Because personal income tax brackets
had not yet been indexed to the price level and the inflation rate in 1980 was 12.5
percent, the Reagan administration assumed that the revenue loss associated
with the1981 tax rate reductions would be largely offset by “bracket creep” as
inflation pushed taxpayers into higher tax brackets. But when monetary
tightening by the Fed succeeded in reducing inflation to 3.8 percent in 1982 and
1983, the reduced personal tax rates caused significant concurrent revenue
declines.
All of this caused the national debt to rise from 25.7 percent of potential GDP at
the end of 1980 to 41.1 percent at the end of 1988. As a result, the
government’s net interest bill rose from 1.9 percent of potential GDP in 1980 to
3.0 percent in 1988.33 This was the largest source of the increase in the deficit
between 1980 and 1988.

32

For a more complete discussion of fiscal policy in the Reagan years, see my introductory chapter in
Feldstein (1993) and the section of that volume dealing with the budget issues.
33
The change in the net interest bill also reflects changes in interest receipts and in the interest rate.
27

Table 1 summarizes the changes in the key components of the budget between
fiscal year 1980 (the last full year before the Reagan presidency) and fiscal year
1988.34 The first column shows actual changes as percentages of potential GDP
while the second column uses the CBO’s cyclically adjusted data for revenue and
for total deficit figures. Since cyclically adjusted and unadjusted total outlays are
very similar and no details are available on a cyclically adjusted basis, only the
revenue and total deficit figures are presented in cyclically adjusted form.

34

The budget numbers are from CBO (2010a) . The tax expenditures are described in section 4 of this
paper.
28

Table 1
Changes in Budget Components in the Reagan Presidency: 1980 to 1988
Unadjusted
Revenue*

- 0.4

Cyclically Adjusted
- 0.9

Defense

+ 0.9

+ 0.9

Nondefense Discretionary

- 1.6

- 1.6

Mandatory

- 0.5

- 0.5

Spending excluding
net interest

-1.1

- 1.1

Net Interest

+ 1.1

+ 1.1

DEFICIT*

+ 0.4

+ 1.1

Primary Deficit*

- 0.7

- 0.1

Tax Expenditures

- 0.9

- 0.9

Full taxes*

- 1.4

- 1.9

Full spending excluding
- 2.1
- 1.9
net interest
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Deficit as percent of
potential GDP*

3.1

3.3

Primary deficit as percent
of potential GDP*

0.1

0.2

Figures marked with an asterisk are cyclically adjusted.
All figures before the last two lines are changes as a percent of potential GDP. The
final two lines of the table show the level of the deficit as percent of potential GDP.

29

Although revenue declined (by 0.4 percent of GDP)35 and the defense share of
GDP rose (by 1.0 percent), these changes were more than offset by the decline
in non-defense discretionary spending (by 1.6 percent of GDP) and in mandatory
outlays (down 0.5 percent of GDP).36 As a result, total spending excluding net
interest fell by 1.1 percent of GDP. Because of the rise in interest costs, the
deficit rose by 0.4 percent of GDP to a total of 3.1 percent of GDP. However, the
primary deficit in 1988 was just 0.1 percent of GDP.
Tax expenditures were reduced during the period from 1980 to 1988 by 0.9
percent of GDP. Without that change, taxes in 1988 would have been 0.9
percent higher. The actual change in “full taxes” -- i.e., the decline in taxes other
than tax expenditures -- was therefore 1.4 percent of GDP. Counting the fall in
tax expenditures as a decline in nondefense discretionary spending implies that
“full spending” excluding net interest fell by 2.1 percent of GDP.
The fiscal deficit rose sharply in the early years of the Reagan presidency,
reaching a peak of 5.7 percent of GDP in 1983 from 2.7 percent in 1980. More
than half of this 3.0 percent deficit increase was cyclical since the cyclically
adjusted deficit only rose by 1.2 percentage points, from 2.1 percent of GDP in
1980 to 3.3 percent in 1983. The rise in net interest outlays from 1.9 percent to
2.4 percent accounted for more than a third of the increased cyclically adjusted
deficit. The remaining 0.8 percent of GDP rise was the net effect of four
components: a decline of cyclically adjusted revenue, increases in defense
spending and mandatory outlays, and a substantial fall in nondefense
discretionary outlays.
It is interesting to consider how that 5.7 percent of GDP deficit was cut almost in
half to 3.1 percent of GDP in 1988. This was achieved even though net interest
rose by 0.6 percent of GDP, from 2.4 percent of GDP in 1983 to 3.0 percent in
1988. How did the primary deficit go from 3.2 percent of GDP to 0.1 percent of
GDP in 1988, an improvement of 3.1 percent of GDP?
One answer is that cyclical conditions improved dramatically. The cyclical
component of the budget deficit was 2.3 percent in 1983 but was a negative
cyclical effect (reflecting above trend GDP) of 0.2 percent in 1988. This swing of
2.4 percent accounts for about three-fourths of the improvement in the primary
deficit.

35

All of these percentages are stated as percentages of potential GDP. This does not distort the picture
but makes comparisons somewhat more meaningful
36
The decline in mandatory outlays was achieved despite Social Security outlays remaining a constant
share of GDP and outlays for Medicare and Medicaid rising relative to GDP. This was achieved by cuts in
a variety of the “other mandatory” programs.
30

Half of the remaining 0.7 percent of GDP budget improvement was achieved by
cutting nondefense discretionary outlays between 1983 and 1988 by 0.4 percent
of GDP. Some of the 1.0 percent decline in miscellaneous mandatory
expenditures was cyclical and the rest closed the remaining gap in the cyclically
adjusted primary deficit.
The defense share of GDP rose by 0.1 percent. The primary mandatory
programs (Social Security, Medicare and Medicaid) took the same share of GDP
in 1988 as in 1983. Tax expenditures were reduced by 1.9 percent of GDP,
allowing sharp tax rate reductions without any decrease in cyclically adjusted
revenue as a share of GDP.
In short, the Reagan years achieved a substantial rise in defense outlays and
decrease in tax rates while lowering the primary deficit to just 0.1 percent of GDP
by reducing tax expenditures, nondefense discretionary spending, and the
“mandatory” programs other than Social Security, Medicare and Medicaid. Even
though net interest rose by 1.1 percent of GDP, the total deficit including net
interest only rose by 0.4 percent of GDP.
George H.W. Bush
The four years of the presidency of George H.W. Bush saw changes in budget
composition with no net impact on cyclically adjusted fiscal deficits. The entire
rise in the budget deficit -- from 3.1 percent of GDP in 1988 to 4.5 percent in
1992 -- was due to deteriorating economic conditions. The cyclically adjusted
deficit was 3.3 percent of GDP in both years. Despite increases in tax rates, the
cyclically adjusted total revenue fell from 18.1 percent to 17.9 percent. This was
balanced by a fall in cyclically adjusted outlays from 21.4 percent of GDP to 21.3
percent of GDP.
The big shifts in spending were a cut in defense outlays by 1.1 percent of GDP
balancing a rise in Medicare and Medicaid spending of 0.7 percent of GDP and
of 0.3 percent of GDP in “other mandatory spending”. Nondefense discretionary
outlays and Social Security remained at the same share of GDP. Even interest
on the national debt remained unchanged as lower interest rates offset a larger
debt.
Bill Clinton
The budget policies of the Clinton administration caused the national debt to
decline in each of the final four years of the Clinton presidency, the only such

31

sustained decline in the nominal debt since the three years of decline after World
War II.37
The annual deficit went from 4.5 percent of potential GDP in 1992 to a surplus of
2.5 percent of GDP in 2000. Part of this improvement was due to improved
cyclical conditions. But even on a cyclically adjusted basis, the swing was from a
deficit of 3.3 percent of GDP to a surplus of 1.1 percent.
The primary source of this 4.4 percent of GDP improvement in the budget
situation was the rise in tax revenue. Cyclically adjusted revenue rose by 2.1
percent of potential GDP to 20.0 percent of potential GbDP.38 Tax expenditures
rose by 0.9 percent of GDP, implying that full taxation rose by an additional 0.9
percent for a total increase of 3.0 percent of potential GDP.
The other major source of the fiscal improvement was a sharp cut in defense
spending, from 4.7 percent of GDP to just 3.1 percent of GDP, the lowest
defense share since 1940.
Taken together, the increase in cyclically adjusted “full taxation” and the fall in
defense spending reduced the budget deficit by 4.6 percent of potential GDP.
Lower interest rates caused the net interest to shrink by 0.8 percent, making the
total potential budget improvement 5.4 percent of GDP.
None of this potential budget improvement was used to increase traditional
outlays on domestic programs. Instead, the rise in domestic spending was
achieved through the 0.9 percent of GDP increase in tax expenditures.39
Traditional non-defense domestic outlays actually declined from 3.6 percent of
GDP to 3.4 percent while mandatory outlays fell from 10.1 percent of GDP to
10.0 percent as the rise in Medicare and Medicaid (from 2.9 percent to 3.3
percent) was offset by a 0.3 percent of GDP decline in “other mandatory” and a
0.1 percent decline in Social Security.
In short, higher taxes and reduced defense spending were used to reduce the
budget deficit and to increase backdoor domestic spending through the tax code.

37

See the Appendix to this paper for a brief analysis of the national debt reductions after World War II.
Actual revenue was 20.6 percent of GDP, a level exceeded only by the 20.9 percent at the peak of
World War II spending in 1944. Comparable cyclically adjusted data are not available.
39
There are no cyclically adjusted estimates for tax expenditures. The business cycle might affect the
size of tax expenditures by moving individuals to different marginal tax rates.
38

32

George W. Bush
The fiscal record of George W. Bush is difficult to assess because of the massive
economic downturn that began at the end of 2007. Although the CBO presents
cyclically adjusted figures, the difficulty of doing the cyclical adjustment implies
that it is useful to look at results for the period ending in 2007 as well as the
period through 2008. These figures are presented in Table 2.
In 2007, before the downturn began, the fiscal deficit was just 1.2 percent of GDP
on both a cyclically adjusted and an unadjusted basis (not shown in Table 2).
That compares with a surplus of 1.1 percent of GDP in 2000 for a swing of 2.2
percent of GDP. Without the cyclical adjustment, the budget moved from a 2.5
percent surplus to a 1.2 percent of GDP deficit, implying that the cyclical
deterioration from 2000 to 2007 accounted for nearly 40 percent of the budget
deterioration through 2007.
In 2008, the fiscal deficit was 3.1 percent of GDP and 2.8 percent on a cyclically
adjusted basis. The 1.9 percent of GDP rise in the deficit from 2007 to 2008 was
dominated by the decline in revenue (1.1 percent of GDP) and the increase in
“other mandatory” outlays (which include unemployment benefits and certain
means tested programs). Because of this, I will focus on the comparison of 2000
and 2007, although presenting data in Table 2 for 2008 as well.
The deficit in 2007 was only 1.2 percent of potential GDP on both a cyclically
adjusted and unadjusted basis. With a net interest bill of 1.7 percent, the primary
balance in 2007 was a budget surplus of 0.5 percent of GDP.
Between 2000 and 2007 the national debt as a percent of potential GDP was
essentially unchanged, rising from 36.0 percent in 2000 to 36.2 percent in 2007
before rising to 39.7 percent in 2008.

33

Table 2
Changes in Budget Components in the Presidency of George W. Bush
Change from 2000 Change from 2000
to 2007
to 2008
Revenue*

-1.6

- 2.5

Defense

+ 0.8

+ 1.1

Nondefense Discretionary

+ 0.2

+ 0.2

Mandatory

+ 0.4

+ 0.9

Spending excluding
net interest

+ 1.4

+ 2.2

Net Interest

- 0.6

- 0.6

DEFICIT*

+ 2.2

+ 3.9

Primary Deficit*

+ 2.9

+ 4.5

Tax Expenditures

- 0.7

- 0.8

Full taxes*

- 2.3

- 3.3

Full spending excluding
net interest

+ 0.7

+ 1.4

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Deficit Level as percent of
potential GDP*
Primary Deficit Level as percent
of potential GDP*

1.2

3.1

- 0.5

1.4

*Figures with an asterisk are cyclically adjusted
All figures except the final two lines are changes as a percent of potential GDP.
The final two lines of the table show the level of the deficit as percent of potential GDP
in the final year.

34

Table 2 shows the changes in the key budget components from 2000 to 2007
and 2008 and the deficit levels in 2007 and 2008. The revenue figures and
deficits are presented on a cyclically adjusted basis. Since spending totals are
very close on a cyclically adjusted and unadjusted basis and details of
components are not available, those outlays are shown with no cyclical
adjustment.
During the seven years through 2007, “full spending” (including defense and
domestic outlays, tax expenditures, and net interest) was essentially unchanged,
declining by less than 0.1 percent of GDP. The cyclically adjusted budget went
from a surplus of 1.1 percent of GDP in 2000 to a cyclically adjusted deficit of 1.2
percent of GDP because full taxes fell by 2.3 percent of GDP. If the effect of
changes in tax expenditures is ignored, spending rose by 0.7 percent of GDP
and taxes fell by 1.6 percent of GDP.
More specifically, non-defense discretionary spending rose by 0.2 percent of
GDP and mandatory spending rose by 0.4 percent. The mandatory increase was
the result of a 0.7 percent of GDP rise in Medicare and Medicaid outlays (with
about half of this due to the new Medicare part D program) offset by a small
decline of Social Security from 4.3 percent to 4.2 percent and a larger 0.2
percent decline of “other mandatory programs.” This 0.6 percent of GDP net
increase in nondefense outlays was balanced by a fall in tax expenditures of 0.7
percent of GDP. The budget was also helped by a decline of interest costs from
2.4 percent of GDP to 1.7 percent.
The 0.7 percent of GDP decline of tax expenditures implies that the 1.6 percent
of GDP fall in revenue understates the actual tax cut by 0.7 percent, i.e., that “full
taxes” fell by 2.3 percent of GDP and that the government then took back 0.7
percentage points of this by reducing spending done through tax expenditures.
This is shown in Table 2 as a fall of full taxes of 2.3 percent and a rise of full
spending excluding interest payments of 0.7 percentage points. Excluding
defense and interest, full spending declined by 0.1 percent of GDP between 2000
and 2007 and rose by 0.3 percent of GDP between 2000 and 2008.
6. Conclusion

The projected path of the U.S. national debt is the major challenge now facing
American economic policy. Without changes in tax and spending rules, the
national debt would rise from 62 percent of GDP now to more than 100 percent
of GDP by the end of the decade and nearly twice that level within 25 years.
35

Allowing the national debt to remain on that trajectory would pose serious risks
for the economy and for our national security. This paper discusses three
strategies that, taken together, could reverse this trend and reduce the ratio of
debt to GDP to less than 50 percent.
The first strategy, labeled “stop digging,” focuses on the current decade and the
budget proposals of the Obama administration. A “stop digging” strategy would
reduce the proposed spending increases and tax reductions that would otherwise
add $3.8 trillion to the national debt in 2020, an amount equal to 17 percent of
that year’s GDP.
The second strategy deals with the long-term costs of the Social Security,
Medicare and Medicaid programs. The combination of population aging and the
rapidly rising cost of medical care would raise the cost of these programs from
about 10 percent now to 17 percent of GDP in 2035 and more than 25 percent of
GDP in 2084, with the vast majority of this increase coming from the health
programs. Paying for these benefits with the current pure tax-financed structure
would require raising all personal and corporate tax rates by more than 50
percent. Although this has led to calls for large cuts in health spending, the
projected increase of per capita GDP (160 percent over the next 75 years)
means that non-health spending could rise very substantially even if there is no
reduction in the projected rise of Medicare and Medicaid.
The real problem is therefore not the future cost of health care but the tax
consequences of paying for that care through taxation. A strategy to augment
the tax financed benefits with investment based accounts would permit the higher
future spending on health care and pensions with an additional saving rate of
only about four percent of GDP on top of the current tax share devoted to the
pay-as-you-go financing of those programs.
The third strategy focuses on “tax expenditures,” the special features of the tax
law that reduce revenue in order to achieve effects that might otherwise be done
by explicit outlays. Most federal government non-defense spending, other than
Social Security, Medicare and Medicaid, is now done through tax expenditures
rather than by direct cash outlays. These tax expenditures include deductions,
credits and exclusions that now result in an annual total revenue loss of about $1
trillion or more than 6 percent of GDP. Significant reductions in federal domestic
spending would therefore require changing tax rules to limit tax expenditures.
Such changes in tax rules could reduce future deficits without increasing
marginal tax rates or reducing the rewards for saving, investment and risk taking.
Those changes in the tax laws would cause permanent reductions in spending
and deficits.
36

Although the task of reducing the projected deficits is politically challenging, the
historic record is actually encouraging. The fiscal deficit that reached 109
percent of GDP in 1946 after World War II was returned to the pre-war level by
1960 through a “stop digging” strategy that prevented any rise in the nominal
national debt. The combination of real GDP growth at 2.6 percent and inflation at
3.3 percent brought the ratio of debt to GDP down to 46 percent.
More recently, the presidencies of Ronald Reagan and George H.W. Bush
experienced temporary surges in budget deficits but each ended with cyclically
adjusted primary deficits of just 0.2 of potential GDP. The Clinton administration
ended with a cyclically adjusted fiscal surplus of 1.1 percent of GDP. Until the
economic and financial crisis began in 2008, the administration of George W.
Bush had a cyclically adjusted surplus of 0.5 percent of potential GDP.
Cambridge, MA
September 2010

37

APPENDIX
The National Debt After World War II
The national debt rose during World War II from 42 percent of GDP in 1941 to a
record 109 percent of GDP at the end of 1946. The debt ratio then fell slowly,
getting back to 46 percent of GDP in 1960. This appendix examines what
caused that debt ratio to decline.
The nominal level of the government debt held by the public rose from $48 billion
in 1941 to $242 billion in 1946 and was at virtually the same level ($237 billion) in
1960. It achieved this despite the fact that the period included the Korean War
years and that debt increased in nine of the 15 years.
At the end of World War II the debt fell by about 10 percent over the next two
years, reaching $216 billion in 1948. It rose briefly to $219 billion in 1950 and
then fell to $214 billion in 1951. From 1951 to 1960 it rose by one percent of GDP
per year, bringing it back to $237 billion.
During the years from 1946 to 1960 the level of nominal GDP rose by 133
percent, causing the debt to GDP ratio to fall from 109 percent to 46 percent.
About half of the rise in nominal GDP over this period was real and the rest was
the rise of the price level. Real GDP grew at 2.6 percent a year and the GDP
price level rose by 3.3 percent a year. The details are shown in table A
From 1946 to 1950, the nominal debt fell 9.5 percent. If the nominal GDP had
remained unchanged, the debt to GDP ratio would have declined from 1.09 to
0.98. With the flat real GDP between 1946 and 1950, the rise in the price level
caused all of the decline from 1.09 to 0.80 in 1950.
From 1950 to 1955, the nominal debt rose just 3.5 percent. The 27 percent rise
in the real GDP during those years would have reduced the debt to GDP ratio to
.65. The actual decline was to 0.57.
And from 1955 to 1960 the nominal debt rose by 4.5 percent and real GDP rose
by 16 percent. The combination would have left the debt to GDP ratio at 0.51.
The remaining decline to 0.46 was due to higher prices.

38

Table A
The National Debt from 1941 to 1960
Debt**

GDP*

Debt/GDP

Real
GDP***

Price
Level****

1941

$ 48

$114

0.42

$1264

1946

242

223

1.09

1883

11.8

1950

219

273

0.80

1880

14.5

1955

227

396

0.57

2394

16.5

1960

237

519

0.46

2785

18.6

9.0

* Nominal GDP in billions of dollars

** Debt in billions of dollars held by the public (including debt held by Federal
Reserve
*** Real GDP in billions of chained 2005 dollars
**** CPI with 100 in 2005

References
Auerbach, Alan and William Gale, “Déjà vu All Over Again: On the Dismal Prospects
for the Federal Budget,” Brookings and Urban Institute, Tax Policy Center, April
2010.

39

Burman, Toder and Leonard Geissler, “How Big Are Total Individual Income Tax
Expenditures, and Who Benefits from Them?” American Economic Review, May
2008, Vol. 98, Issue 2, pp. 79-83.
Campbell, John and Martin Feldstein, eds, Risk Aspects of Investment-Based Social
Security Reform, eds., Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2001.
Commission on Tax Reform, Reforming the Tax System, October 2006.
Congressional Budget Office, Budget Options: Volume 2. 2009
Congressional Budget Office, The Budget and Economic Outlook: Fiscal Years 2010 to
2020, January 2010
Congressional Budget Office, An Analysis of the President’s Budgetary Proposals for
the Fiscal Year 2011, March 2010.
Congressional Budget Office,The Long-Term Budget Outlook, June 2010.
Congressional Budget Office, Federal Debt and the Risk of a Fiscal Crisis, July 2010.
Congressional Budget Office, The Budget and Economic Outlook: An Update, August
2010.
Feldstein, M, “Administrative Costs in Social Security Reform: A Comment,” in John
Shoven, ed., Administrative Costs in Social Security Reform, Chicago: University
of Chicago Press, 2000.
________ “Rethinking Social Insurance,” The 2005 Presidential Address to the
American Economic Association, in American Economic Review, Vol. 95, No. 1,
March 2005, pp. 1-24. (2005a)

_______Reducing the Risk of Investment-Based Social Security Reforms,” J.
Brown, J. Lieberman and D. Wise (eds.), in Social Security Policy in a Changing
Environment, Chicago: Chicago University Press, 2005. (2005b)
_______ “The Economics of Health and Health Care: What Have We Learned? What
Have I Learned?” American Economic Review, Vol. 85, No. 2, May 1995.
_______ American Economic Policy in the 1980s, ed., Chicago: University of Chicago
40

Press, 1993
_______ “Extend the Bush Tax Cuts – For Now,” The Wall Street Journal, May 12,
2010. 2010
_______ “A Deduction from Charity,” The Washington Post, March 25, 2009.
Feldstein, Martin and Andrew Samwick, “The Transition Path in Privatizing Social
Security,” in M. Feldstein (ed.), Privatizing Social Security, Chicago: Chicago
University Press, 1998, pp. 215-60.
Feldstein, Martin and Andrew Samwick, “Potential Paths of Social Security Reform, in
ed. James Poterba, Tax Policy and the Economy 2001, Vol. 16, 2002, Cambridge:
MIT Press, pp. 181-224.
Internal Revenue Service, Statistics of Income 2010
Neubig, Thomas and David Joulfaian “The TAx Expenditure Budget Before and After
the
Tax Reform Act of 1986,” US Treasury, Office of Tax Analysis, Paper 60
(October
1988)
Office of Management and Budget, Budget of the United States, 2010
President’s Economic Recovery Advisory Board, “The Report on Tax Reform Options –
Simplification, Enforcement, and Corporate Taxation,” August 2010.
Reinhart, Carmen and Kenneth Rogoff, This Time is Different, Princeton University
Press, 2009.
Surrey, Stanley and Paul McDaniel, Tax Expenditures, Harvard University Press, April
1985.
END

41

42

