NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE IMPACT OF COLLEGE EDUCATION ON GEOGRAPHIC MOBILITY:
IDENTIFYING EDUCATION USING MULTIPLE COMPONENTS OF VIETNAM DRAFT RISK
Ofer Malamud
Abigail K. Wozniak
Working Paper 16463
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16463

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2010

The authors would like to thank Dan Black, Kerwin Charles, Bill Evans, Lawrence Katz, Caroline
Hoxby, Thomas Lemieux, Laddie Sula and Lars Lefgren for helpful conversations and comments.
Comments from seminar participants at SOLE, the University of Notre Dame, the Midwest Economics
Association Meetings, University of Illinois-Urbana Champaign, Dartmouth College, University of
Illinois-Chicago, Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis, Rutgers University, Princeton
University and the University of Maryland improved the paper. All errors are our own. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Ofer Malamud and Abigail K. Wozniak. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

The Impact of College Education on Geographic Mobility: Identifying Education Using Multiple
Components of Vietnam Draft Risk
Ofer Malamud and Abigail K. Wozniak
NBER Working Paper No. 16463
October 2010
JEL No. I23,J24,J61
ABSTRACT
We examine whether higher education is a causal determinant of geographic mobility using variation
in college attainment induced by draft-avoidance behavior during the Vietnam War. We use national
and state-level induction risk to identify both educational attainment and veteran status among cohorts
of affected men observed in the 1980 Census. Our 2SLS estimates imply that the additional years of
higher education significantly increased the likelihood that affected men resided outside their birth
states later in life. Most estimates suggest a causal impact of higher education on migration that is
larger in magnitude but not significantly different from OLS. Our large reduced-form estimates for
the effect of induction risk on out-of-state migration also imply that the Vietnam War led to substantial
geographic churning in the national labor market. We conclude that the causal impact of college completion
on subsequent mobility is large and provide evidence on a range of mechanisms that may be responsible
for the relationship between college education and mobility.

Ofer Malamud
Harris School of Public Policy Studies
University of Chicago
1155 East 60th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
malamud@uchicago.edu
Abigail K. Wozniak
Department of Economics
University of Notre Dame
441 Flanner Hall
South Bend, IN 46556
and NBER
a_wozniak@nd.edu

Data from the 1940-2000 U.S. Censuses show that the long-distance migration rates of
college graduates are roughly twice those of high school graduates.1 This gap is similar in magnitude
to the log wage gap between college and high school graduates toward the end of this period.
Strikingly, these migration rates by education group have been largely stable over these six decades,
despite large increases in post-secondary educational attainment. This is consistent with the
possibility that higher education has a causal impact on the geographic mobility of its recipients, but
without a credibly identified empirical analysis we cannot rule out other explanations for this pattern,
such as falling transportation and communication costs.2 However, in contrast to the extensive
evidence on the causal contribution of education to the wage gap (Card 1999 provides a survey),
little is known about the role of education as a causal determinant of geographic mobility.
Geographic mobility may afford an individual a larger choice set over jobs and locations and may
also reflect an ability to respond appropriately to spatial disequilibria across labor markets. As such,
it would constitute an important return to schooling that is distinct from increased wages. In this
paper, we use exogenous variation in college going to provide the first credible analysis of the causal
relationship between education and geographic mobility.
We use variation in college attainment induced by draft-avoidance behavior among cohorts
of men affected by the Vietnam conflict to isolate the causal effect of education on geographic
mobility. This approach is inspired by Card and Lemieux (2000, 2001a) who document the excess
educational attainment among cohorts induced to enter college as a means of deferring conscription
into the Armed Services during the Vietnam conflict. While Card and Lemieux focus on differences
in induction risk across birth cohorts, we also exploit state level variation in induction risk within
This is true for both migration measures in the Census: out of birth state residence and migration across state/county
lines in the past five years. We discuss these measures in more detail later in the paper. For early evidence on
educational migration differentials, see Ladinsky (1967), and Greenwood (1975). Wozniak (forthcoming) and
Greenwood (1997) provide more recent evidence. Ferrie (2005) provides important evidence on migration rates and the
migration-occupation mobility link over the past 150 years, but educational attainment is only available in the Census
beginning in 1940.
2 Migration rates within an education group would fall as educational attainment increased if the propensity to migrate
were a normally distributed unobserved characteristic correlated with college going, as in a simple selection explanation
for the differential in migration rates.
1

2

cohorts. The existence of state level variation allows us to decompose national induction risk into
its constituent parts: induction risk faced by a young man’s own state cohort and risk faced by young
men of that cohort in the rest of the country. The decomposition yields two instruments, which we
use to identify the two endogenous variables—education and veteran status—in our empirical
application.
This is the first use of a two instrument strategy to address the endogeneity of both
education and military status that is common in studies using changes in military policies as
instrumental variables (Angrist and Krueger, 1992; Bound and Turner 2002; Stanley 2003;
MacKinnis 2006).3 The use of two instruments allows us to generate estimates of the causal effect
of higher education on geographic mobility that are free of bias arising from the correlation between
veteran status and either educational attainment or the individual error term. Of equal importance,
our strategy exploits state-year level variation in induction risk to identify the college enrollment
decision. This is a significant advance over studies that use the Card and Lemieux measures to
identify college going using only year to year variation in induction risk (De Walque 2007, Grimard
and Parent 2007, and MacInnis 2006). Our robustness analysis reveals evidence that the
assumptions required to identify higher education from the time series variation in induction risk
alone are unlikely to be satisfied.
Finally, our identification strategy is particularly appropriate for studying the impact of a
college education on internal migration. The increased incentives for college going in our setting
leave the relative price of attending any given college unchanged, and thus our instruments
encourage college going without affecting which college a student chooses. In other words, our
instruments increase college-going in a more general way than other instruments previously
employed in the literature, such as proximity to college and variation in state tuition policy (Card
1995; Dynarski 2008). These instruments have provided useful estimates of the return to college
3 Angrist and Krueger (1992) faced an identical problem in their study of the effects of educational attainment on
earnings using draft lottery numbers to identify educational attainment.

3

education, but because they increase access to college by lowering the price of some colleges relative
to others (usually on the basis of geography), they are less appropriate for studying education’s effect
on mobility because of exclusion restriction concerns. This is an important consideration—
particularly when the outcome is mobility—since attending a local college may have different effects
on the outcome than attending a distant college. On this basis, our strategy will appeal to those
interested in identifying the effect of higher education on migration in the absence of relative price
changes. However, we also examine how our results might differ if we used “policy-style”
instruments based on college availability and tuition inducements.
Using micro-data from 5% samples of the 1980 U.S. Census of Population, we provide both
OLS and 2SLS estimates of the effect of college education on geographic mobility. In crosssectional OLS regressions, we observe that an additional year of higher education is associated with
an increase in an individual’s probability of residing outside his birth state at mid-career of three
percentage points, or approximately ten percent of the mean of this variable. When we instrument
for college with cohort-level induction risk, the causal effect of an additional year of college on
geographic mobility is generally larger, but estimates range from 1.9 percentage points to 6.7
percentage points. Moreover, large reduced-form estimates for the effect of induction risk on outof-state migration suggest that the Vietnam War led to substantial geographic churning in the
national labor market.
After presenting our estimates of the causal impact of college going on mobility, we consider
the mechanisms through which college may have this effect. We show that our results are driven by
increased educational attainment at the post-secondary level alone, not through increases in
education generally. This suggests that the particulars of the college experience or skilled labor
market are likely drivers of the education-migration relationship, rather than increased cognitive
skills. We find evidence of a role for the migration experience of “going away” to college in

4

explaining later adult migration, but other mechanisms, including the geographic diversity of one’s
peers and the nature of the college labor market, appear to play important roles as well.
The notion that education can provide valuable skills which make individuals more
productive in the workplace is well-established in the economics literature. However, the analysis of
the relationship between education and labor market outcomes has tended to focus on one of two
aspects of this relationship. The first is reduced form, quasi-experimental evidence that education is
causally linked to higher earnings (Card 2001). The second is that education improves measured
cognitive ability, which is one channel through which education is assumed to affect earnings
(Johnson and Neal 1996; Cascio and Lewis 2006). There is less, but growing, evidence that
education is causally linked to other important outcomes, such as health (Adams 2002; Currie and
Moretti 2003; Lleras-Muney 2005; Jayachandran and Lleras-Muney 2009). Similarly, there is growing
interest in and evidence that education confers skills other than cognitive ability that are rewarded in
the labor market (e.g. Bowles, Gintis, and Osborne 2001; Heckman, Stixrud and Urzua 2006;
Borghans et al. 2008).
Our paper makes contributions to both these growing literatures. First, we test for a
reduced-form, causal relationship between education (specifically higher education) and geographic
mobility. This has important implications for individual welfare. Geographic mobility, like health,
expands the set of choices available to an individual and is therefore an important component of
individual utility. Similarly, mobility may have a direct impact on individual earnings, magnifying its
importance as a determinant of utility (Wozniak, forthcoming; Bound and Holzer, 2000). In addition
to its effect on an individual’s choice set of consumption bundles, Shultz (1961) and Bowles (1970)
both identified migration as a major form of human capital investment. Our paper can therefore
shed light on how one form of human capital investment may encourage another.
This leads to our second contribution to the literature. By focusing on geographic mobility
as an outcome, we expand the notion of human capital acquired through schooling to include a
5

broader set of skills and attributes. A causal link between education and migration would imply that
geographic mobility is one of the “returns” to higher education. Because migration has long been
modeled by economists as the appropriate response to labor market disequilibria, finding a causal
link between education and mobility can potentially add much to our understanding of what
education confers. There was a period in which leading labor economists considered the question of
whether education confers the ability to respond to economic disequilibria, but this line of analysis
withered without resolution.4 Examining the nature of the relationship between education and
geographic mobility may provide new insight into this important question.
Finally, concerns about immigration policy’s displacement effects on natives (Borjas 2006)
and about the need for and effects of geographic reallocation in the recent global downturn also
make it a timely outcome for study (Dougherty 2009).
The paper proceeds as follows. Section II explains our identification strategy. Section III
describes the data and estimating equations, and IV presents our main results. Section V
investigates mechanisms for the causal effect of education on migration, and VI concludes.

II. Identification Strategy
We extend an instrumental variables strategy inspired by Card and Lemieux (2000, 2001);
hereafter CL. They show that Vietnam era induction risk varied significantly across birth year
cohorts due to differences in military manpower requirements and cohort size. They find that
young men responded to an increased risk of induction by attending and completing college at
higher rates than pre-draft cohorts.5 College enrollment was a well known and virtually foolproof
way to defer conscription. The Military Service Act of 1967 stated that college students in good

4 Nelson and Phelps (1966) postulate a higher return to education in the presence of technological change and Welch
(1970) provides some related evidence. Schultz (1975) offers a survey of studies examining the ability to deal with
disequilibria.
5 Specifically, increased induction risk led to significant deviations in male college attainment gains from the inter-cohort
path traced out by females, whose attainment gains followed a similar trajectory to that of pre-draft males.

6

standing could defer induction until receipt of undergraduate degree or age 24, whichever occurred
first. Prior to 1967, deferment for the purposes of four-year college enrollment was guaranteed in
practice as local draft boards issued deferments for a variety of reasons including school attendance.6
Although new college deferments were eliminated in September of 1971 with the introduction of the
draft lottery, those currently enrolled were able to retain their deferments. Thus, the incentive to
enroll was great: among “fit” men, risk of induction was [eventually] very high.7 CL estimate that
male college attendance would have been 4 to 6 percentage points lower and graduation 2
percentage points lower had male college attainment in these cohorts followed the female path. Like
CL, we use variation in college attendance and completion generated by draft avoidance behavior to
isolate the portion of college education that was induced by policy changes on the part of the U.S.
government from that which would have been chosen by individuals independent of the policy
change.
An artifact of our identification strategy for education—using draft avoidance behavior—is
that the likelihood an individual is a veteran also varies across cohorts in our sample. Veteran status
is a plausible determinant of geographic mobility (Pingle 2007), and may be correlated with the
individual error term in much the same way that education is. Our equation of interest therefore
contains two endogenous variables. To deal with this, we could exclude veteran status from our
included controls. This would generate a biased estimate of the causal impact of education on
mobility, but the size of the bias might be estimated using formulas for omitted variables bias and
assumptions about the magnitude of the causal effect of veteran status on mobility.8
Instead, our approach is to deal with the problem of multiple endogenous variables directly.
We exploit state level variation within the cohort level variation identified by CL in order to obtain
Tatum and Tuchinsky, Guide to the Draft, Ch. 3. By contrast, enrollment in a two year college was not considered
grounds for automatic deferment. Students at two year programs were only eligible for occupational deferments under
the same rules as those already employed. See Rothenberg (1968).
7 CL provide a rough estimate of the risk of being drafted conditional on not enrolling in college.
8 This is the approach taken by Angrist and Kreuger (1992). If the coefficient vector is estimated using instrumental
variables, the estimate is not guaranteed unbiased if the model contains more endogenous variables than instruments.
Wooldridge (2002), p. 83.
6

7

separate instruments that can be used to identify both higher education attainment and veteran
status simultaneously. The existence of state-cohort level variation allows us to break national
induction risk into its constituent parts, yielding two instruments.
A. Constructing Multiple Instruments: State and National Level Induction Risk
Institutional factors caused induction risk to vary across states within a cohort as well as
across birth year cohorts. Responsibility for devising and meeting the national target number of
conscriptions rested with the federal Department of Defense (DoD). To achieve this target, the
DoD issued monthly “draft calls” that divided the national number into quotas assigned to state
draft boards, which in turn did the active work of ordering men to be inducted. The monthly state
quotas sum to the national draft call each month.9
CL use total inductions nationally as the numerator in the following annual measure of
induction risk for a birth cohort:
(i)

CL induction risk 

I bt
Nbt

where I is the number of inductees from a birth year cohort, N is the number of men in that cohort,
b indexes birth years, and t indexes calendar years since a cohort was at risk to be drafted for several
years. Similarly, young men residing in state s faced state cohort risk that is analogous to the CL
measure, where s indexes state of residence:
(ii)

state cohort risksbt 

I sbt
N sbt

State cohort risk is our first instrument. (We postpone the details of its construction until
Section III.) We then use our state level data on I and N to construct a second instrument in the
following manner:
(iii)

9

national cohort risksbt 

I  sbt
N  sbt

Information in this paragraph is based on Shapiro and Striker, Mastering the Draft, Chapter 20.

8

This measure defines national cohort risk for a man living in state s and born in birth year b
as the number of inductees from all other states –s and birth year b, divided by the total number of
such men. This is highly correlated with CL’s measure (i) but varies across state-birthyear cohorts.
The inclusion of the national and state cohort risk measures is similar to the inclusion of state and
national unemployment rates in the right hand side of a regression (as in Ziliak, Wilson and Stone,
1999). Our final measures of state and national cohort risk are actually averages of the measures in
(ii) and (iii) over the years a young man was ages 19 through 22. This follows CL, who argue that
this average induction risk best reflects the draft-based incentive to stay in college.
State level variation in induction risk—such that the probability of induction was not equal
to (i) for all members of cohort b—arose for several reasons. First, the high degree of autonomy
enjoyed by local draft boards generated variation in draft risk across local boards. Davis and
Dolbeare identify three sources of variation in local board risk, “…[1] variation based on differences
in socioeconomic characteristics of jurisdictions; [2] variation among states based on differences in
policy interpretations provided to local boards and exaggerated by success in achieving
standardization around such particular practices; and [3] variation produced by idiosyncratic
discretionary decision-making by local boards.”10 They later write, “The conclusion seems
inescapable: local board autonomy implies both within state and between state variability, even
among socioeconomically similar board jurisdictions.”11
A second source of state-year variation in induction risk were the severe communication
delays between the federal, state, and local officials in charge of the draft. These delays meant that
local draft boards knew the number of registrants available in their jurisdiction at a point in time
while the DoD assigned quotas using registrant numbers that were several months old. Thus draft
risk for an eligible man at a point in time was not only a function of the number of men in his state
currently eligible for the draft but also of the number available several months ago. The current
10
11

Davis and Dolbeare, Little Groups of Neighbors, Page 18.
Ibid. Page 84.

9

pool could be much larger than the past pool if, for example, a large number of local men graduated
high school thus becoming draft eligible or much smaller if a large number married or aged out of
the draft pool in the intervening months. In practice, boards were encouraged to have just enough
eligible registrants to match the number of inductees they would be asked to produce in response to
the next call. Under this pressure, the communication lags led to a cobweb-type feedback loop as
boards struggled to achieve the successful “standardization” identified in item [2] of the Davis and
Dolbeare list.12
We examine our exploited state-year level variation in Figure 2, which graphs the variation in
state-level induction risk for a selection of states over our period of interest. Panel A shows raw
induction risk (i.e. quantity (ii)) while Panel B shows residual induction risk after controlling for a
time trend, state-of-birth fixed effects, and national risk as defined in (iii). It is apparent from Panel
A that some states have higher levels of induction risk associated with them on average. However,
because we include birth state fixed effects in our main specification, this is not part of our
identifying variation. The data in Figure B more closely approximates our identifying variation. (In
practice we will add other controls to our 2SLS specifications.)
There are two things to notice in Figure B. First, there is indeed variation across states in
the induction risk that is not explained by fixed state characteristics alone. Second, relative
induction risk in a state appears to fluctuate smoothly over time. This is consistent with the known
sources of cross-state variation in draft risk. While Davis and Dolbeare identify purely idiosyncratic
variation in board decision-making (their item [3]), the other sources of state and local variation in
risk would tend to generate smooth fluctuations in state relative risk. For example, if the
demographics of a local board jurisdiction are changing smoothly such that more men are aging into
the draft pool but the local board is slow to adjust the number of deferments it grants because of
pressures to achieve standardization, then risk will slowly decline in this jurisdiction over time.

12

See Shapiro and Striker, Mastering the Draft Ch. 20.

10

These smooth fluctuations do not pose a threat to our identification strategy as long as our
instruments meet the IV assumptions.

If this is the case, then the problems for statistical inference

posed by serial correlation in our instrumental variables (as opposed to purely idiosyncratic
fluctuations over time) can be handled through appropriate standard error adjustments along the
lines discussed in Bertrand, Duflo, and Mullainathan (2004). (Also see footnote 24 on this.)
B. Do Our Instruments Meet the IV Assumptions?
Our instruments need to meet the fundamental requirements of IV: joint significance in the
first stage, the exclusion restriction, and the monotonicity condition for the interpretation of our
estimates as local average treatment effects. We present our first stage results in a subsequent
section, but as our IV strategy is new to the literature, the other two requirements bear some
discussion.
The exclusion restriction requires that the components of draft risk had no influence on
migration choices except through the channels of college attainment and veteran status. Our
instruments could fail to meet this restriction if young men attempted to exploit local level variation
in induction risk by moving between localities. Draft board policies prohibited this type of “local
board shopping.” Rothenberg (1968) notes that it is a myth that “you [can] change draft boards the
way you change your patronage of a supermarket or a bank.” A young man was required to register
with his local board at age 18, and this remained his local board for his entire period of draft
eligibility. In the event that he did move away, his original local board always maintained final
decision making authority over his draft eligibility although some particulars of draft processing may
have been handled by a board closer to his new residence.13

13 Rothenberg (1968) p. 48. We have also consulted several reference guides on the draft—books written for young men
at the time to inform them about their draft duties and obligations—to determine whether the practice of board
shopping may have been common even though it was prohibited by board policy. We find no evidence of this. See
Evers (1961), Tatum and Tuchinsky (1969) and Sanders (1966). Only later did advocates of reforming the Selective
Service System highlight this variation.

11

A more likely scenario is that draft risk increased the likelihood that a young man attended
college at a significant distance from home since marginal college goers may have had to search
more widely to find a college that would accept them. If true, this scenario does not imply a
violation of the exclusion restriction. Rather, it implies that local treatment effects we identify are
particular to the setting from which we take our exogenous variation (something which is common
to all instrumental variables applications). Our effects may be larger than other causal estimates of
the same parameter if going away to college is an important mechanism through which college has a
causal effect on mobility.
Finally, it is well known that some men enlisted voluntarily in order to secure safer military
assignments. (The Texas National Guard is an example.) Again, this possibility does not constitute
an exclusion restriction violation. This is simply another channel through which the draft
“encouraged” military enlistment. The other channel is the local draft board’s threat of
incarceration.
Monotonicity requires that there be no “defiers” in the population—i.e. individuals who
would have gone to college or become a veteran in the absence of the draft but who did not do
these things because of the draft (Angrist and Imbens, 1994; Angrist et al. 1996). It is difficult to
test for such a subpopulation directly, and most IV applications assume there are no defiers. We
are, however, somewhat concerned that blacks may have been crowded out of college slots by large
numbers of whites attempting to avoid conscription, a violation of monotonicity. In light of this, we
examine the sensitivity of our results to this assumption by estimating our key models separately for
blacks and whites. We find no difference in the key parameters across these subgroups, suggesting
that any individual instances that violate the no-defiers assumption do not generalize to the black
population as a whole.14

14

For instance as discussed in Kuziemko (2008).

12

III. Sample Construction and Estimating Equations
Our data on men in the “Vietnam generation” come from the IPUMS microdata 5% sample
of the 1980 Census. (Ruggles et al., 2004). The main cohorts of interest to CL were men born
between 1935 and 1955. We focus on a similar set of cohorts because these men turned 19, the age
of peak draft risk, during the period when induction risk made its dramatic rise and fall with the
Vietnam War. However, due to data limitations on state-level induction rates and enrollment, we
must restrict our sample to men born between 1942 and 1953. Since these cohorts experienced the
largest rise and fall in induction risk, we do not lose much time series variation relative to CL by
excluding the earlier and later cohorts.
The measure of migration we employ in this paper is a dummy variable indicating that an
individual resides outside his birth state when we observe him in the Census. This is equivalent to
an indicator for whether he is residing outside his birth state at a certain age—i.e. his late 20s or early
30s. This measure captures long distance migration that generally involves a change of local labor
markets.15 Because long distance moves involve changing labor markets, we feel they are a more
appropriate outcome measure than short distance moves given our interest in the relationship
between education and the ability to make changes in the face of disequilibria. We can also show
that educational differences in 1-year and 5-year migration rates are similar to those in the out of
birth state measure over longer distances.16 For example, college graduates are roughly twice as
likely as high school graduates to have moved across state lines in the last five years. This gap
narrows slightly for older individuals and when the one year measure is used, but the educational
differential remains substantial. By contrast, both the 1- and 5-year migration rates show that high
school graduates are considerably more likely than college graduates to have moved within their
county. This is particularly true at younger ages. Based on these comparisons, we conclude that our
See Saks and Wozniak 2009 for a discussion of the measurement error involved in assuming a move across state lines
involves a move between local labor markets.
16 We tabulated 1-year and 5-year migration rates for 20 to 45 year olds in our four education groups from the 1981
Current Population Survey and the 1980 Census, respectively.
15

13

measure is a good proxy for the likelihood of a long-distance move over shorter time horizons.
However, we prefer the lifetime rates since they more closely approximate a stock of migration
choices rather than a flow as do the five-year rates.17
The main shortcoming of the dummy variable measure is that it is potentially confounded by
parental migration patterns. It is well known that an individual's education level is correlated with
that of his parents, and thus some of the observed migration differentials using this measure could
arise from more educated parents moving their children (who potentially go on to get more
education) across state lines. Fortunately, the migration advantage that more educated parents
confer to their children is small compared to migration differentials observed across education
groups later in life.18 Thus we interpret migration rate differences observed according to our
measure as reflecting migration undertaken by individuals themselves rather than their parents.
We use birth state to proxy for residence state at the time of the draft. Evidence in Wozniak
(forthcoming) shows that although this assumption generates measurement error by misclassifying
individuals into incorrect states of residence at draft age, the misclassification error is not
substantially different across education groups.
Our identification strategy requires that we choose a measure of education, since we cannot
separately identify the effect of one level of higher education from another. To inform our choice
of education measure, we explore the impact of our instrument on educational attainment. Figure 3
plots the coefficients and standard errors from separate regressions of educational attainment at
each grade level and higher (inclusive). The figure shows that increased induction risk increased
male educational attainment at all post-secondary levels. Our main estimates use years of schooling

The one year rates are only available in the CPS.
Using the NLSY 79, Wozniak (forthcoming) shows that the difference in rates of out of birth state residence at age 14
across individuals who go on to become high school graduates and college graduates is small, around four percentage
points. Most of the education group differential in migration rates among 30-year-olds in the NLSY using our Census
measure represents migration that occurred after age 14. Of course it is possible some migration is driven by the
decision about where to attend college. This mechanism could potentially explain education group differences in
migration and we consider it later in the paper.
17
18

14

as our education measure but we also present alternative specifications using discrete measures such
as graduating or attending college.
It is possible that measurement error in education (in any of the measures) could bias our IV
estimates, along the lines explained by Black et al. (2000) and Kane, Rouse, and Staiger (1999) for
cases of non-classical measurement error in an endogenous variable.19 Unfortunately we are not able
to implement the bounding procedures developed by these authors, since we do not have the
second independent observation on an individual’s educational attainment these corrections require.
We simply note this is a concern in most IV estimates of the returns to schooling. However, we will
show that our conclusions are robust to alternative measures of educational attainment. This is
reassuring since these measures suffer from potential bias to different degrees. College completion
has been shown to be the most accurately measured higher education outcome and to contain little
measurement error overall (Black et al. 2003). Years of schooling, while suffering from non-classical
measurement error to some degree, is unlikely to be plagued by error that is purely negatively
correlated with the recorded value, as is the case with the dummy variable schooling measures.
Measurement error is likely of greatest concern in IV results using the college attendance dummy to
measure education.
To construct the measures in Equations (ii) and (iii), we obtained data on the number of
inductees from each state for each six-month period spanning 1952 to 1972 from reports of the
Selective Service and converted these into electronic format. Like CL, we measure cohort size (at
both the national and state levels) using data on school enrollments of 17 year olds. We estimated
state cohort size using enrollment numbers spanning 1959 to 1970, the academic years in which our
cohorts of interest were in 11th grade.20 Thus state-cohort level risk (hereafter state risk) for a young

19 Kane et al. (1999) note that the direction of the bias is not clear in the general case of non-classical measurement error
in the endogenous variable, although Black et al. show that in some 2SLS specifications the IV estimates constitute an
upper bound on the true parameter.
20 We also check our estimates using enrollment in 10th grade. For 1959 and 1960, we only have information on
enrollment in all high school grades so we divide this figure by 4.

15

man born in Alabama in 1950 equals the number of inductees from Alabama in 1969 (the year he
turned 19) divided by the number of students enrolled in 11th grade in Alabama in 1967. National
level risk for the same young man roughly equals the number of men inducted nationally in 1969
divided by the size of his birth cohort; more precisely, we subtract own state inductions from the
numerator and own state cohort size from the denominator. Like CL, we construct an average draft
risk for the years a man was 19-22 since draft risk was non-trivial for men ages 20 to 22.
Our basic second stage estimating equation is the following:
(1) moveisb   X isb   yrsisb   vet isb   trend isb   i   isb
move is our indicator for out of birth state residence, yrs is years of schooling completed, vet is a
dummy variable for veteran status, trend is a linear time trend entered as i’s birth-year cohort, X is
our set of demographic controls (which includes indicator variables for black and Hispanic), and Θ
is a complete set of state of birth dummies. As before, s indexes state of birth and b indexes birth
year. Since our sample is drawn from only a single cross-section of Census data, we omit time
subscripts. yrs and vet are predicted from first stage equations that includes the remaining right hand
side covariates in Equation (1) plus stateriskisb and nationalriskisb as defined in (ii) and (iii), respectively.
All estimation is done via standard linear 2SLS.21
All covariates in (1) are included in all subsequent specifications; in our tables, we refer to
these as the “demographic controls”. The inclusion of age is equivalent to a year of birth trend in
our cross-sectional data. Age also accounts for national (linear) trends in male college completion.
We allow for state of birth fixed effects to account for different rates of geographic mobility across
states. This also removes variation arising from states that have persistently higher or lower than
average induction rates, which may be correlated with other state characteristics which are in turn
correlated with migration rates. Industrial composition, which may affect both migration choices

See Wooldridge (2002) pp. 622-624 concerning 2SLS versus an approach with a probit first stage when the
endogenous variable is a dummy variable. In some cases, the latter is more efficient but may tend to produce larger
point estimates. Given our concerns about possible upward bias, we implement 2SLS estimation.
21

16

and induction rates if deferments are routinely granted for certain types of work, is one example of a
potential confounding factor that state dummies remove.
We also show results for two additional specifications that include an expanded set of
controls. The first adds two variables to capture labor market conditions facing a cohort at the time
of the college enrollment decision: a measure of employment conditions and the log of cohort size.
Employment conditions are measured as the employment to population (epop) ratio in the
individual’s state of birth the year his cohort turned 19. Cohort size is measured as the log of the
number of respondents from a birth year cohort in the 1960 Census. The epop measure
approximates state labor demand conditions facing a birth year cohort at the time they decided to
enter college. Log cohort size approximates the labor supply available to meet those conditions.
Together, we believe these measures capture labor market conditions that may have occurred
alongside changes in state-level induction risk and that are thought to influence college enrollment
decisions.22 Both factors may also be independently related to inter-state mobility levels within a
cohort. Saks and Wozniak (2009) show that internal migration rates, including inter-state migration
rates, are procyclical. The literature on cohort size suggests that large cohorts have relatively poorer
educational and behavioral outcomes than large cohorts. Although we know of no work that links
cohort size to mobility, we include it since cohort differences in other outcomes may be related to
mobility potential. The second additional specification adds nine linear birth region trends to this
expanded set of controls. These trends further account for changes in college-going or migration
that may have been correlated with changes in state level induction risk.
We restrict our analysis to men. As women were not subject to induction at the time of the
Vietnam War, we do not expect to find large treatment effects of male induction risk on female
college going. This implies that women might make a useful comparison group, and this is how CL
treat women in their analysis. They assume that the trend in female college attainment is the
22 The literature tends to find no consistent, significant relationship between local labor market conditions and college
attendance (Wozniak, forthcoming; Card and Lemieux 2001b).

17

appropriate counterfactual trend for male college attainment in the absence of the Vietnam War.
This allows them to calculate excess college going by men. However, there are reasons to believe
that female college attendance may have been affected by male college going during the Vietnam
years, with large inflows of men into college either crowding out women who would otherwise have
attended or encouraging more women to attend to take advantage of marriage market prospects.
Moreover, while women may or may not make an appropriate counterfactual for men in the context
of college going, marriage markets that link men and women in their geographic location decisions
mean that they certainly are not a useful counterfactual in the context of migration. For these
reasons, we prefer to control directly for counterfactual male trends in college going and its cooccurring determinants—as outlined above—rather than indirectly as is suggested by the CL
approach. Finally, our use of state-year variation means identification is generated in part by
comparing men from different birth states to their peers in a given birth year cohort. This withincohort identifying variation reduces the need to find comparison groups outside our men in cohorts
of interest. We also estimate our main specifications on two placebo groups of men to show that
our results are unlikely to be explained by changes across birth states and over time in college going
other than those captured by our instrumental variables.
Descriptive statistics from the Census samples of the cohorts we consider are given in Table
1 which summarizes the variables used in our analysis using the sample of men born between 1942
and 1953. Migration is a common outcome in our sample, with roughly one-third of men living
outside their birth states and the average man living over 300 miles from his place of birth. Our
main demographic controls include age, veteran status, and state of birth. Veteran status is a
dummy variable equal to 1 if an individual reported Vietnam era service.
Figure 1 plots the means of selected variables separately for each birth year cohort. The
course of the draft expansion across cohorts is evident in Panel A, which also shows the high
correlation between our measure of national risk in (iii) and CL’s measure in (i). The increase in
18

male college going is also visible in Panel A, particularly for cohorts born between 1944 and 1950,
during the main rise and fall in induction risk. Panel B of Figure 1 plots our measures of education
and migration (adjusted for a basic set of controls) alongside our national risk measure. This is
essentially a graph of our reduced form results. It is clear that migration and educational attainment
increase along with national induction risk across cohorts.
The inclusion of controls in our 2SLS regressions removes a large amount of variation from
our instruments. To assess the remaining variation, we regressed both risk measures, (ii) and (iii),
separately on the sets of controls just described. The R-squared from all six versions of this
exercise—two outcome variables times three sets of controls, used in Tables 3 through 6 below—
ranged between 0.25 and 0.42. This means that we are using approximately two thirds of the
variation in the risk measures to identify our endogenous variables.23

IV. Results from the Vietnam Generation
A. First stage and reduced form results
Table 2 presents first stage results using the sample of men described in Table 1 based on
our basic Equation 1 specification as well as the two augmented specifications. We maintain the
convention of showing results for all three specifications for our main results. We also maintain the
convention of clustering our standard errors at the birth year level in specifications using only a
single instrument or national aggregates for cohort size and the employment rate. In specifications
using both instruments or state level measures of cohort size and employment rates, we cluster the
standard errors at the birth state-birth year level. 24 In Panel A, national and state cohort risk are
entered separately as the only variable identifying years of schooling. This is similar to the approach
23 Most of the variation is explained by the inclusion of the linear trend in age and another non-linear variable. In our
exercise, this was the national unemployment rate, but we did not perform an exhaustive set of regressions that
examined all possible subsets of our control variables.
24 We have also explored some specifications using multi-way clustering on both birth year and birth state, following
procedures suggested by Cameron, Gelbach, and Miller (2006). The standard errors on the coefficients increase
somewhat, but the qualitative results remain similar.

19

in other studies in which education is assumed to be the only endogenous variable. This is not our
preferred approach to identification, but we present the results for the purpose of comparison.
The results in columns (1) through (3) of Panel A show that a 10 percentage point increase
in national cohort risk (roughly the entire range of this variable) increased the average years of
completed schooling in our sample by 0.35 to 0.45 years with the impact declining somewhat as we
add additional controls to the basic specification in column (1). These estimates show that cohorts
with higher national risk also attain more years of schooling. This is consistent with Figure 1 and
the results in CL (2000, 2001). Although our specification differs from that of CL, the magnitude of
our coefficients is similar and the F-statistics suggest that this first stage has substantial power.25
We repeat the first stage estimates using only state cohort risk as the identifying variable in
columns (4) through (6) of Panel A. When national cohort risk is excluded, state cohort risk
positively predicts college graduation rates for men in our sample although the point estimates are
slightly smaller than those generated by national risk alone. We speculate that the similarity in the
estimates of the effects of the two risk measures is driven by the strong correlation (of 0.93) between
our state and national cohort risk measures.
Panel B shows first stage equations from our preferred approach of identifying both years of
schooling and veteran status in Equation 1. For transparency, we estimate two separate first stage
equations—predicting college graduation and veteran status—although 2SLS estimates these
equations jointly. Consistent with the manner in which 2SLS identifies endogenous variables, both
equations include national and state cohort risk as identifying variables.
Columns (1) through (3) in Panel B show that, as in Panel A, increased national induction
risk is strongly associated with increases in years of schooling. The point estimates here are
somewhat larger than when national risk is included alone, indicating increases of 0.5 to 0.6 years of

Table 1 in Card and Lemieux (2001a) shows estimates corresponding to 4.6 percentage point increase for college
graduation. Using our specification with a dummy variable for college graduation as left hand side variable suggests an
increase of 3.5 to 4 percentage points in college completion for the same change in induction risk.

25

20

schooling over the range of in induction risk in our sample. On the other hand, years of schooling
are insignificantly or negatively related to state cohort risk when national induction risk is included.
This is in sharp contrast to the relationship between years of schooling and state risk in Panel A,
which suggests that increases in schooling attainment are largely driven by variation in national risk.26
It is not clear a priori what relationship we should expect between state risk and years of
schooling in the Panel B specifications. If young men were unaware of their state level risk, we
would expect no relationship, as we see in column (1). On the other hand, if young men were aware
of their state risk, we might expect a positive relationship between state risk and years of schooling
as men “dodged in to college” more in riskier state-years. We find no evidence of this. Instead, in
the augmented specifications we find a negative relationship between state risk and years of
schooling. We can think of at least two reasons for this. First, it may be the case that state risk
increased a young man’s likelihood of becoming a veteran and that being a veteran in turn decreased
his likelihood of attending college. This is not unlikely, given that the well known hostility toward
the war that prevailed on many college campuses may have deterred some veterans from attending.
Alternatively, the negative relationship in columns (2) and (3) may be an artifact of the high
correlation (collinearity) between national and state level risk, which may be exacerbated by
including the non-linear controls for cohort size and employment rate. The coefficient pattern
across Panels A and B—in which state level risk positively predicts education when national risk is
excluded and the point estimates on national risk increase when state risk is included—is consistent
with collinearity (Verbeek 2000 and Wooldridge 2002). 27
Neither interpretation of the results in columns (2) and (3) of Panel B invalidates our IV
strategy. Ex ante, increased state and national risk both increase the likelihood that a man becomes
26 National cohort risk was relatively easy to judge as national draft calls were widely reported while deviations of state
cohort risk from national were unknown ex ante. These facts suggest to us that state cohort risk had relatively more
influence on an individual’s veteran status while national cohort risk influenced his likelihood of college attainment.
This independence in the roles of the two instruments is not necessary for identification. All that is required in the 2SLS
method we apply is that the number of instruments equal or exceed the number of endogenous regressors.
27 Authors’ simulations show that the probability of collinearity alone generating coefficient estimates of opposing signs
on two variables that are significant at the 5% level is about 1 in 20.

21

a veteran and that he attends college; this is the required monotonicity condition. Conditional on
becoming either a veteran or a college attender, a young man may then be less likely to also become
the other. Indeed, this is why the draft drove young men into college. This simply highlights the
desirability of including controls for education and veteran status simultaneously in our setting.
Multicollinearity does not affect the predicted value of the left hand side variable, although it has
obvious effects on the coefficients estimated for the collinear variables.28 Thus collinearity does not
introduce systematic bias since the predicted values of the endogenous variables in the first stage are
correct in expectation, although it may contribute to imprecision in our second stage estimates.
Columns (4) through (6) address the second endogenous variable in Equation 1. These
show that national and state cohort risk both covary positively with veteran status. This is
reassuring since higher rates of induction at both the state and national level should lead more young
men to go to war. We interpret the fact that the coefficient on national risk exceeds that of state risk
in the veteran equation to mean that the time series variation in draft risk generated by the massive
fluctuation in military manpower demands is responsible for more of the variation in veteran status
than are the differences in induction risk across states.
Table 3 presents reduced form estimates of the impact of induction risk on our measure of
geographic mobility.29 These results are striking. The estimates show that increases in national
cohort risk are associated with a large positive increase the likelihood than an individual is residing
outside his birth state. Men from the highest risk cohort are 8 to 13 percentage points more likely to
reside outside their states of birth than men in the lowest risk cohort. This difference is the
equivalent of roughly one-fourth to one-third of the mean of this variable in Table 1. Once state
cohort risk is included, the impacts of national risk on mobility are even larger and state cohort risk
has generally weak negative impacts on migration. The remainder of the paper is devoted to

Verbeek (2000).
Note that we drop specifications using only state cohort risk to identify education in our subsequent analysis. This
was only presented as an alternative first stage in Table 2.

28
29

22

demonstrating that higher levels of college graduation are the mechanism driving these reduced
form estimates.
B. 2SLS estimates of the effect of higher education on migration
Table 4 presents our main estimates of interest. We show results from the estimation of
Equation 1 via both OLS and 2SLS and with and without a control for veteran status. When we
follow the single instrument strategy (for comparison), as we do in Panel A, we exclude the veteran
status control since it is believed to be endogenous. We use our national risk measure as the single
instrument for years of schooling in this case. Our preferred estimates are in Panel B, where we
instrument for both years of schooling and veteran status using our two risk measures.
In columns (1) through (3) of both panels, we report our OLS estimates. An additional year
of schooling is associated with a 3 percentage point increase in the likelihood that a man resides
outside of his birth state. This estimate is robust to the inclusion of additional controls across
specification columns and to the addition of the veteran status control in Panel B. Consistent with
our concern that veterans may be more geographically mobile than non-veterans, we find that
veteran status is associated with a 4 percentage point increase in our migration measure. If men who
are willing to serve in the military are also willing to move geographically, this relationship could bias
our estimated coefficient vector and it is the reason we need to instrument for veteran status as well
as education.
Columns (4) through (6) of Panel A show results from 2SLS estimation of Equation 1 and
its augmented versions using national risk to instrument for years of schooling and omitting veteran
status from the equation. Years of schooling have an insignificant relationship to migration in
column (4), but the augmented specifications in (5) and (6) show a positive and significant – and
precisely estimated – relationship. As is often the case in the literature on instrumented returns to
schooling, the IV estimates exceed the OLS estimates, in our case by a little over 25%.

23

Columns (4) through (6) of Panel B show our preferred estimates from 2SLS estimation of
Equation 1 using our two induction risk instruments to correct for endogeneity in both years of
schooling a veteran status. The estimates of the causal impact of years of schooling on migration are
larger than in the single IV estimates of Panel A, although they also cover a fairly large range. The
smallest estimate implies that an additional year of schooling raises the probability of an out of state
residence by 4.4 percentage points while the largest implies an increase of 6.7 percentage points.
The 2SLS estimates in Panel B have large standard errors, but this is not surprising given the added
imprecision our two instrument strategy entails and all are significant at conventional levels.30 The
estimates across all three 2SLS specifications in Panel B consistently imply a large causal role for
years of higher education schooling in determining geographic mobility. Interestingly, after
instrumenting veteran status has no significant impact on subsequent mobility. This indicates that
the significant relationship between veteran status and mobility in the OLS equations is in fact
driven by selection of more geographically mobile men into the military.
The OLS coefficient on college graduation typically lies within the 95% confidence interval
around our 2SLS estimates because the latter are estimated with large standard errors. We can
compare the estimates from our OLS and 2SLS estimates more formally using a Durbin-WuHausman test for endogeneity. We can reject the null hypothesis that OLS and IV are the same at
the 5 percent level for estimates in column 4 of Panel B of Table 5. In the other five cases, OLS and
IV estimates are not statistically distinguishable.31
C. Discussion of 2SLS Magnitudes and Specification Checks
We consistently find estimated treatment effects that equal or exceed OLS estimates. On the
one hand, this pattern is not uncommon in the literature on instrumented returns to education, and
Additionally, there is some cause for concern about the consistency of the standard errors in the single-instrument
estimates, since the number of clusters in that case is small. Our preferred estimates alleviate this concern since the
number of clusters is sufficiently large. See discussions in Bertrand et al. (2004) and Wooldridge (2003).
31 The F-statistic of this test for the 2SLS specifications in Panel A of Table 5 are 0.78, 0.99, and 1.00 respectively (pvalues of 0.3960, 0.3407, and 0.3395); the F-statistic of this test for the 2SLS specifications in Panel B of Table 5 are
6.11, 1.82, and 1.90 respectively (p-values 0.0310, 0.2048, 0.1958).
30

24

we generally cannot reject equality of the OLS and 2SLS impacts. 32 Two standard explanations
immediately come to mind. First, as is also the case in the returns to schooling context,
measurement error might bias OLS estimates downwards. This bias might be more likely in our
sample if older respondents are more likely to misreport educational attainment in retrospective
surveys. Eliminating bias due to measurement error can increase IV estimates above OLS estimates.
A second possibility is that heterogeneity in the response to treatment leads to local average
treatment effects on the marginal college graduate (identified in our 2SLS estimates) that differ from
the average effect (identified in OLS). We examined evidence for this in the National Longitudinal
Survey of Youth by dividing an NLSY sample of men into groups whom we considered a priori to
have different propensities to complete college. We found that the OLS returns to college
completion were higher among groups who were more likely to be marginal college attenders in the
Vietnam era—specifically, men in the upper quartile of the AFQT distribution and with mothers
who had some college education. We interpret this evidence as suggestive of the possibility of
heterogeneous treatment effects.33
It is also worth considering the possibility that the historical setting of our instrument leads
to larger treatment effects in the cohorts we examine than would be found in a more culturally
neutral experiment. The atmosphere surrounding the decision to avoid Vietnam by going to college
may have served to heighten an existing difference between marginal and inframarginal college
graduates in a manner that increases the estimated causal impact of college on mobility. For
example, if marginal college graduates are less similar to their family and high school friends than
inframarginal college graduates, they may find it easier to relocate over long distances leading to
heterogeneous treatment effects and the resulting 2SLS > OLS coefficient relationship.
Unfortunately we have no way of testing this claim. While we allow that the historical setting we use
may contribute to our large estimates, we do not believe that the causal impact of college on
32
33

Card (1999) addresses the differences between OLS and IV estimates of returns to schooling.
Results and analysis available from the authors upon request.

25

mobility is potentially zero. The array of evidence strongly suggests a large causal effect of college
graduation on mobility.
We conducted a number of tests to examine the robustness of the results in Table 4. First,
we repeated the Table 4 analysis using alternative educational attainment measures: dummy variables
for college attendance (measured as 13 or more years of schooling) and for college graduation (16 or
more years of schooling). The results are reported in Appendix Table 1.34 College graduation is
associated with a higher probability of out of state residence among men in our sample than is
college attendance. Consistent with this, our IV estimates of the causal impact of college
completion are somewhat larger than our estimates of the causal impact of college attendance
(although these are not statistically distinguishable due to the large standard errors). In general, our
estimates tell the same story regardless of the measure of education we use.
We also estimated the 2SLS equations on data collapsed to birthstate-birthyear cells. This is
the level of our variation, so it is natural to consider obtaining estimates using collapsed data. We
present the results of this exercise in Appendix Table 2. The point estimates are nearly identical to
those in Table 4, and although our standard errors increase somewhat, all the main results retain
statistical significance at conventional levels.35 Additionally, dropping national induction risk and
replacing the trend with birth year dummies in the Table 4 specifications—which forces our
identifying variation to come solely from cross-state differences in induction rates—does not
qualitatively alter our conclusions, nor does using overall national cohort risk as defined in (i) instead
of (iii) as our education instrument.
Finally, in Table 5 we report the results of two placebo style analyses. These are intended to
verify that the causal relationship we identify is in fact driven by the response of young men in our

34 Since the inclusion of veteran status does not affect the OLS coefficient on education in these specifications either, we
only report one set of OLS results. 2SLS estimates with national risk only exclude veteran status from the equations.
2SLS estimates using both instruments include veteran status and treat it as endogenous.
35 We weight each cell by the number of observations used to compute it, in order to correct for differential precision of
our estimated averages. Results without weighting are essentially unchanged, but the standard errors increase further.

26

affected cohorts to the induction risk they faced. First, we re-estimate our reduced form
specifications for men in our same sample of cohorts using data from the 1960 Census. At this
point in their lives, these men had not yet been affected by the incentives for higher education
associated with the Vietnam draft. If the cohorts who would eventually face the greatest draft risk
were somehow also more likely to have migrated by our measure before the draft, this might mean
our causal estimates in Table 4 are spurious. It would suggest high-risk cohorts were somehow
different from low-risk cohorts in a way that might lead them to have both higher educational
attainment and migration rates.
The results from this exercise are in Panel A of Table 5. In four of the six specifications we
find no relationship between the draft risk a man will face in the future and his out of state residence
in 1960. In two of the specifications, however, men who will face high national risk are also more
likely to have moved out of their birth states prior to 1960. We believe this suggests estimates using
national risk alone to identify years of schooling in our augmented specifications should be
interpreted with caution. However, our preferred specifications and the basic specification using the
single IV do not suffer from this concern.
In Panel B, we estimate our 2SLS models on a set of placebo cohorts. Unfortunately, there
is no ideal placebo group on which to run such a test. We use men born between 1930 and 1941—
the twelve cohorts preceding those in our sample—who were too old to be affected by induction
orders during the Vietnam conflict although by virtue of their age these men were not subject to the
same non-draft related cohort factors experienced by the men in our main sample. Nevertheless,
the estimates in Panel B show no significant relationship between education and migration when we
use our Vietnam draft risk measures to identify years of schooling. This is consistent with our claim
that our instruments affect educational attainment only for our main sample of cohorts and that it is
the higher education of these cohorts that leads to increased migration.

27

V. Mechanisms behind the Causal Relationship
Our results suggest a large causal role for higher education in geographic mobility. This
causal effect may operate through either direct or indirect channels. On the one hand, higher
education may directly confer skills or provide information which enhances the ability to undertake a
long distance move. Individuals may develop general cognitive skills that facilitate the accumulation
of information about alternative employment possibilities in other places. Moreover, individuals
may actually gain information about new opportunities for migration either through attending
college away from home or by interacting with peers who come from other places. In addition,
individuals may gain some moving-specific skills because attending college may itself necessitate a
move across state lines. A college education may also lower the psychic costs associated with
migration by fostering openness to new experiences and awareness of national or global issues may
lessen the difficulties of adjustment in a new place.
On the other hand, higher education may indirectly affect the likelihood of undertaking a long
distance move. Research shows that increased schooling is causally related to higher wages (Card,
2001). If moving involves a fixed monetary cost, higher incomes may increase migration. Obtaining
a college degree also alters the set of possible occupations that are available for recent graduates.
Across the United States, the market for college graduates is often considered more geographically
integrated than the market for lower-educated workers. If the skills associated with a college
education are marketable in many regions, this may make it easier to consider moving out of state.36
Finally, education may alter other non-economic characteristics such as marriage which can affect
the likelihood of geographic mobility (Lefgren and McIntyre, 2006).
We are able to provide credibly identified evidence on two of the mechanisms mentioned
above: exposure to a geographically diverse set of peers and a move out of state to attend college.
We obtain exogenous variation on both dimensions using data on public and private four-year

36

See Bound et al. (2004).

28

college enrollment from the 1980 HEGIS survey (conducted by the National Center for Education
Statistics). We created two separate rankings of states: the “out of state” ranking and the “diversity”
ranking. The first ranks states according to the shares of their college-attending natives getting their
degrees out of state, with quartile 1 having the lowest shares of its natives attending college out of
state and quartile 4 the highest. If the experience of moving to go to college is an important channel
behind the causal impacts we estimate, we might expect the college migration premium to be larger
for natives of the highest quartile states. The “diversity” ranking divide states into quartiles
according to the geographic diversity of their college populations measured using a Herfindahl
index.37 The idea in this case is that exposure to a geographically diverse set of fellow students
might increase one’s awareness of other labor markets or even improve one’s network in distant
locations, thereby increasing the migration premium to higher education in these states.
We use our sample of Vietnam era men from the 1980 Census to estimate versions of our
main 2SLS specification in which years of schooling has been interacted with quartile indicators for
each of the two state rankings. Since this specification now contains five endogenous variables—the
four interactions with schooling plus veteran status—we instrument using interactions of the four
quartiles with national risk plus (non-interacted) state risk.38 The results, including OLS estimates,
are shown in Table 6.
We find that for natives of states in the bottom quartile of out-of-state college going, the
OLS migration premium to an extra year of schooling in our sample, of 0.019, is significantly lower
than that for natives in the higher quartiles who get returns of above 0.03. As was the case with the
2SLS estimates of the migration premium in earlier tables, the estimates in Table 6 have large
standard errors. These prevent us from saying definitively whether the causal effect of higher

37 The states in each set of quartiles are listed in Table 6. While there is some overlap between a state’s quartile ranking
on one dimension and its ranking on the other, there seem to be enough differences for the measures to capture
different dimensions of the college experience.
38 We find qualitatively similar results when estimate these effects using interactions of the four quartiles with national
risk as well as interactions of the four quartiles with state-;level risk (an overidentified specification).

29

education on migration is larger for natives of one quartile than another. The point estimates
suggest, however, that the premium may be higher for natives of states in the middle of the out-ofstate college going distribution. In the case of the geographic diversity of one’s college peers, the
OLS estimates show no consistent difference in the schooling migration premium across natives
from states in the four quartiles of this distribution. Again, the 2SLS estimates are noisy, but they
suggest that the causal impact of higher education on subsequent migration may be higher for
natives of states in which the college system enrolls a more geographically diverse set of students.
From the Table 6 results we conclude that while there is some evidence that going to college
out of state increased a man’s likelihood of residing out of state later, this is only part of the story.
The relationship between out-of-state college going propensity across states and subsequent
migration of that state’s college educated natives is far from linear. Moreover, our estimates using
variation in the geographic diversity of a state’s college population suggest that exposure to peers
from other places may also play a role in subsequent mobility. While these conclusions are limited,
we nevertheless believe they are a helpful step in understanding the nature of the relationship
between higher education and migration.39
Lastly, we turn to alternative instrumental variables techniques to shed further light on the
mechanisms behind the causal relationship we identify. As explained in the introduction, we feel our
strategy is the most appropriate of several alternatives for identifying a “pure” effect of [higher]
education on geographic mobility. However, because alternative identification strategies use policies
that affected educational attainment in particular ways, we can compare the results from our main
specifications to those using alternative IV strategies in order to assess how different policies affect
the migration-education relationship. If the manner in which educational attainment was increased

These results are consistent with what is known about the causal effect of attending college out of state (Groen 2004)
or studying abroad (Parey and Waldinger 2009) on subsequent labor mobility choices. In our analysis, however, we
attempt to distinguish between the two distinct but correlated channels of “going away” for higher education and
exposure to a more geographically diverse set of peers.
39

30

matters for our results, this would suggest that the particular policy may have also affected one of
the channels through which education has its effect on migration.
In Table 7 we present results from our main specification (or its nearest approximation,
given data constraints) estimated using three leading alternative instruments for educational
attainment: quarter of birth, new college openings, and state merit aid policies.40 Details of the
estimation are given in the table notes. Panel A shows the results of estimating our three main 2SLS
specification using quarter of birth to instrument for years of schooling. We find no evidence of a
causal impact of years of schooling on migration using this identification strategy. This has two
important implications for our main results. First, since quarter of birth increases educational
attainment at the high school margin and not the college margin, these results imply that it is years
of college only that causally impact adult migration, not simply education at any level. Second, since
education alone is not enough to increase mobility, these results downplay the importance of
cognitive ability as a mechanism in the education-migration relationship.41
Panel B shows the 2SLS results for our main equations using the Currie and Moretti (2003)
college openings instrument to identify years of schooling. In this case, the instrument is number of
colleges in a man’s state of birth in the year he turned 17, divided by his state cohort size at age 17.
Higher educational attainment is identified using variation in the per capita number of colleges
available to 17 year olds across states and over time. The results show a large, negative impact of an
additional year of schooling on migration. This is in striking contrast to our main results and to the
OLS estimate. We believe the difference is due to the way in which the instrument affects
educational attainment. The college openings instrument operates by encouraging marginal college
attenders to go to a college nearer their home and specifically in their state of birth. If going away to
40 These were originally exploited for identification purposes in Angrist and Krueger (1991); Currie and Moretti (2003);
and Dynarski (2008).
41 The estimates in Panel A also serve as a valuable specification check for those concerned that some unknown
mechanical relationship leads to estimates of overly large causal impacts when we instrument for education in a
migration equation. On the other hand, there are important concerns about the consistency of 2SLS estimates obtained
using the quarter of birth instrument, particularly in a setting such as ours with very limited controls for family
background (Buckles and Hungerman, 2008).

31

college is an important channel through which higher education increases mobility (as the results in
Table 6 suggest), then an instrument that effectively shuts down that channel should be expected to
produce different estimates of the education premium on migration. Moreover, if college graduates
require labor markets with more high skilled jobs, and the presence of colleges creates such jobs,
then additional in-state colleges may further decrease a man’s propensity to leave his birth state after
completing a college education. (See Moretti 2004a and 2004b for related discussions.)
Finally, Panel C shows results from estimating our main specifications using two state merit
aid policies to identify higher education in the 2000 Census. Following Dynarski (2008), we use a
dummy variable for college completion as our education measure and estimate the equations for a
younger sample of cohorts who were eligible to receive assistance through these policies. These
state policies increase college completion by lowering college costs through tuition scholarships to
any student who maintains a threshold grade point average in both high school and college. Large
percentages of high school seniors in both states with these programs qualify for this assistance. As
was the case with our main estimates, we find large, positive OLS and 2SLS premiums to college
completion on subsequent migration.
The implications of these results are less straightforward than with the instruments in Panels
A and B because of the fact that the merit aid instrument operates on two margins. First, by
lowering the relative cost of in-state colleges, it likely increased in-state college attendance by
students who would otherwise have gone out of state to college. This would tend to reduce the
migration premium estimated via 2SLS in a manner similar to that of the college openings
instrument. On the other hand, lowering the relative costs of college (without increasing the per
capita number of colleges) encourages college attendance overall among a state’s natives although
the biggest effect is probably on in-state college attendance. We conclude that in the case of the
merit aid instrument, the positive effect of increased college attainment swamps the negative effect
of in-state college attendance on subsequent migration. This is consistent with the results of Table
32

6, which show that while out of state college going may be an important channel through which
higher education increases mobility, it is unlikely to be the only channel. This is also consistent with
the possibility that college openings in a state discourage later outmigration of college educated
natives by providing attractive local labor markets for high skill workers.

VI. Conclusion
In this paper, we examined the causal role of college graduation in determining geographic
mobility, in particular, the likelihood of lasting, long-distance moves indicated by a man’s residence
outside his birthstate in early- to mid-adulthood. We show that selection is unlikely to explain the
large increases in migration rates associated with college completion.
Using a 5% sample from the 1980 U.S. Census, we provide estimates of the causal impact of
college education on the probability of a long-distance move. We use state-cohort level variation in
college completion arising from draft avoidance behavior among men at risk for conscription into
the Armed Forces during the Vietnam conflict as a source of exogenous variation in the probability
that a man completed college. We show that this variation increased migration rates substantially
among affected cohorts. It also significantly increased the probability that a young man completed
some post-secondary education. We then use induction risk to identify the causal effect of higher
education on subsequent mobility. We find that college education increases the probability of a
long-distance move for the marginal college graduate significantly. Moreover, our instrumental
variables strategy enables us to purge our estimates of potential bias due to correlation of
unobservables with a relevant control variable other than education: veteran status. Our preferred
estimates use two instruments to account for the potential endogeneity of both college completion
and veteran status among our sample of Vietnam era young men.
The use of two instruments to identify separate variables in our equations of interest results
in large standard errors. Our 2SLS estimates of the causal impact of college are significant at
33

conventional levels, but we cannot say with certainty that the causal effect is larger or smaller than
the OLS estimate. However, our estimates strongly suggest that the causal impact is economically
significant. The average man in our dataset moves out of his birthstate with probability 0.33, and
simple OLS estimates put the premium to an additional year of higher education on out-ofbirthstate migration at 0.3 while the highest estimate from our preferred 2SLS specification puts this
premium at 0.7.

34

References
Adams, Scott. 2002. “Educational Attainment and Health: Evidence from a Sample of Older
Adults.” Education Economics. 10(1): 97-109.
Angrist, Joshua and Imbens, Guido. “Identification and Estimation of Local Average Treatment
Effects.” Econometrica. 62(1994): 467-475.
Angrist, Joshua; Guido Imbens; and Donald Rubin. 1996. “Identification of Causal Effects Using
Instrumental Variables.” Journal of the American Statistical Association: Applications.
Angrist, Joshua and Kreuger, Alan. ”Does Compulsory School Attendance Affect Schooling and
Earnings?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 106(1991): 979-1014.
Angrist, Joshua and Kreuger, Alan. “Estimating the Payoff to Schooling Using the Vietnam-Era
Draft Lottery.” NBER Working Paper #4067 (1992).
Bertrand, Marianne; Esther Duflo; and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2004. “How Much Should We Trust
Difference-in-Differences Estimates?” Quarterly Journal of Economics. 119(1): 249-275.
Black, Dan A.; Mark C. Berger; and Frank A Scott. “Bounding parameter estimates with nonclassical
measurement error.” Journal of the American Statistical Association. Sep 2000. Vol. 95, Iss. 451; p. 739738.
Black, Dan; Seth Sanders; and Lowell Taylor. “Measurement of higher education in the census and
current population survey.” Journal of the American Statistical Association. Sep 2003. Vol. 98, Iss. 463; p.
545-554.
Borghans, Lex; Angela L. Duckworth; James J. Heckman; and Bas Ter Weel. 2008. “The
Economics and Psychology of Personality Traits.” Journal of Human Resources. 43(4): 972-1059.
Borjas, George. 2006. “Native Internal Migration and the Labor Market Impact of Immigration.”
Journal of Human Resources. 41(2): 221-258.
Bound, John; Groen, Jeffrey; Kezdi, Gabor; and Turner, Sarah. “Trade in University Training:
Cross-state Variation in the Production and Use of College-Educated Labor.” Journal of Econometrics.
121(2004).
Bound, John and Holzer, Harry. “Demand Shifts, Population Adjustments and Labor Market
Outcomes during the 1980s.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review. 18(2000): 20-54.
Bound, John and Sarah Turner. 2002. “Going to War and Going to College: Did World War II and
the G.I. Bill Increase Educational Attainment for Returning Veterans?” Journal of Labor Econoimcs.
20(4): 784-815.
Bowles, Samuel. “Migration as Investment: Empirical Tests of the Human Investment Approach to
Geographic Mobility.” The Review of Economics and Statistics 52(1970): 356-362.
Bowles, Samuel; Herbert Gintis; and Melissa Osborne. 2001. “The Determinants of Earnings: A
Behavioral Approach.” Journal of Economic Literature. 39(4): 1137-1176.
35

Buckles, Kasey and Daniel Hungerman. 2008. “Season of Birth and Later Outcomes: Old
Questions, New Answers.” NBER Working Paper #14573.
Cameron, C., Gelbach, J., and D. Miller (2006) “Robust inference with Multi-Way Clustering”
NBER Technical Working Paper #T0327.
Card, David. “Earnings, Schooling, and Ability Revisited.” Research in Labor Economics. 14(1995): 2348.
Card, David. 1999. “The Causal Effect of Education on Earnings.” Handbook of Labor Economics.
Vol 3. Ed. Orley Ashenfelter and David Card. Elsevier Science B.V.
Card, David. “Estimating the Return to Schooling: Progress on Some Persistent Econometric
Problems.” Econometrica. 69(2001): 1127-1160.
Card, David, and Lemieux, Thomas. “Going to College to Avoid the Draft: The Unintended Legacy
of the Vietnam War.” Manuscript. Vancouver, Canada: University of British Columbia (2000).
Card, David, and Lemieux, Thomas. “Going to College to Avoid the Draft: The Unintended Legacy
of the Vietnam War.” American Economic Review. 91(2001): 97-102.
Card, David and Thomas Lemieux. 2001. “Dropout and Enrollment Trends in the Post-war
Period: What Went Wrong in the 1970s?” ed. John Gruber. Risky Behavior Among Youth. Cambridge,
MA.
Cascio, Elizabeth and Lewis, Ethan. “Schooling and the Armed Forces Qualifying Test.” Journal of
Human Resources 41(2006): 294-318.
Currie, Janet and Enrico Moretti. 2003. “Mother’s Education and the Intergenerational
Transmission of Human Capital: Evidence from College Openings.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
118(4): 1495-1532.
Davis, Jr., James W., and Dolbeare, Kenneth M. Little Groups of Neighbors: The Selective Service System.
Chicago: Markham Publishing Company (1968).
De Walque, D. (2007) “Does education affect smoking behaviors?: Evidence using the Vietnam
draft as an instrument for college education," Journal of Health Economics Vol. 26(5), pages 877-895.
Dougherty, Conor. “U.S. Migration Falls Sharply.” The Wall Street Journal. Page A3. March 19, 2009.
Dynarski, Susan. 2008. “Building the Stock of College Educated Labor.” Journal of Human Resources.
43(3): 576-610.
Evers, Alf. Selective Service: A Guide to the Draft. New York: Lippincott Company (1961).
Ferrie, Joseph. 2005. “The End of American Exceptionalism? Mobility in the U.S. Since 1850.”
Journal of Economic Perspectives. 19(Summer): 199-215.

36

Greenwood, M.J. (1975) “Research on Internal Migration in the United States: A Survey.” Journal of
Economic Literature. 13: 397-433.
Greenwood, M.J. (1997) “Internal Migration in Developed Countries.” Handbook of Population and
Family Economics. Mark R. Rosenzweig and Oded Stark, eds. New York: Elsevier Science
Grimard, F. and D. Parent (2007) “Education and Smoking: Were Vietnam War Draft Avoiders
Also More Likely to Avoid Smoking?” in Journal of Health Economics, Vol. 26. No. 5: pp. 896-926.
Groen, J. 2004. “The Effect of College Location on Migration of College-educated Labor.” Journal
of Econometrics. 121(1-2): 125-142.
Heckman, James; Jora Stixrud; and Sergio Urzua. 2006. “The Effects of Cognitive and
Noncognitive Abilities on Labor Market Outcomes and Social Behavior.” Journal of Labor Economics.
24(3): 411-82.
Kane, Thomas; Cecilia Rouse and Douglas Staiger. 1999. “Estimating Returns to Schooling When
Schooling is Misreported.” Industrial Relations Section Working Paper #419. Princeton University.
Kuziemko, Ilyana. “Dodging Up to College or Dodging Down to Jail: Behavioral Responses to the
Vietnam Draft by Race and Class.” Manuscript, Princeton University (2008).
Ladinsky, J. (1967) “The Geographic Mobility of Professional and Technical Manpower.” in Journal
of Human Resources: Vol. 2, No. 4, pp. 475-494
Lefgren, Lars and McIntyre, Frank. “Examining the Relationship between Women’s Education and
Marriage Outcomes.” Journal of Labor Economics 24(2006): 787-730.
Lleras-Muney, Adriana. 2005. “The Relationship Between Education and Adult Mortality in the
U.S.” Review of Economic Studies 72(1):189-221
Jayachandran, Seema and Adriana Lleras-Muney. 2009. “Longevity and Human Capital
Investments: Evidence from Maternal Mortality Declines in Sri Lanka.” Quarterly Journal of Economics.
124(1): 349-397.
Johnson, William R. and Neal, Derek. “The Role of Pre-Market Factors in Black-White Wage
Differences.” Journal of Political Economy. 104(1996):869-895.
MacInnis, Bo (2006) “The Long-Term Effects of College Education on Morbidities:
New Evidence From the Pre-Lottery Vietnam Draft,” mimeo, University of Michigan.
Moretti, Enrico. “Estimating the Social Return to Higher Education: Evidence from Longitudinal
and Repeated Cross-sectional Data.” Journal of Econometrics. 121(2004): 175-212.
Moretti, Enrico. 2004. “Human Capital Externalities in Cities.” Handbook of Urban and Regional
Economics. North Holland-Elsevier.
Nelson, Richard R. and Phelps, Edmund S. “Investment in Humans, Technological Diffusion and
Economic Growth.” American Economic Review 56(1966): 69-75.
37

Parey, Matthias and Fabian Waldinger. 2009. “Studying Abroad and the Effect on International
Labor Market Mobility: Evidence from the Introduction of Erasmus.” Manuscript. London School
of Economics.
Pingle, Johnathan. 2007. “A note on measuring internal migration in the United States.” Economic
Letters 94(1): 38-42.
Rothenberg, Leslie S. The Draft and You: A Handbook on Selective Service. New York: Doubleday &
Company, Inc. Anchor Books (1968).
Ruggles, Steven; and Matthew Sobek, Trent Alexander, Catherine A. Fitch, Ronald Goeken, Patricia
Kelly Hall, Miriam King, and Chad Ronnander. Integrated Public Use Microdata Series: Version 3.0
[Machine-readable database]. Minneapolis, MN: Minnesota Population Center [producer and
distributor], 2004. URL: www.ipums.org.
Saks, Raven and Wozniak, Abigail. 2009. “Labor Reallocation over the Business Cycle: New
Evidence from Internal Migration.” Manuscript, University of Notre Dame.
Sanders, Jacquin. The Draft and the Vietnam War. New York: Walker and Company (1966).
Schultz, T.W. “Investment in Human Capital” in American Economics Review 51(1961), pp. 1-17.
Schultz, T.W. “The Value of the Ability to Deal with Disequilibria.” Journal of Economic Literature
13(1975): 827-846.
Shapiro, Andrew O. and Striker, John M. Mastering the Draft: A Comprehensive Guide to Solving Draft
Problems. Boston: Little, Brown and Company (1970).
Stanley, Marcus. 2003. “College Education and the Midcentury GI Bills.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics. 118(2): 671-708.
Tatum, Arlo and Tuchinsky, Joseph S. Guide to the Draft. 2nd Edition. Boston: Beacon Press (1969).
VerBeek, Marno. A Guide to Modern Econometrics. Chichester, UK: John Wiley and Sons Ltd. (2000).
Welch, Finis. "Education in Production," Journal of Political Economy 78(1970), 35-59
Wozniak, Abigail. Forthcoming. “Are College Graduates More Responsive to Distant Labor
Market Opportunities?” Journal of Human Resources.
Wooldridge, Jeffrey. Econometric Analysis of Cross-section and Panel Data. MIT Press: Cambridge,
Massachusetts (2002).
________. 2003. “Cluster-Sample Methods in Applied Econometrics.” American Economic Review.
93(2):122-138.
Ziliak, James; Beth Wilson; and Joseph Stone. “Spatial Dynamics and Heterogeneity in the
Cyclicality of Real Wages.” Review of Economics and Statistics , May 1999, 81(2): 227-236.

38

Panel A: Induction risk and college-going

0.12

0.1

0.5

0.08
0.4
0.06
0.3

Induction risk

College attendance or completion rate

0.6

0.04

0.2

0.02

0.1

0
1940

1941

1942

1943

1944

1945

College Completion

1946

1947

1948

College Attendance

1949

1950

1951

1952

C&L induction risk

1953

1954

1955

National risk

Panel B: Induction risk and residual schooling and mobility
0.25

0.015

0.2

0.15

migration rate (residuals)

0.1
0.005
0.05

0

0
1942

1943

1944

1945

1946

1947

1948

1949

1950

1951

1952

1953
-0.05

-0.005
-0.1

-0.15

induction risk / years of schooling (residuals)

0.01

-0.01
-0.2

-0.015

-0.25
Migration (residuals)

Years schooling (residuals)

National risk

Figure 1. Panel A plots shares of each birth year cohort with 1+ and 4+ years of post-secondary
schooling (left axis) and induction risk defined in Equations (i) and (iii) (right axis). Panel B plots
birth year cohort’s average years of schooling and migration rate adjusted for state of birth fixed
effects, birth year trend and national risk as defined in (iii) (left axis) and national risk (right axis).

39

Panel A: Induction risk
0.16

0.14

0.12

Induction risk

0.1

0.08

0.06

0.04

0.02

0
1942

1943
AK

1944

1945

AR

CO

1946
IL

1947

KY

LA

1948
MA

1949
MO

1950
ND

1951
PA

1952

1953

National

Panel B: Residual induction risk
0.04

0.03

Residual induction risk

0.02

0.01

0
1942

1943

1944

1945

1946

1947

1948

1949

1950

1951

1952

1953

-0.01

-0.02

-0.03

-0.04
AK

AR

CO

IL

KY

LA

MA

MO

ND

PA

Figure 2. Birth state – birth year variation in induction risk. Panel A plots state risk as defined in
(ii). Panel B plots (ii) adjusted for birth state fixed effects, birth year trend, and national risk as
defined in (ii).

40

Panel A: Estimated Effect of National Risk
0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

College 6

College 7

College 8

College 6

College 7

College 8

College 5

College 4

College 3

College 2

College 1

Grade 12

Grade 11

Grade 10

Grade 9

-0.1

Grades 5-8

Grades 1-4

0

-0.2

Panel B: Estimated Effect of State-level Risk
0.4

0.35

0.3

0.25

0.2

0.15

0.1

0.05

College 5

College 4

College 3

College 2

College 1

Grade 12

Grade 11

Grade 10

Grade 9

Grades 5-8

-0.05

Grades 1-4

0

-0.1

Figure 3. Coefficients and standard errors from OLS regressions of dummy variables for completed
education of x-axis grade and higher, inclusive, on national risk and state risk as defined in
Equations (iii) and (ii), respectively.

41

Table 1: Summary Statistics for 1980 Census

Living outside of birth state

0.358

Standard
deviation
0.479

Distance moved (’000 miles)

0.300

0.593

0

4.933

794,331

Years of schooling

13.425

2.952

0

20

794,331

College graduation

0.281

0.450

0

1

794,331

College attendance

0.428

0.495

0

1

794,331

Veteran status

0.329

0.470

0

1

794,331

National induction risk

0.059

0.036

0.004

0.112

794,331

State-level induction risk

0.060

0.039

0.002

0.153

794,331

31.412

3.430

26

38

794,331

Black

0.089

0.285

0

1

794,331

Other nonwhite

0.045

0.208

0

1

794,331

Employment/population (birth-year level)

327.489

20.462

294.579

352.073

794,331

Employment/population (birth-year-state)

323.285

43.010

185.279

415.559

794,331

10.298

0.237

9.835

10.518

794,331

6.760

0.821

2.398

8.039

794,331

Mean

Age

Log cohort size (birth-year level)
Log cohort size (birth-year-state level)

Min

Max

Observations

0

1

794,331

Notes: Data are from the 5% sample of the 1980 U.S. Census, available from IPUMS. All specifications are restricted to men born
between 1942 and 1953. Cohort size is derived from the 1960 Census. Mobility is equal to 1 if respondent resides outside his state
of birth at the time of the Census, and 0 otherwise. The employment-population ratio is defined for the year in which individuals
are 19 years of age. Log cohort size is defined as the logarithm of the number of respondents to the 1960 Census in the
corresponding year of birth.

42

Table 2: 1st-Stage Estimates of Induction Risk
Panel A: National and state-level induction risk, entered separately
dependent variable:

National induction risk

years of schooling

years of schooling

(1)

(2)

(3)

4.441***
[0.512]

3.748***
[0.394]

3.707***
[0.392]

State-level induction risk

Trend
Demographic controls
Cohort size
Employment rate
Birth region trends
F-test on IV

(4)

(5)

(6)

4.031***
[0.208]

3.396***
[0.208]

3.375***
[0.167]

X
X

X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X

X
X

X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X

75.27

90.32

89.51

377.26

267.30

408.30

Panel B: National and state-level induction risk, entered together
dependent variable:

National induction risk
State-level induction risk

Trend
Demographic controls
Cohort size
Employment rate
Birth region trends
Joint F-test on IVs

years of schooling

veteran status

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

5.420***
[0.785]

6.049***
[0.651]

5.237***
[0.615]

1.234***
[0.151]

1.256***
[0.136]

1.332***
[0.116]

-0.978
[0.784]

-2.198***
[0.649]

-1.459**
[0.593]

0.890***
[0.148]

0.733***
[0.139]

0.689***
[0.117]

X
X

X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X

X
X

X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X

233.00

217.82

260.30

1251.49

1229.23

1651.41

Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets, clustered by birth-year in columns 1, 2, and 3 and birth year-state in columns 4, 5, and
6. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent level, respectively. Data are from the 5% sample of
the 1980 U.S. Census, available from IPUMS. All specifications are restricted to men born between 1942 and 1953. Number of
observations is 794,331 in each regression. Trend is a linear trend in age. Demographic controls include race (white, black, other)
and birth state fixed effects. Cohort size is derived from the 1960 Census and defined at the birth-year level in columns 1, 2, and
3 and birth year-state in columns 4, 5, and 6. Employment rate is the employment to population ratio, also defined at the birthyear level in columns 1, 2, and 3 and birth year-state in columns 4, 5, and 6.

43

Table 3: Reduced-Form Estimates of Induction Risk on Migration
dependent variable: living outside state of birth

National induction risk

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.084*
[0.043]

0.139***
[0.031]

0.138***
[0.031]

0.238***
[0.088]

0.226***
[0.086]

0.230***
[0.088]

-0.155*
[0.083]

-0.118
[0.083]

-0.125
[0.086]

State-level induction risk

Trend
Demographic controls
Cohort size
Employment rate
Birth region trends

X
X

X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X

X
X

X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X

R2
Mean of dep. variable

0.02
0.358

0.02
0.358

0.02
0.358

0.02
0.358

0.02
0.358

0.02
0.358

Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets, clustered by birth-year in columns 1, 2, and 3 and birth year-state in columns 4, 5, and
6. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent level, respectively. Data are from the 5% sample of
the 1980 U.S. Census, available from IPUMS. All specifications are restricted to men born between 1942 and 1953. Number of
observations is 794,331 in each regression. Trend is a linear trend in age. Demographic controls include race (white, black, other)
and birth state fixed effects. Cohort size is derived from the 1960 Census and defined at the birth-year level in columns 1, 2, and
3 and birth year-state in columns 4, 5, and 6. Employment rate is the employment to population ratio, also defined at the birthyear level in columns 1, 2, and 3 and birth year-state in columns 4, 5, and 6.

44

Table 4: OLS and IV Estimates for the Impact of Years of Schooling on Migration
dependent variable: living outside state of birth
Panel A: IV with national-level induction risk
(1)

OLS
(2)

(3)

0.029***
[0.001]

0.029***
[0.001]

Trend
Demographic controls
Cohort size
Employment rate
Birth region trends

X
X

R2
Mean of dep. variable

0.05
0.358

Years of schooling

(4)

2SLS
(5)

(6)

0.029***
[0.001]

0.019
[0.011]

0.037***
[0.008]

0.037***
[0.009]

X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X

X
X

X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X

0.05
0.358

0.05
0.358

0.358

0.358

0.358

(6)

Panel B: IV with national and state-level induction risk
(1)

OLS
(2)

(3)

(4)

2SLS
(5)

Years of schooling

0.029***
[0.001]

0.029***
[0.001]

0.029***
[0.001]

0.067**
[0.033]

0.044*
[0.024]

0.059*
[0.032]

Veteran Status

0.040***
[0.002]

0.041***
[0.002]

0.041***
[0.002]

-0.101
[0.069]

-0.03
[0.048]

-0.057
[0.062]

Trend
Demographic controls
Cohort size
Employment rate
Birth region trends

X
X

X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X

X
X

X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X

R2
Mean of dep. variable

0.06
0.358

0.06
0.358

0.06
0.358

0.358

0.358

0.358

Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets, clustered by birth-year in columns 1, 2, and 3 and birth year-state in columns 4, 5, and
6. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent level, respectively. Data are from the 5% sample of
the 1980 U.S. Census, available from IPUMS. All specifications are restricted to men born between 1942 and 1953. Number of
observations is 794,331 in each regression. Trend is a linear trend in age. Demographic controls include race (white, black, other)
and birth state fixed effects. Cohort size is derived from the 1960 Census and defined at the birth-year level in columns 1, 2, and
3 and birth year-state in columns 4, 5, and 6. Employment rate is the employment to population ratio, also defined at the birthyear level in columns 1, 2, and 3 and birth year-state in columns 4, 5, and 6. Columns 4, 5, and 6 of Panel A use national-level
induction risk to instrument for years of schooling. Columns 4, 5, and 6 of Panel B use national and state-level induction risk to
instrument for schooling and veteran status.

45

Table 5: Placebo Regressions
dependent variable: living outside state of birth
Panel A: Reduced-Form Estimates of Induction Risk on Childhood Migration (1960 Census)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
National induction risk

0.024
[0.026]

0.078***
[0.010]

0.076***
[0.009]

State-level induction risk

(6)

0.027
[0.109]

0.053
[0.111]

-0.003
[0.114]

-0.003
[0.105]

-0.003
[0.107]

0.049
[0.108]

Trend
Demographic controls
Cohort size
Employment rate
Birth region trends

X
X

X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X

X
X

X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X

R2
Mean of dep. variable

0.02
0.163

0.02
0.163

0.02
0.163

0.02
0.163

0.02
0.163

0.02
0.163

Panel B: IV Estimates for Schooling on Migration for older cohorts born 1930-1941(1980 Census)
2SLS with national risk
(1)
(2)
(3)
Years of schooling

0.121
[0.947]

-0.008
[0.183]

-0.026
[0.148]

Veteran Status

2SLS with national & state-level risk
(4)
(5)
(6)
0.016
[0.132]

-0.871
[7.094]

-0.069
[0.255]

-0.02
[0.260]

-0.662
[5.646]

0.023
[0.215]

Trend
Demographic controls
Cohort size
Employment rate
Birth region trends

X
X

X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X

X
X

X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X

Mean of dep. variable

0.396

0.396

0.396

0.396

0.396

0.396

Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets, clustered by birth-year in columns 1, 2, and 3 and birth year-state in columns 4, 5, and
6. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent level, respectively. Data in Panel A is from the 1%
sample of the 1960 U.S Census; data in Panel B is from the 5% sample of the 1980 U.S. Census. Specifications in Panel A are
restricted to men born between 1942 and 1953; specifications in Panel B are restricted to men born between 1930 and 1941.
Number of observations is 167,475 in each regression of Panel A; 531,138 in each regression of Panel B. Trend is a linear trend
in age. Demographic controls include race (white, black, other) and birth state fixed effects. Cohort size is derived from the 1960
Census for both panels and defined at the birth-year level in columns 1, 2, and 3 and birth year-state in columns 4, 5, and 6.
Employment rate is the employment to population ratio, also defined at the birth-year level in columns 1, 2, and 3 and birth yearstate in columns 4, 5, and 6. Columns 1, 2, and 3 of Panel B use national-level induction risk to instrument for years of schooling
while columns 4, 5, and 6 use national and state-level induction risk to instrument for schooling and veteran status.

46

Table 6: Potential Mechanisms
dependent variable: living outside state of birth
Out-of-State College Going
(by quartile)

Geographic Diversity of State Colleges
(by quartile of Herfindahl Index)

OLS
(1)

2SLS
(2)

OLS
(3)

2SLS
(4)

Years of schooling*Quartile 1

0.019***
[0.001]

0.067
[0.057]

0.029***
[0.001]

0.05
[0.041]

Years of schooling*Quartile 2

0.032***
[0.001]

0.131**
[0.053]

0.033***
[0.001]

0.047
[0.036]

Years of schooling*Quartile 3

0.034***
[0.001]

0.084**
[0.042]

0.025***
[0.001]

0.145***
[0.049]

Years of schooling*Quartile 4

0.037***
[0.001]

0.015
[0.044]

0.027***
[0.001]

0.060*
[0.033]

Veteran Status

0.043***
[0.002]

-0.108
[0.089]

0.041***
[0.002]

-0.069
[0.071]

Trend
Demographic controls
Cohort size
Employment rate
Birth region trends

X
X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X

R2
Mean of dep. variable

0.06
0.358

0.358

0.06
0.358

0.358

Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets, clustered by birth-year in columns 1, 2, and 3 and birth year-state in columns 4, 5, and
6. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent level, respectively. Data are from the 5% sample of
the 1980 U.S. Census, available from IPUMS. All specifications are restricted to men born between 1942 and 1953. Number of
observations is 794,331 in each regression. Trend is a linear trend in age. Demographic controls include race (white, black, other)
and birth state fixed effects. Cohort size is derived from the 1960 Census and defined at the birth-year level in columns 1, 2, and
3 and birth year-state in columns 4, 5, and 6. Employment rate is the employment to population ratio, also defined at the birthyear level in columns 1, 2, and 3 and birth year-state in columns 4, 5, and 6. Column 2 uses national-level induction risk
interacted with quartile and state-level induction risk to instrument for years of schooling interacted with quartiles and for veteran
status.
Out-of-state college going quartiles: Quartile 1 (AL, AZ, CA, LA, MI, MS, NC, OK, SC, TX, UT, WI); Quartile 2 (AR, FL, IL,
IN, IA, KS, KY, MO, NE, OH, OR, TN, WV); Quartile 3 (CO, GA, HI, ID, MA, MN, MT, NY, ND, PA, RI, WA, WY); Quartile
4 (AK, CT, DE, DC, ME, MD, NV, NH, NJ, NM, SD, VT, VA). Herfindahl index quartiles: Quartile 1 (AL, CA, IL, MA, MI,
NY, NC, OH, PA, TN, TX, VA); Quartile 2 (CO, CT, FL, GA, IN, KS, MN, MO, NH, NJ, SC, WA, WI); Quartile 3 (AZ, AR,
IA, KY, LA, ME, MD, MS, OK, SD, UT, VT, WV); Quartile 4 (AK, DE, DC, HI, ID, MT, NE, NV, NM, ND, OR, RI, WY)

47

Table 7: Alternative IV Strategies
dependent variable: living outside state of birth
Panel A: Quarter of Birth (cohorts born 1942-1953)
(1)

2SLS
(2)

(3)

OLS
(4)

-0.052
[0.054]

-0.051
[0.051]

-0.051
[0.052]

0.029***
[0.001]

Trend
Demographic controls
Cohort size
Employment rate
Birth region trends

X
X

X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X

Mean of dep. variable

0.358

0.358

0.358

0.358

(1)

2SLS
(2)

(3)

OLS
(4)

-0.045**
[0.018]

-0.045**
[0.018]

-0.062**
[0.027]

0.029***
[0.001]

Birth-year dummies
Demographic controls
Cohort size
Employment rate
Birth region trends

X
X

X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X

Mean of dep. variable

0.358

0.358

0.358

0.358

(3)

OLS
(4)

Years of schooling

Panel B: College Openings (cohorts born 1942-1953)

Years of schooling

Panel C: State Merit Aid Policies (cohorts born 1966-1978)
2SLS
(1)
(2)
0.800**
[0.332]

0.629**
[0.274]

0.523*
[0.356]

0.117***
[0.004]

Birth-year dummies
Demographic controls
Cohort size
Employment rate
Birth region trends

X
X

X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X

Mean of dep. variable

0.333

0.333

0.333

0.333

College degree attainment

Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets, clustered by birth-year in columns 1, 2, and 3 and birth year-state in columns 4, 5, and
6. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent level, respectively. Data in Panels A and B are from
the 5% sample of the 1980 Census; data in Panel C is from the 1% sample of 2000 Census. Number of observations in Panels A,
B, and C are 798,508, 792,169 and 349,578 respectively. Columns 1, 2, and 3 of Panel A use indicators for quarter of birth to
instrument for years of schooling; columns 1, 2, and 3 of Panel B use number of 2 and 4 year colleges per capita to instrument for
years of schooling; columns 1, 2, and 3 of Panel C use an indicator for Arkansas after 1991 and Georgia after 1993 to instrument
for years of schooling. The standard set of controls is defined as in previous tables.

48

Appendix Table 1: OLS and 2SLS Estimates for the Impact of College Attendance and Graduation on Migration
dependent variable: living outside state of birth
Panel A: College Attendance
(1)

OLS
(2)

(3)

0.152***
[0.008]

0.153***
[0.008]

0.153***
[0.008]

0.096
[0.055]

0.190***
[0.044]

0.191***
[0.045]

0.268**
[0.126]

0.203*
[0.109]

0.297*
[0.162]

X
X

X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X

X
X

X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X

X
X

X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X

0.03
0.428

0.05
0.428

0.05
0.428

0.428

0.428

0.428

0.428

0.428

0.428

(1)

OLS
(2)

(3)

0.166***
[0.007]

0.166***
[0.006]

0.166***
[0.006]

0.132*
[0.072]

0.242***
[0.054]

0.244***
[0.055]

0.304**
[0.135]

0.237*
[0.124]

0.319*
[0.166]

Trend
Race & Birth state
Cohort size
Employment rate
Birth region trends

X
X

X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X

X
X

X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X

X
X

X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X

R2
Mean of dep. var.

0.03
0.281

0.05
0.281

0.05
0.281

0.281

0.281

0.281

0.281

0.281

0.281

Attendance
Trend
Demographic controls
Cohort size
Employment rate
Birth region trends
R2
Mean of dep. var.

2SLS with national risk
(4)
(5)
(6)

2SLS with national and state-level risk
(7)
(8)
(9)

Panel B: College Graduation

Graduation

2SLS with national risk
(4)
(5)
(6)

2SLS with national and state-level risk
(7)
(8)
(9)

Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets, clustered by birth-year in columns 1, 2, and 3 and birth year-state in columns 4, 5, and 6. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5,
and 10 percent level, respectively. Data are from the 5% sample of the 1980 U.S. Census, available from IPUMS. All specifications are restricted to men born between 1942 and 1953.
Number of observations is 794,331 in each regression. Trend is a linear trend in age. Demographic controls include race (white, black, other) and birth state fixed effects. Cohort size is
derived from the 1960 Census and defined at the birth-year level in columns 1-6 and birth year-state in columns 7-9. Employment rate is the employment to population ratio, also defined at
the birth-year level in columns 1-6 and birth year-state in columns 7-9.

49

Appendix Table 2: Collapsed OLS and IV Estimates for the Impact of Schooling on Migration
(collapsed to birth year*birth state level cells)
dependent variable: living outside state of birth
Panel A: IV with national-level induction risk
(1)

OLS
(2)

(3)

0.009**
[0.004]

0.021***
[0.004]

Trend
Demographic controls
Cohort size
Employment rate
Birth region trends

X
X

R2
Mean of dep. variable

0.94
0.358

Years of schooling

(4)

2SLS
(5)

(6)

0.027***
[0.006]

0.019
[0.011]

0.037***
[0.009]

0.038***
[0.009]

X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X

X
X

X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X

0.94
0.358

0.95
0.358

0.358

0.358

0.358

Panel B: IV with national and state-level induction risk
(1)

OLS
(2)

(3)

(4)

2SLS
(5)

(6)

Years of schooling

0.006
[0.007]

0.015*
[0.008]

0.014*
[0.008]

0.069*
[0.035]

0.046*
[0.026]

0.062*
[0.034]

Veteran Status

0.013
[0.019]

0.015
[0.019]

0.018
[0.020]

-0.106
[0.074]

-0.034
[0.052]

-0.064
[0.066]

Trend
Demographic controls
Cohort size
Employment rate
Birth region trends

X
X

X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X

X
X

X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X

R2
Mean of dep. variable

0.94
0.358

0.94
0.358

0.95
0.358

0.358

0.358

0.358

Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets, clustered by birth-year in columns 1, 2, and 3 and birth year-birth state in columns 4, 5,
and 6. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent level, respectively. Data are from the 5% sample
of the 1980 U.S. Census, available from IPUMS. All specifications are restricted to men born between 1942 and 1953, and
weighted by number of observations in each cell to account for the differential precision of our estimated averages. Number of
state-year observations is 600 in each regression. Trend is a linear trend in age. Demographic controls include the percentage of
whites, blacks, and others in each state-year and birth state fixed effects. Cohort size is derived from the 1960 Census and defined
at the birth-year level in columns 1, 2, and 3 and birth year-birth state in columns 4, 5, and 6. Employment rate is the employment
to population ratio, also defined at the birth-year level in columns 1, 2, and 3 and birth year-birth state in columns 4, 5, and 6.
Columns 4, 5, and 6 of Panel A use national-level induction risk to instrument for years of schooling. Columns 4, 5, and 6 of
Panel B use national and state-level induction risk to instrument for schooling and veteran status.

50

