                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                PUBLIC DEBT AND U.S. SAVING: A NEW
                 TEST OF THE NEUTRALITY HYPOTHESIS


                        Michael J. Boskin

                      Laurence J. Kotlikoff



                      Working Paper No. i61.6




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                            June 1985




We have benefitted greatly from conversations with Lawrence Weiss,
Takeshi Pinemiya, Joseph Stiglitz, Jose Sheinkman, Jim Poterba, Karl
Bruner, and John Roberts, and from the participants of the
Carnegie—Rochester Conference and Public Finance Seminars at
Stanford and Harvard. We thank John Roberts and Mike Knetter for
excellent research assistance, and the Center for Economic Policy
Research, Stanford University and the National Bureau of Economic
Research for financial support. The research reported here is part
of the NBER's research programs in Taxation and Economic
Fluctuations and project in Government Budget. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                       NBER Working Paper #i616
                                                       June 1985




                         Public Debt and U.S. Saving: A New
                          Test of the Neutrality Hypothesis


                                       PBSTRACT


            The substantial post war decline in the U.S. saving rate has added
great    impetus to the debate over whether public debt policy crowds out saving.

Rather than attempting to reject specific saving models, empirical research

on debt policy and savings has primarily focused on the impact of particular

policy variables on savings. In this paper we examine Barro's infinite horizon,

intergenerationally altruistic model. A distinguishing feature of this model

is that aggregate consumption depends only on collective resources and not the

age distribution of resources.

            To test this proposition we specify the Barro model under earnings

uncertainty, rate of return uncertainty, and demographic change and test

whether, given the level of consumption predicted by this model, variables

measuring the age distribution of resources influence actual consumption. Data

on the age distribution of resources are primarily obtained from the annual

Current Population Surveys. Our results imply a rejection of the hypothesis

that aggregate consumption is independent of the age distribution of resources.

They therefore cast doubt on the contention that government debt policy does not

affect   consumption and saving.




Michael J. Boskin                                        Laurence J. Kotlikoff
National Bureau of Economic Research                     Department of Economics
20)4 Junipero Serra Boulevard                            Boston University
Stanford, CA 94305                                       Boston, MA 02115
                                 Michael J. Boskin
                                        and
                               Laurence J. Kotlikoff


            The significant postwar decline in the U.S. saving rate is a rather

startling stylized fact that invites explanation. Since 1930 the U.S. has been

saving 14.7 percent of its net national product. This figure contrasts with the

7.8 percent average saving rate of the l9TOs, the 8.7 percent average rate of

the 1960s, and the 8.8 percent average rate of the l950s.- The U.S. saving

rate is quite low not only relative to its own recent past level, but also

relative to the saving rates of its principal trading partners. Since 1960 the

U.S. net national saving rate has averaged only 55 percent of the European OECD

rate and just 314 percent of the Japanese rate.2 Over the postwar period the U.S.

econoIr has experienced remarkable changes in fertility rates, the median age of

retirement, and the rate of female labor force    participation;   but each of these

changes appears more likely to have raised rather than lowered the rate of

saving.

            The search for a culprit in explaining the saving reduction has led

naturally   to the federal government's   doorstep. This paper examines the

government's potential role in influencing postwar U.S. saving. As argued in
the next section, a "smoking gun" in this mystery, if one is to be found, is
most   likely hiding amidst the government's intergenerational transfer policies.

Intergenerational transfer policies are referred to here as debt policies; they

may be explicit, in the sense of altering the government's official measure of

its liabilities, or implicit, in which case cross generational transfers arise,

but have no direct impact on accounting deficits.
                                        —2—


            Fesolving the impact of debt policy on saving is no easy task. There

are only a few, rather subtle testable differences between, for example, the

life cycle model (Modigliani and Brurnberg (l95)) that predicts crowding out

from debt policies and the infinite horizon Barro (l9T) model that predicts no

crowding out. Section II contains a short discussion of this point and a

description of tests that can potentially discriminate between these models.

The main contribution of this paper is to examine empirically Barro's model of

intergenerational altruism. A restatement of the proposition that intergenera-

tional transfers do not influence saving is that saving is invariant to the age
distribution of resources.3 This proposition is directly tested by measuring
the excess influence of the age distribution of personal income and components
of personal income on aggregate consumption given the level of consumption
predicted   by our formulation of the Barro model.

            This model, which is described in section III, differs from that

underlying the traditional time series consumption regression (e.g., Feldstein

(l971), Barro (19T8), Munnell (l9Tlii, Darby (l9T9)) by explicitly incorporating

earnings   uncertainty, rate of return uncertainty, and demographic change into
the optimal consumption decision. From the perspective of uncertainty models,
the   standard consumption specification seems quite naive; indeed, the failure

explicitly to model uncertainty produces major conundrums over squeezing data

from an uncertain world into a certainty model (Leinier and Lesnoy (1981)). Our

approach to including uncertainty in the analysis involves estimating simple

stochastic processes for earnings and the return to savings and explicitly

solving for the optimal consumption path of the infinitely lived Barro—type
                                            —3—




family. We    then test whether, given the optimal predicted consumption program,

the age distribution of resources has an impact on actual aggregate consumption.

Since the age distribution of resources is obviously influenced br changes in

the population age structure, the model controls for such changes by taking

explicit account of variations in the size and age distribution of the

population.

            Section IV contains a description of the data and the specification of

earnings and return uncertainty. The empirical findings are discussed in

section V, and concluding comments appear in Section VI.


I. Government Fiscal Policy and National Saving

            In considering the government's potential impact on saving one might

ask whether postwar growth in total (federal, state, and local) government

consumption   relative to NNP     could be a key factor. The ratio of government

consumption   to   NNP has increased, but the increase has been fairly modest.

Government consumption averaged 21.14 percent of net national product in the

1950s, 23.0 percent in the 1960s, 23.5 percent in the 1970s, and 23.1 percent

in the period l980_19814. If, during the last 5 years,     government consumption
had been 21.14   percent rather than 23.1 percent of NNP and if private consumption

as   a share of NNP   had   not changed, the net national saving rate would   have

averaged   6.5 percent rather than 14.7 percent. Assuming that private consumption

is invariant to changes in government consumption seems, however, highly

unrealistic. At one extreme, government consumption ny substitute perfectly

for private consumption (Bailey (1961) and David and Scadding (19714)). In this
                                               —




case the 1.1 percentage point increase in the ratio of government consumption to

NNP between the 50s and early BOs would, abstracting from issues of tax

distortions and redistributions, have been completely offset by a 1.7 percentage

point decrease in the ratio of private consumption to NNP, leaving the net

national saving rate unchanged. With government consumption a perfect

substitute for private consumption, the private sector's ultimate disposable

income is simply NNP; and the private saving rate would coincide with the net

national saving rate. From this perspective, the key question is why the

private sector's saving behavior changed such that total consumption, private

plus government, rose as a share of NNP.

              At the other extreme, government consumption might not enter private

utility functions at all, or might enter separably. In choosing its consumption

level one would expect the private sector in this case to view NNP—G, where G is

government consumption, as its ultimate disposable income, since current

government      consumption must ultimately be financed by the private sector)
In    the   l950s   the   private sector saved 10.9 percent of this definition of
disposable      income. In the 1980s the corresponding saving rate has been only

6.1 percent. Had the private sector maintained its 1950's 10.9 percent rate of

saving out of NNP—G,         the rise in the ratio of government's consumption to NNP
wouldhave generated only a L5 percent decline in the net national saving rate
between the 1950s and 1980s, rather than the I6.6 percent drop actually
observed. From this perspective the increase in the government's rate of con-
sumption     out of N1P      contributed, at mast, a small amount to the decline in the
net    national saving rate. Again, the real question is why an       appropriately
defined     private saving rate fell during this period.
                                      —5--



          A second accusation that could be levelled at government policy is

that the use of distortionary taxes to finance both its consumption and transfer

expenditures has reduced incentives to work and save. While there was some

increase in average marginal taxes on labor earnings, the increase was modest

and seems unlikely to account for the decline in the U.S. saving rate. A recent

article by Barro and Sahasakul (1983) suggests that the average marginal tax on

labor income was 22 per cent in the 1950s, 22 percent in the 1960s, and 27

percent in the 1970s.5

          These marginal tax figures exclude social security's payroll tax.

However, there is reason to believe that inclusion of Social Security's tax and

benefit provisions in the analysis would reduce rather than raise estimated

marginal labor taxes particularly in the 1970s. Blinder and Gordon's (1981)

analysis suggests that social security's tax and benefit provisions constitute a

sizeable subsidy to labor earnings of married males and others leaving net

effective marginal taxes on labor earnings for these groups quite low. Boskin

and Hurd (198k) confirm the significant size of the Gordon effect. Crediting

the public with the perspicacity and knowledge required to assess correctly the

marginal social security return on the marginal tax contribution may be

unrealistic; but the opposite assumption, that workers believe they receive no

return at the margin for marginal social security tax payments, seems equally

implausible. If one takes an intermediate view that workers view marginal

social security taxes as providing marginal social security benefits of equal

present value, then the post 1950 rise in the average marginal tax on labor

income is adequately captured by Barro and Sahasakul's estimates.
                                              —6—


                Marginal saving incentives are   also determined by capital income
taxes.         studies argue that effective capital income taxes, at least on
           Several

corporate source income, rose substantially in the 1970s (e.g., Feldstein and
Summers (1919)). But in contrast to this popular belief that such taxes rose
between 1950 and 1980, extensive calculations contained in King and Fullerton
(l98) suggest a small decline in effective marginal taxes on capital income
over this period. The 1981 tax act lowered effective marginal capital income
taxes more significantly. Based on a ten percent pretax return to capital and
the prevailing inflation rate King and Fullerton calculate that the overall
effective       marginal capital income tax   rate   was I8 percent   in 1960, 37   percent in

1980,    26 percent    in 1981, and 32 percent in 1982. In combination with the

figures just cited for marginal taxes on labor income, these findings suggest

that    the distortive effects of government fiscal policy cannot explain the drop
in the U.S. saving rate over the last 35 years.
            Another type of policy that could        potentially be   blamed for the saving
decline    is    intragenerational redistribution from the rich to the poor. The poor
may have a higher rate of time preference than the rich. Alternatively the poor
may be liquidity constrained. In either case the poor within arr age group will
have    larger marginal propensities to    consume than their better endowed
contemporaries;       and intragenerational transfers     from the rich to the poor will
lower    saving. Emily Lawrence (1983) recently examined the potential effect of

intragenerational redistribution on saving using a life cycle simulation model.

Lawrence considered verj substantial differences in time preference rates between

the rich and poor as well as liquidity constrained consuription by the poor. She
                                         —7—


found that even very significant intragenerational redistribution, such as that

characterizing U.S. welfare programs, has only minor effects on saving in life

cycle models.

             The explanation for these small changes in the case of differences in

time preference rates is simply that neither the associated differences in

marginal    consumption propensities across the two groups nor the size of the
simulated transfers are sufficiently large to have much impact on the econorrrj's
total wealth accumulation. In the case the poor are liquidity constrained,
their    marginal consumption propensities are unity; but the change in disposable

income multiplying their unitary propensities is only current transfers. For

rich,   unconstrained transferers, the reduction in current consumption equals
their much smaller marginal propensity to consume multiplied by the present
value of transfers, which is typically a much larger number than simply the
current payment. The reduced consumption of the rich offsets to a significant
extent the increased consumption of the liquidity constrained poor        producing

only    a small reduction in national saving despite a quite substantial program of
intragenerational   transfers.   We conclude from this and   related dels that

intrageneratiorial redistribution is probably not a major determinant of the

decline in the U.S. saving rate since 1950.

            A fourth channel by which government policy may have reduced saving is

by transfering resources from younger    and future   generations   to older genera-
tions. Intergenerational    transfers towards older generations, which is     referred
to here as debt policy, can be and have been conducted in quite subtle ways.
The unfunded financing of the U.S. Social Security System is by now a well
                                               —8—




understood,      if   nonetheless   quite subtle, debt policy (Feldstein (l971)). Less

well   unde rstood debt policies are changes in the tax stracture that shift the
burden of taxation from older          to younger age groups   (Summers (1981a), Auerbach
and Kotlikoff (1983a)) and changes in tax provisions that raise market values of

financial assets and, thereby, transfer resources to older age groups who are

the   priinaiy owners of such assets (F'eldstein (1977), Summers       (198Th)).    An

example of the former type of policy is switching from income taxation to wage
taxation. An example of the latter policy is reducing investment incentives

(Auerbach and Kotlikoff (1983b)). Since investment incentives in the U.S. are

effectively provided only to new investment, old capital, capital that has been

fully or partially written off, sells at a discount reflecting the differential

tax treatment. A reduction in investment incentives means a smaller discount

and a capital gain to owners of old capital. Younger and future generations are

worse off as a result of such policies because they rrn.ist now pay a higher price

to acquire      claims to the econoiry's capital stock.

            In    addition to these ire subtle mechanisms of transferring          to older

generations, governments can engage in debt policies by reducing taxes levied on

current generations and raising taxes         levied on   future generations.

Intergenerational       redistribution of this variety may     eventuate   in larger offi-
cially   reported deficits.         An example in which even this ire obvious fonn of
redistribution        does not necessarily alter official debt calculations is when

such tax cuts and tax increases are coincident, respectively, with equivalent

reductions and increases in the level of government consumption.

           The fact that very significant intergenerational redistribution can be

run   without    its ever showing up on government books suggests that officially
                                             —9—




reported   deficits are at best a verj poor indicator of underlying economic debt

policies.6 This proposition notwithstanding, there has been an enormous public

interest, especially in recent years, in officially reported deficits.

Curiously, public attention has focused only on a subset of official liabili-

ties of the federal government and has essentially ignored both the official

assets of the federal government as well as the official assets and liabilities

of state and local governments. As discussed by Boskin (1982, 1985),           Eisner
and Pieper (l981), and the 1982 Economic Report of the President, the n.rket

value of the U.S. federal governmentts official assets may         currently   equal if

not exceed the market value of its official liabilities.

            In light of the very significant if not overwhelming difficulties of
gauging   the extent of true debt policies from official reports, it seems safer
to   assess post war U.S.   debt policy by   asking   the following question: were the
lifetime   budget constraints of older generations expanded significantly in the

post war period as a consequence of government policy at the. expense of

contracted   budget constraints for young and future generations? One might
point, in this context, to the enormous expansion of the social security system
which greatly increased the budget opportunities of the elderly. The problem,
however, with considering any one component of government policy is that it may
have   been instituted to offset some other component; i.e., the postwar redistri-

bution through social security to the elderly y simply represent the

government's way of compensating the elderly for higher income taxes over their

lifetimes or for their contribution to the nation during World War II. Just as

there is no single correct way    to measure offical deficits, there is no single
                                            —10—


correct way of posing counterfactuals about observed government transfer              poli-
cies. To put this point differently, intergenerational redistribution must

always   be   assessed relative to some benchmark, and the choice of a benchmark

seems inherently subjective. The implication of this point is that any calcula-

tion of the magnitude of postwar       intergenerational     transfers will be arbitrary.7

              Having conceded this point we believe that at least one interesting,

if arbitrary, counterfactual to pose with respect to postwar U.S. debt policy is

an econoir with either a very small unfunded social security program targeted

toward the elderly poor or a larger, but         fully   funded social security system.

There    is little need to review here the well—known facts about the magnitude of
the U.S. Social Security system 'whose unfunded liabilities appear to range
between   4 and 6 times the size of the U.S. government's official liabilities.8

The growth of this program was coincident with the decline in the net national

saving rate. The social security system appears to represent the only

(potentially) discrete postwar intergenerational transfer policy capable of pro-

ducing a major drop in the national saving rate. Simulation studies of the

potential savings impact of unfunded Social Security suggest a possible reduc-

tion   in long—run savings of     20 to 25 percent (Kotlikoff (1979) and Auerbach and

Kotlikoff     (1983c)).
              To summarize   this section, we   have   identified   four   stylized features
of   fiscal policy, viz., government consumption, the extent of distortionary

taxation, intragenerational transfers, and intergenerational transfers, each of

which can     affect   a nationts saving behavior. We have     tried   to argue,   although
hardly exhaustively, that of these four features of fiscal policy, intergenera—
                                               —11-.


tional transfers    are   the   most likely to have generated a decline in the U.S.

saving rate over the last three and a half decades.

             We turn next to a brief discussion of recent empirical attempts to

resolve the impact of debt policies on saving. In the course of reviewing this

literature we indicate that there have been surprisingly few tests designed to

distinguish sharply among       broad models    of saving. Rather than testing more

fundamental propositions of particular saving models, st of the research has

concentrated on the empirical impact of particular policy variables on consuiup—

tion and savings. This focus has been excessive; indeed, in trany studies the

predicted impact of policy variables on dependent variables is the same under

models with quite different implications about the affect of debt policies on

national saving.



II. Empirical Analyses of Debt Policies

          Much of the recent empirical research relating to the effects of eco—

nornic deficits falls into two categories: cross—sectional analysis of social

security's   impact on    household wealth accumulation and    time series analysis
of the consumption impact of government policy variables, such as social
security wealth. Many cross—sectional studies have proceeded without clealy
formulating rejectable hypotheses concerning Barro's (197)4) conjecture of
intergenerational altruism. These studies, including those of Feldstein and
Pellechio (1979) and Kotlikoff (1979b), involve regressions of household private
wealth on social security tax and transfer variables. The central question
posed in niuch of this literature is whether households reduce their private
                                                                    — 12—




asset accumulation when young because of the anticipation of receiving net wind-.

fall transfers when old. The evidence here is mixed, but even if each of these

studies had strongly confirmed the proposition that expected future windfalls

lead to higher current consumption arid, therefore, less private wealth accumula-

tion, the results would still leave unresolved the issue of altruism; the

altruistic hypothesis, like the life cycle hypothesis, suggests that increases

in the future resources of a particular household should raise that household's

consumption and lower its own savings. In the altruistic case, however, the

    4-,, r vt4,,
    •
S LA %JLA S
                 , f'o 1 1 +.JSJ
            flSLSLASLS.hJ    Es +vJinc
                                    LS. in
                                         Si   ccl,SS'.J.JLA
                                                   ,, rI 4 r, nv, cc 4 4 rsrv tTrs,1 1 1.SS
                                                                   LAJ'JSdiifl¼.'LASLA    o 1%J'
                                                                                              c Es  v.o 4J p.
                                                                                                 J.c.bS    '.._a +1, a nest,
                                                                                                                  QiS'_ L%SSha,
                                                                                                                              %J,mrs+
                                                                                                                                 A2ii.# J4_IJLS
                                                                                                                                           r..n   i-s
                                                                                                                                                  5./4%
                                                                                                                                                      J.



all      other altruistically linked households in the extended family. Indeed, a

central proposition of the altruism hypothesis is that the consumption of par-

ticular extended family members depends on the resources of other extended

family members. Unfortunately, this latter proposition is not tested in the

cross—section empirical literature, nor does it appear capable of being tested,

at least for the U.S., given available micro data sources (although Kurz (1982)

indirectly examines altruistic behavior using data on transfers.)

                 While this distinguishing implication of the altruism del has not

been tested, a distinguishing implication of the pure life cycle uodel, that the

elderly have larger marginal consumption propensities, has been directly tested

by Blinder, Gordon, and Wise (1981). Their findings are weakly supportive of

this proposition. Other implications of the life cycle idel have also been

analyzed. For example, Kotlikoff and Summers (1981) find that life cycle saving

cannot explain the bulk of U.S. savings. Several studies addressing dissaving

after retirement by Darby (1978), Mirer (1979), David and Menchik (1980), and
                                             —13—



Bernheim (198i) find either no dissaving or too little to be consistent with the
strict   life cycle model.

           The time series analyses of Feldstein (l9'fl, 1982), Munnell (l971),

Barro (1918), Darby (1919), Leimer and Lesnoy (1981), and numerous others have

proved inconclusive. The econometrics here is plagued by problems of

aggregation,   simultaneity, and errors in defining variables such as social
security wealth. Auerbach and Kotlikoff (1983c) demonstrate the problem of the
time   series statistical approach by running the standard time series

specification on simulated data that conformed perfectly to the nonaltruistic,

life cycle hypothesis. The coefficients on the critical social security wealth

variable as well as many other variables proved extraordinarily sensitive to the

choice of sample period. Auerbach and         Kotlikoff   concluded that the standard

time series approach could easily      reject   the strict life cycle, no altruism

hypothesis   even if it were   true.

           Curiously,   the time series studies have been quite vague with respect
to which of several (e.g., life cycle, Keynesian, or altruistic) saving models
is   being tested. As a consequence a variety of ad hoc specifications have

been employed. In a time series context taking the life cycle model as the null

hypothesis immediately runs afoul of the paucity of cohort specific time series

data. Absent such data key      parameters   cannot be identified and one cannot test

two basic propositions of the life cycle models alluded to above: First, that

consumption of a particular cohort depends only        on its own resources and not

collective   societal   resources; and second, that older cohorts have larger rrargi—

nal consumption propensities.
             The Barro idel is much more suited to analysis with time series data
since only collective, rather than cohort specific resources are predicted to
influence aggregate consumption. This proposition is particularly         useful     in
incorporating government policy in the model. In a certainty model the private
Barro economy's budget can be written as the economy's total human plus non-
human resources       (including those owned by   the government) less the present
value   of   government consumption. As described below an analogous private budget
constraint,     involving only government consumption, i.e.,     requiring no infor-
mation about       taxes, arises witri uncertainty.

             As mentioned, the key proposition of the Barro ndel that consumption

depends on collective resources and does not depend on the age distribution of

resources is the focus of our empirical work. To test this proposition, we spe-

cify   the Barro nde1 under earnings and rate of return uncertainty and determine
whether,     given the consumption predicted by this nodel, variables measuring

the age distribution of resources significantly influence actual consumption.

Data obtained from annual current population surveys on the age distribution of

income, including wages and salaries, property income, and government transfer

payments, are used for this test. In addition, we use data compiled by Dean

Leirner and Selig Lesnoy (1981) on the distribution of net Social Security wealth

by age.



III.    The Barro Model with Demographics and Uncertain Earnings and Returns
             The    expected utility of the "infinite horizon" Barro family at time t,
U, is written in equation (i).
                                                      —15—


                                  D
(i)          U
              t
                   = E
                        t t=O a=O
                          L
                                            t+T,a
                                                    e u(c
                                                     a    t+T,a



            The function u( ) when multiplied by 0a indicates the family's period

t+t    utility    associated with the consumption of a member age a at t+r,
                                                                                                a

In    this formulation of the utility from particular family members' consumption,

the 0a parameters can be thought of as age—specific utility weights. They
determine the relative consumption of different family members at a point in

time; i.e., they determine the shape of the cross secion age—consumption

profile.    t+T,a is the number of family members age                 a (with maximum longevity of

D)    at time t+T, and c is a discount factor. Since we are                applying   this model to
the entire U.S. economy, t+Ta corresponds to the U.S. population age a at
t+T. The function TJ( ) is assumed to be of the iso—elastic form, i.e.:
                          l—y
(2)         u(c)

            Let    A stand for the private sector's net worth at time t, Gt for
government consumption at time t,                   for the stochastic pre-tax return       to savings

received at the end of period t,   for the stochastic pre—tax labor earnings
of the economy received at the end of period t, and    for net taxes paid by
the private      sector   at the end of period t. Private sector net worth evolves
according to:

(3)                 =
                         (A   —
                                  a0   Pt   aCta + ) + t          —




            The Euler         equation associated with       optirt.l choice of
                                                                                  a
                                                                                      is:
                                                              —i 6—




(14)
              Ec+1:1(l +                   (i        -   )) =         a +1


In     (14)   is the nrginal effective capital income tax, which is assumed here

to be nonstochastic.
              At any point in time the relationship between consumption of different

age groups is given by:


               c               e
                                           1/i
                t,a —_'a
              _______              a
               t,a+l           a+l


              Turning to the government's budget constraint, let                    and Gt stand,

respectively, for government net worth and consumption at time t, then
              A grows according to:


                     =                           +        +
(6)
              A1         (A
                               —
                                   G)(l
              Adding (6) to (3) gives the following expression for the evolution
of total net worth in the econonrf, At:


                                       D
                     =                                                          +
(T)
              At+i       (At
                               —

                                   a0
                                       E
                                            PtaCta Gt)(l +                rt)

              In this model the distribution of tax burdens either at a point in

time or over time has no impact on consumption choice; hence government policy

is fully described by the evolution of Gt and the marginal effective capital

income tax,              Given the time paths of these policy variables as well as

earnings and return distributions, equations (14), (5), and (7) can be used in
                                                        —iT —




solving    for the optimal choice of consumption at any point in time. In contrast

to other analyses such as Feidstein (l9T)-) and Barro (19T8), this formulation

avoids the difficulties of defining and measuring government debt policy

variables such as Social Security wealth.
            In this one good model all net worth terms,
                                                                            A,   A, and At. are
measured    at replacement cost rather than market value. This method of
expressing the private and government budget constraints plus the fact that
r is the pre—tax rate of return implies that Tt includes taxes levied both on
households and on businesses. To illustrate the point consider an econorrrj with

a single tax levied on the profits of businesses at rate p.                        Also assume the
government permits full expensing of new investment. For simplicity assume pri-
vate assets consist only of holdings of capital, Kt, end official government
debt, Dt. As described in Auerbach and Kotlikoff (1983b) the market value of
private capital is (l_1i)K, where K is the replacement value of capital at t.
Since the return on capital paid by- business with full expensing is the pre—tax
return, the private sector budget constraint with assets valued at market prices
is:

                                                                      D
            (1                           =                    +                                   +
(8)              —
                     P)Kt+i
                              +
                                  Dt+i                i1)Kt
                                                                  —

                                                                      a0   Pt aCt a)I(l +   rt)

Rewriting    (8) yields:

(8')       A1 = Kt+i +            Dt÷i
                                         =
                                             (K   +
                                                      D)(l + ) + 11(K+i — K)         —



Note the P(K+i —        K)     corresponds to expensing rebates obtained from the

government, and                corresponds to business profits taxes. The corresponding
                      i.irtK
                                                          —18—


government equation is:

(9)                      =
                               + c)(1    +         —
                                                              + .(K1 — K)
Subtracting (9) from            (8')   yields (T).
               The three equations (14), (5), and (7) that are used to solve for the

optimal consumption program can be further                       simplified    by using (5) to express

(14) and (7) in terms of the consumption of a Barro family member age a*.


                      —1                            =         —Y
               E.tCt+l,a* 1 +
                                  rt   1 —
                                                           t,a
                                                    1/i

                                                                               ')
                                  D          0
(7")           A+1 = (At —        z                       Ct,a* —   G)(1   +        +
                           a=0                a*



Solving for the Optimal Consumption Program

               Our method of deterrriing the optimal consumption plan is to solve

the finite period analogue to the infinite horizon ndel for a time horizon

sufficiently large that extending it would make no difference to our results.

Specifically we solve the finite period model for successively larger values of

t,    where    t    is   the number of periods, until the consumption programs for each of

the    first       50   periods converge. Our data covers 19146 through 19814; we choose
2060 as the terminal year. The optimal consumption values for the years 19146 to
19814 based on a terminal year of                2059   were less than a half percent different
from those derived using 2060 as the terminal year.
                   The finite period problem is solved using dynamic programming. At
time t+t      the       consuinrtion function Ct+a* is given by:
                                                          —19—


    (10)               Ct+a*(At+t) =            —
                                         At+        Gt+

Substituting this expression Into the Euler relationship (4') for period t+'r—l

yields:

 (ii)
                         Ct+_i,a*1 Et+i ct+ a* ÷r1(1                         +
                                                                                 +_(l   —



The accumulation equation (7') for At+_ can now be plugged into (11):


           /
                         t+T-.l,a'

                           Et+t_iCt+t,a* E(At+_i_ht_iCt+T_i,a* —                 Gt+_i)(l+rt+_i(l_6+_i))
                           +


                          D               1/y
where ht_i =
                         a0
From           (11')   and the implicit function theorem we have that                       is a rnotonic
increasing function of A — ,
                       t+t—l
                                                i.e.:

(12)                   Ct+_ia* =     ct+_ia*(At+_i;
In    (12) S.-1 is a vector of state variables conditioning the distributions

of
       t+t—1
               —   and et+t—1
                         — .          The function C —
                                                        t4-T—1
                                                                 (   ) can now be used to solve for

Ct+_2(At+_2;                           Proceeding in this manner one can calculate each

consumption function C+(At+ ; S÷) for 0 (                               (   t—3.

                   In general there are no simple closed form solutions for the

C+( ) functions, and                 these   functions must be derived numerically. The

numerical          method we employ      is to select a grid of potential values of

A
t+t
           and St+t • Next       we   take   random draws        from the bivariate distribution
                                             —20—




f         and        conditional on the particular grid value of S4. These

draws are then used to evaluate (conditional on alternative values of

         the expectation of c++1( )1(+rt+T(1_t+T)) for alternative values

of         •    The value of C÷        * producing an equality between this

expectation and Ct+Ta*1 i::., satisring (n'),              is   stored as

the function Ct+Ta*(At+TSt+T)• The number of grid points and random draws

chosen are sufficiently large that our empirical result are invariant to further

increases in their values.



IV. Specification of Return and Earnings Uncertainty and Description of the Data

            The model outlined in section III assumes that current and future

population age distributions are        known with certainty. To be consistent in
modeling earnings uncertainty, we also assume that Barro          family   planners

understand   the impact of projected demographic change on future total labor
earnings distributions. More generally, we assume that          age distribution
                                                                the

of earnings is known     with   certainty. What is uncertain then is the level
of earnings at future dates for a representative worker. Let w+1               * be   the
random annual earnings of the benchmark worker age a* at time t+r.            Then

total   earnings at t+T,            can be expressed as:


(13)             =
                     Wt+T a*        t+t,a t+t,a t+T,a
                               a0
where           is the non—stochastic ratio of earnings of a worker age a at t+t
        t+T,a
to that of a worker age a* at t+t, and               is the non—stochastic work

experience rate for the population age a at t+T.
                                                            —21—




             We assume the following fairly simple bivariate                       process

forw
        t+T,a*
                  and rt+T

(i14)        log                =        +    c1 log Wt+t_l,a* ÷ 2t+Tl + C
                     t+T,a*         c0

             r+T c3 + c14r÷T 1 + c5log Wt+.r_l,a* + Cr

where CW and C are mean zero, bivariately distributed normal errors with
              2 r2
variances a , a
              C      r,
                           and covariance a
                                                   Cr
                                                        .   Since the distributions of w               and
                                                                                             t+T,a*
        depend on their lagged values, these lagged variables represent the additional

state variables                  entering the Ct+ta*( )                 functions.9
            Values of w÷T                    are calculated        for the years 19146 through 19814    by
                                    a*
dividing total annual earnings by the multiplicand of                                  in (13). Total

annual earnings equals NIA wage                 and salary compensation plus an updated version
of Kotlikoff and Summers' (1981) estimate of labor earnings of the self employed.

Values for the relative earnings profile                                come from Social Security data

on median earnings by age and sex.1° There is very little variation in this

profile between 19146 and 19814. For years after 19814 the projected profile of

relative earnings is set equal to the 19814 relative earnings profile. Work

experience    rates by age and sex are reported starting in 1959 in the Employment
and   Training Report       of the President, although labor force participation rates
are available for the entire periodJ3- For the period 19146 through 1958 work

experience rates          are   imputed based on a regression of work experience rates on labor

force participation rates            for      the years 1959 through 19814. Work experience

rates   projected beyond 19814 are assumed to equal the 19814 rates.
                                         —22—


            Private consumption is measured here as NIA consumer expenditures on

non—durables and serrices plus imputed rent on durables. The BEA consumer

durables series was used in this calculation. The rate of imputation equals the

annual average three month Treasury bill rate less the annual percentage

increase in the POE durables deflator plus an assumed 20 percent depreciation

rate. Government consumption is also corrected for durables consumption. The

stock of government durables, both military and nonmilitary, was divided into

equipment and structures. A 20 percent rate of depreciation was assumed for

government equipment, and a 3   percent depreciation rate was assumed for
government structures. Like demographics and       the   age   distribution   of earnings,

we    assume that the future course of government consumption is known with
certainty. Future government consumption is determined by assuming that
government consumption per capita after 19814 equals the 19814 level of government
consumption per capita. Besides government consumption, the marginal tax on
capital income is the only policy variable influencing the optimal consumption
plan. A 30 percent marginal tax on capital income is used in calculating each
of the consumption functions for the years 19146 through 2060.
           Econo,r wide net worth is measured as the sum of private plus govern-
ment reproducible tangible wealth nasured at replacement cost estimated by the
BEA, plus the value of private land estimated by the Federal Reserve. These and
other series are deflated to 19T2 dollars. Given wealth in years t and t+l, and
year t earnings, private consumption, and government consumption, equation (7)
can    be used to solve for r+T. This procedure was used to determine the pretax
rate   of return series for the period 19146   through 19814.
                                           —23—


            Data for the age distribution of resources, which, according to the

Barro model, is irrelevant for aggregate consumption, was obtained from the

annual Current Population Surveys (CPS) for the years 1968           through   l984.

While the CPS    data   does not provide information about asset holdings, it does

include property income, wage and salary income, and government transfers

including welfare, food stamps, unemployment compensation, veterans' benefits,

and Social Security retirement and disability benefits. These data and the CPS

population weights are used to construct shares of total income as well as

shares of labor income, property income, and social security income of

households with heads whose ages fafl in particular age categories.



V. Testing the Intergenerational Altruism Model

            Equation (15) indicates the nonlinear regression rdel used to test

intergenerational alt ruism.


(15) Ct =        +                                                             +
                                W 1,r l;OO,...,OD,1,P) + Xisi + •••                Xs + 6ct

In (is)
          C   is actual consumption, Ct(    )   is   the level of total consumption

predicted by our idel and depends on the age—utility weights e,...,OD, the

relative risk aversion coefficient y, and the time preference rate p, where p =

The variables s1 through s are year t shares of personal income or components of

personal income of in different age    groups.       The error      is assumed to be

normally    distribited with mean zero and variance      a2.     A test of the altruism

model,    conditional, of course, on both our specification       of intergenerational

altruism   and our functional forms   for utility as well as earnings and return
uncertainty,    is that all the Xs are zero. Note that the         alternative bypothesis
includes most other consumption theories such as the life cycle nxdel.

            Before presenting the results of this regression it is useful to

describe values of the C(       )   series   and changes through time in the shares of

personal income and its components received by different age groups. Table 1

presents actual consumption and consumption predicted by our ndel (C( ))

for   selected years for alternative values of a and y. Consumption is measured

in 1912 dollars. The age—utility weights in this table are set such that Oa

equals .5 for age a less than 16 or age a greater than 85. At age 40 Oa is set

equal to 1. For ages between 15 and 140        Oa rises   linearly from .5   to   1,   and   Oa

declines linearly from 1 to .5      between   ages 40 and 80. Quite similar results
arise for other choices of the values of 0 at ages 15 and 80.
            From the preliminary     examination of alternative parameters values

described   in Table 1, it appears that for certain sets of parameter values the
model presented in section III does fairly well in predicting actual consump-
tion.   Of the parameter combinations examined in the table, a value of y              equal
to 2, p equal to .04, and 0 equal to .5, produces the smallest root—mean squared

error for consumption. These parameter values are certainly within the middle

of the range of those that have been estimated.

            Table 2 contains, for selected years, various income shares of

households whose heads are in particular age groups. The table also indicates

the fraction of all    households with heads in     particular age intervals; and it

displays   the   ratio of the average income of households with heads in a

particular   age category to the average income of        all   households. Table 2
indicates some sizeable changes in income shares of particular age groups
                                                  —25-


between      1968 and 19814. For example, the share of total income of households

with heads age 25 to 34 rose from          18.6   percent to 22.5 percent over the period.

For the 45—514 age group the income share fell during this period from 25.0

percent to 19.3 percent. Many of these changes are explained by changes in the

age distribution of households; the first column of the table is clearly highly

correlated with the second. But there were also changes in income shares over

the period that are not directly related to demographic change. The figures in

column 3 indicate that in 1968          households   with heads age 145 to 514   had average
incomes that were L30 times the overall average household income. In 19814 such
households had average incomes that were 1.140 times the overall average. During
this 11 year period the ratio of the average income of households with 45               to 55

year    old heads to that of households       with 25 to 34 year    old heads rose by 22
percent. Shares of property income           also   changed significantly for certain age
groups; the 45       to 54 year old group experienced a 35 percent        drop in its share
of property income between 1968 and 198)4. Similar sizeable changes in income shares
and income ratios are indicated in Table 2 for labor income and transfer income.
                 Table 3 reports maximum likelihood estimates of equation (15)
excluding income shares, including income shares of all age groups, and
including only the income share of          households   age 6   and   older. Maximum
likelihood       estimates were derived by searching over a grid of values of y, p,

and 0. For each combination of these parameters, (15) was estimated by OLS.

The maximum likelihood estimates are those producing the               smallest residual sum
of    squares. Following Arnemiya ( ) standard errors were computed by replacing

c.(     )   in   (15) with   a first order Taylor's approximation taken around the
maximum likelihood       estimates and estimating the resulting equation by OLS.
                                          —26—



The   coefficients    on the first deritives of      ) with   respect to y, p, and
first 0 are approximately equal to the maximum likelihood estimates, and the
standard errors of these and other righthand side estimated coefficients are
consistent      and asymptotically efficient if ct is i.i.d., normal.

           The first column of Table 3 confirms the point made above, that our

model tracks actual consumption fairiy well. The         is .958, and the estimated

values of 'y'   and p are both significant and reasonable. The coefficient on
is .172 and is significantly different from 1 at the 5 percent level. In

addition, the intercept is significantly different from zero. Both of these

results are at odds with the prediction of our ndel. Also at odds with our

model is the siificance of the 65+ income share in column (2) and the five

total income shares included in column three. The critical F(5,7) for the

inclusion of all the shares at the 5 percent level is 3.97, which is below the F

of 5.85 calculated for the inclusion of the five shares. The sign and to some

extent pattern of the income share coefficients accord with the prediction of

the life cycle model that redistribution from younger to older age groups raises

consunrption. According to these estimates a redistribution of 10 percent of

income from the youngest to the oldest age group would raise U.S. consumption by

.7 percent, evaluated at the mean value of consumption. With prevailing saving

rates, a .7 percent increase in consumption would lower the net national saving

rate by over 10 percent.

           The significance of' age resource distribution variables does not apply

to the three components of income for which we have separate data, labor income,
                                        —27—


property income, and social security income. To reduce computation costs we

constrained y, p, and 0 in this analysis to equal their imxiiaim likelihood esti—

mates from column (1), Table 3. The F(5,l0) values for the inclusion of the

shares of labor income, property   income, and social security income are 1.87,
2.08, and 1.51, respectively. While these values are each below the critical F

of 3.33, if one constrains b1 to equal zero and b2 to equal 1, the respective

F(5,12) values are 12.2 for total income shares, 114.8 for labor income shares,

9.9 for property income shares, and 5.6 for social security income shares. The

critical F(5,l2) for this test is 3.11. Hence, the data reject the hypothesis

that age—resource shares are irrelevant given the mndel's predicted values of

b1 and b2.
           To examine whether the significance of the age resource variables is

robust to choices of y, p, and 0 that differ from the n.xiinuni likelihood esti-

mates, we tested the significance of the total income shares for several different

constrained  choices of these three rameters. The critical F value for these
tests is F(5,10)3.33. For l0, p.01, and 0.5 the F statistic is 16.75; for
y=l.1, p.014, and (3=.5 the F statistic is 1.59; for y=2, p=.l5, and 0=.5 the F
statistic is 3.78, and for p.O5, y1.5, and e=.8 the F statistic is 14.75.
Hence, for a range of a priori choices of y, p, and 0, nst, but not all, of the

test statistics for the inclusion of income shares are significant.

           Table 14 presents maximum likelihood estimates of (15) for
                                                                    the period
1917 to 1977 using levels of net Social Security wealth of different age groups.
For this 31 year sample period, the maximum likelihood estimates of y, p, and 0
are   close to those reported in Table 3. While
                                                  b2 is not   significantly different
                                          —28—



from unity,    as predicted by the theory, b1 is significantly different from       zero.
In addition, the Social Security wealth levels of different age groups are

significant explanatory variables. The F(6,20) statistic for their inclusion is

16.2, which exceeds the 5   percent   critical value of 2.60.



VI. Conclusion

            The results presented here clearly reject our formulation of the

altruism model. However, it should be restressed that the model imbeds strong

assumptions not only about preferences, but also about the extent and nature of

uncertainty.    Rather than a rejection of altruism, the significance of the age
resource shares may reflect misspecification of the altruism model that        is

correlated with age resource shares. For example, the age resource shares might

conceivably enter in the processes determining earnings and rates of return.

In this case, the state variables, S, in c(         ) should   include the age resource

information, and the exclusion of this information would bias the results.

Alternatively, there may be a large number       of discreet altruistic families with
different   age structures. In this case, changes in the age distribution of

resources   will typically be associated with changes in the interfamily
distribution of resources, and such changes would be expected to alter aggregate
consumption)-2
            The paper's contribution is, hopefully, not only to test a particular

formulation of the Barro proposition, but to stimulate additional research that

directly    tests central implications of lifecycle and altruistic saving models.
                                                 —29—


                                          Footnotes

1.   These average annual net national saving rates are based on NIA data. The
198)4 saving rate is 5.2 peroent, a lower value than observed in any year in the
l950s. The saving rate over the past 15 years has averaged only slightly more
than three quarters of the average rate of the previous two decades.

2.    Kotlikoff (198)4), Table 2.

3.   Lawrence Weiss stressed this point and its implications for empirical tests
in a conversation with one of the authors several years ago.

14•   This assumes the econon,r is below the golden nile.

5.    Barro and Sahasakul (1983), Table 2, post 1980, column 2.

6.   Boskin (1982,85) and Kotlikoff (198)4) provide extensive discussions of the
failure of officially recorded debt to measure underlying redistribution to
older generations.

7.   One might argue that zero intergenerational transfers is an objective
benchmark. There are at least two problems with such a benchmark. First,
distinguishing negative intergenerational transfers from taxes required to
finance government consumption is completely arbitrary. Second, past
intergenerational transfers imply (require) offsetting current or future
intergeneration transfers. Hence, taking zero intergenerational transfers as
the benchmark requires considering a world in which intergenerational transfers
in the past had always been zero.
8.    1982   Economic Report of the President, Appendix to Chapter .
9.    Estin.tion   results of   this   bivariate process are:
Dependent
Variable           Constant      log Wt+T_1,a*              rt+t_l          B2


log   v              .028               .989                 .00111        .992
      t+t,a*        (.0)42)            (.015)               (.0009)4)

      rt+t         17.11                .)435              —3.57           .302
                   (6.66)              (.1)49)             (2.38)


The estimated covariance ntrix of C              and
                                                            /2 \f
                                                       Cr is:( a         (5.)403.lo
                                                                                      .05
                                                                    acr) 13.37
                                      —30—


10. Social Security Administration, Annual Statistical Supplement.

11. Employment and Training Eeport of the President, 1982, Table BlO, p.23)-i and
Table A3, p.122; and Ibid, 1971, Table B15, p.257'.

12. There ma,r be far fewer distinct altruistic Barro families than one might
think. Kotlikoff (1983) and Bernheim (1985) independently demonstrate that
marital ties can generate altruistic linkages across families, producing,
effectively, extremely large Barro families.
                                          —31—


                                       References


Ando, Albert and Franco Modigliani. "The 'Life Cycle' Hypothesis of Saving:

     Aggregate Implications and Tests," Am. Econ. Rev., March 1963, pp. 55—8b.

Amemiya, Takeshi, "Nonlinear Regression Models," in Handbook of Econometrics,

     Zvi Griliches and Michael D. Intriligentor, eds., vol. 1, North      Holland,
     1983.

Auerbach, Alan J. and Laurence J. Kotlikoff. "National Savings, Economic

     Welfare, and the Structure of Taxation," in Behavioral simulation methods

     in tax policy analysis. Ed.: Martin Feldstein. Chicago: U. of Chicago

     Press, 1983a, pp. )45993.

__________ and Laurence J. Kotlikoff. "Investment Versus Savings Incentives: The
     of the Bang for the Buck and the Potential for Self—Financing Business Tax

     Cuts," The economic consequences of government deficits. Ed.: L.H. Meyer,

     Boston: Kluwer—Nijhoff Publishing, l983b, pp. 12l—5)-.

__________ and Laurence J. Kotlikoff. "An Examination of Empirical Tests of

     Social Security and Savings," in Social policy evaluation: An economic

     perspective. Eds.: Elharnan Helpman et al.: Academic Press, 1983c.

Barro, R.J. "Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?," J. Pal. Econ., Nov./Dec. 1971,

     82(6),   pp.   1095—1118.

              and Chaipat Sahasakul. "Measuring the Average Marginal Tax Rate

          from the Individual Income Tax." Journal of Business, vol. 56, no.

          1983, pp. 1419...152.

___________    "Social Security and   Private Saving—Evidence from the U.S • Time
                                                —32—


     Series," Studies in social security and             retirement   policy. Washington,

     D.C.: Am. Enterprise Inst., 1918.

Bernheim, Douglas. "Dissaving After Retirement." NBER Working Paper No. 1)409,

     July l984.

__________ and Kyle Bagwell. "Is Everything Neutral?" minieo, 1985.

Blinder, Alan S., Roger H. Gordon, and David E. Wise. "Life Cycle Savings and

     Bequests: Cross—Sectional Estimates of the Life Cycle                 Model,"   Nat. Bur.

     Econ. Rsrch. Working Paper No. 619, Jan. 1981.

Boskin, Michael J. "Taxation, Saving, and the Rate of Interest," J. Pol. Econ.,

     April 1918, 86(2), Part 2, pp. 3—21.

__________ and      Michael D. Hurd. "The Effect of Social Security on Retirement
     in the Early 1970s," forthcoming, Q.J.Econ., 198)4.
__________•     "Federal Government Deficits:           Sortie Myths and Realities,"
     A.E.R.,   Maj    1982, 72 (2),      pp. 296—303.

_________•     The Real Federal Budget, forthcoming, Harvard              University   Press,

          1985.

__________ and      Lawrence J. Lau. "Taxation and Aggregate Factor Supply:
     Preliminary      Estimates," Cambridge, Mass.: Nat. Bur. Econ. Rsrh. Working

     Paper No. 221, 1917.

              and   Laurence   J. Lau.    An Analysis of Postwar U.S. Consumption and

          and Saving, forthcoming BER volume, University of                Chicago Press.
Darby, Michael R. Effects of Social Security on income                and the capital stock.

    Washington, D.C.: American Enterprise Institute,              1979.
David, Martin, and Paul L. Menchik. "The Effect of Social                 Security on Lifetime
                                               —33—


     Wealth Accumulation and Bequests," Inst. for Rsrch. on Poverty Discussion

     Paper No. 61i, 1981.

__________        "The   Effect of Income   Distribution and Redistribution on Lifetime
              I
     Saving    and Bequests." Institute for Research on Poverty Discussion Paper
     No. 582, 1980.
David, Paul and John L. Scadding. "Private Savings: Tjltrarationality, Aggregate
     Saving,      and 'Denison's Law'," J.     Pol. Econ., 19T4, 82, pp. 225—49.
Diamond, Peter A. and Jerry Hausman. "Individual Retirement and Savings
     Behavior," Mimeo, May 1983.

Eisner, Robert and Paul J. Pieper. "A New View of the Federal Debt and              Budget

            Deficits," AER, March      1984.

Feldstein, Martin. "Social Security, Induced          Retirement, and   Aggregate   Capital
     Accumulation,"        J. Pol. Econ., Sept./Oct. 197)4b, 82(5),   Part 2, pp. 905—26.
__________        "Social Security and      Private Saving: Reply," J. Pol. Econ., 1982a

     2.2.   PP. 630lt2.

_________ "The           Surprising Incidence of a Tax on Pure Rent: A New Answer to an
     Old Question," J. Pol. Econ., April 1977, 85(2), pp. 3I9_60.
__________        "Government   Deficits and Aggregate Demand," J. Mon. Econ., Jan.
     1982,    9(1), pp. 1—20.
              and Lawrence Summers. "Inflation and the Taxation of Capital Income
             in the Corporate Sector," National Tax Journal, vol. 32, Dec. 19T9,

             pp. 145_7O.

__________ and Anthony Pellechio. "Social Security and Household Wealth

     Accumulation: New Microeconometric Evidence," Rev. Econ. Stud., 1979,
                                              _3'4 —




     61(3), pp.      361—68.

Gordon, Roger. "Social Security and Labor Supply Incentives," NBER Working

     Paper No. 986, April 1983.

Hall, Robert E. "Stochastic Implications of the Life Cycle—Permanent Income

     Hypothesis: Theory and Evidence," J. vol. Econ., 1978, 86, pp. 911—87.

Hansen, tars P. and Kenneth J. Singleton, "Stochastic Consumption, Risk Aversion

     the Temporal Behavior of Asset Returns," J. Pol. Econ., April 1983, 91(2),

     pp. 219_65.

King, Mervin and Donald Fullerton, The Taxation of Income from Capital, NBER

             Publication,      University of Chicago Press, Chicago, Illinois, l984.

Kotlikoff,     Laurence J. "Social Security and Equilibrium Capital Intensity,"
     Q.J. Econ., May 1979a, pp. 233_51.
__________• Theoretical and Empirical Analysis of Altniistic Linkages Within
     the    Extended Family," proposal to the Sloan Foundation, June 1983.

___________•     "Testing the Theory of Social Security and Life Cycle
     Accumulation," Am. Econ. Rev., June 1979b, pp. 396—lilO.
___________     "Taxation and Saving," Journal of Economic Literature,
     Dec.    l981.

Kurz, M., "Capital Accumulation and Characteristics of Intergenerational

     Transfers," No. 36l, IMSSA, Stanford, 1982.

Lawrence, Emily.       "Do Transfers to the Poor Reduce Savings?" Mimeo, 1983.

Lesnoy, Selig and Leimer, Dean R. "Social Security and Private Saving: New             Tirr
     Series Evidence with Alternative Specifications," Soc. Sec. Admin. Working

     Paper No. 22, Sept. 1981.

Mankiw, N. Gregory; Julio J. Rotemberg, and Lawrence H. Summers. "Intertemporal
                                        —35—


     Substitution in Macroeconomics," Nat. Bur. Econ. Fsrch. Working Paper

     No. 898, June 1982.

Modigliani, Franca and Richard Bruntherg. "Utility Analysis and the Consumption

     Function: An Interpretation of Cross—Section Data," in Post—Keynesian

     economics. Ed.: Kenneth K. Kurihara. New Brunswick, N.J.: Rutgers U.

     Press, 1954.

Munnell, Alicia. "The Impact of Social Security on Personal Savings," Nat.

    Tax. J., Dec. 1971-i, 17, pp. 553—67.

Summers, Lawrence H. 'raxation and   Capital   Accumulation in a Life Cycle Growth

    Model," Am. Econ. Rev., Sept. 198la, 71(4), pp. 533—44.

_________    "Taxation   and Corporate Investment: A q Theory Approach," Brookings

    Papers on Economic Activity, 11(1), Washington, D.C., 198Th, pp. 67—127.
         Tahie 1      Comparison of Actual With Predicted Consu.mption
                             for Alternative Values of c and y

                            Consumption   Predicted by   Altruism Model


                   Actual    11.5         y=2      y=2
 Year        Consumption p.O5          p.014      p.03         p=.014
                                       8=.5       O=.5



 19147              298       262      213       260          322

 1950               3142      250      259       2147         296

 1955               399       318      335       318          1400


 1960               1479      395      1405      388         1462


 1965               581       1465     1488      1465         565

 1970               TOO       562      663       629         162

 1975               185       809      831       798         938

 1980               9147     1006     1019       972         1132

 19814             1087      101414   1032       9614        1136
Root—Mean
Squre
Error
19)46—1984                     69.7       58.3    75.6          78.6


         All consumption values are measured in billions of 1972 dollars.
                                 Table    2:   Age Distribution of Incone and Related Variables


                        Fraction    Share of       Total   Share of   Labor  ]iare of   Property               Transfer
                         of All       Total       Income   Labor      Income Property    Income    Share of     Income
Age of   Hea'   Year   Households    Income        Ratio   Income      Ratio   Income     Ratio    Transfers     Ratio


  15-24         1968     0.079           0.050     0.633     0.060      .759   0.009       .114      0.005       0.006

                1975     0.102           0.058     0.568     0.069      .676   0.009       .088      0.006        .006

                1984     0.092           0.043     0.465     0.051      .554   0.011       .120      0.003        .033

  25—34         1968     0.177        0.186        1.048     0.214     1.209   0.049       .277      0.023        .130

                1975     0.213        0.219        1.029     0.257    1.207    0.062       .291      0.017        .08U

                1984     0.243        0.225        0.927     0.273    1.123    0.063       .259      0.016        .066

  35—44         1968     0.193        0.240        1.243     0.257    1.332    0.105       .544      0.055        .285

                1975     0.164        0.207        1.269     0.227    1.384    0.092       .561     0.042         .256

                1984     0.188        0.240        1.274     0.275    1.463    0.113       .601      0.035        .186

  45-54         1968     0.193           0.250     1.296     0.258     1.337   0.193      1.000      0.081        .420

                1975     0.175           0.236     1.350     0.250    1.429    0.176      1.006      0.074        .423

                1984     0.138           0.193     1.403     0.214    1.551    0.125       .906      0.038        .275

  55—64         1968     0.167           0.172     1.033     0.165      .988   0.243      1.455      0.121        .724

                1975     0.154           0.167     1.085     0.159    1.032    0.246      1.597     0.138         .896

                1984     0.144           0.166     1.154     0.153    1.063    0.238      1.660      0.134        .931

  65+           1968     0.191           0.102     0.534     0.046      .241   0.400      2.094      0.714       3.738

                1975     0.193           0.112     0.583     0.037      .192   0.416      2.155     0.723        3.746

                1984     0.196           0.134     0.682     0.034      .173   0.450     2.296      0.774        3.949
Table 3                 Excess Sensitivity of Consumption to Income Shares,
                l968—198,       Maximum Likelihood Estimates (Standard Errors)
                                                         Models


                                         (1)              (2)                 (3)



                1                        1.5              2.0                 2.0
                                         (.195)           (.i61)              (.826)

                p                        .05              .03
                                         (.017)           (.031)              (.016)

                O                        .3               .5                  .5
                                         (.291)           (.250)              (.29)
                                         2fl'9            2925            _735F1
                                         ('5.6)           (72.0)          p4825.3)

                                         .772             .526                .993
                                         (.130)           (.071)              (.1i8)


     Income Shares

          S65+                                            62.9                86.8
                                                          (26.0)

          S                                                                   10]4.5
                    6
                                                                              (60.1)

          S5                                                                  8o.1
                                                                              (59.2)


          S3 5-                                                               66.1
                                                                              (3.6)

          S25 —                                                               61.T
                                                                              (52.5)

          R2                             0.958            0.975               0.992

          DW                             1.12             .91                 2.18
          SSR                            12083.6          7293.0              23314.6

          SEE                            28.14            22.8                15.3

          Mean of Dependent Variable: 8145.5
Table 14         Excess Sensitivity of Consumption to Social Security
           Wealth Shares, 191471977, Maximum Likelihood Estimates (Standard   Errors)
                                                 Models


                                    (i)            (2)           (3)

                 y                  2.0            1.5           1.5
                                    (.'r83)        (.221)        (.092)
                 p                  .03            .05           .03
                                    (.0114)        (.009)        (.010)

                 8                  .5             .3            .3
                                    (.157)         (.204)        (.083)

                     1              114.1          23.1         155.14
                                    (16.7)         (28.8)       (141.9)


                 b2                 .915           1.231         .7614
                                    (.149)         (.159)        (.195)
     Social Security
      Wealth Levels



           L6 5+                                   .377          .014
                                                   (.098)        (.359)

                                                                 .6414
           L5 5-65
                                                                 (.570)


           L45—5                                               —.966
                                                                 (.528)

           L
               35—
                                                                2.022
                                                                 (.338)

           L                                                   —1.526
            25—3
                                                                (.5614)

           L                                                   —.220
                                                                (48)

           B2                       0.979          .986           0.996

           DW                       .5             .9             1.6

           SSR                      18242.1        11796.2        3113.1

           SEE                      25.1           20.5           11.6

           Mean of Dependent Variable: 540.8
