                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             THE TAXATION OF FUEL ECONOMY

                                              James Sallee

                                         Working Paper 16466
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w16466


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2010




This paper was presented as part of the NBER's Tax Policy and the Economy conference in 2010 and
will appear in the conference volume. The author would like to thank Jeffrey Brown for editorial guidance
and Adam Cole for providing assistance in locating key data and legislative details. The views expressed
herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by James Sallee. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
The Taxation of Fuel Economy
James Sallee
NBER Working Paper No. 16466
October 2010
JEL No. H23

                                            ABSTRACT

Policy-makers have instituted a variety of fuel economy tax policies -- polices that tax or subsidize
new vehicle purchases on the basis of fuel economy performance -- in the hopes of improving fleet
fuel economy and reducing gasoline consumption. This article reviews existing policies and concludes
that while they do work to improve vehicle fuel economy, the same goals could be achieved at a lower
cost to society if policy-makers instead directly taxed fuel. Fuel economy taxation, as it is currently
practiced, invites several forms of gaming that could be eliminated by policy changes. Thus, even
if policy-makers prefer fuel economy taxation over fuel taxes for reasons other than efficiency, there
are still potential efficiency gains from reform.


James Sallee
Harris School of Public Policy Studies
University of Chicago
1155 East 60th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
sallee@uchicago.edu
1     Why do we tax fuel economy?

In recent decades, the United States government has introduced several “fuel economy taxes”
– that is, taxes or subsidies on the purchase of new consumer automobiles that depend on the
vehicle’s fuel economy performance. These policies vary in detail. Some provide subsidies
to vehicles that utilize a specific technology (e.g., hybrids), while others apply to all vehicles
of a given fuel economy. Some levy taxes directly on automakers, while others operate
through the personal income tax system. All attempt to provide automakers and consumers
with an incentive to choose more fuel economical vehicles so as to reduce the consumption
of gasoline. The purpose of this paper is to review the motivation and structure of these
policies, describe their intended and unintended consequences, and distill lessons that may
inform future policy.
    The principal economic motivation for the taxation of fuel economy is to correct for
externalities associated with fuel consumption. Fuel economy itself does not create external-
ities, but it indirectly determines the consumption of gasoline, which affects local air quality,
energy security and global climate change. The goal of fuel economy taxation is to cause
consumers to internalize these externalities by raising the price of fuel inefficiency.
    Policies to reduce energy consumption in the personal transportation sector are an essen-
tial part of energy policy – the sector accounts for 20% of U.S. greenhouse gas emissions and
40% of petroleum consumption (Environmental Protection Agency 2007). Globally, personal
vehicles will play an expanding role in coming decades because there is a strong relationship
between wealth and vehicle ownership. The extreme is the United States, which had 248 mil-
lion registered motor vehicles in 2008 – equivalent to 1.2 vehicles per driver (U.S. Department
of Transportation 2009). This contrasts sharply with ownership in lower income countries.
In 2007, for every 1,000 residents, the U.S. had 820 registered vehicles, whereas China had
32 (World Bank 2010). As countries like China grow, vehicle ownership will rise rapidly
and policies aimed at mitigating related externalities will become even more important than
they are today. What role should fuel economy taxes play in limiting the consequences of

                                                1
growing vehicle ownership? What lessons from the U.S. experience can inform future policy,
both here and abroad?
   Several lessons emerge from an analysis of the U.S. experience in fuel economy taxation.
First, fuel economy taxation does have an impact on fleet fuel economy. Research on existing
policies shows that taxing inefficient cars and subsidizing efficient ones does influence the
market share of targeted vehicles.
   The second lesson, however, is that fuel economy taxation is a less efficient policy for
reducing gasoline consumption than would be direct taxation of gasoline. Fuel economy
taxation shares the weaknesses of fuel economy regulation in that it induces a “rebound
effect” by lowering the cost of driving, which erodes gasoline savings and increases congestion
and accident externalities. In addition, fuel economy taxation and regulation both influence
only new vehicles, rely on imprecise fuel economy rating systems and maintain a distinction
between passenger cars and light trucks, all of which are disadvantages relative to direct
gasoline taxation. Auxiliary justifications sometimes used to make the case for fuel economy
taxation – like consumer fallibility, technological spill-overs or network effects – currently
lack strong empirical evidence.
   The third lesson is that fuel economy taxation can be reformed to reduce inefficiencies
related to policy gaming, by which consumers and producers improve the tax treatment of
vehicles in ways that have little or no impact on actual fuel consumption. Gaming takes the
form of short-run timing changes – where transactions are accelerated or delayed in order to
take advantage of temporary tax treatments, medium-run vehicle design – where automakers
tweak vehicles to achieve large tax improvements for small fuel economy changes, and long-
run relabeling of passenger cars as light trucks – where automakers can improve tax treatment
by designing vehicles to achieve more generous regulatory classification. Policy makers could
limit gaming on all three of these margins through straightforward policy reform.
   The balance of the paper is as follows. Section 2 briefly describes an efficient policy for
gasoline-related externalities, a Pigouvian tax. Section 3 describes the various fuel economy


                                              2
tax policies that have been used in the United States, with some attention to related policies
in Canada. Section 4 then reviews econometric evidence on the effects of these policies on
vehicle sales and prices. Section 5 lays out arguments regarding the inefficiency of fuel econ-
omy taxation relative to direct gasoline taxation. Section 6 reviews the evidence on gaming
in transaction timing, vehicle tweaking, and vehicle reclassification. Section 7 describes the
difficulty of designing fuel economy taxation that puts a consistent price on the conservation
of gasoline and the consequences for efficiency. Section 8 considers alternative rationales for
fuel economy taxation. Section 9 draws lessons for policy and concludes.



2     The Pigouvian solution to gasoline externalities

Before analyzing the actual practice of fuel economy taxation, it is helpful to establish the
ideal solution to the problem that fuel economy taxation is intended to solve. The canonical
theory of taxation to correct for externalities dates back to Pigou (1932), who showed that
the first-best allocation of resources in an economy could be provided by a free market given
a tax on the externality-generating good equivalent to the marginal external damages at the
optimal quantity.
    To illustrate, consider the case of manufacturers who leach toxic dyes into waterways
as part of their production process. In the absence of policy, all firms will leach dyes if
it lowers their production costs. The Pigouvian policy is to directly tax the externality –
toxic dye. Facing a dye tax, all firms who can modify their production process to eliminate
dye contamination at a cost below the tax will do so. Firms for whom eliminating dye
contamination is more expensive than the tax will continue polluting and pay the tax (or go
out of business).
    If the tax is set equal to the marginal damage to society of dye contamination, then this
arrangement will be efficient – manufacturers will stop polluting if and only if doing so is less
costly to society than continuing to pollute. Critical to this efficiency is that every individual



                                                3
agent faces the same price for the externality.
   Gasoline consumption, the target of fuel economy taxation, is slightly more compli-
cated because it generates three distinct externalities. First, greater demand for gasoline
may threaten energy security, which can have political consequences and increase economic
volatility. Second, gasoline consumption releases carbon dioxide into the atmosphere, which
contributes to climate change. Third, gasoline consumption releases local air pollutants that
have environmental and health implications.
   In the first two cases, a Pigouvian solution is a direct tax on gasoline, because the
externality is directly proportional to the gallons of gasoline consumed, regardless of who
consumes it or how they do so. In the case of local air pollution, however, different vehicles
emit different levels of emissions depending on engine technology and driving conditions.
Thus, the Pigouvian solution to local air externalities is a tax on emissions, but this is
impractical given current technologies. While a gasoline tax is therefore not fully efficient,
Fullerton and West (2000) estimate that a gasoline tax achieves about two-thirds of the
benefits of the optimal tax on emissions, which represents the lion’s share of the benefits
achievable under the best feasible policy. As a result, the gasoline tax will be used here as
the efficient benchmark for all gasoline externalities.
   In spite of these efficiency arguments for fuel taxation, gasoline taxes are low in the
United States. This is usually explained as a result of political constraints – raising the
gasoline tax is politically unpopular and therefore infeasible. Instead, the U.S. relies on
other policies for reducing gasoline consumption, including fuel economy regulation and fuel
economy taxation. To mimic the efficiency of a gasoline tax, fuel economy policy would
need to place a uniform price on the consumption of gasoline that applied across all vehicles,
automakers, consumers, and time periods. Unfortunately, as argued below, fuel economy
taxation cannot, in theory, achieve this parity, and it has not, in practice, been as efficient
as might be possible. After reviewing the structure of fuel economy tax policies and the
estimates of their impacts, the second half of the paper returns to the issue of efficiency


                                               4
relative to this Pigouvian benchmark to assess the merits of fuel economy taxation.



3     How do we tax fuel economy?

This section reviews the main fuel economy tax policies in the United States and Canada,
highlighting features that are relevant for further analysis.


3.1    The Gas Guzzler Tax

Fuel economy taxation started in the United States with the Gas Guzzler Tax, which levies
an excise tax on passenger cars that have fuel economy below a certain level. The tax,
which took effect in 1980, was introduced at the same time as Corporate Average Fuel
Economy (CAFE) standards and the official fuel economy rating program that was necessary
to administer these programs.
    The tax phased-in between 1980 and 1991, and it has not changed since. But, because
it is not adjusted for inflation, the real value of the tax has gradually fallen over time. The
minimum tax is $1,000 on passenger cars that get below 22.5 miles-per-gallon (mpg), and
any vehicle getting above that fuel economy is free of taxation. The maximum tax is $7,700
for any vehicle with a combined fuel economy rating below 12.5 mpg. The tax schedule is a
step function, as shown in figure 1. Manufacturers remit the tax, and the tax is included as
a line item in the sticker price visible to consumers.
    Importantly, the tax applies only to passenger cars, not to light trucks. In practice, this
means that the tax is levied on vehicles that are very expensive and generally low volume.
Table 1 shows that, in 2006, 6.2% of vehicle configurations that are separately rated by the
EPA were subject to a tax, but that these vehicles held only a 0.7% market share. As a
result, the tax raises a modest amount of revenue, around $200 million in recent years. The
taxed models are overwhelmingly made by foreign manufacturers.




                                               5
                                                                                                      Figure 1: The U.S. Gas Guzzler Tax and Canadian Feebate in 2008

                                                                                   3000	  

                                                                                   2000	                                                                                                     CA	  EcoAuto	  (Trucks)	  

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              CA	  EcoAuto	  (Cars)	  
  Subsidy	  or	  Tax	  Amount	  (nominal	  US	  or	  CAN	  dollars)	  




                                                                                   1000	  

                                                                                         0	  

                                                                                  -­‐1000	  

                                                                                  -­‐2000	               CA	  Green	  Levy	  

                                                                                  -­‐3000	  

                                                                                  -­‐4000	                                             US	  Gas	  Guzzler	  Tax	  

                                                                                  -­‐5000	  

                                                                                  -­‐6000	  

                                                                                  -­‐7000	  

                                                                                  -­‐8000	  
                                                                                                 10	           12.5	         15	      17.5	         20	         22.5	      25	            27.5	        30	           32.5	     35	     37.5	     40	       42.5	        45	  
                                                                                                                                                                                Fuel	  Economy	  (MPG)	  


Source: Sallee and Slemrod (2010). Figure includes nominal values. The exchange rate was close to 1 for
much of 2008.


3.2                                                                                     Income tax benefits for clean vehicles

Other fuel economy taxes operate through the personal income tax code. From 2000 to 2005,
consumers who purchased a qualified clean fuel vehicle were able to take a $2,000 above-the-
line tax deduction under the Clean Fuel Vehicle Tax Deduction. In principle, a qualifying
clean fuel vehicle was one that used any of several alternative fuels, including compressed
natural gas, liquified natural gas, liquified petroleum gas, hydrogen or electricity. In practice,
the only vehicles that qualified were gas-electric hybrid vehicles, like the Toyota Prius.
                                                             This credit was replaced in 2006 by the Hybrid Vehicle Tax Credit, which afforded new
car buyers a credit, worth up to $3,400 depending on a vehicle’s fuel savings. The subsidy
was the sum of two components, a fuel economy credit and a conservation credit. The


                                                                                                                                                                                          6
fuel economy credit provided up to $2,400 in $400 increments for a hybrid based on the
percentage increase in its city fuel economy rating relative to the average city fuel economy
for vehicles in the same inertia weight class, the categorization used for emissions testing.
The conservation credit provided up to $1,000 in $250 increments based on the estimated
fuel savings relative to the same benchmark. The credit was non-refundable, and it did not
apply to individuals paying the Alternative Minimum Tax. Compared to the Gas Guzzler
Tax, there were far fewer model configurations that qualified for the subsidy, but they are
much higher volume vehicles so that the overall market share was twice as large in 2006, as
is shown in table 1.
   The Hybrid Vehicle Tax Credit featured a phase-out provision. Once a manufacturer sold
60,000 qualifying vehicles, the available credit would be reduced to half the original value
two quarters into the future, and it would be further reduced to one quarter of the original
value six months after that, finally going to zero in two more quarters. This phase out was
reportedly intended to ensure that Toyota and Honda, who sold the best selling hybrids,
did not capture too much government subsidy relative to the domestic automakers (Lazzari
2006). Toyota hit the cap in the second quarter of 2006, and Honda hit the cap in the third
quarter of 2007. Ford, the next best selling hybrid maker, hit the cap in the first quarter of
2009. This credit is still available today for those manufacturers who have not phased out.
The market share of hybrid vehicles has grown to around 2.7% in 2009, but the number of
vehicles affected by the tax credit has shrunk since 2007 because of the phase out.
   The federal government also provides a separate tax credit for plug-in hybrids and all
electric vehicles, like the Chevrolet Volt and Nissan Leaf. This credit ranges from $2,500 to
$7,500 depending on the killowatt hour capacity of the vehicle’s battery. This policy also
features a phase-out provision, but it is triggered by the 200,000th vehicle sold across all
manufacturers, rather than being a manufacturer specific trigger. As of the writing of this
article, mainstream qualifying vehicles were not yet available on the market.




                                              7
                         Table 1: Fuel Economy Tax Policy Summary
                                     Revenue        Maximum Tax           Percentage of    Market Share of
                                    (millions)   (Subsidy) Per Vehicle   Models Affected   Models Affected
U.S. Gas Guzzler Tax (2006)            $208             $7,700                6.2%             0.7%
Hybrid Vehicle Tax Credit (2006)      ($426)           ($3,400)               1.2%             1.6%
Canadian Green Levy (2008)              $64             $4,000               14.6%             2.0%
Canadian EcoAuto Rebate (2008)         ($95)           ($2,000)               3.0%             6.4%

Note: Gas Guzzler Tax revenue based on IRS statistics. U.S. models affected based on EPA fuel economy
data. U.S. market share based on NHTSA data. Canadian revenue data based on Canada Revenue Agency
reports. Canadian models affected based on Natural Resources Canada fuel economy data. Canadian market
share based on JD Power and Associates market data.



3.3     State subsidies for clean fuel vehicles

A number of states have had similar policies aimed at clean fuel vehicles, which in practice
has meant hybrid vehicles. Colorado, Maryland, New York, Oregon, Pennsylvania, South
Carolina, Utah and West Virginia have all had a state income tax credit for hybrid vehicles.
In some cases, like Colorado and West Viriginia, this benefit was as large as the federal
credit for many vehicles. Connecticut, the District of Columbia, Maine, New Mexico, New
York and Washington have had sales tax exemptions for qualifying hybrid vehicles. Sallee
(Forthcoming) and Gallagher and Muehlegger (2007) describe these policies in more detail.


3.4     Canadian feebate

The Canadian government introduced a limited feebate – a set of taxes (fees) on inefficient
models and subsidies (rebates) on efficient cars – in March 2007. The fees and rebates were
introduced simultaneously and designed to roughly offset each other to preserve revenue
neutrality, but the policies were administered as separate programs. The tax side, called
the Green Levy, taxes fuel inefficient vehicles between $1,000 and $4,000 depending on their
fuel economy. Like the Gas Guzzler Tax, pick-up trucks are exempt from the tax, but SUVs
and vans are subject to the tax. Consequently, it affects more vehicles than the Gas Guzzler
Tax (as shown in table 1), despite the fact that it exempts vehicles with lower fuel economy



                                                  8
than its U.S. counterpart (as shown in figure 1). Many of the taxed vehicles are low volume,
however, so the market share of taxed vehicles was still only 2% in 2008. This tax is remitted
by manufacturers.
   The rebate side, called the EcoAuto rebate program, gives a subsidy of up to $2,000 to
consumers who purchase a particularly efficient vehicle. This policy is a direct to consumer
rebate program. And, while it influences only a small number of models, several of these are
popular vehicles, like the Toyota Yaris and Toyota Prius, so the EcoAuto rebate program
applied to an estimated 6.4% of vehicle sales in 2008. The EcoAuto program was introduced
as a temporary program, and it only applied to model year 2006, 2007 and 2008 vehicles.
Unlike the Hybrid Vehicle Tax Credit, the EcoAuto rebate program applies to all vehicles
regardless of any particular fuel technology. Virtually all hybrid vehicles qualify for a subsidy,
but other fuel economic models also qualify. In 2008, 9 out of the 28 models that received a
subsidy were hybrids.
   Like their counterparts in the United States, both the Green Levy and the EcoAuto
rebate feature notches. Figure 1 shows that the feebate is a step-function, with discrete
changes in $500 or $1,000 increments made at specific levels of fuel economy. Individual
Canadian provinces have also featured a number of similar tax subsidies for vehicles. These
are discussed in detail in Chandra, Gulati and Kandlikar (2009).


3.5    Scrappage programs

Another brand of fuel economy tax is scrappage rebates. In the United States, the “cash-
for-clunkers” program offered consumers a one time subsidy of either $3,500 or $4,500 for
scrapping an inefficient model used as a trade-in during a new vehicle purchase. Trade-ins
were eligible for the subsidy only if the new vehicle had a fuel economy rating sufficiently
high relative to the trade-in. As such, this program acted as a fuel economy tax. Passenger
cars and light trucks were subject to different fuel economy requirements to be eligible, but
these were fairly weak so most trade-ins were eligible. The program was explicitly temporary,


                                                9
and it lasted for only a few weeks in July and August of 2009, at a cost of $2.85 billion.
    A similar program exists in Vancouver province. Several European nations introduced a
scrappage program during the economic downturn of 2009, but these policies generally did
not have the environmental component of the cash-for-clunkers program and are thus not
fuel economy taxes.


3.6    Key observations about these policies

Several facts about these laws are worth noting. First, taxes tend to be levied on manufac-
turers, whereas subsidies tend to be given directly to consumers, a point which is explored in
the next section. Second, by their very nature, none of these policies places a direct tax on
the targeted externality, but instead tax fuel economy. This deviation from the Pigouvian
ideal has efficiency implications which are detailed in section 5. Third, all of these policies
create tax notches – by which small, marginal changes in fuel economy create large, discrete
changes in taxation. These notches introduce incentives that may cause inefficiency, as dis-
cussed in section 6. Fourth, all of these policies maintain a distinction between passenger
cars and light trucks, which induce automakers to relabel vehicles as light trucks, as analyzed
in section 6.
    Finally, an important caveat is in order. Although the taxes and subsidies per vehicle
have been substantial, no existing policy has applied widely enough to affect a large fraction
of the new vehicle market. Instead, policies have been targeted at narrow bands of vehicles
that represent the extremes of the fuel economy distribution. Lessons from existing programs
should be understood in this context.



4     Intended consequences

This section reviews the existing evidence on who has born the burden of these policies and
whether or not they have succeed in boosting fuel economy.


                                              10
4.1    Incidence

There is little doubt that a policy which ultimately lowers the final price to consumers of a
particular automobile will serve to increase the market share of that vehicle. As such, fuel
economy tax policies will influence quantity demanded, provided that automakers do not
bear the entire burden of the tax. Actual transaction price data in this market are difficult
to come by, so there is relatively little research that measures the incidence of these taxes.
One exception is Sallee (Forthcoming), which examines the incidence of tax credits for the
Toyota Prius. This paper shows that transaction prices for the Toyota Prius were steady
surrounding both large changes in the federal tax credit and changes in state tax policies.
Because consumers later gain a tax benefit from the government, constant transaction prices
imply that consumers bear the full burden (enjoy the full benefit) of these tax credits.
Sallee (Forthcoming) further argues that this is surprising, because Toyota faced a capacity
constraint and rationed Priuses in this period, implying that they could have appropriated
the gains from the credit. Sallee (Forthcoming) argues that the observed incidence is a
result of Toyota’s desire to send a long-run signal to the market that hybrids were affordable
– this prevented them from raising prices to boost short-run profits. Interestingly, this line
of reasoning suggests that the incidence of the tax credit depended on who was responsible
for remitting the tax, which is usually ruled out by tax theory.
   Busse, Silva-Risso and Zettelmeyer (2006) also argue for unconventional tax asymmetry
in the automobile market. They find that direct to consumer rebates and direct to dealer
rebates from a manufacturer have different impacts on final prices. Busse et al. (2006) find
that consumers capture nearly all of subsidies of which they are aware, which accords with
findings in Sallee (Forthcoming) and suggests that consumers bear the incidence of fuel
economy taxation.
   Busse et al. (2006) argue that asymmetric incidence is the result of asymmetric infor-
mation – consumers are better informed about direct to consumer rebates and this enables
them to bargain more accurately. While this research examines manufacturer rebates and


                                             11
not government policy, the results do suggest that fuel economy tax incidence might depend
on statutory burdens, particularly if taxes are temporary or changing so that information
may not be complete. In a similar vein, Gallagher and Muehlegger (2007) find suggestive
evidence that state sales tax credits have a greater impact on hybrid sales than do equiva-
lently sized state income tax credits. They attribute this difference to the relative salience
of these different forms of subsidy.
   It is not clear how general are the implications from these three studies. Nevertheless,
they do suggest that one of the tenets of tax theory – that economic incidence is independent
of statutory incidence – may not always hold in the taxation of fuel economy. It appears
that, at least under some market conditions, subsidies “stick” to the side of the market where
they are legislated and that salience matters.
   Moreover, policy-makers behave as if this is true. As noted above, taxes tend to be
levied on manufacturers, whereas subsidies tend to be given directly to consumers. This is
exemplified by the Canadian feebate program, which introduced two matching policies but
administered them separately, levying the tax on manufacturers but giving the rebate to
consumers. Similarly, the Gas Guzzler Tax is levied on manufacturers, whereas state and
federal subsidies for hybrid vehicles and scrappage subsidies are all direct to consumer.
   Policy makers may believe that by giving the subsidy to consumers it is more likely to
benefit consumers. Alternatively, they may believe that even if economic incidence ultimately
does not depend on remittance structure, it is still the case that they are more likely to
receive political credit for subsidies that are more visible to consumers. Taxes, unpopular
with voters, may be better laundered through the manufacturer while rebates, popular with
voters, should be out in the open and freely associated with government.


4.2    Evidence on the sales impact of fuel economy taxation

Provided that fuel economy tax policies do influence the price of vehicles, theory predicts
that they will influence the relative market share of affected models and thereby change


                                             12
fleet fuel economy and ultimately gasoline consumption. This is indeed what the existing
literature finds.
   Gallagher and Muehlegger (2007) use a panel regression approach to estimate the sales
impact of state tax subsidies for hybrid vehicles. Their baseline results indicate that the
average impact of state subsidies on sales is equivalent to a 20% increase in hybrid market
share. Chandra et al. (2009) do a similar analysis in Canada, using variation in provincial
subsidies for hybrids in a panel estimation framework. They find evidence that tax subsidies
do indeed have noteworthy impacts on the diffusion of hybrid vehicles, as they attribute 26%
of hybrids sold to the policy. This translates into an average of $195 of government revenue
used per ton of carbon dioxide emissions reduced.
   Beresteanu and Li (Forthcoming) build an equilibrium model of the new car market and
use the estimated parameters to infer the effects of policy on hybrid vehicle sales, rather than
attempting to use observed changes surrounding the advent of a policy. They conclude that
tax credits for hybrids accounted for 20% of hybrid sales in 2006, and they estimate that
these policies created greenhouse gas emissions reductions equivalent to 1 ton of emissions
per $177 of government revenue.
   Li, Linn, Spiller and Timmins (2010) evaluate the recent “cash-for-clunkers” program,
which subsidized fuel economy by providing a subsidy for new car transactions where a
trade-in that had sufficiently low fuel economy relative to the new car was scrapped by the
dealer after the sale. They conclude that this policy did influence overall sales and shift the
market towards more fuel efficient vehicles. They estimate that the policy achieved carbon
dioxide reductions at a revenue cost between $91 and $301 of per ton.
   Despite using different methodologies, examining different policies, and studying two
different countries, all of this research achieves consensus on two points. First, fuel economy
taxation does have a significant impact on the market share of affected vehicles. These
policies do influence the fuel economy of new vehicles, and this does have a subsequent
impact on gasoline consumption and greenhouse gas emissions. But, second, this comes at


                                              13
a large revenue cost – with the minimum estimate being $91 and the average closer to $150
or $200 per ton.
    To put these estimates in context, the price of a ton of carbon dioxide on the European
Emissions Trading Scheme exchange was around e15 ($19) in July 2010, and the historic
high was around e30 ($38). Offsets for sale on the Chicago Climate Exchange are even
cheaper, with recent prices under $5. Congressional Budget Office scoring of the Waxman-
Markey bill suggested that equilibrium carbon prices in 2019 would only reach $26 under the
bill (Congressional Budget Office 2009). Some published estimates of the optimal carbon
price are higher, including the oft-cited Stern Report, which argues for a carbon price as
high as $85 per ton of carbon dioxide (Stern 2006). It has been shown that this high price is
driven by unorthodox assumptions about discounting in distant years, but Weitzman (2007)
argues that the same large values can be justified under normal discounting if the parametric
uncertainty surrounding catastrophic climate change is included.
    Regardless, even the highest estimates of carbon prices fall short of the revenue outlay
estimates from the literature. It is not surprising to find that fuel economy taxes are an
inefficient means of reducing gasoline consumption because they are a significant departure
from a Pigouvian tax on gasoline. These efficiency considerations are the subject of the next
section.



5     Fuel economy taxation is a blunt instrument for re-

      ducing gasoline consumption

As a tool for correcting gasoline consumption externalities, fuel economy taxation has several
drawbacks. These drawbacks are common to both fuel economy taxation and fuel economy
regulation, the latter of which has been studied extensively by economists (see Anderson,
Parry, Sallee and Fischer (2010) for a survey). This section reviews these inefficiencies and
describes how the interaction of fuel economy regulation and fuel economy taxation further


                                             14
complicates matters.
   Economists typically model consumer welfare from vehicles as a function of miles driven
and vehicle attributes. Consumers do not directly value fuel economy, instead they value it
indirectly because it allows them to drive more miles at the same fuel cost. This is represented
in equation 1, which shows that the cost of driving in dollars-per-mile dpm is equal to the
price of gasoline per gallon pg divided by fuel economy written in miles-per-gallon mpg:

                                                    pg
                                         dpm =         .                                    (1)
                                                   mpg

A policy that raises fuel economy without changing the price of fuel lowers the price of
driving, which induces people to drive more. This additional driving, which is often called
the “rebound effect”, counteracts some of the gasoline savings that arise from improved
fuel economy. In contrast, a tax on gasoline raises the price of driving. This difference is
important. The best estimates from recent years indicate that this rebound effect erodes
about 10% of the value of increased fuel economy (Small and Van Dender 2007), making fuel
economy taxation less efficient than direct taxation of fuel.
   A tax on gasoline also differs from fuel economy taxation because a gasoline tax affects
both new and used cars. Cars are durable goods, with an average lifespan of 14 years in the
United States. A change in gasoline taxes affects new and used cars alike, but a change in
fuel economy taxation has no direct effect on used vehicles.
   These limitations relative to gasoline taxation are common to both fuel economy taxes
and fuel economy regulation. Standard conclusions show that fuel economy regulation is
substantially more costly per gallon of gasoline saved. For example, Austin and Dinan
(2005) estimate the welfare costs of reducing gasoline over a 14 year period via a gasoline
tax increase and via an increase in CAFE and conclude that CAFE costs three times more
per gallon conserved.




                                              15
5.1       Fuel economy taxation exacerbates mileage externalities

These problems are greatly exacerbated by the fact that there are externalities related not
only to gasoline consumption but also to miles driven. When one individual drives an
additional mile, it has a negative impact on others by increasing the probability of accidents
and congestion. Increasing fuel economy lowers gasoline consumption, but it raises miles
driven, so the net welfare effect of the externality change could be positive or negative,
depending on magnitudes. Estimates of the externalities from congestion and accidents tend
to be quite large relative to national security and climate change, and some analysis shows
that current fuel economy standards are in fact too high (Harrington, Parry and Walls 2007;
Anderson and Sallee Forthcoming).


5.2       Interactions with regulation may negate the benefits of taxa-

          tion

Fuel economy tax policies in the United States do not operate in isolation. By all accounts,
Corporate Average Fuel Economy standards are the most important policy influencing fuel
economy in the United States. CAFE standards require each automaker to maintain a
minimum average fuel economy in each model year. Automakers who fail to meet the
minimum are subject to fines. Automakers who greatly exceed the minimum standard are
not incentivized by the program at all, since the standard is not binding for them. But,
for those near the standard, the policy causes automakers to boost fuel economy either by
changing the mix of vehicles sold or by boosting the fuel economy of existing models. In
practice, the domestic automakers appear to be bound by these minimum standards, whereas
Asian automakers have a significant cushion and most European automakers fail to comply
and instead pay fines.1
      For firms bound by the standard, a fuel economy tax may have no net impact on fleet fuel
  1
      Detailed evidence on compliance is provided in Anderson and Sallee (Forthcoming).




                                                    16
economy, even if it causes the automaker to sell fewer taxed (or more subsidized) vehicles.
To see how, imagine an automaker who makes only three vehicles, named for their fuel
economy – the Guzzler (which has fuel economy below the standard), the Standard (which
has fuel economy equal to the standard), and the Hybrid (which has fuel economy above
the standard). To comply with CAFE, some minimum number of Hybrids must be sold for
each Guzzler. If the CAFE constraint is binding on the firm, this means that the firm is
selling this minimum ratio of Hybrids to Guzzlers – it would like to sell more Guzzlers but it
is constrained by the regulation. In this situation, the CAFE constraint creates an implicit
subsidy for Hybrids and an implicit tax on Guzzlers.
       Now suppose that an explicit fuel economy tax is levied on Guzzlers, and the number
of Guzzlers sold falls as a result. This will relax the CAFE constraint, which removes
the implicit subsidy for Hybrids, causing the automaker to sell fewer Hybrids. If Hybrid
sales fall enough, the CAFE constraint will again be binding, in which case no change in
average fuel economy will result. (Total sales may rise or fall depending on the behavior
of Standards. This has the additional surprising implication that CAFE could potentially
increase total automobile sales.) The same logic applies to the introduction of a subsidy for
Hybrids – it may have no impact on average fuel economy if Hybrid sales increases are offset
proportionally by Guzzler sales increases.2
       This limitation will generally not apply to automakers who are not bound by CAFE
standards. Since European automakers are the primary makers of gas guzzlers and Asian
automakers are the primary makers of hybrids, this consideration has probably not played
a dominant role in the effects of fuel economy taxes in the past. But, it does imply that
the transition of the domestic automakers out of the market for sedans subject to the Gas
Guzzler Tax (discussed further below) does not imply that the Gas Guzzler Tax had an
impact on fleet fuel economy, because these automakers are CAFE constrained. And, going
   2
     A related problem is analyzed by Goulder, Jacobsen and van Benthem (2009), who show that a state
which introduces a fuel economy standard in the context of a binding national standard may have little final
effect on gasoline consumption.



                                                    17
forward, CAFE standards are scheduled to increase dramatically, which may make standards
binding for Asian automakers as well as domestic ones. In addition, many expect the fine
structure to change significantly so that many European automakers may switch from paying
fines to achieving compliance. As such, in the future, the interaction between fuel economy
taxes and CAFE regulation is likely to create a situation in which fuel economy taxation
will often influence the sales of particular vehicles without having any net impact on fleet
fuel economy.
    In sum, because fuel economy taxation does not directly tax the targeted externality, it
fails to achieve the efficiency of a Pigouvian tax. This inefficiency is common to fuel economy
taxation and regulation. Moreover, the interaction of fuel economy taxation and regulation
will sometimes imply that fuel economy taxation has no impact at all. These problems
are theoretical and cannot easily be solved by redesigning fuel economy tax programs. In
contrast, the next section deals with inefficiencies that stem from the details of existing fuel
economy tax policies, which could be eliminated through straightforward reform.



6     Notches in fuel economy taxation engender gaming

All existing fuel economy tax policies feature notches – points in the tax schedule where
marginal changes in fuel economy correspond to large changes in tax treatment. These
notches create several gaming opportunities, where gaming is defined as action that improves
tax status but has little or no impact on gasoline consumption. In the short run, tax
changes that are anticipated induce timing responses, whereby transactions are shifted into
the high-subsidy or low-tax time period. In the medium run, automakers make very minor
modifications to vehicles that lie very close to a fuel economy notch in order to receive more
favorable tax treatment. In the long run, vehicles are redesigned in order to take advantage
of the favorable treatment of light trucks relative to passenger cars. Should they desire to
continue to tax fuel economy, policy-makers can improve the efficiency of their policies by



                                              18
being attentive to these responses.


6.1       Timing notches cause intertemporal shifting

Some fuel economy tax policy changes are known in advance. The Clean Fuel Vehicle Tax
Deduction became the more generous Hybrid Vehicle Tax Credit on January 1, 2006. This
tax change was passed into law in August of 2005, and consumers who were aware of the
looming change were able to delay their purchases to take advantage of the more generous
credit.
       Sallee (Forthcoming) shows this intertemporal bunching for the Toyota Prius surrounding
changes in the federal tax treatment. This exercise is extended here to include all hybrid
vehicles.3 Figure 2 shows the distribution of hybrid vehicle sales (solid line) in the two
months surrounding the tax change and the distribution of non-hybrids over the same time
period (dashed line). The overall pattern of sales follows a predictable selling cycle. Few
vehicles are sold on Sundays, and many more are sold on Fridays and Saturdays. More
vehicles are also sold at the end of a month or quarter, as automakers try to hit quantity
targets.
       For all eligible vehicles, the credit available in January 2006 was more generous than the
deduction available in December 2005. We would thus expect to see more hybrid vehicles
sold in January, which is exactly what appears in the top panel of figure 2. In the bottom
panel, figure 2 also shows the same two months in the previous calendar year, when there
was no change in tax policy. This shows that the additional hybrids sold in early January
are not a pattern that obtain in other years, bolstering the conclusion that this bunching is
due to the tax policy.
       During the available sample period for the data, Toyota models experienced two addi-
tional changes as the credit phased out. All credits fell by 50% of their value on October
1, 2006, and they fell again to 25% of their original value on April 1, 2007. Figures 3 and
   3
    Data come from a nationally representative sample of transactions from an industry source. See Sallee
(Forthcoming) for details.


                                                   19
Figure 2: Shifting of Hybrid Transactions into Tax Preferred Time Period: December and
                                                January
                 Figure 2: Distribution of Sales December 2005 and January 2006 (Hybrids
                                                                                                                                   and All Other Vehicles)
                                     (a) December 2005 and January 2006 – Tax Credit Increase
                   0.08


                   0.07             Tax Deduction Worth
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Tax Credit Worth Up To $3150
                                    $2000 * Marginal Tax Rate
                                    ($500 to $700)
                   0.06

                                                                                                                          Tax Deduction Ends
                   0.05                                                                                                   Tax Credit Begins
                                                                                                                          1/1/06
             PDF




                   0.04


                   0.03


                   0.02


                   0.01


                     0
                                                                            12/11/05
                                                                                       12/13/05
                                                                                                  12/15/05
                                                                                                             12/17/05
                                                                                                                        12/19/05
                                                                                                                                   12/21/05
                                                                                                                                              12/23/05
                                                                                                                                                         12/25/05
                                                                                                                                                                    12/27/05
                                                                                                                                                                               12/29/05
                                                                                                                                                                                          12/31/05
                                                                                                                                                                                                     1/2/06
                                                                                                                                                                                                              1/4/06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1/6/06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1/8/06
                          12/1/05
                                    12/3/05
                                              12/5/05
                                                        12/7/05
                                                                  12/9/05




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1/10/06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1/12/06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1/14/06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1/16/06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1/18/06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1/20/06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1/22/06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1/24/06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1/26/06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1/28/06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1/30/06
                                                                                                                                                                                          Date

                                                                                                                                                                               All                            Hybrids
                             Figure 2: Distribution of Sales December 2004 and January 2005 (Hybrids
                                                        and All Other Vehicles)
                                              (b) December 2004 and January 2005 – No Tax Change
                   0.08


                   0.07             Tax Deduction Worth                                                                                                                                                                                                                Tax Deduction Worth
                                    $2000 * Marginal Tax Rate                                                                                                                                                                                                          $2000 * Marginal Tax Rate
                                    ($500 to $700)                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ($500 to $700)
                   0.06


                   0.05
             PDF




                   0.04


                   0.03


                   0.02


                   0.01


                     0
                                                                            12/11/04
                                                                                       12/13/04
                                                                                                  12/15/04
                                                                                                             12/17/04
                                                                                                                        12/19/04
                                                                                                                                   12/21/04
                                                                                                                                              12/23/04
                                                                                                                                                         12/25/04
                                                                                                                                                                    12/27/04
                                                                                                                                                                               12/29/04
                                                                                                                                                                                          12/31/04
                                                                                                                                                                                                     1/2/05
                                                                                                                                                                                                              1/4/05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1/6/05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1/8/05
                          12/1/04
                                    12/3/04
                                              12/5/04
                                                        12/7/04
                                                                  12/9/04




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1/10/05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1/12/05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1/14/05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1/16/05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1/18/05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1/20/05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1/22/05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1/24/05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1/26/05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1/28/05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1/30/05




                                                                                                                                                                                          Date

                                                                                                                                                                               All                            Hybrids




Note: The “hybrids” series includes all hybrids, regardless of manufacturer, that were eligible for a tax credit.
For all of these vehicles, the introduction of the tax credit increased the real value of the tax benefit, but the
amount of this change varies across vehicles. The “all” series includes all vehicles sold in the market that
did not qualify for a hybrid tax benefit.




                                                                                                                                                                20
Figure 3: Shifting of Hybrid Transactions into Tax Preferred Time Period: September and
                                                October
                 Figure 2: Distribution of Sales September 2006 and October 2006 (Toyota
                                                                                                      Hybrids and All Other Vehicles)
                                    (a) September 2006 and October 2006 – Tax Credit Decline
                   0.08


                   0.07             Full Tax Credit Available for                                                                                                                                                                                                   Half Tax Credit
                                    Toyota Hybrids (Up to                                                                                                                                                                                                           Available for Toyota
                                    $3150)                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Hybrids (up to $1575)
                   0.06

                                                                                                               Tax Credit Falls
                   0.05
             PDF




                   0.04


                   0.03


                   0.02


                   0.01


                     0
                          9/1/06
                                   9/3/06
                                            9/5/06
                                                     9/7/06
                                                              9/9/06




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             10/11/06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        10/13/06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   10/15/06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              10/17/06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         10/19/06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    10/21/06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               10/23/06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          10/25/06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     10/27/06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                10/29/06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           10/31/06
                                                                       9/11/06
                                                                                 9/13/06
                                                                                           9/15/06
                                                                                                     9/17/06
                                                                                                               9/19/06
                                                                                                                         9/21/06
                                                                                                                                   9/23/06
                                                                                                                                             9/25/06
                                                                                                                                                       9/27/06
                                                                                                                                                                 9/29/06
                                                                                                                                                                           10/1/06
                                                                                                                                                                                     10/3/06
                                                                                                                                                                                               10/5/06
                                                                                                                                                                                                         10/7/06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   10/9/06
                                                                                                                                                                           Date

                                                                                                                                                         All                     Toyota Hybrids
                             Figure 2: Distribution of Sales September 2005 and October 2005 (Hybrids
                                                        and All Other Vehicles)
                                            (b) September 2005 and October 2005 – No Tax Change
                   0.08


                   0.07            Tax Deduction Worth                                                                                                                                                                                                   Tax Deduction Worth
                                   $2000 * Marginal Tax Rate                                                                                                                                                                                             $2000 * Marginal Tax Rate
                                   ($500 to $700)                                                                                                                                                                                                        ($500 to $700)
                   0.06


                   0.05
             PDF




                   0.04


                   0.03


                   0.02


                   0.01


                     0
                          9/1/05
                                   9/3/05
                                            9/5/05
                                                     9/7/05
                                                              9/9/05




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             10/11/05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        10/13/05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   10/15/05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              10/17/05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         10/19/05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    10/21/05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               10/23/05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          10/25/05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     10/27/05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                10/29/05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           10/31/05
                                                                       9/11/05
                                                                                 9/13/05
                                                                                           9/15/05
                                                                                                     9/17/05
                                                                                                               9/19/05
                                                                                                                         9/21/05
                                                                                                                                   9/23/05
                                                                                                                                             9/25/05
                                                                                                                                                       9/27/05
                                                                                                                                                                 9/29/05
                                                                                                                                                                           10/1/05
                                                                                                                                                                                     10/3/05
                                                                                                                                                                                               10/5/05
                                                                                                                                                                                                         10/7/05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   10/9/05




                                                                                                                                                                           Date

                                                                                                                                                         All                     Toyota Hybrids




Note: The “Toyota hybrids” series includes only Toyota hybrids – all other manufacturers experienced no
tax change in October 2006. Toyota hybrids all experienced a 50% reduction in the value of the tax credit on
October 1, 2006. Hybrids made by other manufacturers, and all non-hybris, are included in the “all” series.




                                                                                                                                                 21
Figure 4: Shifting of Hybrid Transactions into Tax Preferred Time Period: March and
                                                  April
                 Figure 2: Distribution of Sales September 2006 and October 2006 (Toyota
                                                                                                     Hybrids and All Other Vehicles)
                                                (a) March 2007 and April 2007 – Tax Credit Decline
                  0.08


                  0.07             Half Tax Credit Available for                                                                                                                                                                                           Quarter Tax Credit
                                   Toyota Hybrids (Up to                                                                                                                                                                                                   Available for Toyota
                                   $1575)                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Hybrids (up to
                  0.06                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     $787.50)

                                                                                                              Tax Credit Falls
                  0.05
            PDF




                  0.04


                  0.03


                  0.02


                  0.01


                    0
                         3/1/07
                                  3/3/07
                                           3/5/07
                                                    3/7/07
                                                             3/9/07




                                                                                                                                                                                    4/2/07
                                                                                                                                                                                             4/4/07
                                                                                                                                                                                                      4/6/07
                                                                                                                                                                                                               4/8/07
                                                                      3/11/07
                                                                                3/13/07
                                                                                          3/15/07
                                                                                                    3/17/07
                                                                                                              3/19/07
                                                                                                                        3/21/07
                                                                                                                                  3/23/07
                                                                                                                                            3/25/07
                                                                                                                                                      3/27/07
                                                                                                                                                                3/29/07
                                                                                                                                                                          3/31/07




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        4/10/07
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  4/12/07
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            4/14/07
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      4/16/07
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                4/18/07
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          4/20/07
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    4/22/07
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              4/24/07
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        4/26/07
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  4/28/07
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            4/30/07
                                                                                                                                                                          Date

                                                                                                                                                        All                     Toyota Hybrids
                            Figure 2: Distribution of Sales March 2006 and April 2006 (Toyota Hybrids
                                                       and All Other Vehicles)
                                                     (b) March 2006 and April 2006 – No Tax Change
                  0.08


                  0.07            Full Tax Credit Available for                                                                                                                                                                                 Full Tax Credit Available for
                                  Toyota Hybrids (Up to                                                                                                                                                                                         Toyota Hybrids (Up to
                                  $3150)                                                                                                                                                                                                        $3150)
                  0.06


                  0.05
            PDF




                  0.04


                  0.03


                  0.02


                  0.01


                    0
                         3/1/06
                                  3/3/06
                                           3/5/06
                                                    3/7/06
                                                             3/9/06




                                                                                                                                                                                    4/2/06
                                                                                                                                                                                             4/4/06
                                                                                                                                                                                                      4/6/06
                                                                                                                                                                                                               4/8/06
                                                                      3/11/06
                                                                                3/13/06
                                                                                          3/15/06
                                                                                                    3/17/06
                                                                                                              3/19/06
                                                                                                                        3/21/06
                                                                                                                                  3/23/06
                                                                                                                                            3/25/06
                                                                                                                                                      3/27/06
                                                                                                                                                                3/29/06
                                                                                                                                                                          3/31/06




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        4/10/06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  4/12/06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            4/14/06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      4/16/06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                4/18/06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          4/20/06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    4/22/06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              4/24/06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        4/26/06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  4/28/06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            4/30/06




                                                                                                                                                                          Date

                                                                                                                                                        All                     Toyota Hybrids




Note: The “Toyota hybrids” series includes only Toyota hybrids – all other manufacturers experienced no
tax change in April 2007. Toyota hybrids all experienced a 50% reduction in the value of the tax credit
(down to one-quarter of the original amount) on April 1, 2007. Hybrids made by other manufacturers, and
all non-hybris, are included in the “all” series.




                                                                                                                                                22
4 show the same distributional figures for those time periods. In this case, the incentive is
to accelerate transactions into the earlier month. This pattern again emerges. It is absent
in the bottom panels of these figures, which show the same distributions in the prior year
when there were no tax changes.
   This timing response is important for two reasons. First, if policy evaluators mistake such
intertemporal shifting for permanent sales responses, they may overstate the effect of the
policy. A simple before-after comparison of the number of vehicles sold after the tax subsidy
increased would overstate the impact of the policy on the relevant externalities. Second,
this intertemporal shifting is fiscally wasteful; it increases the fiscal outlay without putting
extra hybrids on the road. The Canadian feebate program was introduced as a surprise and
subsequently did not witness the same shifting. Where possible, revenue can be saved via
the element of surprise, though it should be noted that automakers complained of being
ill-prepared for the Canadian policy.


6.2    Notches cause small manipulations of fuel economy

Timing responses are a short-run phenomenon. In the medium run, fuel economy tax notches
create incentives for automakers to “tweak” vehicle design in ways that have very small
impacts on fuel economy but large tax implications. It takes several years to design a new
automobile or to change core characteristics of a body or engine. Over the course of a few
months, however, minor design decisions can be made that change fuel economy by .1 or
.2 mpg – like vehicle light-weighting, the addition of aerodynamic features like spoilers or
belly-pans, and tire modification to change rolling resistance. When automakers discover
that a vehicle is very close to a tax notch, they may be able to modify the vehicle to improve
its tax status through such means.
   Sallee and Slemrod (2010) show that automakers do indeed respond to such incentives
in the U.S. Gas Guzzler Tax, the U.S. fuel economy label rating program and the Canadian
feebate program. They show that the distribution of decimal ratings of vehicles subject to


                                              23
                                                         Figure  5: Gas
                                                           Gas Guzzler   Guzzler
                                                                       Decimal: All Decimal
                                                                                    Vehicles, Distribution: 1980-2007
                                                                                              1980 - 2009 (N=1,477)


                                            14




                                            12
 Percent of Observations in Each Category




                                            10




                                             8




                                             6




                                             4




                                             2




                                             0
                                                  0.0     0.1      0.2     0.3      0.4      0.5     0.6      0.7       0.8   0.9
                                                                                  Decimal Category



Source: Sallee and Slemrod (2010). Data come from the Internal Revenue Service. Total sample size is
1,477. Tax liability falls at the .5 category. In 1980, 1981, 1983 and 1985, tax liability changed at whole
integers (the .0 category) rather than at half-integers (the .5 category), so observations from those years are
shifted to make the notch location consistent.


the Gas Guzzer Tax and fuel economy labels shows significant bunching on the tax preferred
side. Gas Guzzler Tax liability falls at every .5 decimal – 13.5 mpg, 14.5 mpg, etc. If
automakers respond to these incentives by making minor modifications to vehicles that are
just below a tax notch (at 13.4 mpg, 14.4 mpg, etc.), then we would expect to find relatively
few vehicles that, in the end, have a fuel economy rating ending in .3 or .4, and many with
a fuel economy rating ending in .5 and .6.
                                            Figure 5, replicated from Sallee and Slemrod (2010), shows the distribution of fuel econ-
omy rating decimals for vehicles subject to the Gas Guzzler Tax over its entire history. As
predicted, there are many more vehicles with fuel economy ratings ending in .5 or .6 mpg,
which means that they are just on the tax-preferred side of a notch. This suggests that



                                                                                     24
automakers make small modifications to vehicles that happen to be just below a tax notch,
but they do not apply those same changes to vehicles that happen to be further away.
   The welfare implications of this behavior are negative because this medium-run tweaking
corresponds to design choices that make very small improvements in fuel economy in order to
generate very large changes in tax treatment. Sallee and Slemrod (2010) estimate that the net
impact of these local manipulations amount to a negative welfare impact equal to three times
the positive welfare impact that can be expected from a smooth, ideal Pigouvian tax. While
notched tax schedules may be simpler to legislate, they create negative welfare implications
from this medium-run manipulation, which would not exist in a smooth schedule.


6.3    Policies invite relabeling of vehicles as light trucks

In the medium run when engine characteristics and body style are fixed, automakers have
a limited menu of options for changing fuel economy. In the long run, they can modify
the engine, transmission and core body characteristics in response to policy. These long-
run changes are the intended effects of the policy, but a further unintended consequence
stems from the distinction between passenger cars and light trucks. Because light trucks
receive more favorable treatment under CAFE and are exempt from the Gas Guzzler Tax,
automakers have an incentive to relabel cars as trucks whenever possible.
   The regulatory definition of a light truck is a vehicle that is a “truck derivative” (hence a
truck) that has gross vehicle weight and curb weight below specific thresholds (hence light).
The definition of a truck derivative is not precisely defined in the statute, but in practice
vehicles built on a truck chassis that have truck characteristics (like four-wheel drive, flat
beds, and a higher clearance that facilitates off-road driving) are deemed trucks.
   Consequently, all minivans and SUVs are classified as light trucks, and a variety of other
vehicles like Subaru station wagons, the Chrysler PT Cruiser and Chevrolet HHR also qualify.
Three waves of vehicle design have achieved a transformation of the passenger car versus
light truck share of the market. First, minivans supplanted station wagons and large sedans


                                              25
as the modal family car starting in the late 1980s. Second, SUVs further displaced higher-
end sedans in the 1990s. Third, so-called cross-overs, almost all of which qualify as light
trucks, are currently rising in market share, further displacing sedans. Overall, light trucks
now account for roughly half of the personal vehicle market, whereas they were a modest
10% in 1978.
   The precise nature of this transition suggests automaker attention to fuel economy tax-
ation. Figure 6 shows the relationship between curb weight (a common measure of vehicle
size) and fuel economy (using the Gas Guzzler Tax rating value) for passenger cars in 1984
(the earliest year with available data) and 2004. Each circle or square in the figure represents
a CAFE rated vehicle configuration, and the size of the shape indicates sales volume. The
solid lines are quadratic regression lines. In 1984, the Gas Guzzler Tax was still phasing-in,
and vehicles were taxed only if their fuel economy was below 19. Once fully phased-in, the
Gas Guzzler Tax applied a minimum $1,000 tax to all vehicles getting 22.5 mpg or below,
and the figure has a vertical line to indicate this cut-off.
   Figure 6 shows that fuel economy technology improved – a vehicle of the same weight in
2004 had significantly higher fuel economy than in 1984. In 1984, there are very few vehicles
getting below 19 mpg, the cutoff for the Gas Guzzler Tax. This discontinuity shifts sharply
to 22.5 mpg, the new tax cutoff, in 2004, by which time passenger cars getting below 22.5
mpg had all but disappeared.
   Figure 7 shows the same figure, but it includes both passenger cars and light trucks. Once
light trucks are included, there is no apparent drop-off in vehicles getting below 22.5 mpg
in 2004. There does appear to be technological improvement – the schedule is shifted out
– but there is no movement away from low fuel economy vehicles around the Gas Guzzler
Tax. One explanation is that automakers have continued to sell heavy vehicles to consumers
willing to pay for size, but they have avoided the tax by transforming these vehicles into light
trucks. Figure 7 does suggest a discontinuity in the entire vehicle market at 19 mpg in 1984.
This is consistent with the idea that it takes several years to make the vehicle classification


                                               26
       Figure 6: Curb Weight and Fuel Economy in 1984 and 2004: Passenger Cars




Source: Sallee and Slemrod (2010).



changes exhibited later.
   Figure 8 presents a different way to show a similar result. This figure plots the market
share of vehicles that get between 20 and 22.5 mpg for passenger cars and all vehicles (cars
and trucks combined). The car series shows the near extinction of vehicles in that fuel
economy category. But, the rise of light trucks that get between 20 and 22.5 mpg almost
completely offsets this trend over the period.
   In a simple Pigouvian framework of gasoline conservation, there is no justification for
treating light trucks and passenger cars separately. If either vehicle type generates a negative
social externality by consuming gasoline, the efficient response is to tax that gasoline at the
Pigouvian level. The same intuition holds for taxing fuel economy. The preference given


                                              27
Figure 7: Curb Weight and Fuel Economy in 1984 and 2004: Passenger Cars and Light
                                    Trucks




Source: Sallee and Slemrod (2010).



to light trucks has created a long-run design distortion that causes costly vehicle redesign
and manipulation that improves tax treatment without necessarily improving (and perhaps
harming) the targeted outcome – gasoline consumption.



7     Taxes do not put a consistent price on gasoline con-

      servation

As described above, the ideal Pigouvian tax is efficient because it places a consistent tax on
the consumption of a gallon of gasoline so that all consumers and producers face a common


                                             28
Figure 8: Percentage of Vehicles Rated Between 20 and 22.5 MPG: Passenger Cars and All
                                        Vehicles

                   25%	  



                   20%	  



                   15%	  
  Percentage	  




                   10%	  



                    5%	  



                    0%	  
                        1975	     1980	     1985	     1990	                 1995	     2000	     2005	     2010	  
                                                                     Year	  

                                                         All	          Cars	  

Source: Author’s calculations of NHTSA data.



incentive to reduce consumption. Fuel economy taxation, however, faces several obstacles
to achieving this incentive parity. To understand why, it is helpful to first describe the
relationship between fuel economy and gasoline consumption.
         The number of gallons of gasoline consumed by a vehicle g can be written as the number
of miles driven m divided by fuel economy written as miles-per-gallon mpg:

                                                                    m
                                                         g=            .                                             (2)
                                                                   mpg

Because mpg is in the denominator, the relationship between gasoline consumption and fuel
economy is nonlinear – the gasoline conserved by a unit increase in fuel economy depends



                                                              29
on the starting level of fuel economy. This relationship can be described by the derivative of
the gasoline consumption function:

                                        ∂g    −m
                                            =       ,                                     (3)
                                       ∂mpg   mpg 2

which shows that a one mpg improvement in fuel economy has a greater impact on gasoline
consumption when fuel economy is lower. Note that this would not be true if fuel econ-
omy were written as gallons-per-mile. Much of the rest of the world rates fuel economy
in liters-per-hundred-kilometers, which inverts the distance-consumption relationship and
makes consumption linear in fuel economy.
   Laboratory experiments suggest that consumers are confused by this nonlinearity – they
tend to believe that marginal increases in mpg are more valuable for vehicles with high
mpg ratings (Larrick and Soll 2008). This difference can be quite large. For purposes
of illustration, suppose that all cars are driven 120,000 miles in their lifetime, which is
the assumption used in calculating conservation in the Hybrid Vehicle Tax Credit. The
number of gallons of gasoline conserved by a 1 unit increase in fuel economy is therefore
120, 000/mpg − 120, 000/(mpg + 1). Figure 9 shows how this conservation value varies across
the fuel economy distribution. Vehicles, like the Toyota Prius, at the extreme of the fuel
economy distribution conserve less than 10% of the gasoline from a 1 unit increase in mpg
that is conserved by a vehicle, like the Chevrolet Silverado, at the low end. The variation
in the middle is significant as well – a 1 mpg improvement for a Volkswagen Jetta that gets
25 mpg represents about twice as many gallons of gasoline as the same improvement for a
Honda Civic that gets 35 mpg. Put differently, the Prius fuel economy would need to rise
by 16 mpg to match the lifetime fuel savings of a 1 mpg increase in the Silverado.
   To create a common tax on gasoline consumption across relevant actors, the tax on fuel
economy cannot be the same cost per unit of fuel economy when rated as miles-per-gallon.
Nor can it be a linear function of the percentage improvement in fuel economy. Instead, it



                                             30
Figure 9: Gasoline Conserved By One Mile Per Gallon Improvement in Fuel Economy for
                            Vehicle Driven 120,000 Miles

                                                                  1200	  
  Life%me	  Gallons	  Saved	  by	  1	  mpg	  increase	  




                                                                  1000	  



                                                                   800	  



                                                                   600	  

                                                                                                 Chevrolet	  Silverado	  

                                                                   400	  

                                                                                                                 Ford	  Crown	  Victoria	  
                                                                   200	                                                         Volkswagen	  Je?a	  
                                                                                                                                                              Honda	  Civic	                       Toyota	  Prius	  

                                                                       0	  
                                                                               10	     15	            20	            25	           30	          35	           40	           45	     50	           55	            60	  
                                                                                                                                  Ini%al	  Fuel	  Economy	  (MPG)	  

Note: Example vehicles taken from 2006 EPA fuel economy data file. Ratings are the in-use shortfall adjusted
combined highway and city ratings.



must be a nonlinear function.
                                    In practice, fuel economy taxes have done a poor job of creating this consistency for
two reasons. First, because these policies all feature notches, the implicit subsidy for small
improvements in fuel economy will be zero for some vehicles (because the improvement is too
small to move the vehicle into the next tax tier) and large for others. Figure 10 illustrates
these effects for the Gas Guzzler Tax by showing the tax reduction per gallon of gasoline
conserved (assuming a lifetime of 120,000 miles) for vehicles with different starting fuel
economy values assuming first a .5 mpg increase and second a .1 mpg increase. Notches
create three types of inconsistencies visible in this figure.


                                                                                                                                                31
Figure 10: Gas Guzzler Tax Change Per Gallon of Gasoline Conserved for Two Different
                           Fuel Economy Improvements

                                                                                                            (a) For .5 mpg increase                                                                                                                                                                                                               (b) For .1 mpg increase
                                                                                 25	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  25	  
    Tax	  Change	  per	  Gallon	  of	  Gasoline	  Conserved	  ($/g)	  




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Tax	  Change	  per	  Gallon	  of	  Gasoline	  Conserved	  ($/g)	  
                                                                                 20	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  20	  



                                                                                 15	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  15	  



                                                                                 10	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  10	  



                                                                                   5	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   5	  



                                                                                   0	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0	  
                                                                                      11.5	     12.5	     13.5	     14.5	     15.5	     16.5	     17.5	     18.5	     19.5	     20.5	     21.5	     22.5	     23.5	                                                                                            11.5	     12.5	     13.5	     14.5	     15.5	     16.5	     17.5	     18.5	     19.5	     20.5	     21.5	     22.5	     23.5	  
                                                                                                                                             Ini9al	  Fuel	  Economy	                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ini9al	  Fuel	  Economy	  




Note: Gasoline conservation is calculated assuming all vehicles are driven 120,000 miles in their life.




    First, since notches are all at .5 mpg in the tax, a .5 mpg fuel economy improvement for a
vehicle with a fuel economy rating ending in .5 - .99 will see no tax change from implementing
the improvement. The resulting tax change is therefore 0, even though gasoline is conserved,
and this creates the jagged schedule shown. Second, because the tiers of the Gas Guzzler
Tax are not written to exactly equate tax changes with gasoline conserved, the amount of
subsidy varies across notches, most notably with the last notch at 22.5 mpg, which is worth
$1,000. Third, the tax change per gallon conserved is different depending on the size of
the fuel economy improvement. This can be seen by comparing parts (a) and (b) in figure
10, which shows that the tax improvement per gallon conserved is much higher for small
fuel economy improvements that trigger a tax change than for larger improvements. The
Pigouvian ideal would subsidize a gallon of conserved gasoline at a constant level in all
situations. Notched schedules, like the Gas Guzzler Tax, create capriciously varying tax
incentives. This is inefficient because automakers will install fuel economy improvements on
vehicles close to notches and they will not do so on vehicles far away from notches, even
though the social benefits are equivalent.



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     32
Figure 11: Gallon of Gasoline Conserved Per Dollar of Subsidy Under Hybrid Vehicle Tax
                       Credit for Two Different Vehicle Classes




Source: Author’s calculations.



    The second reason that fuel economy taxes have created inconsistent incentives is that
some subsidies are based on a vehicle’s proportional improvement in fuel economy over a
baseline. The Hybrid Vehicle Tax Credit has this feature. It includes both a conservation
credit, which is a (notched) subsidy for gallons of gasoline conserved, and a fuel economy
improvement credit, which is a (notched) subsidy based on the percentage improvement in
fuel economy. To determine fuel economy improvement and gasoline conserved, the legisla-
tion uses as a benchmark the average city fuel economy of vehicles in the same inertia weight
class – a designation used in determining fuel economy.
    Because fuel economy improvement is nonlinearly related to gasoline conserved, the credit
creates a highly variable subsidy per gallon of gasoline conserved, which is illustrated in figure


                                               33
11. Figure 11 first shows the amount of the subsidy as a function of the vehicle’s fuel economy
improvement over the baseline. This is a notched schedule. Next, the figure plots the number
of gallons conserved per dollar of subsidy as a function of fuel economy improvement for two
sample vehicles – one a heavy vehicle with an inertia weight class of 5,500 pounds and the
other a lighter-weight vehicle with an inertia weight class of 3,000 pounds. The notches
create a “saw-toothed” per gallon subsidy, which is declining as the vehicle gains larger
subsidies. Because percentage improvements in fuel economy have a larger effect on gasoline
consumed at lower levels of fuel economy but the subsidy is (notched) linear, this saw-tooth
is declining in fuel economy improvement.
   Moreover, because vehicles with lower fuel economy save more gasoline for a given per-
centage improvement in fuel economy, the heavier vehicle’s schedule lies above the lighter
vehicle’s, which demonstrates that more gasoline is saved per dollar of tax credit for heavier
vehicles. The position of two actual vehicles is noted. The Chevrolet Silverado Four-Wheel
Drive Hybrid vehicle belongs in the 5,500 lbs weight class, and it achieves a 25% improve-
ment in fuel economy over its baseline. Over 120,000 miles, this equates to 1,621 gallons of
gasoline saved. The truck qualifies for a $400 subsidy, equivalent to 4.0 gallons of gasoline
per dollar of subsidy. In contrast, the Toyota Prius, which is the in the 3,000 lbs weight class,
is a 150% improvement over its benchmark, earning a $2,500 subsidy. The Prius conserves
2,744 gallons of gasoline – which is less than twice the Silverado’s savings, yet it gains six
times the subsidy. As a result, the Prius only conserves 1.1 gallons of gasoline per dollar of
government revenue expended.
   The point of this exercise is to illustrate that fuel economy taxation does not create
consistent incentives for the conservation of gasoline. Instead, it creates incentives for im-
provement that vary significantly across vehicles based on their initial fuel economy and the
size of the improvement. An efficient policy would create constant incentives, but this is
difficult to do when fuel economy is used as the basis for taxation because fuel economy’s
relationship to gasoline consumption is complicated.


                                               34
7.1    Fuel economy ratings are imprecise

Adding to the challenge of creating efficient fuel economy taxation is the fact that the fuel
economy ratings upon which the policies are based are themselves far from perfect. Fuel
economy ratings cannot accurately reflect the on-road fuel economy of individual consumers
because individual driving behavior influences fuel performance. Speed, acceleration, hard-
braking, cargo load and external factors all have a significant impact on realized fuel economy.
   The difference between EPA’s city and highway test procedures hints at the importance
of this variation. All vehicles are tested separately on a city and highway course, and, on
average, the city fuel economy is 19% lower than highway fuel economy. This difference is as
large as the difference between a Volkswagen Jetta and a Ford Crown Victoria. The realized
fuel economy of someone who drivers a vehicle primarily in stop-and-go urban traffic is very
different than the fuel economy of someone else who drives an identical vehicle primarily
on uncongested highways. Fuel economy tax policy has no way of accounting for these
differences – it must treat these two vehicles the same.
   Even ignoring individual heterogeneity, fuel economy ratings may be inaccurate on aver-
age. One reason is that actual fuel economy may erode over time as a vehicle ages. Another
reason is that average driving behavior changes, so ratings become outdated. The EPA ini-
tiated the rating system in 1978, but then adjusted all ratings in the mid-1980s to account
for the fact that on-road use consistently underperformed relative to the official estimates.
Highway ratings were uniformly reduced to 78% of their previous levels, and city ratings
were reduced to 90% of the original values.
   In 2008, the EPA determined that an overhaul of the rating system was necessary to
correct further inaccuracies. Over time, average highway speeds, the distribution of city
versus highway driving, and the use of energy consuming features like air conditioning have
changed dramatically in the population, making the old test inaccurate. For example, the
EPA’s highway test had a maximum speed of 55 miles-per-hour, a gross underestimate of
today’s highway speeds. The EPA determined that it required an entirely new test procedure


                                              35
based on five different tests, rather than the original two. This new battery of tests is
currently being phased in and the revised ratings are being used to create new label ratings
on vehicle stickers.
   When these revisions have been undertaken, the updated values have been used to create
the fuel economy labels that consumers see when they purchase a new vehicle, but the orig-
inal, inaccurate ratings are still used for CAFE and fuel economy taxes like the Gas Guzzler
Tax. Presumably, the reason for this is that changing CAFE and tax policy will create
winners and losers, which necessitates a political process of compromise and compensation.
To avoid this, the government chose to continue using a less accurate system. The welfare
implications of this are described in Sallee (2010), who shows how to characterize the social
welfare loss from using mismeasured values and describes the degree of mismeasurement in
the fuel economy program. In principle, ratings could be corrected so they are accurate on
average as driving changes over time, but in practice the original ratings become ossified.
   Yet one more reason that fuel economy taxation is imprecise is that it cannot adjust to
the gasoline content of fuel. Virtually all gasoline sold in the United States now contains
between 5 and 10% ethanol, and flexible-fuel vehicles are capable of running on E85, which
is 85% ethanol and 15% gasoline. If two vehicles with identical fuel economy ratings use
fuel with different average ethanol shares, then these two vehicles will represent different
gasoline consumption and emissions profiles, even if they are driven in identical manners.
Fuel economy taxes cannot account for this.
   Fuel economy tax policies do not adjust to the driving patterns of individuals, so that
driving heterogeneity necessarily creates idiosyncratic variation in the tax or subsidy imposed
per gallon of gasoline in a fuel economy tax. Average inaccuracies may also exist. And, fuel
economy taxes cannot account for variation in the gasoline content of motor fuel. In contrast,
a gasoline tax would automatically adjust for all of these things without requiring policy-
makers to gather new detailed information. Put simply, it is much harder to correctly design
a fuel economy tax than it is to correctly design a direct tax on fuel.


                                              36
8     Other justifications for fuel economy regulation

The preceding discussion focuses on the efficiency of fuel economy taxation as a tool for
reducing gasoline consumption in the presence of fully rational consumers. Some advocates
of fuel economy taxation argue that consumers are not fully rational in their valuation of
fuel economy and that this creates an additional efficiency benefit from taxation. Another
possibility is that the goal of fuel economy taxation is not to reduce gasoline directly but
rather to promote new technologies that will subsequently achieve gasoline conservation in
the future, through technological spill-overs or network effects. Yet another possibility is
that fuel economy tax policy has desirable redistributive properties. The implications for
fuel economy tax policy of these ulterior motives are explored here.


8.1     Do equity considerations justify fuel economy taxation?

The gasoline tax, taken in isolation, is regressive in the United States – lower income house-
holds spend a larger fraction of their household income on gasoline than do more wealthy
households, a fact which can be shown directly by looking at expenditure data. Might fuel
economy taxes be less regressive? Is this a reason to prefer them over gasoline taxes?
    New car buyers are wealthier than average because lower income households tend to buy
used vehicles. Within the set of new car buyers, however, the relationship between income
and fuel economy is not clear a priori. No empirical studies of the incidence of a full-scale
feebate program exist, but West (2004) compares the distributional consequences of gasoline
taxes to those of a tax on vehicle size, which is functionally very similar to a fuel economy
tax. West (2004) finds that a tax on size is significantly more regressive than a gasoline tax.
    In addition, the regressivity of gasoline taxes is less clear than it initially appears. Poterba
(1991) shows that when households are ordered according to their total consumption instead
of total income, middle income households consume more gasoline than lower or upper
income households. Moreover, the revenue from a gasoline tax can be rebated in lump-sum



                                                37
fashion back to consumers to undo regressivity (Bento, Goulder, Jacbosen and von Haefen
2009; West 2004). Thus, given the flexibility to adjust other policies, the efficient gasoline
tax should be preferred even if it has poor redistributive consequences because these can
be efficiently undone. Even in the absence of this flexibility, however, the existing research,
while incomplete, suggests that fuel economy taxation will not be more progressive than a
gasoline tax, which casts doubt on an equity justification for fuel economy taxation.


8.2    Does consumer bias justify fuel economy taxation?

Many people believe that consumers undervalue fuel economy. Several types of evidence
fuel this belief: consumers appear confused about the nonlinear relationship between fuel
costs and fuel economy ratings (Larrick and Soll 2008); car shoppers have a poor ability to
recite the components necessary to do a proper valuation (Turrentine and Kurani 2007); and
econometric estimates of implicit discount rates imply myopic valuations (Hausman 1979;
Dubin and McFadden 1984).
   If consumers do not fully value fuel economy, then the relative efficiency of a gasoline
tax over fuel economy taxes (or fuel economy regulation) may be lost because fuel taxes
shift consumer vehicle choice by increasing the value of fuel efficiency. As a result, some
advocate fuel economy taxes or regulation on the grounds of consumer fallibility (see Greene,
Patterson, Singh and Li (2005) for an example and Greene (2010) and Helfand and Wolverton
(2009) for literature reviews).
   To test for consumer fallibility, researchers have sought to understand how vehicle prices
respond to gasoline price changes. If consumers fully value fuel economy, economic theory
makes sharp predictions about how the relative prices of efficient and inefficient vehicles
should change when gasoline prices move. Results have been mixed, with Kilian and Sims
(2006) finding significant underadjustment, Allcott and Wozny (2009) finding modest un-
deradjustment, and Sallee, West and Fan (2009) and Busse, Knittel and Zettelmeyer (2009)
finding full adjustment.


                                              38
   Importantly, modest consumer bias is not sufficient to overturn the strong preference for
direct fuel taxation. Fischer, Harrington and Parry (2007) show that consumer underval-
uation must be severe in order for fuel economy taxation (or regulation) to be a desired
strategy, given the other inefficiencies it creates. While the literature on consumer valuation
of fuel economy is not completely settled, evidence thus far indicates that it is unlikely that
undervaluation is sufficient to overcome the other drawbacks of fuel economy taxation.


8.3    Do technology spill-overs justify fuel economy taxation?

Some fuel economy tax policies target specific new technologies. This is an inefficient way
to motivate short-run gasoline conservation, but it could be an efficient approach if there
are technological spill-overs or other market failures. If the initial introduction of a new
technology generates spill-overs across automakers, then it might be efficient to subsidize a
technology because the benefits extend beyond the manufacturer doing the initial research
and deployment. The phase-out provision in the Hybrid Vehicle Tax Credit and the Plug-in
Hybrid Tax Credit is sometimes purported to do just this – it fosters early innovation but
withdraws the subsidy once initial innovation is brought to market.
   Technological applications are all patented, however, so it is not clear that one au-
tomaker’s development of a technology will have spill-overs to other firms. Toyota holds
over 1,000 patents related to the use of hybrid technology, and they license various proce-
dures to other automakers including Nissan, Ford and Fuji Heavy Industries (Rowley 2006).
If the benefits of research and deployment of a new technology are captured by the innovator,
then there is little reason to suspect a market failure that justifies intervention.
   Moreover, in practice, the amount of money that flows to automakers from these subsidies
is quite small compared to the cost of developing a new model that utilizes a new power
train. And, these policies have been put into law only once the technologies are market
ready. It seems unlikely, therefore, that the subsidies could prove pivotal in determining
whether or not an automaker chose to investigate a particular technology or chose to design


                                               39
a new model to use a different power train. Instead, tax subsidies for hybrids, plug-ins or
all-electric models probably act as windfall gains to automakers that offset a modest portion
of the research and design costs of building a new model.


8.4    Do network effects justify fuel economy taxation?

A slightly different efficiency argument relates to network effects. Consumer demand for a
new technology may be a function of the market penetration of that technology if there are
positive network effects. Network effects could stem either from information dispersion –
the more hybrid owners there are the less uncertainty others have about the technology –
or from economies of scale in maintenance – the first owners of a new technology may have
trouble finding qualified repair services.
   Heutel and Muehlegger (2010) argue that this is indeed the case for hybrid vehicles.
They show that states that had many early Prius sales saw more rapid diffusion of hybrids
in the future, and, conversely, states with many early sales of the Honda Insight had slower
diffusion. They interpret this as evidence that consumers were uncertain of the merits of
hybrid vehicles, and Priuses – which ended up being enormously popular – sent a positive
signal about the technology whereas Insights – which were not commercially successful and
were discontinued even as they hybrid market took off – sent a negative signal.
   If early sales of a new technology resolve uncertainty and accelerate diffusion, there could
be a role for government subsidies. But, the divergence of the Prius and the Insight highlights
the problems with such an approach. We only wish to subsidize the high quality version
of the technology – in other words, we only want to subsidize the vehicles that could be
commercially viable on their own in the future, but there is no way for policy-makers to
make that distinction in advance.
   In sum, it seems difficult to make an efficiency case for the types of policies passed in
recent years. These policies do not appear particularly well suited for correcting identifiable
market failures. It is possible that these policies have some efficiency role tied to technological


                                                40
spill-overs, network effects or consumer bias, but there is limited evidence to support such
a claim. Alternatively, they can best be understood as the politically feasible policy option,
which is theoretically inferior to direct fuel taxation but politically palatable.



9     Open questions and lessons for future policy

The preceding analysis points to several lessons for policy. First, fuel economy taxation as it
is practiced is a crude instrument for achieving gasoline conservation. If the primary aim of
a policy is to reduce gasoline consumption in the United States so as to reduce reliance on
fossil fuels, improve local air quality and mitigate global climate change, direct fuel taxation
will deliver greater benefit per dollar of social cost.
    Second, fuel economy taxation as it is practiced invites gaming through short-run in-
tertemporal shifting, medium-run vehicle tweaking, and long-run relabeling of vehicles as
light trucks. All three practices represent costly manipulation that improves tax treatment
without necessarily reducing the consumption of gasoline. Policy-makers could eliminate
the first by introducing fuel economy taxes as surprises, as was done in Canada’s feebate
program. They could eliminate the second by using smooth tax schedules instead of notched
ones. They could eliminate the third by removing the preferential treatment of light trucks.
    A third lesson is that these policies do impact fleet fuel economy. Automakers and
consumers do respond to tax incentives. This response is, however, likely to be achieved
in a more cost effective manor by direct taxation of fuel. That said, the fuel economy tax
programs that have been instituted in the past have had large taxes and subsidies per vehicle,
but they have affected a small percentage of the market. We do not have any large scale fuel
economy tax programs that have influenced the majority of the market to study.
    Even if fuel economy taxation may be an inefficient tool for reducing gasoline consumption
in the near-term, there might be an efficiency motivation based on technological spill-overs or
network effects. Or, fuel economy taxes might be justified by consumer mis-valuation of fuel



                                                41
economy. To date, however, existing research has provided scant support for these alternative
motivations for fuel economy taxation. Further research in these areas is warranted.
   Overall, the efficiency case for using fuel economy taxation as an ideal tool is weak
for all of the same reasons that the case for fuel economy regulation over fuel taxation is
weak. Instead, its existence likely owes more to political expediency than the theoretical
ideal. Nevertheless, if policy-makers continue to use fuel economy taxation, then significant
efficiency gains can still be made by eliminating policy notches that lead to wasteful gaming.



References

Allcott, Hunt and Nathan Wozny, “Gasoline Prices and the Fuel Economy Discount
  Puzzle,” September 2009. Manuscript: Princeton University.

Anderson, Soren T. and James M. Sallee, “Using Loopholes to Reveal the Marginal
  Cost of Regulation: The Case of Fuel-Economy Standards,” American Economic Review,
  Forthcoming.

  , Ian Parry, James M. Sallee, and Carolyn Fischer, “Automobile Fuel Economy
  Standards,” April 2010. Manuscript: University of Chicago.

Austin, David and Terry Dinan, “Clearing the Air: The Costs and Consequences of
  Higher CAFE Standards and Increased Gasoline Taxes,” Journal of Environmental Eco-
  nomics and Management, November 2005, 50 (3), 562–582.

Bento, Antonio M., Lawrence H. Goulder, Mark R. Jacbosen, and Roger H.
  von Haefen, “Distributional and Efficiency Impacts of Increased US Gasoline Taxes,”
  American Economic Review, June 2009, 99 (3), 667–699.

Beresteanu, Arie and Shanjun Li, “Gasoline Prices, Government Support, and the
  Demand for Hybrid Vehicles in the U.S.,” International Economic Review, Forthcoming.



                                             42
Busse, Meghan, Jorge Silva-Risso, and Florian Zettelmeyer, “$1,000 Cash Back:
  The Pass-Through of Auto Manufacturer Promotions,” American Economic Review,
  September 2006, 96 (4), 1253–1270.

Busse, Meghan R., Christopher R. Knittel, and Florian Zettelmeyer, “Pain at the
  Pump: The Differential Effect of Gasoline Prices on New and Used Automobile Markets,”
  September 2009. Manuscript, University of California, Davis.

Chandra, Ambarish, Sumeet Gulati, and Milind Kandlikar, “Green Drivers or Free
  Riders? An Analysis of Tax Rebates for Hybrid Vehicles,” February 2009. Manuscript,
  University of British Columbia.

Congressional Budget Office, “H.R. 2454, American Clean Energy and Security Act of
  2009,” May 2009. http://www.cbo.gov/doc.cfm?index=10262.

Dubin, Jeffrey A. and Daniel L. McFadden, “An Econometric Analysis of Residential
  Electric Appliance Holdings and Consumption,” Econometrica, March 1984, 52 (2), 345–
  362.

Environmental Protection Agency, Inventory of U.S. Greenhouse Gas Emissions and
  Sinks: 1990-2005, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 2007. EPA430-R-07-002.

Fischer, Carolyn, Winston Harrington, and Ian W.H. Parry, “Should Automo-
  bile Fuel Economy Standards Be Tightened?,” February 2007. Resources for the Future
  Discussion Paper 04-53 (Revised).

Fullerton, Don and Sarah E. West, “Tax and Subsidy Combinations for the Control of
  Car Pollution,” July 2000. NBER Working Paper no. 7774.

Gallagher, Kelly Sims and Erich J. Muehlegger, “Giving Green to Get Green? The Ef-
  fect of Incentives and Ideology on Hybrid Vehicle Adoption,” September 2007. Manuscript,
  Harvard University.


                                           43
Goulder, Lawrence H., Mark R. Jacobsen, and Arthur A. van Benthem, “Un-
  intended Consequences from Nested State and Federal Regulations: The Case of Pavley
  Greenhouse-Gas-per-Mile Limits,” September 2009. NBER Working Paper no. 15337.

Greene, David L., “How Consumers Value Fuel Economy: A Literature Review,” Technical
  Report EPA-420-R-10-008, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency March 2010.

  , Philip D. Patterson, Margaret Singh, and Jia Li, “Feebates, rebates and gas-
  guzzler taxes: a study of incentives for increased fuel economy,” Energy Policy, April
  2005, 33 (6), 757–775.

Harrington, Winston, Ian Parry, and Margaret Walls, “Automobile Externalities
  and Policies,” Journal of Economic Literature, June 2007, 45 (2), 373–399.

Hausman, Jerry A., “Individual Discount Rates and the Purchase and Utilization of
  Energy-Using Durables,” The Bell Journal of Economics, Spring 1979, 10 (1), 33–54.

Helfand, Gloria and Ann Wolverton, “Evaluating the Consumer Response to Fuel
  Economy: A Review of the Literature,” August 2009. National Center for Environmental
  Economics Working Paper No. 09-04.

Heutel, Garth and Erich Muehlegger, “Consumer Learning and Hybrid Vehicle Adop-
  tion,” April 2010. Manuscript: University of North Carolina at Greensboro.

Kilian, Lutz and Eric R. Sims, “The Effects of Real Gasoline Prices on Automobile
  Demand: A Structural Analysis Using Micro Data,” April 2006. Manuscript, University
  of Michigan.

Larrick, Richard P. and Jack B. Soll, “The MPG Illusion,” Science, June 2008, 320
  (5883), 1593–4.

Lazzari, Salvatore, “Tax Credits for Hybrid Vehicles,” December 20, 2006. Congressional
  Research Service: CRS Report RS22558.

                                           44
Li, Shanjun, Joshua Linn, Elisheba Spiller, and Christopher Timmins, “Evaluating
  ‘Cash for Clunkers’: Program Effect on Vehicle Sales and Cost-Effectiveness,” April 2010.
  SSRN Working Paper No. 1594924.

Pigou, Arthur C., The Economics of Welfare, 4th edition ed., London: Macmillan and
  Co., 1932.

Poterba, James M., “Is the Gasoline Tax Regressive?,” Tax Policy and the Economy,
  1991, 5, 145–164.

Rowley, Ian, “Toyota Winning the Hybrid Race,” Business Week, April 3, 2006.

Sallee, James M., “Corrective Policy with Mismeasurement: The Case of Fuel Economy
  Ratings,” July 2010. Manuscript: University of Chicago.

  , “The Surprising Incidence of Tax Credits for the Toyota Prius,” American Economic
  Journal: Economic Policy, Forthcoming.

  and Joel Slemrod, “Car Notches,” May 2010. Manuscript: University of Chicago.

  , Sarah E. West, and Wei Fan, “Consumer Valuation of Fuel Economy: A Microdata
  Approach,” Proceedings of the National Tax Association Annual Conference on Taxation,
  2009.

Small, Kenneth A. and Kurt Van Dender, “Fuel Efficiency and Motor Vehicle Travel:
  The Declining Rebound Effect,” Energy Journal, 2007, 28 (1), 25–51.

Stern, Nicholas, Stern Review: The Economics of Climate Change, Cambridge, MA: Cam-
  bridge University Press, 2006.

Turrentine, Thomas S. and Kenneth S. Kurani, “Car Buyers and Fuel Economy?,”
  Energy Policy, February 2007, 35 (2), 1213 – 1223.




                                            45
U.S. Department of Transportation, Highway Statistics 2008 Highway Statistics Series,
  U.S. Department of Transportation, 2009.

Weitzman, Martin L., “A Review of The Stern Review on the Economics of Climate
  Change,” Journal of Economic Literature, September 2007, 45 (3), 703–724.

West, Sarah E., “Distributional Effects of Alterntive Vehicle Pollution Control Policies,”
  Journal of Public Economics, March 2004, 88 (3-4), 735–757.

World Bank, World Bank Development Indicators 2010, World Bank, 2010.




                                             46
