                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 BANKING IN GENERAL EQUILIBRIUM



                          Ben   Bernanke
                          Mark Gertler



                     Working   Paper No. 161-VT




             NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                      Cambridge, MA 02138
                           June 1985




Prepared for the Conference on New Approaches to Monetary
Economics in May 1985, Austin, Texas. The research reported here
is part of the NBERts research program in Economic Fluctuations.
Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                      NBER Working Paper #1647
                                                      June 1985




                           l3anking   in General Equilibrium


                                        ABSTRACT

    This paper attempts to provide a step towards understanding the role of financial
intermediaries ("banks") in aggregate economic activity. We first develop a model of the
intermediary sector which is highly simplified, but rich enough to motivate several special
features of bauks. Of particular importance in our model is the assumption that banks
are more efficient than the public in evaluating and auditing certain information—intensive
loan projects. Banks are also assumed to have private information about their investments,
which motivates the heavy reliance of banks on debt rather than equity finance and their
need for buffer stock capital.
    We embed this intermediary sector in a general equilibrium framework, which includes
consumers and a non—banking investment sector. Mainly because banks have superior
access to some investments, factors affecting the size or efficiency of banking will also
have an impact on the aggregate economy. Among the factors affecting intermediation, we
show, are the adequacy of bank capital, the riskiness of bank investments, and the costs of
bank monitoring. We also show that our model is potentially useful for understanding the
macroeconomic effects of phenomena such as financial crises, disintermediation, banking
regulation, and certain types of monetary policy.



Ben Bernanke                                                Mark Certler
Stanford GSB                                                Department of Economics
Stanford CA 94305                                           University of Wisconsin
(415) 497-2763                                              Madison WI 53706
                                                            (608) 263-3860
 1. Introduction
     The Miller—Modigliani theorem asserts that economic decisions do not depend on finan-
cial structure in a setting of perfect capital markets. An implication is that the addition of
financial intermediaries to this environment has no consequence for real activity. A number
of authors (e.g. Bernanke (1983), Blinder and Stiglitz (1983), Boyd and Prescott (1983),
Townsend (1983)), recently have questioned the relevance of these propositions. They re-
vive the earlier view of Gurley and Shaw (1956), Patinkin (1961), McKinnon (1973), and
others that financial intermediaries provide important real services to the economy, and
that the provision of these services has substantive implications for macroeconomic behav-
ior. The basic premise is that, in the absence of intermediary institutions, financial markets
are incomplete. This incompleteness arises primarily because of certain informational prob-
lems. By specializing in gathering information about loan projects, financial intermediaries
help reduce market imperfections and thus facilitate lending and borrowing. Accordingly,
changes in the level of financial intermediation due to either monetary policy, legal restric-
tions, or other factors, may have significant real effects on the economy. Bernanke, for
example, argued that the severity of the Great Depression was due in part to the loss of
intermediary services suffered when the banking system collapsed in 1930—33.
    This paper is an analysis of the role of financial intermediaries in the determination of
general equilibrium. (From now on, we refer to financial intermediaries simply as 'banks".)
Our objective is to provide a step toward understanding the role of banks in aggregate
economic activity. We employ a model of the banking sector which is highly simplified but
is rich enough to motivate several special features of banks. When embedded in a broader
general equilibrium setting, this model implies that banks play an important role in real
allocation and are not merely financial veils. Critical to this result is the premise that both
banks and depositors have private information about certain aspects of their respective
opportunities and needs. With no private information financial intermediation would be
irrelevant to economic activity, as in the Miller—Mo digliani analysis.
    There are three distinguishing characteristics of banks that are particularly important
for our purposes. First, banks specialize in the provision of credit for projects which,
because of high evaluation and monitoring costs, cannot easily be funded by the issuance
of securities on the open market. The "information intensity" of bank investments, in turn,

                                              1
makes it difficult for outsiders to ascertain the value of bank assets at any given moment.
Second, banks finance their lending by the issuance of liabilities which are, for the most
part, non—contingent claims, and which are typically more liquid than bank assets. Finally,
bank capital (although small relative to bank assets) plays a vital role as a "buffer"; i.e.,
the existence of capital allows banks to meet fixed interest obligations despite variations in
deposits or asset returns.1
     The seminal work of Jensen and Meckling (1976), which first noted the potentially
great importance of ownership structure in settings with agency costs, may be used to
support the view that these features of banking are interdependent. For example (following
a standard J—M argument), the high ratio of debt to equity financing by banks (and the
associated high fixed interest obligation) presumably substitutes for direct observability of
bank. asset values by reducing the latitude of bank managers for shirking or peculation.
Similarly, as Cone (1982) has suggested, the very short-term nature of most bank liabilities
may provide an additional check on managers, by creating an essentially continuous need
for the maintenance of "confidence" in the bank.
     Because this paper is about the macroeconomic role of banks rather than the details
of banking structure, we do not undertake here a full—blown analysis of agency costs in
banking. (Such an exercise would require the modelling of the behavior of at least three
groups—bank managers, outside equity holders, and depositors—and would soon become
quite complex.) However, by making some strong simplifying assumptions about the pri-
vateness of bank portfolios, we are able to derive, in a way that is both internally consistent
and in the spirit of Jensen—Meckling, some features of banking relevant to macroeconomic
performance. It is our belief that the results we get are at least suggestive of what would
be obtained with a richer and more realistic microeconomic model of banking.
     We begin our simplified analysis of the banking sector with the assumption that there
exists a pool of potential investment projects which are costly both to evaluate and to audit
if undertaken. We assume that banks are able to perform two intermediary functions, at a
cost: First, they determine which projects in the pool are "viable" and worthy of investment.
Second, they monitor the projects in which they invest depositor funds in order to determine
   1 An additional important feature of banks, which we will not however emphasize in this
paper, is their role in facilitating transactions. For a model of banking that focuses on their
transactions role, see Fischer (1983).

                                              2
their true ex post returns. We hypothesize that there exists an informational economy of
scope in ex ante and ex post project evaluation to motivate why a single institution performs
both of these functions. Further, it is assumed that the banks' evaluation and auditing
technology requires a fixed setup cost, which discourages individuals from independently
evaluating projects.
     The information that a bank obtains, about both ex ante project viability and actual
ex post project returns, is taken to be the private knowledge of the banker. This assumption
is admittedly overstated, but it reflects what many argue is a crucial aspect of banking:
the intimacy and privateness of the relationship between banks and their loan customers
(especially long—term customers with complex or non—standard credit needs). For exam-
ple, Diamond (1984) gives an excellent exposition of how banks typically establish a close
relationship with loan customers, which is maintained through the application process and
through the life of the loan; this extended relationship is necessary to monitor whether loan
covenants are being satisfied. As Diamond argues, because information about the current
status of outstanding loans is costly to obtain and highly idiosyncratic, it is not easily
observed by bank depositors or other outsiders.2 For our purposes, the assumption that
banks' information is private is a convenient way to introduce agency costs in banking in a
manner that makes the general equilibrium analysis tractable. One can view our postulated
information structure and its implications as a stand—in for a more complex agency model.

    Although simple, the above framework allows us to motivate the three features of
banking given above. First, the fixed cost of the evaluation and auditing technology ex-
plains the need for specialization (by banks) in the provision of credit for certain projects.
Second, the premise that the information a batik acquires about its loan projects is not
publicly observable rationalizes in a simple way, and in a way consonant with the agency—
cost approach, the heavy reliance of banks on debt finance: Since bank creditors cannot
directly observe the return on the bank's portfolio, they will not accept claims with returns
contingent on this information, because of the potential for dissembling on the bank's part
(the moral hazard problem). It follows that equity contracts are inadmissible, and that

  2 Indeed, Peltzman (1970) notes that even professional bank examiners typically focus
on the quantity of bank capital relative to the quantities of certain broad categories of
loans, since individual bank assets are so difficult to value.

                                              3
 banks must issue debt to finance investment.3 Finally, the privateness of the bank's portfo-
 lio and the associated reliance of the bank on debt finance implies that banks must hold a
 "buffer stock" of capital, in order to guarantee the returns on their liabilities.4 Depositors
 will accept non-contingent claims only from banks which can meet their obligations under
 all possible outcomes of their respective portfolios.5 Hence, banks must have net assets in
 order to self-insure, in the absence of comprehensive federal deposit insurance. It follows,
 as will be seen, that the degree of financial intermediation by banks depends critically on
 the availability of capital in the banking sector.6
       A feature of banking which is not motivated by the assumptions made so far is the
 heavy issuance of banks of demand debt, rather than fixed—term debt. Our choice here is
 to avoid the difficult—to—model Cone argument mentioned above. Instead, we will appeal
 to the liquidity insurance argument provided by Bryant (1980) and.elaborated by Diamond
 and Dybvig (1983): Suppose that individuals face independent liquidity risks, which are
not publicly observable. Because of this unobservability, a simple contingent claims market
cannot provide insurance. By offering demand deposit-like contracts, banks can provide
liquidity insurance to a large number of depositors.7 8

       Cone makes a more extended argument for private information about bank asset values
as a cause for the issuance of deposits by banks. Similarly, Diamond appeals to the "ex
post information asymmetry" to explain why banks issue debt contracts. Note that these
information problems cannot be simply resolved by third—party auditing: In the first place,
 the auditor must incur the (possibly high) monitoring costs already borne by the bank.
 Second, if the auditor's interest diverge from the depositors (e.g., if there are potential side
payments), a new layer of agency costs is added.
   '  Throughout this paper, "bank capital" refers to insider capital, not capital raised
 through a public issue. Our model is not sufficiently rich to accommodate outsider equity,
since we make no distinction between bank owners and bank managers. The notion that
bank capital (either inside or outside) is used primarily as a buffer, however, does seem to
be realistic (Peltzman, p.1).
      This assumes that there is no effective sanction against banks who claim "too often"
that their investments didn't pay off. See the discussion in Section 2.
   6 When
             government deposit insurance does exist, it is usually accompanied by regula-
tions which establish minimum capital requirements for a given amount of intermediation.
We expect to address the effects of deposit insurance more directly in later research.
     The ability to provide liquidity insurance is not restricted to banks, however. In the
analysis of Section 4 below, we will allow consumers to choose between bank-provided
insurance
   8 It
           and liquidity insurance provided by a non-bank equity sector.
        should also be emphasized that the liquidity insurance argument alone does not
explain why the returns on a bank's liabilities are not contingent on the earnings of its
assets. In the Diamond—Dybvig model, for example, there is nothing to prevent banks
from offering equity contracts which perform the insurance function (Jacklin (1985)). In

                                               4
     Once we have developed the model of banking described above, we will embed it in
a stylized general equilibrium framework. Using this framework, we will argue that banks
matter to real activity mainly because they provide the only available conduit between
savers and projects which require intensive evaluation and auditing.9 Factors which affect
the ability of the banking system to provide intermediation, or which affect the cost of
intermediation, will therefore have an impact on the real allocation. Among the factors
affecting intermediation, we will show, are the adequacy of bank capital, the riskiness of
bank investments, and the costs of bank monitoring. We will show also that our model
is potentially useful for understanding the macroeconomic effects of phenomena such as
financial crises, disintermediation, banking regulation, and certain types of monetary policy.
     The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we describe a general equilibrium model
with consumers and banks. Section 3 characterizes the dynamic and steady state equilibria
of this model. In Section 4, we analyze how the equilibrium is affected by the addition of a
non-banking investment sector (in which there are none of the information problems that
exist in the banking sector). Section 5 discusses some applications and Section 6 concludes.

2. Setup of the Basic Model with Consumers and Banks
     We consider an economy with the following production possibilities. There is one
type of output, a consumption good. The consumption good is perishable and must be
consumed in the same period that it is produced. The only input is an endowment good,
which cannot be consumed immediately. It may either be stored for one period and then
consumed (one unit of endowment yielding one unit of consumption), or invested in a
project which yields a random amount of output in two periods. We refer to these two
methods of converting the endowment good to the consumption good as the liquid and
illiquid investments respectively. An important additional feature of the latter is that, in
the absence of costly monitoring, it is not possible to evaluate the quality of a project ex ante
nor to observe its returns ex post. This characteristic motivates the need for institutions,
such as banks, which specialize in gathering information about investment projects.
our framework, however, depositors other than insiders will not accept equity contracts
because the performance of the bank's assets is private information.
     This follows from the assumption of extreme non—substitutability between ban.k and
non—bank assets. Some comments on the realism of this assumption for the contemporary
economy are given in the Conclusion.

                                               5
     The consumer sector consists of overlapping generations of identical agents, each of
 whom lives three periods. The population of consumers is represented as a continuum of
constant length. Each newly born agent receives W units of the endowment good, but does
not consume until either the second or third period of life. Individuals face idiosyncratic
liquidity risks, as in Diamond and Dybvig. A fraction a of the population born at time t
are type I's who receive utility from consumption only in t+ 1, and, conversely, (1— a) are
type II's who receive utility only in t + 2. An individual agent's type is private information.
However, agents must decide how to allocate their endowment before they learn their
respective types. The options are storage and lending to the banking system. Individuals
can store endowment if they wish, but they cannot directly invest in illiquid projects because
evaluation and auditing of the projects are prohibitively costly. In Section 4 below we will
introduce an alternative two-period technology (an equity sector), in which opportunities
and returns are costlessly observable.

    The banking sector has the following properties. There exist a fixed number of
agents distinct from consumers, termed bankers, who are infinitely-lived and risk neu-
traL'0 Bankers intermediate resources between consumers and investment projects. They
sell their liabilities to consumers in exchange for endowment. Further, each banker owns
a physical asset, referred to as bank capital, which yields an additional Wb units of the
endowment good each period. (Bank capital is postulated in order to provide a source of
insider equity, which is necessary to overcome the agency problems in this model.) After
receiving consumers' deposits and the proceeds of their own capital good, bankers must
decide how to allocate the endowment received from these various sources between the
liquid and illiquid investment projects.
     Each banker owns and operates a technology for evaluating and auditing illiquid invest-
ment projects; we assume that, without this technology, it is impossible to locate and invest
in 'viable" projects (i.e., projects that pay positive returns). The returns to viable projects
are random: We assume that all viable projects have the same ex ante return distribution,

 '° The risk-neutrality assumption plays no critical role but is adopted for convenience. It
is also possible to conduct the analysis with finite-lived bankers; however, in this case certain
inefficiences arise in equilibrium which we do not consider to be fundamentally interesting.
The exogenous division of the population into bankers and non—bankers is a weakness of
our model; see Boyd and Prescott for a model in which this division is endogenous.

                                               6
but that the ex post realizations of individual project returns may differ. The degree of
correlation between the realizations of the investment projects of a given bank or across
banks does not matter much for our story; for concreteness, we will assume that realized
returns are independent. The bank's technology also allows it (privately) to observe the
true realization of its investment project's return.1' As we have mentioned, the assumption
that the true return from its investments is seen only by the bank is an important one; its
purpose here is to provide a simple agency cost motivation for debt finance by banks.
     Note that we are proceeding as if banks invest in projects directly, rather than indirectly
through the provision of credit to entrepreneurs. Thus this paper differs from much earlier
work on banking which has focussed on optimal bank lending arrangements. We employ
the simpler characterization of the bank investment process since it seems to capture the
features that are most important for our analysis—principally, that the returns to bank
investment are random and that these returns are not perfectly observable by the public.
     We also assume that there is associated with an individual bank's evaluation and
auditing technology a large fixed cost. This fixed cost prevents the direct evaluation of
projects by individual consumers.12 This fixed cost is assumed to be paid once, at the
beginning of time (and before the span of time analyzed by the model), rather than each
period; having the fixed cost being incurred each period would have no important effect on
the results.
     For simplicity, we take the marginal evaluation and auditing cost to be constant and
equal to 5 over the relevant range; thus, the variable cost function is equal to SI, where
cost is measured in units of endowment and I is the number of viable (illiquid) investment
projects undertaken.'3 It is important to our story that no single bank make all the
     As noted earlier, the assumption that the same technology is used for evaluation and for
auditing is rationalized by the existence of informational economies of scope between these
two functions. We believe that these economies are practically of great importance; without
them we would probably observe considerably more decoupling of these two functions than
in fact we do.
  12 This assumption is unnecessarily strong. What is essential is that bank credit and
other sorts of credit not be perfect substitutes. There is evidence that the imperfect sub-
stitutability assumption is realistic; see, e.g., Fama (1985).
  13 We take the evaluation cost function to be deterministic, also for simplicity. In an
environment where the bank is sampling potential investments in search of viable candi-
dates, it is more natural to think of these costs as random. The extension to a random
cost function, given the risk—neutrality of banks, is not difficult. In particular, note that if

                                               7
 investments in the economy (since if a bank can achieve perfect diversification the agency
 problem disappears). We must therefore assume that the marginal evaluation and auditing
 cost begins to grow quickly beyond some point (e.g., when I exceeds the maximum number
 of investments in the economy divided by the number of banks). Alternatively, we might
 assume that the fixed cost incurred by the bank gives it access only to a limited pool of
 projects.
      Let L (for liabilities) be the flow of new endowment the bank borrows from others at
 time t (below we will allow for the possibility that the bank sells liabilities to other banks
 as well as to consumers), St the amount of endowment the bank invests in the liquid asset
 (storage), and h(I) the total cost in endowment of investing in I illiquid assets. The bank's
resource constraint at each moment is given by

                                    L + W& = h(I) + St                                   (2.1)

where


                                       h(I)=I÷6I
                                             = 1+ 6                                      (2.2)

Equation (2.1) states that the amount of endowment the bank receives from selling deposits
and from earnings on bank capital constrains the total level it can invest in the illiquid and
liquid projects. According to (2.2), the cost of investing in the illiquid project is the sum
of the direct input (assumed to be one unit of endowment per project) and the evaluation
and auditing cost.
     Banks acquire deposits during each time interval from newly born agents who, as de-
scribed earlier, expect to receive utility from consumption in either the subsequent period
or the one after. Since depositors cannot observe the returns to the banks' illiquid invest-
ments, equity contracts are inadmissable. However, at least three basic types of debt—type
deposit contracts are possible (plus linear combinations): These are (i) "storage contracts",

banks are sampling from a large population of i.i.d. potential investments, then the number
of draws required to obtain I viable projects obeys a negative binomial distribution. In
this case, if each draw incurs a constant cost, the expected cost of finding I viable projects
is proportional to I, analogous to the above.

                                              8
that pay the depositor a fixed sum in the second period of life, one period after the initial
deposit; (ii) time deposits" T that pay a fixed sum two periods after the deposit. in the
depositor's third period of life; and (iii) Ldemand deposits" D which, as in Diamond and
Dybvig, the depositor may redeem (at his volition, but in an amount that depends on when
he withdraws) in either the second or third period of life.'4 Since the consumption good
is perishable, and since the period in which the depositor will be able to get utility from
consumption is uncertain, it is straightforward to show that storage contracts and/or time
deposits will be dominated by demand deposit contracts in equilibrium. The proof, e.g.
for time deposits, is to note that the bank can offer at effectively the same real cost a
time deposit that pays r and a demand deposit that pays a quantity approaching r/(1 a)
(which is greater than r) in the second period and an infinitesimal positive quantity in the
first period.15 This demand deposit will always be strictly preferred by the consumer to
the time deposit.'6
    Based on these considerations, we therefore take all deposits made by consumers in
banks to be representable as demand deposits. In addition, it will be convenient for expo-
sition to allow banks to buy and sell time deposits among themselves.17 Accordingly, we

     The returns to a demand deposit can be written as (r', r2), where r1 is the gross
real return to the depositor if he withdraws after one period, and r2 is the return if the
withdrawal is made after two periods.
  ' A quantity infinitesimally below r/(1 — a) can be offered in the second period since
only a fraction 1 — a of consumers will actually withdraw in the second period. The rest of
the consumers, the Type I's, get utility only from first—period consumption and thus will
prefer the infinitesimal return available in the first period. Note that in equilibrium the
bank will always face a finite rate of transformation between payouts in adjacent periods.
  16 Demand deposits will possibly fail to dominate only when there exist markets in which
consumers in the second period of life can trade current consumption and claims on next-
period consumption; in this case it is not necessarily possible to rule out time or storage
deposits. However, the addition of these markets does not make possible any allocations
which are superior to those achievable by the use of pure demand deposits, and may lead
to an inferior allocation. In particular, if demand deposits also exist, the existence of such
markets introduces the possibility of Diamond—Dybvig—like bank rims. This can occur
because these markets provide a means by which Type II consumers may withdraw early
(i.e., run on the bank) and still have positive consumption in the third period of life; with
perishable consumption, which we have assumed, it could never otherwise pay Type H
consumers to run. (See Jacklin for a discussion of a related issue.) It is also not obvious
what prices would obtain in these markets, since under our assumptions participants would
always have zero marginal utility from the goods or claims that they are selling and strictly
positive marginal utility from what they are buying. For these reasons, we rule out these
markets, at least for the present paper.
      Since storage can be done at any level at zero cost, it is redundant to allow banks to

                                             9
 can disaggregate the net flow of new deposits, as follows:

                                         = D + T — Tb,t                                    (2.3)

 where, again, L is new bank liabilities; D is new demand deposits from consumers; T is
new time deposits issued (to other banks); and, also, T8, is the bank's new holdings of time
deposits (at other banks).
     Let R be the average gross return on the bank's illiquid investment projects realized
in period t; note that this return pertains to investments made in t — 2.18 The random
variable R is supported on the closed interval [Re, Rh], with Rt < R". We also assume
that the following restrictions on the distribution of R always hold:

                                                       <1,
                                       j9R/(1+S)> 1                                        (2.4)

wnere T is the mean of R and       is the bankers' common utility discount factor, discussed
further below.
     Let     and r? be the rates of return on demand deposits acquired at t and redeemed
after one and two periods, respectively. Finally, let rt be the rate of return on time deposits
acquired at t. The expression for the bank's profit ñ each period is

           = RI_2 +        —             — (1   —
                                                     a)r_2D_2 — r_2(T_2 — T,_2)           (2.5)

     The first term on the right side reflects gross returns from the bank's illiquid invest-
ments, made two periods earlier. The second is the return from storing endowment one
trade storage deposits. We have not carefully examined the implications of allowing banks
to offer each other demand deposits; this would appear to raise some difficult issues. On
this question we only note two points: First, banks would clearly not issue demand deposits
to other banks on the same terms that demand deposits are offered to consumers, since the
pattern of withdrawals from bank-owned demand deposits would presumably be different
from those owned by consumers. Second, the structure of banks' private information about
their own portfolios is such that it seems unlikely that the trading of demand deposits

 '
would allow a perfect pooling of bank investment risks; only if this conjecture is false would
the addition of interbank demand deposits qualitatively affect the results of this paper.
     Since the returns to individual projects are i.i.d., the second but not the first moment of
R will depend on the number of investments made. Since banks are assumed risk-neutral,
nothing will be lost by ignoring this dependence.

                                                10
period earlier in the liquid investment. The last three terms represent the bank's net obli-
gations at t. Depositors will withdraw the fraction a (reflecting the percentage of type I's
in the population) of demand deposits made one period earlier, and the fraction (1 — a)
(reflecting the percentage of type II's) made two periods ago.'9 Also, all time deposits
either issued or acquired by the bank two periods earlier come due.
     Note that the bank's profits come in the form of the perishable consumption good, and
therefore must be consumed immediately by the banker. Setting up the model this way
rules out the reinvestment of bank profits and makes the bank's optimal control problem
essentially deterministic, despite the randomness of returns to the illiquid investment. In
particular, the bank's sequential decisions will not depend on the realizations of returns to
earlier investments.20 This substantially simplifies the analysis of the model.
     As has been noted, the fact that the returns to bank projects are private information
rules out the issuance of contingent liabilities by the bank; we have therefore assumed
that the bank issues non—contingent liabilities, i.e., debt. We have also assumed that the
number of projects that will be undertaken each period by the bank is "too small" to
achieve perfect diversification. This suggests an important question: By what means can
the bank guarantee depositors that its obligations will be met?
    A potentially interesting set of contracts involves the use of bank capital, or of some
other asset of the banker, as a bonding device. (This is the approach used in a similar
setting by Diamond (1984).) Under a contract of this form, banks would make a binding
promise to forfeit or destroy their capital if they failed to meet their deposit obligations.21
Contracts with bonding actually re-introduce a degree of contingency into the deposit

  19 So that we can neglect any uncertainty that banks might have about the proportion of
their demand deposits which are withdrawn each period, we will assume that the number of
customers at each bank can be represented as a continuum of positive length. (Thus, there
are a finite number of banks, which we will nevertheless assume behave competitively.)
Alternatively, given that withdrawals are observable, there would be no barrier to banks
insuring each other against idiosyncratic withdrawal risk. See Diamond and Dybvig for a
discussion of the issues that arise when a is uncertain.
  20 However, as will be discussed, the bank's decisions will depend on the distribution of
the returns to the illiquid investments.
  21 In our model, bank capital is not directly consumable, so it could not be used topay off
depositors. Thus both depositors and the bank would be hurt if the bank failed. In practice,
the bond posted by bank managers and owners takes the form of a legal commitment to
incur the costs of bankruptcy and reorganization, should creditor obligations not be met.

                                              11
arrangement; such contracts might be desirable ex ante in some cases, even though they
allow the possibility of bank failure.
     We hope to consider bonding contracts in future research. For the present paper,
however, we rule out bonding. Instead, we simply require that the bank plan its investment
and storage so as to be able to meet deposit obligations in each period, even u.nder the
worst possible set of outcomes on its illiquid investment projects. If the quantities of bank
deposits, investment, and storage are observable, this is obviously incentive—compatible.
We also conjecture that the behavior of the model will be similar under this regime to what
it would be with bonding contracts, with the exception that under the present rule there can
be no bank failures.22 (There can, however, be sharp contractions of the banking system
in our model, which for purposes of macroeconomic analysis are essentially equivalent to
a wave of bank failures. See Section 5.) Formally, therefore, we require the following
condition to hold for all t > 0:

              RtIt_i + St crDt + (1 — c)r?_jDt_i + rt_j(T_i — T6,_1)                   (2.6)

The left side of the inequality is the sum the bank will be able to pay at t + 1 in the event
that all its illiquid investments yield the minimum possible gross return RL. The right side
is the bank's net obligation at t + 1. In the initial period zero, when the bank has neither
investments nor deposits from the past, the relevant constraint is

                                         So ckrD0                                      (2.7)

    Each banker's objective is to choose the sequence {It,S,Dt,T,Tb,}O to maximize
expected discounted profits, i.e.

                                                                                       (2.8)

subject to constraints (2.1), (2.3), and (2.5)—(2.7), and where E0 is the mathematical
expectation operator conditioned on information at time zero and 13 is a subjective discount
factor, with 0 <13 < 1.
 22 With bonding, it is possible to induce truthful revelation by the bank of its returns
over a subset of the outcome space. Normally, however, it will not be possible or desirable
(given the costs of bonding) to induce revelation over the entire range of returns. Incentive
compatibility will therefore impose a condition of the form of (2.6) below.

                                             12
     To solve the bank's optimal control problem, we may use the resource constraint (2.1)
and the deposit relation (2.3) to solve out for total deposits L and demand deposits D;
in particular, we are able to remove D from both the equation for profits (2.5) and the
liquidity constraint (2.6). Hence, L and D no longer appear directly in the problem. At
each time t, accordingly, the bank chooses the levels of the illiquid investment I, of storage
S, and of time deposits issued T and acquired Tb,t. Let fl+lA be the multiplier associated
with the constraint (2.6). Then the first order necessary conditions for I, S, T, and Tb,t
are respectively:

                 9[R + +1R]/(1 + 5) [(1 + )it)rfl + i3[(i + .X÷1)(1 — a)rfl              (2.9)
                              (1 + [(1 + Xt)arfl + /3[(1 + )+)(1 —        )r]           (2.10)

                         /9rg(1 + )+i)   [(1 + )it)rfl + fl[(1 + )+j)(1 — c)rfl        (2.11)

                         i.?r(1 + )÷i)   [(1 + )t)crfl + [(1 + A+1)(l — cz)r1          (2.12)

     Equation (2.9) states that the expected discounted marginal benefit from investing a
unit of endowment in an illiquid project (the left side) must be greater than or equal to


,
the marginal cost (the right side). In addition to providing an expected gross return of
    having another illiquid investment increases the minimum amount which the bank can
guarantee to depositors two periods hence; it therefore may reduce the level of endowment
the bank must allocate to liquid projects in the subsequent period in order to satisfy the
incentive compatibility constraint (2.6) (updated to apply at t+ 1). The undiscounted value
of this marginal benefit is )+jR, where X4i is the value at t + 1 of a relaxation of the
constraint that requires the guaranteeing of the bank's obligations to depositors at t -f 2.
The sum + At+iRtJ is deflated by the marginal cost of investment 1 + 6, so that the
expected marginal benefit is in units of endowment. It also is premultiplied by the discount
factor fi, which appears in this expression and elsewhere due to difference in the timing of
various benefits and costs.
     The marginal cost of investing is the obligation implied by the demand deposit the
bank issues in exchange for a unit of endowment. This liability includes both the implied
direct payments to depositors and the cost of having to insure these deposits by investing
in liquid projects. The latter cost is reflected by the presence of   and         in the right
side of (2.9).

                                             13
       According to equation (2.10), the marginal benefit from investing in the liquid asset
(the left side) cannot be less than the marginal cost (the right side). The former includes
both the direct gross return from storage (equal to unity) and the value of having additional
liquidity (equal to .      The marginal cost is the obligation implied by the additional demand
deposit liability as before.
       Equation (2.11) pertains to how the bank determines its liability structure. It states
that the net discounted obligation implied by a time deposit at the margin (the left side),
cannot exceed that of an additional demand deposit; otherwise banks would never issue
the former type of liability. Conversely, according to (2.12), the value to the bank of an
obligation on a demand deposit (the right side) must be less than or equal to the value of
the return on time deposits: otherwise banks would never sell the former in order to obtain
the latter. Combining (2.11) and (2.12) yields:

                    /3rt(1 + A+1) = [(1 +   )t)r] +/3[(1 + )Lt+1)(1 — )r]               (2.13)

How the bank values the respective returns on time and demand deposits must be equal.
This condition eliminates the bank's incentive to take an infinitely long or short position
in either of the assets.
       There are two special cases of equation (2.13) which are of interest. First, assume that
the bank is liquidity—constrained (A >      0,    > 0) so that storage is positive. Assume
also that storage is finite, so that (2.10) holds with equality. Then combining equation
(2.13) with equation (2.10) it can be shown that

                                         re=                                            (2.14)

       The relationship between time and demand deposit rates given in the above equation
can also be obtained by a simple arbitrage argument. Suppose that the storage constraint
is binding in period t. On the margin, the bank can always accept an additional demand
deposit, store the quantity are' to provide for withdrawals in t + 1, and then invest the
remainder of the deposit (1 — ire') at the time deposit rate ?t. In period t + 2 the returns
from the time deposit must be used to pay off second—period withdrawals in the amount
(1 —a)r?. The returns to this arbitrage activity are thus rt(1 — art) — (1 —           If this
quantity is positive, banks will try to drive their holdings of demand deposits, storage, and

                                                 14
of time deposits at other banks to inanity. If this quantity is negative, banks will try to go
infinitely short in these assets. This quantity must therefore be zero if storage is positive
and finite, which yields (2.14).
     The second interesting case, which is the complement of the fIrst, arises when the bank
is not liquidity constrained. In this case (2.6) does not hold with equality, so that ) and
      equal zero. Now the bank has no incentive to invest in the liquid asset, since the
discounted expected gross return on the illiquid asset $ exceeds unity, the gross return
on storage. Therefore the relevant first order conditions for this case are

                                     + 6) cr + $(1 —      c)r                          (2.15)

                                                                                       (2.16)

Equation (2.15) is the first order condition for investment in illiquid projects. Equation
(2.16) is the arbitrage condition between the bank's valuation of the returns to time and
demand deposits; it follows directly from setting ) and         equal to zero in (2.13). With
no storage, the arbitrage condition between deposit rates is simply that the present values of
the expected payouts to a time deposit and to a demand deposit must be equal. Comparing
(2.16) and (2.14), we note that the relation between time and demand deposit rates changes
discontinuously when the banking system moves from a storage equilibrium to one without
storage.
3. Equilibrium with Consumers and Banks
     We are now in a position to determine the equilibrium behavior of: (i) bank deposits,
and the allocation between demand and time deposits, (ii) investment, and the allocation
between illiquid and liquid projects, and (iii) the rates of return on demand and time
deposits. A point that we shall want to emphasize is that, because of the existence of
private information about bank assets, the equilibrium will be quite sensitive to (1) the
availability of bank capital and (2) the minimum possible return to investment in the
illiquid project.
     So as not to have to keep track of population parameters, we normalize the number
of consumers in each generation at unity and also normalize the number of banks at unity.
Thus, each period the total endowment received by consumers is W and the yield bankers
receive from bank capital is Wb.

                                             15
      We recall from an above discussion that we need only consider equilibria in which newly
 born consumers invest all their endowment in demand deposits. This is because, unlike
 fixed—term deposits, demand deposits allow these consumers the flexibility to consume in
 either of the two subsequent periods of life. In equilibrium, therefore, we have

                                                                                         (3.1)



3a. The Behavior of Intere3t Rate.,
     At time t, the bank offers newly born agents demand deposit contracts which yield r'
if withdrawn one period later, and r? if held for two periods. From the discussion at the
end of Section 2 it it clear that, on the margin and given rt, the bank is indifferent among
combinations of r and r which satisfy the arbitrage relation between the returns to time
and demand deposits (2.13). Therefore, the pair (rt', r?) which survives in the market place
should be the one which maximizes consumers' utility, subject to the relation (2.13).
     Assume that In c1 and pin c4.2 are the ex post utility functions for agents born at t
who become type I's and type II's, respectively, where c is consumption by a type 1, i =
I, II, at time j. The representative newly born agent at t then has the following expected
utility function:
                     E {u (c+i,c4.2)} = crInc1 + (1— a)plnei2                           (3.2)
Further since agents allocate all their endowment to demand deposits;

                                         = r'Dt = r'W                                   (3.3)

                                     c2 = rD = rW                                       (34)
The equilibrium pair (re', r) is the one which maximizes (3.2), subject to (2.13), (3.3), and
(3.4). Solving this problem yields

                          = [(1 + ÷i)/(1 + .Xe)Jflrt/(a + p(l — a))                     (3.5)
                          = prt/(a + p(1 — a))                                          (3.6)

We note once again that, due to our assumption that the consumption good is non-storable,
it will never pay a Type II agent in our model to withdraw early; thus we can here ignore the

                                             16
incentive compatibility constraints on the demand deposit contract that play an important
role in the earlier work of Diamond and Dybvig, Jacklin, and others.
    Simpler expressions for r' are available, which depend on whether the liquidity con-
straint (2.6) is binding. When the constraint is directly relevant, so that (2.10) holds with
equality, the expression for r'   reduces   to a constant.

                                        =1/(a+p(1—r))                                     (3.7)

When the liquidity constraint does not bind, so that           and        equal zero, r becomes
proportional to the time deposit rate:

                                       = i9re/(cx + p(l — ))                              (3.8)

It is easily verified that (3.6) and (3.7) together satisfy condition (2.14), and that (3.6) and
(3.8) together satisfy condition (2.16).
    Finally, we obtain an expression linking the time deposit rate to both the expected re-
turn and minimum possible return on the illiquid investment, by appropriately substituting
the arbitrage condition (2.13) into the bank's first order condition for investment (2.9):

                           [R+)+1R]/[(1 +5)(i +.+)]                  Tt                   (3.9)

Equation (3.9) holds with equality, when the same is true for (2.9). Notice that when the
liquidity constraint (2.6) is not binding, the time deposit rate depends only on and not
on R1. When         equals zero (3.9) becomes,

                                        /(1+S) rt                                        (3.10)


3b. Interest Rates and Investment in the Steadg State
    In this section we derive the steady state time deposit rate and allocation of investment.
Once the time deposit rate is known, it is then possible to use (3.5) and (3.6) to calculate the
associated demand deposit rates. There are three general types of steady state outcomes
in which we are interested: (i) Banks invest only in illiquid projects; (ii) they acquire
both illiquid and liquid assets; or (iii) they acquire no illiquid assets, except with their
                                                 17
own capital; i.e., they invest no depositor funds in illiquid assets. We refer to this last
possibility as a non—banking equilibrium, since in this case the special function of ban.ks,
the investment of depositor funds in information—intensive projects, does not occur. We
shall see that whether or not a banking equilibrium (i.e., (i) or (ii)) exists depends critically
on the quantity of the yield from bank capital W6.
     Before proceeding, it is useful to establish the following preliminary results:

Lemma 1: The time deposit rate cannot remain below 1/fl indefinitely.

PROOF: The proof is by contradiction. Suppose that r < 1/fl for periods t, t + 1, . . . We
will show that an intermediary which accepts deposits but only invests in liquid projects (a
"storage intermediary") will in this case store an infinite amount and make infinite profits,
which is inconsistent with equilibrium.
    The first step is to note that, for a sthrage intermediary, the liquidity constraint (2.6)
can be written as
                                S ar'St + (1 —         c)r1S_i                            (3.11)
We wish to substitute for r' and r in this expression. From (3.7) and (3.8) we note that,
under the maintained hypothesis,
                                                   1
                                        <                                                 (3.12)
                                            (c!+p(1—cr))
Using this and (3.6), it is straightforward to show that a sufficient condition for the liquidity
constraint to be non—binding is
                                        S > r—iS-_i                                       (3.13)
This condition is always feasible. Thus we may assume that, for a sufficiently high level
of storage, the liquidity constraint (2.6) is not binding for the storage intermediary, i.e.,
   = 0. A similar argument for t + 1 shows that, for sufficiently high           = 0.
     If ) and       equal zero (provisionally), the first order necessary condition for invest-
ing in a unit of storage at the margin can be written as:

                                    1 r + fl(1 — cx)r                                     (3.14)

where the left side is the marginal benefit from storage and the right side is the marginal
cost (i.e. the value of the obligation implied by an additional unit of demand deposits).
If (3.12) and (3.6) are used to substitute for r and r, it follows directly that, when
rt < 1/fl, the right side of (3.14) is strictly less than one. Thus the marginal cost of storage

                                              18
will be less than the marginal benefit. This implies an infinite demand for the liquid
asset. Similarly, iteration forward shows that there is unbounded demand for storage in
each subsequent period; thus our provisional assumption that the liquidity constraint never
binds is admissible. Since infinite storage is impossible in equilibrium, we have reached a
contradiction and the lemma is proved. •

    Intuitively, when r < 1/fl, it is possible for a storage intermediary to play an infinite
Ponzi game, in which new deposits are used to pay off old obligations. However, this Ponzi
game could not be consistent with equilibrium, since it requires (among other things) that
the growth rate of deposits exceed the time deposit rate indefinitely. Thus r must not be
less that 1/fl.

Lemma 2: In the steady state with investment only in the illiquid project, the time deposit
rate is in the closed interval [1/fl,/(1 + 5)]. When there is storage in the steady state,
the time deposit rate equals 1/fl.
PROOF: In the steady state where banks invest only in illiquid projects, the expression for
the time deposit rate (3.10) becomes /(1 + 5) rg. Thus /(1 + 5) is an upper bound
for r in this situation. It follows from Lemma 1 that 1/fl is a lower bound.
     In the steady state with storage, the bank's first order condition for investment in
the liquid asset (2.10) and the arbitrage condition between the time and demand deposit
returns (2.13) yield
                                      (1-f-X) = flrt(1+)                           (3.15)
where     is the steady state value of .X. From (3.15) we obtain rt = 1/fl. The intuition is
that the time deposit rate adjusts to equate the marginal benefit from storage (1 + ) with
the marginal cost flrt(1 + ).


     We   can now characterize the conditions under which various steady state behaviors of
investment and the time deposit rate will occur. The value of the dividend from bank capital
W relative to the consumers' endowment W, the minimum return on illiquid investments
Rt, and the liquidity constraint (2.6), it turns out, play critical roles.

Proposition 1: Let x = [a + p(l — a)]/[(flcr + p(1 — a))(1 + 5)]. If zRt(1 + W6/W) is:
 (i) > /(1 + 5), then in the steady state banks invest only in illiquid projects, and the
    time deposit rate equals /(1 + 5);
                                              19
 (ii)     /(1 + 8), but 1/fl, then in the steady state banks invest only in illiquid projects,
        and the time deposit rate equals xR(1 + W6/W);
(iii) < 1/fl, then banks invest some positive fraction of their assets in the liquid project in
        the steady state, the amount S being determined by the following expression:

                            S = [((flx)1   —
                                               Rt)W — R1W6J/[l + 8 — R]                  (3.16)

PROOF: In the steady state without storage the level of investment equals (1 + 8)'(W +
Wb). It follows from the liquidity constraint (2.6) that the following must be true:

                          RL(1 + 8)'(W + Wb) [cr' + (1 —        cz)r2]W                  (3.17)
Substitute (3.6) and (3.8) into (3.17) to obtain

                                    Rt(W + Wb) z1rW                                     (3.18)

where 1/fl      r /(1 + 8) according to Lemma 2. Rearranging (3.18) implies
                                     zRt(1 + W6/W)      r                               (3.19)

When the left side of (3.19) strictly exceeds R/(1 + 8), the maximum value of r, it follows
that the liquidity constraint (3.17) holds with strict inequality in the steady state. Thus,
the time deposit rate adjusts to equate the expected marginal benefits and costs from
investing in the illiquid project (i.e. (2.15) holds with equality):

                                                                                        (3.20)

If, however, the left side of (3.19) is less than R/(1 + 8), the liquidity constraint will be
violated if r is determined by (3.20). In this case, the time deposit rate must adjust to the
maximum value which satisfies (3.19) (so long as this value is greater than or equal to 1/fl.)
Even though /(1 + 5) exceeds r, banks cannot invest more in illiquid projects, because
they are liquidity constrained.
     When Re(1 + Wb/W) is less than 1/fl, banks must invest in the liquid asset in the
steady state, since r may not fall below 1/fl, according to Lemma 1. It follows from (2.6),
(3.5), and (3.6), that in order for banks to satisfy the liquidity constraint in this case, the
following must be true:

                     R(1 + 8)'(W + Vf — S') + S [flx(1 + 5)J1W                          (3.21)
The steady state level of storage is the minimum value of S which satisfies (3.21). This
value is given by equation (3.16).

                                               20
      Figure 1 illustrates the dependence of the steady state time deposit rate on the lower
bound of the return to the illiquid investment and the dividend from bank capital, as
defined in Proposition 1: It portrays r as a function of xftt(1 +W6/W), the critical term in
Proposition 1. It is seen that the time deposit rate is a non-decreasing function of Rt and
Wb; increases in R or Wb ease the liquidity constraint, reduce the need for storage, and
thus allow a higher return to be paid on deposits. Figure 1 also shows that there is a link
between the time deposit rate in the steady state and whether there is positive investment
in the liquid asset.
      It is also possible that a non—banking steady state equilibrium, in which banks invest
no depositor funds in the illiquid project, might arise. Whether this case arises depends
critically on the level of bank capital. We have:

Proposition 2: If (a) zRt(1 + Wb/W) < 1//9 and (b) Wb/W < ()                            then
in the steady state there will be no investment of depositor funds in the illiquid project.23

PROOF: Condition (a) implies that there will be storage in the steady state, by part (iii)
of Proposition 1. It further implies that the steady state level of investment in the illiquid
project, 1, satisfies the liquidity constraint

                       RtI* + (W + Wb — (1 +   6)1) = [x$(1 + 8)11W                    (3.22)

or, equivalently
                       I' = (1 + 5 — R1)'[Wb + (1 — (zf3(1 5))')W]                     (3.23)
If condition (b) holds, 1 is less than Wb. In this case, banks would prefer not to accept
deposits and would instead invest only their own endowment in the two—period illiquid
technology. We see that a minimal level of bank capital is necessary to provide insurance
for deposit obligations when the bank invests depositor funds in risky assets. I



      Figure 2 shows the steady state relationship between investment as a fraction of con-
sumer endowment, 1/W, and the ratio of bank capital to consumer endowment, Wb/W,
as defined by (3.22). As Wb/W rises above the threshold defined by (b), banking emerges.
Steady—state illiquid investment increases as the ratio of bank endowment to consumer
 23   The parameter x is defined in Proposition 1.

                                             21
endowment increases, until all of the economy's endowment is devoted to the illiquid in-
vestment, i.e., I = (1 + 5)'(W + Wa). In this last situation, banks have sufficient capital
to insure against all outcomes on their portfolio without the need to hold liquid assets;
therefore, all endowment can be invested in the more productive illiquid asset.


3c. Dynamici
    In this section we discuss the dynamic behavior of investment in the illiquid asset, of
storage, and of the time deposit rate.
    When the liquidity constraint (2.6) is not binding, all resources are invested in the illiq-
uid asset. Otherwise, this constraint governs the investment dynamics. (It is automatically
binding in period zero, since the bank has no previous investments to provide revenues
to meet deposit obligations in the subsequent period.) Accordingly, by substituting the
resource constraint (2.1) and the aggregate relation for deposits (3.1) into equation (2.6),
one can obtain a relation for investment in the illiquid asset when the liquidity constraint
is binding:
                  = {RI_i — [crr' + (1 — a)r_,]W + W + Wb}(1 + 6)—'                      (3.24)

Further, substituting (3.7) and (3.6) for r' and r2 respectively yields

                   I={R1I_,+W—                     t_1)l)W}(1+6Y.1                       (3.25)


    For convenience, we rewrite the relation (3.9), which restricts rt, as follows:

                                   R_Rt                  Rt
                              (1 + 6)(1 +
                                                   +
                                                       (1 + 6)
                                                                 r                       (3.26)

Equation (3.26) holds with equality when the liquidity constraint is binding; when the
liquidity constraint does not bind, (3.26) may hold with equality or it may not. (Refer to
Proposition 1.)
    When equation (3.26) holds with equality note that re, and therefore I, depends on
the shadow price A,. When the liquidity constraint is not binding, .A÷, simply equals
zero. When the constraint does bind, a difference equation for A can be obtained from the
bank's first order necessary conditions for the illiquid investment and storage ((2.9) and

                                              22
(2.11) respectively), which hold with equality under these circumstances. This difference
equation is:
                             = [(1 + 5)/flRL1.A + [(1 + 5) — fl]/flRt                      (3.27)

The coefficient on A exceeds unity. However, it follows from Lemma 1 (which states that
rt cannot fall permanently below 1/fl) and from (3.26) and (3.27) that A is bounded above.
    Also relevant to the behavior of A is a terminal condition, which depends on which type
of steady state arises. The shadow price converges to zero if the steady state involves only
investment in the illiquid project (so that the liquidity constraint isn't binding). Otherwise,
A converges to a positive constant, defined by the steady state of (3.27).

Proposition 3. From any initial position, the model with banks and consumers converges
over time to a steady state. (The characteristics of the steady state depend on the param-
eters of the model. See Proposition 1.)

PROOF: See appendix. •

     Proposition 3 is useful at least in that it validates the use of comparative statics analysis
in applications of the model.


4. Equilibrium with an Alternative, Publicly Observable, Technology
    Until this point we have restricted ourselves to the case in which all productive in-
vestment is intermediated by banks. This clearly overstates the importance of financial
intermediaries in the economy. In this section we consider the implications of introducing
into the model an alternative technology for transforming endowment into consumption
goods. Like the storage technology but unlike the illiquid investment technology monitored
by banks, this alternative technology is assumed to be costless to observe; that is, mon-
itoring to evaluate the viability of this technology or to observe its returns is inessential.
As a result, investment in the alternative technology may be financed by directly issuing
securities on the open market; bank credit is unnecessary.
    In the general equilibrium with both bank investment and the alternative investment,
it turns out that, once again, bank capital and the support of the return distribution for
bank illiquid projects play critical roles. In the case discussed in the previous section, these

                                               23
 variables were important in determining how the bank allocated its portfolio between liquid
 and illiquid projects. In the present setting, in which the alternative sector competes with
banks for funds, these variables will also help determine the size of the banking sector itself.

4a. Investment in the Alternative Technology
     We assume that the alternative technology has the following characteristics: An input
at time t of 1 units of endowment yields f(l) certain units of consumption two periods
later. The function f(S) is concave and increasing in 1. Further, the output of consumption
per unit of endowment invested g(l) obeys the following restriction:


                                      g(I) =f(1)/l 1                                      (4.1)

That is, the average gross return to investment in the alternative technology is always
greater than or equal to one (in the relevant range).
     Assume that there exists a fixed number of firms which each independently operate
the technology. For convenience, normalize the number of firms at unity.24 The firm's
economic decisions are trivial. It simply accepts endowment and issues securities which are
claims to the subsequent yield. It uses the endowment to produce consumption output two
periods later and then distributes all the revenues to its creditors, based on their respective
percentage contributions to the investment. The important point to note is that, because
its production activity is publicly observable, the firm can directly issue securities to any
other agent in the economy, without the need for a monitoring intermediary.
    Since there is no moral hazard problem, it is also true that the securities issued by
the firm may have returns contingent on its earnings, if they are random. This potential
dependence on earnings is in practice an important distinction between equity—like secu-
rities and (adequately—backed) demand deposits issued by banks. In the present analysis,
however, we will avoid dealing with random security yields by the expedient of assuming
that the alternative technology is purely deterministic. We make this assumption for two
reasons: First, this approach results in considerable simplification, without affecting the
nature of the main results. Second, as will be seen in a moment, in our model determinacy
 24 It may be useful to think of this single firm as being owned in common by members
of the currently—investing generation.

                                              24
in security returns allows for the creation of security—backed assets that are perfect sub-
stitutes for bank demand deposits in consumers' portfolios. This perfect substitutability
between the principal financial assets available to savers will permit us to shift the focus
of the analysis from traditional issues concerning the special role of bank liabilities to the
question that most concerns us here: the special role of bank—intermediated credit.25

     As we have noted, the public observability of the alternative technology implies that
there is no barrier to the direct issuance of firm securities to consumers. There remains the
problem, however, that the security is a claim to an investment that pays off only after two
periods, while a fraction   of consumers will want to consume one period after investment.
There are a number of possible institutional arrangements that could address this problem.
For example, individual consumers could combine purchases of securities with the storage
of endowment. After the revelation of types, Type I's would be willing to trade their shares
to Type II's (say, at a prespecified price) in exchange for the Type H agents' storage. Type
II's would then consume the proceeds of all the firm's investments in the second period
of life. A similar result could be obtained if the firms stored as well as invested in the
alternative technology.
    A difficulty with purely intra-generational solutions to the liquidity problem is that
they imply the perpetual existence of storage in the economy, which may be inefficient;
a similar problem would arise in the banking sector, if bankers only lived two periods.
In symmetry with our assumptions about the banking sector, therefore, we introduce a
new class of infinitely—lived agents, capable of trading with multiple generations. These
new agents are called brokers. Brokers intermediate funds between households and firms,
but they do not perform any monitoring. Rather, their function is to pool liquidity risk.
Brokers issue liabilities to newly born consumers in exchange for endowment; they invest
this endowment in storage and firm securities. Because there is no uncertainty in firm
returns, without loss of generality we can assume that brokers' liabilities are in the form of
demand deposits, i.e., broker liabilities and bank liabilities will be perfect substitutes.26

  25 The emphasis of most analyses on bank liabilities rather than bank assets derives
from the traditional concern with the quantity of the medium of exchange. For further
discussion, see Section 5.
 26 Alternatively, brokers could set themselves up as mutual funds that pay a first—period
dividend of consumption and permit an ex—dividend trading of shares (consumption goods

                                              25
     We assume that brokers have the same preferences as bankers, except that they do
not have access to a monitoring technology, nor do they receive an endowment each period.
Thus, they will not invest in the uncertain, monitoring—intensive projects used by banks.
The issue of brokers' risk preferences is irrelevant, since their only option is to acquire
assets with certain returns. As with bankers before, we normalize the number of brokers
at unity.
     So that brokers may have a non—trivial economic role in the model, we will assume
banks do not have access to the alternative technology. That is, banks may neither ac-
quire firm securities directly, nor may they acquire them indirectly by buying deposits
from brokers. (This may be thought of as resulting from a legal restriction that separates
commercial and investment banking. Without this assumption, banks would intermediate
all investment in the economy.) It turns out that this assumption has only minor effects
on the real equilibrium allocation, e.g., on the distribution of resources between the two
technologies; and, in fact, it makes the calculation of the equilibrium marginally more dif-
ficult. The advantage of preserving the distinction between banking and brokerage is that
it will make it easier to use the model to study phenomena such as reserve requirements
and interest rate ceilings that affect the banking and non—banking sectors differentially.
Also, by restricting banks away from the alternative technology, we gain the expositional
advantage of not having here to re—solve the bank's optimization problem to include the
possibility of making alternative—sector investments.

    Given the prohibition against bank investment in the alternative technology and the ar-
gument that consumers will not buy firm securities directly, it follows that broker purchases
of firm securities each period will equal the total investment in the alternative technology,
I. Further, since brokers have no capital of their own, the endowment available to them for
investment or storage each period is precisely equal to the number of deposits they issue,
D. Let St the storage by the broker at t. The broker then faces the following resource
constraint in each period:
                                          +=                                            (4.2)

for stock) among their investors. With no uncertainty (in either investment returns or the
rate of depositor withdrawal), this arrangement is isomorphic to the issuance of demand
deposits.

                                             26
       Let: t be the flow of profits accruing to the broker each period; R the dividend at t
per unit of investment made at t — 2, paid by the firm; and , and the rate of return to
households on broker deposits acquired at t and held for one and two periods respectively.
The flow of profits to the broker is

                                = RI— +             —
                                                        a_jbt_i — (1   —
                                                                           a)_2.Ot_2                    (4.3)

The first two terms on the right hand side reflect the broker's revenues from securities
purchases and storage, while the last two terms reflect his net obligations.
       Note that we are asserting that brokers, as well as bankers, can expect with certainty
.    i..__.. ..
                  L-uecLIL,
                              :. —   ..
                                 )eL-Lou .,   4 L1 lULL a
                                              —
                                                            ot
                                                            : ue}
                                                               -  _.i
                                                                .L..               . — i ......i
                                                                                          .LLU
                                                                                        .1.
                                                                                                   ..


1—a      of those made at t — 2. As was discussed above in the context of an economy with
only banking, this assertion is legitimate either if we assume that each broker (and banker)
has depositors representable by a measurable portion of the real line; or, alternatively, if
we allow brokers and bankers to co-insure each other against withdrawal risk.27
       The broker must be able to pay the returns promised to depositors. Thus the following
non-negativity constraint on profits restricts the broker's decisions:

                                                        fr 0.                                           (4.4)

       This restriction is analogous to the liquidity constraint (2.6) faced by bankers. An
important difference is that because the broker's earnings are certain and he faces no
informational problems, he needs only to ensure that his actual profits are non—negative.
In contrast, the banker (because of the agency problem created by asymmetric information
and uncertain project outcomes) must satisfy his liquidity constraint even under the worst
possible portfolio outcomes.
       Since the brokers have the same preferences as bankers, the choice problem facing each
broker is:
                                                                                                        (4.5)
                                                  maxEo{$tt}
    27 Perfect insurance is possible here because of our assumption that there is no aggregate
liquidity risk. It should also be noted that these various intermediaries need not enter
formal insurance contracts. In this case, a "federal fund? market could perfectly perform
the insurance function.

                                                         27
subject to (4.1) through (4.4). Let              be the multiplier associated with the non-
negativity constraint on the broker's profits. Then the first order necessary conditions for
investments in firms and in storage are (after using (4.2) to eliminate b from the problem),
respectively
                   j9R(1+.X+i)      [cr(1+5a) +fl(1—cz)(1+.At+j)J                      (4.6)

                      (1+ A)    [a(i + A) + (1 —              + .X+t)J                 (4.7)

The left sides of (4.6) and (4.7) are the marginal benefits from purchasing a security (in
units of endowment) and from storage, respectively. The right side of each equation is the
value of the additional obligation to depositors implied by accepting a unit of endowment.
Equation (4.6) holds with equality in equilibrium, while (4.7) does so only if brokers are
storing.

4b. Equilibrium with Brokera and Bank.,
      We now describe the construction of general equilibrium in a model with both the
banking and non—banking sectors. The objective is to determine the allocation between
investment in the random two—period technology (which requires bank monitoring) and the
alternative technology (which is costlessly observable). We will use the term "size of the
banking sector" to mean the amount of investment (net of the bankers' endowments) in the
illiquid random technology, in order to focus on the investment flow which is dependent on
banks.
      Begin by noting that, in equilibrium, the sum of deposits that households make with
banks and brokers must equal the aggregate consumer endowment:2

                                      W=D+D.                                          (4.8)

Arbitrage ensures that banks and brokers must offer competitive returns. We have

Lemma 5. If depositors hold positive quantities of both broker and bank demand deposits,
then the competing deposit contracts must be identical. That is,

                                                                                      (4.9)
 28  For reasons discussed above, we can neglect the possibility that consumers will under-
take storage or invest in firms on their own.

                                            28
                                                                                       (4.10)

PROOF: (Sketch) First note that banks are indifferent among demand deposit contracts
(r', r2) that satisfy the arbitrage condition (2.13). Similarly, brokers are indifferent among
demand deposit contracts (p1, 2) which satisfy the analogous condition (4.6), which holds
with equality in equilibrium. Thus, as before, the demand deposit contracts which survive
in the market will be those that maximize the consumer's utility subject to the two arbitrage
constraints.
      When the consumer's utility maximization problem is solved (with the constraints
imposed), the following results arise: (1) If consumers hold both broker and bank demand
deposits in equilibrium, then the return on the broker's illiquid project initiated in period
t must equal the bank time deposit rate in t. Otherwise, one sector or the other could offer
a dominant deposit contract and consumers would not hold both types of deposits. (2)
In equilibrium, the marginal rate of transformation between the first and second—period
demand deposit rates must be the same in the brokerage and banking sectors. (3) If an
individual consumer holds both broker and bank demand deposits, then the allocation of
his endowment between the two types of deposits is indeterminate.
      Result (3) implies that a consumer who holds both types of deposits should be in-
different between a portfolio consisting only of bank deposits and one consisting only of
broker deposits. From (1) and (2), these two portfolios should offer the same return stream.
We know from Section 3 that the demand deposit contract preferred by a consumer with
a homogeneous portfolio is unique. Thus the deposit rates must be identical in the two
sectors.   I
      The rates of return that brokers can offer will vary inversely with aggregate level
of securities they acquire (that is, the aggregate amount of investment in the alternative
technology), which in turn depends on the amount of deposits they receive. Accordingly,
the dividend payout at t per unit of endowment invested at t — 2, R, is given by

                                   = g(I_) = f(It_2)/I_2                               (4.11)

Clearly R is decreasing in I, due to the concavity of the production function f(.). Further,
as stated in the discussion in the proof of Lemma 3, it must be the case that the safe
two—period returns in the brokerage and banking sectors must be equal29:

                                            =                                          (4.12)
 29   Recall   that the timing conventions are such that 14 and r_ are both returns to
investments initiated in t — 2.

                                             29
Thus, from (4.12), it follows that
                                         g(It) =                                       (4.13)

Equation (4.13) suggests the following scenario: a fall (rise) in the bank time deposit
rate will lead to an inflow (outflow) of resources to brokers, who in turn purchase (sell)
securities until that rate of return to investment in the alternative technology is again
equalized with rt. The non-negativity constraint on profits (i.e., the liquidity constraint)
determines whether brokers will have to set aside for storage some of their funds received
from depositors.

4c. The Steady State
     The steady state in the model with brokers and bankers is analogous to the earlier
case without brokers, firms, or the alternative technology. The main difference is that
now the supply of bank deposits is endogenous, since resources may flow between banking
sector investments and the alternative technology. From (4.11) and (4.12), we know that
investment in the latter sector varies inversely with the time deposit rate offered by banks.
As before, the time deposit rate, and hence the real allocation, is highly sensitive to the
quantity of bank capital and to the lower bound of the support of the returns to the bank's
illiquid projects.

Proposition 4: Let the function l(r) equal g'(r), as defined in (4.13). l(r) is the level
of investment in the alternative technology in equilibrium, as a function of the bank time
deposit rate. Further, define the function

                            (r) = [r(W — 1(r)) + zR1I(r)J/W                           (4.14)

q5(r) is positive and monotone increasing in r. Then if the quantity xR(1 + W6/W) is:
 (i) > (/(1 + 6)), then in the steady state both banks and brokers invest only in illiquid
     (two—period) projects; there is no storage. The time deposit rate equals R/(1 + 6).
     The allocation of investment between the banking and brokerage sectors is defined by
     the following equations:
                                     W+Wb =(1÷6)I÷1                                   (4.15)

                                       g(l) =111(1+6)                                 (4.16)

                                             30
(ii) (T/(1 + 6)) but (1/fl), then again in the steady state brokers and banks invest
     only in illiquid projects. However, now the time deposit rate and the allocation of
     investment are defined by the following relations:

                                      W + Wb = (1 + 6)1+ I                               (4.17)


                                      zR1(1 + Wb/W) =                                    (4.18)

                                              g(1)=r                                     (4.19)

(iii) < 41/fl), then in the steady state there will be investment in the liquid asset (storage).
     The time deposit rate equals 1/fl. The level of investment in the random two-period
    technology of banks is indeterminate. The following relations restrict the equilibrium:

                                 W+Wb(1+5)I+I+S+.                                        (4.20)

                               RtI + S (W — 1— )/(j9z(1 + 6))                            (4.21)

                                            g(l)=1/fl                                    (4.22)

                                               (I+.)/(flz)                               (4.23)


PROOF: See the appendix. I



    Proposition 4 says that the nature of the steady state when there are brokers and
banks hinges on the magnitude of a quantity that is proportional to Rt(1 + Wb/W). If the
minimum return to bank investments R and the dividend from bank capital relative to
consumer endowment Wb/W are very high, then in the steady state there is no storage in
the economy, and the time deposit rate and the amount of resources devoted to the banking
sector are at a maximum. For intermediate values of R and Wb/W there is still no steady—
state storage, but the bankers' time deposit rate and deposits received are somewhat less.
Finally, at low levels of R and Wb, there is perpetual storage, time deposit rates are at
their minimum level of 1/fl, and the amount of resources diverted away from banks into
the alternative technology is at a maximum.

                                              31
     For very low levels of R and/or Wb/W it is also possible that, as in the model without
 the alternative technology, there may be no banking in the steady state. Analogous to
 Proposition 2 above, we have

Proposition 5. Let D' be the maximum level of. deposits that brokers will accept when
r = 1/fl (i.e., the quantity of deposits that causes the liquidity constraint (4.23) to be
binding). If (a) zRL(1 + W6/W) < j'(l/fl), and               <   1it:              then in
the steady state banks will not invest depositor funds in the risky two—period assets.

PROOF: By reasoning analogous to that of the proof of Proposition 2, it is easy to verify
that if (a) and (b) hold, the steady state level of bank investment in the illiquid project I
would be less than Wb. Hence banks will not accept deposits and instead will simply invest
their own endowment in the two—period technology. As in the earlier case, the level of bank
capital in insufficient to provide the necessary insurance.


4d. Dynamic Stability
     Finally, we turn to a brief discussion of the dynamic stability of the model with brokers
and bankers. It is possible to derive an expression for the dynamic behavior of investment
in the random ilhiquid technology, analogous to (3.26):

    = [RI_l + Wb —                   (W —   b1) + 1(1a)P)(W — b)](1 + ö' (4.24)
where the level of deposits in the brokerage sector D varies inversely with r, for reasons
discussed earlier. (4.24) differs from (3.26) only in that the level of deposits in the banking
sector is now endogenous.

Proposition 6. The model with brokers and bankers is dynamically stable; i.e., it always
converges to a steady state as defined by Proposition 3.

PROOF: When the steady state involves no storage, the reasoning is virtually the same
as in the analogous part of Proposition 3. (It is helpful to recognize that 1) will vary
inversely with r.) When there is storage in the steady state, the time deposit rate jumps
immediately to 1/fl, for reasons discussed in Proposition 2. Hence the level of investment
in the alternative technology moves instantly to its steady state value. What happens to
I, S, and .' is within certain bounds indeterminate, for reasons discussed in Proposition 4.
I
                                             32
5. Some Applications
      Because the model of this paper is somewhat unusual, we have devoted much space to
the details of its operation. The cost of this is that, in the present paper, we will not be
able to develop completely the model's applications. The potential applications, however,
appear to be varied and important. Here we will just briefly describe some of the significant
possibilities:

     The relationship of financial stability to macroeconomic performance. In a descrip-
tive/historical paper, Bernanke argued that the collapse of the financial system in. the
1930's, and the resulting loss of intermediary services, played an important role in the gen-
eral decline in output and employment. One also hears considerable conjecture, in the news
media or informally from colleagues, that the precariousness of international or domestic
credit markets poses a significant threat to the contemporary economy. Yet there has been
little substantive economic analysis of how or whether a financial collapse could have large
real effects, or of how such effects could be averted.

      The model of our paper would seem to be a suitable framework for such an analysis. We
have already shown, for example, that the quantity of bank capital and the minimum gross
return to bank assets play a key role in determining the size of the banking system and the
equilibrium quantity of bank—intermediated credit. A financial collapse30 would emerge if
there were either a large deterioration of bank capital or a significantly unfavorable change
in the support of the distribution of bank investment returns. As follows from the analysis
of Sections 3 and 4, either of these occurrences would force a contraction of bank liabilities
and bank investment, with resources being diverted to the alternative sector.31 As actually
happened in the 1930's, the cost of funds to firms in the "safe" alternative sector would fall,
while monitoring—intensive projects which rely on bank credit might not be able to obtain
funds at all. Overall, the marginal efficiency of investment would fall. With eudogenous

 30  A financial collapse is here to be thought of as a sharp reduction in. the size of the
intermediary sector; it does not necessarily entail a bank run.
  31 Once
            changes in Wb or      are admitted, the question arises as to whether deposit
contracts will be written contingent on the values of these variables. The answer to this
question is relevant to whether existing depositors will receive their promised payouts and,
in some variants of this model, to whether bank runs occur. However, the ultimate effects of
changes in Wb and R on the real allocation of resources, with which we are most concerned,
is essentially independent of whether deposit contracts are contingent.

                                              33
labor supply in place of the fixed consumer endowments assumed in the present version of
the model, the decline in safe rates of return might have second—round effects on output,
as agents find that the return to working is lower.

     Our model is currently not rich enough to provide an endogenous explanation of why
bank capital or the return distribution might change unfavorably. However, it is con-
ceivable that this analysis might be extended to a yet more detailed setting, in which
these variables are related to aggregate economic activity (as was clearly the case, e.g.,
in the Great Depression). This extension would show how "fundamental" factors can ex-
plain major contractions in banking. Note that this is in contrast to the Diamond—Dybvig
approach to the study of financial collapse, in which market psychology ("sunspots") is
critical. However, with a bit of modification, our model (which has incorporated much of
the Diamond—Dybvig structure) could also be used to analyze financial crises which are
caused by sunspot-induced bank runs. Presumably, again the principal effects would be
the contraction of bank liabilities and bank credit, and the diversion of resources to the
alternative sector.

     Another possible modification of the model that would permit an interesting analysis
of bank runs and bank failures would be the inclusion of bank "bonding" in the demand
deposit contract, as discussed in Section 2 above (cf. Diamond). With bonding, incentive—
compatibility would no longer require that the bank be able to meet its obligations in
all contingencies. Thus, periodic bank failures would naturally occur. Inside information
about pending failures could again generate "fundamentally—based" runs (cf. Jacklin).
Again, such runs would have real allocative effects.

     The effects of banking regulation and de-regulatiorz. There is currently much deregu-
lation of the banking system, much of it in the name of microeconomic efficiency. How-
ever, most of the original regulation was imposed on macroeconomic, not microeconomic,
grounds. How does banking regulation relate to the performance of the macroeconomy?
The discussion of financial stability above suggests that certain regulations, such as bank
capital requirements, deposit insurance, and the necessary monitoring that deposit insur-
ance brings, may be macroeconomically justified. Some other bank regulations, such as
interest rate ceilings, probably are (were) not justified, since they distort the allocation

                                            34
of investment without visibly contributing to financial stability. 32 Our model would be
useful, for example, in studying the steady—state and dynamic effects of interest rate ceil-
ings. While this analysis might involve some complexities, we would expect many of the
qualitative implications of binding rate ceilings to resemble those of inadequate bank cap-
ital. In particular, it should be possible to generate in our model the "disintermediation"
process (as occurred in the U.S. in 1966, 1973, etc.), in which the restriction of bank deposit
rates below equilibrium levels causes a reallocation from bank to non—bank investments.
Since disintermediation lowers the return to savers in the economy, it seems clear that this
phenomenon should have real macroeconomic effects.
     The monetarj transmission mechanism. The means by which central bank OiiCY
affects the economy, if it indeed it does affect the economy, is one of the basic questions
of macroeconomics. Researchers have addressed this question in a number of ways. The
traditional, and most familiar, analysis of central bank policy focuses on the quantity of
the medium of exchange, arguing that the central bank can affect the economy only insofar
as it affects this quantity. The liability side of the bank balance sheet receives special
attention in this approach, because demand deposits are a large part of conventionally—
defined money.
     We certainly do not wish to claim that the quantity of the medium of exchange is
without significance. However, as originally argued by Gurley and Shaw, the traditional
approach is less relevant, the greater the number of substitutes for conventionally—defined
money in consumers' portfolios.33 An alternative to the traditional approach, and the
one taken by this paper, is to take into account bank assets as well as bank liabilities:
In particular, our model eliminates any "specialness" of bank liabilities in order to focus
on the possible non—substitutability of bank and non—bank credit. (Our paper is thus in
the spirit of, e.g., Blinder and Stiglitz.) In this alternative framework, "monetary policy"
(e.g., the manipulation of reserve requirements) matters to real activity because it affects
the extent of financial intermediation, not primarily because it affects the quantity of the
medium of exchange. This distinction may be of practical importance to the conduct of

 32 For an opposing view, see Bruce Smith (1984).
    For example, Hester (1981) argues that the numerous money substitutes that have
resulted from ongoing financial innovation have made dubious the notion that regulating
monetary aggregates is useful or even feasible.

                                             35
monetary policy; for example, in the choice of intermediate targets.
     It should be pointed out that there are several ways to introduce monetary policy into
our framework, and that the conclusions which are drawn may depend heavily on the chosen
specification. A particularly important modelling decision is whether to treat the central
bank as controlling the nominal or the real quantity of bank reserves. Nominal reserve
control means that the central bank issues a fixed number of "dollars" to be held as legal
reserves against nominal quantities of deposits. In this case, changes in the aggregate price
level can make the existing quantity of reserves consistent with any level of real deposits
or loans. Under these circumstances, open—market operations (for example) will have no
significant real effects.34 Alternatively, under a regime of real reserve control, the central
bank is to be thought of as issuing a fixed number of "permits", which are required to be
held for a bank to accept a unit of deposit measured in real (resource) terms. Real reserve
control may be the appropriate assumption, for example, in a Keynesian setting, or when
deposits and loans are issued in nominal terms and are not indexed; it is also isomorphic to
the policy of direct control of bank credit, which has been experienced in recent episodes
in the U.S. and U.K. With real reserve control, open—market operations will affect the real
size of the banking sector and, as should be obvious by now, will change real allocations in
the economy.35

     Ultimately, whether monetary policy works primarily through bank assets or bank
liabilities is an empirical issue. The early empirical returns have not been particularly fa-
vorable to the bank credit story; for example, Stephen King (1984) found stronger reduced—
form correlations between demand deposits and output than between commercial and indus-
trial loans made by banks and output. However, because both demand deposits and bank


 '
credit presumably have large endogenous components (see R. King and Plosser (1984)),

     Changes in reserve requirements will still affect real allocations, however.
     A possibly disturbing implication of our model with real reserve control is that a
reduction of reserves by the central bank will, by re-directing resources from the banking
to the non—banking sector, lower interest rates in the non—banking sector. However, this
result is to some degree artificial, being generated by our assumptions that endowments and
saving are fixed, and that the fall in investment in the banking sector does not affect the
supply of inputs or the demand for output in the non—banking sector. A related implication
of the model, which we believe is more robust and more realistic, is that contractionary
open—market operations will increase the differential in the expected return to investment
between the banking and non-banking sectors.

                                             36
this finding does not settle definitively how an exogenous shock to deposits or credit will
affect the economy. Moreover, Stephen King only considers commercial banks; our analy-
sis suggests that a broader set of financial intermediaries might be relevant. In any case,
permitting a sharper formulation of hypotheses about the transmission mechanism is an
important goal of the present line of research.


6. Conclu3ion
     This paper is the beginning of what may be an extended research program, in which
we will try to gain a better understanding of the role of financial intermediaries in the
determination of macroeconomic equilibrium. Our work is similar to much recent research
on banking in that we are attempting to move away from the conception of financial in-
stitutions as a "veil", towards a view which acknowledges that these institutions provide
important services to the economy. This paper differs from much previous research, how-
ever, in conducting the analysis in general rather than partial equilibrium; thus we are
able to relate the performance of the banking sector to aggregate variables such as interest
rates and the sectoral distribution of investment. In future work we hope to extend the
general equilibrium aspect of this or similar models even further—to include, for example,
the endogenous determination of labor supply and of the supply of bank capital.
     We will close by raising a question that has occurred to us, as follows: Whatever the
historical relevance of this analysis, is it not possible that the widespread innovation in
financial markets currently taking place will make this paper irrelevant to the study of the
modern economy? Since our analysis relies heavily on the assumption that intermediary
and non—intermediary assets are imperfectly substitutable, it is particularly important to
ask whether innovations such as improved information technology and new financial instru-
merits will eliminate over time the special roles played by intermediaries in certain credit
markets. For example, will the introduction of instruments like mortgage—backed securi-
ties eventually decouple completely the fortunes of traditional mortgage lenders and of the
construction industry? if so, the "bank credit" approach to the monetary transmission
mechanism, for example, will no longer be of practical interest.
    This question is too big to address in a really satisfactory way here, but we will essay
the following: The current perception that financial innovation is fundamentally changing

                                            37
the nature of the role that intermediaries play in credit markets is, in our view, somewhat
overstated. Consider the mortgage—backed securities currently being issued by banks and
savings and loans, for example. First, the existence of these securities does not imply that
the agency costs of intermediation are somehow being overcome: The mortgages used as
backing for these bonds are all insured against default, primarily by the Federal govern-
ment.36 Thus, as with the introduction of deposit insurance, the most significant real
change is that the responsibility for monitoring intermediary actions has devolved from
intermediary creditors to the government. Second, these securities do not permit the com-
plete separation of mortgage origination and mortgage ownership, as is sometimes made
out. Mortgage bonds are considered good risks because they are typically backed by ama-
ture" mortgages for which collateral averages from 125% to 160% of face value.37 From the
point of view of the purchasers of these securities, this high rate of collateralization performs
a buffer role and thus substitutes for bank capital. However, since most loans made by in-
termediaries are not so highly collateralized, at least during the period following issuance,
the potential for decoupling loan issuance and ownership is necessarily limited. (Indeed, in
order to sell off loans, intermediaries have appeared willing either explicitly or implicitly to
guarantee them against default.38) Furthermore, to the extent that intermediaries commit
their most highly collateralized loans as backing to securities, the agency problem with
respect to regular depositors (or the deposit insurance agency) is exacerbated, and their
need for capital on that account (at least under appropriate regulation) is increased. Thus
mortgage—backed securities, although a new source of funds for mortgage intermediaries,
do not eliminate the agency costs of intermediation or change the basic economics of the
situation.39
     It is at least possible, we conclude, that the analysis of this paper will remain directly
relevant despite the sweeping changes occurring in financial markets. If not, then at least
the paper may prove helpful in understanding the effects of these changes as they occur.


    Dennis(1983, p. 28).
    Ibid.
 38 See the Economist, May 11, 1985. (We thank Stephen King for this reference.)
    For intermediaries other than mortgage lenders, there would seem to be even less
scope for the development of secondary markets, since the collateral backing the typical
non—mortgage intermediary asset is usually more difficult to value than is real estate.

                                              38
                            Appendix. Proofs of some propositions


Proof of Pro position 3.
     We consider in turn the three possible cases defined in Proposition 1.
     Case (i). From Proposition 1, in this case banks only invest in illiquid projects in the
steady state and the time deposit rate equals /(1 + 5). Define I by:

                           = [RL1_l +     —   (1 — a)p(F — 1)
                                               a + p(1 — a)
                                                                W]/(1 + 5)             (A.1)


with In = In and where F =           It is clear from (3.25), (3.26L and (3.28) that L L for
all t, but that the steady states of the difference equations for I and I are identical (since
r = F in the steady state). Thus if I converges, so does I. Since the coefficient of I_ in
(A.1) is between zero and unity, 1 converges toward its steady state. The steady state of
(A.1) (and thus also of (3.26)) exceeds (W + Wb)/(1 + 5). 1 thus increases until it absorbs
all of the economy's endowment. The same behavior must therefore be exhibited by I.
     Correspondingly, the steady state value of the shadow price .\ in this case must be
zero. The terminal condition requires that the initial value of ) be below the staeady state
value , since the difference equation for ..\ is unstable.
     Case (ii). In this case, according to Proposition 1, in the steady state banks only
invest in the illiquid asset and the time deposit rate equals xRL(1 + Wb/W). The proof of
convergence is identical to the previous case, except now set F = zRt(1 + Wb/W) in the
definition of I. (Note that, from (3.26), (3.27), and the terminal condition that \ = 0,
that rt is always less than F; hence I I.) In this case, the steady states of the difference
equations for I and I are both equal to W + Wb, which is exactly the number of illiquid
projects that are funded when all resources are devoted to the illiquid asset.
     Case (iii). In this case, zRt(1 + W5/W) < 1/6. Assume also that Wb/W satisfies
condition (b) from Proposition 2, so that banking arises. From Proposition 1, in this case
in the steady state there is investment in the liquid asset and the time deposit rate equals
1/fl. Since storage takes place perpetually, the steady state value of the shadow price
) is positive. Since the difference equation for ) (3.27) is unstable, .X must jump to its
steady state value in the initial period. By the same logic used in the proof of Lemma 2,

                                              39
 it follows that the time deposit rate also jumps immediately to its steady state value 1/fl.
 The difference equation for I can now be written

                           = [RI_1 + W —                      W]/(1 + 6)                (A.2)

 where r = 1/fl. (A.2) is a stable difference equation.


 Proof of Proposition 4.
     The reasoning follows closely the proof of Proposition 1. It is helpful to recall, from
Lemma 2, that the time deposit rate lies within the closed interval [1/fl, /(1 + 6)].
    in the steady state without storage, bankers must be able to satisfy their liquidity
constraints with S = 0. Therefore, from (2.6) and (4.8), the following condition must hold:

                                   RI (ar' + (1 — a)r2)(W — I)                          (A.3)

                I
Note that W — is the quantity of bank deposits. Substituting (3.6), (3.8), and (4.15) into
(A.3), we obtain
                                   Rt(W + Wb —1) r(W —      I)/z                        (A.4)

where 1/fl r /(1 + 6). Rearranging (A.4) yields

                            zR(1 + Wb/W) [r(W 1) + xRtIJ/W                              (A.5)

Since 1 is an inverse function of the deposit rate, we can write (A.5) as

                                       zRt(1 + W6/W) #(r)                               (A.6)

where the function ,(.)    is   as defined above.
     When the left side of (A.6) strictly exceeds q(/(1 + 6)), as in case (i), it follows
that the liquidity constraint for banks is not binding in the steady state. Further, the
steady—state liquidity constraint for brokers, which can be written generally as

                                   r1-- r(1+)/(z(1+5))                                  (A.7)

is always non—binding at = 0 for any admissible value of r. (Recall that z(1 + 6) > 1.)
Hence there is no storage in the economy. The time deposit rate adjusts to equate the

                                                    40
expected marginal benefits and costs from investing in the various illiquid projects. As in
case (i) of Proposition 1, (2.15) holds with equality, which implies r =       /(1 + 8).
     If, however, the left side of (A.6) is less than (i/(i+6)), the bank's liquidity constraint
will be violated if r =   /(1 + 8). In this case the time deposit rate is determined by the
liquidity constraint (A.6), given that the solution for r   is   greater than or equal to 1/fl. As
in case (ii) of Proposition 1, banks do not invest in illiquid assets, since they can satisfy
their liquidity constraints without doing so. Even though the expected return to investing
in the illiquid project exceeds the time deposit rate in equilibrium, ban.ks are limited from
further investment by liquidity considerations. Also, again brokers do not need to store.
     When xftt(I + W6/W) < (1/fl), banks must invest in the liquid asset (store) in the
steady state in order to satisfy the liquidity constraint, since r may not fall below 1/j3.
Indeed r will equal 1/fl in this case, according to Lemma 2. It follows directly that in order
for banks to satisfy the liquidity constraint in this case, equation (4.21) must hold.
    In this case, unlike cases (i) and (ii), brokers may invest in liquid assets as well (al-
though they need not). This is because, when the time deposit rate equal 1/fl, it follows
from the broker's first order conditions that he is indifferent between investing in the two—
period alternative technology and storing, so long as the liquidity constraint (4.23) is not
violated. (It will not be violated when = 0.)
    The real allocation, however, is not completely determined in case (iii). It is true that
investment in the alternative technology is fixed by the condition that the real return on
this investment equal 1/fl (equation (4.22)). However, the exact breakdown between the
two sectors of investment in the liquid asset, and the amount of investment by banks in
their illiquid asset, is indeterminate. At one extreme, there is no storage by brokers. In this
case, bankers adjust I and S to satisfy their respective liquidity constraints. At the other
extreme, bankers do not store; instead, they reduce the amount of deposits to the point
where they can satisfy the liquidity constraint without investing in liquid assets. Brokers
accept these deposits and invest the funds in liquid assets, provided they do not violate
their own liquidity constraint. It may be verified that, for the case where r = 1/fl, bank
investment in the two—period asset is at a minimum in the former extreme case, and at a
maximum in the latter.


                                              41
                          Figure 1

   Relationship Between the Steady State Time Deposit Rate r
     and the Ratio of Bank to Household Endowment Wb/W


          r




/(1+o)



   1/fl




                  —1
                                              W6/W
                                      I
                                 (R1z)' — 1
                           1+5
                              Figure 2

Relationship Between the Steady State Ratio of Investment to Household
Endowment I'/W and the Ratio of Bank to Household Endowment Wb/W


                I-lw


   W+W6
   (1 + ö)W


                                       I

                                       I

                                       I
      V,6
   (1 + 6)W                            I

                                       I
            0
                        k                        W6/W
                                       I
                                           —1




 k—
  —   (1+6R)p(1—a)(1—fl)
       (R'—5) fi(a+p(1—a))
                                    References
1. BERNANKE, BEN S., "Nonmonetary Effects of the Financial Crisis in the Propagation
      of the Great Depression," American Economic Review Vol. 73 (June 1983), pp. 257-
       276.
2. BLINDER, ALAN S. AND JOSEPH E. STIGLITZ, "Money, Credit Constraints, and
       Economic Activity," American Economic Review Vol. 73 (May 1983), pp. 297-302.
3. BOYD, JOHN H. AND EDWARD C. PRESCOTT, "Financial Intermediaries," Un-
      published, Minneapolis Federal Reserve Bank and University of Minnesota, March
       1983.
4. BRYANT, JOHN, "A Model of Reserves, Bank Runs, and Deposit Insurance," Journal
      of flanking arid Finance Vol. 4 (1980), pp. 335-344.
5. CONE, KENNETH, Regulation of Depository Financial Intermediaries, PhD Thesis,
       Stanford University, 1982.
6. DENNIS, MARSHALL W., Mortgage Lending: Fundamentals and Practices, Reston,
       Va.: Reston, 1983.
7. DIAMOND, DOUGLAS, "Financial Intermediation and Delegated Monitoring," Review
      of Economic Studies Vol. 51 ( 1984), pp. 393-414.
8. DIAMOND, DOUGLAS W., AND PHILIP DYBVIG, "Banic Runs, Deposit Insurance,
      and Liquidity," Journal of Political Economy Vol. 91 (June 1983), pp. 401-4 19.
9. FAMA, EUGENE F., "What's Different About Banks?," Journal of Monetary Eco-
       nomics Vol. 15 (January 1985), pp. 29-40.
10. FISCHER, STANLEY, "A Framework for Monetary and Banking Analysis,' Economic
       Journal Vol. 93 (March 1983), pp. 1-16.
11. GURLEY, JOHN G. AND E. S. SHAW, "Financial Intermediaries and the Savings-
      Investment Process," Journal of Finance Vol. (May 1956), pp. 259-275.
12. HESTER, DONALD. "Innovations and Monetary Control," Brookings Papers on Eco-
      nomic Activity   ( 1981: 1), pp. 141-189.
13. JACKLIN, CHARLES, Essays in Banking, PhD Thesis, Stanford Graduate School of
       Business, 1985.
14. JENSEN, MICHAEL C. AND WILLIAM H. MECKLING, "Theory of the Firm: Man-
       agerial Behavior, Agency Costs, and Ownership Structure," Journal of Financial
       Economics Vol. 3 (October 1976), pp. 305-360.
15. KING, STEPHEN R., "Monetary Transmission: Through Bank Loans, or Bank Lia-
       bilities?," Unpublished, Stanford University and NBER, February 1985.
16. KING, ROBERT AND CHARLES PLOSSER, "Money, Credit, and Prices in a Real
       Business Cycle," American Economic Review Vol. 74 (June 1984), pp. 363-380.
17. MCKINNON, RONALD I., Money and Capital in Economic Development, Washing-
      ton: Brookings Institution, 1973.
18. PATINKIN, DON, "Financial Intermediaries and the Logical Structure of Monetary
      Theory, American Economic Review Vol. 51 (March 1961), pp. 95-116.
19. PELTZMAN. SAM, "Capital Investment in Commercial Banking and Its Relation
      to Portfolio Regulation," Journal of Political Economy Vol. 78 (January/February
       1970), PP. 1-26.
20. SMITH. BRUCE D., "Private Information, Deposit Insurance Rates, and the 'Sta-
       bility' of the Banking System," Journal of Monetary Economics Vol. 14 (November
       1984), pp. 293-317.
21. TOWNSEND, ROBERT M., "Financial Structure and Economic Activity," American
      Economic Review Vol. 73 (December 1983), pp. 895-911.
