NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

BIRTH RATES AND BORDER CROSSINGS:
LATIN AMERICAN MIGRATION TO THE US, CANADA, SPAIN, AND THE UK
Gordon H. Hanson
Craig McIntosh
Working Paper 16471
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16471

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2010

We thank Gordon Dahl, Paul Menchik, Caglar Ozden, Dean Yang, and seminar participants at various
universities for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Gordon H. Hanson and Craig McIntosh. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Birth Rates and Border Crossings: Latin American Migration to the US, Canada, Spain, and
the UK
Gordon H. Hanson and Craig McIntosh
NBER Working Paper No. 16471
October 2010, Revised October 2010
JEL No. F2,J61
ABSTRACT
We use census data for the US, Canada, Spain, and UK to estimate bilateral migration rates to these
countries from 25 Latin American and Caribbean nations over the period 1980 to 2005. Latin American
migration to the US is responsive to labor supply shocks, as predicted by earlier changes in birth cohort
sizes, and labor demand shocks associated with balance of payments crises and natural disasters. Latin
American migration to Canada, Spain, and the UK, in contrast, is largely insensitive to these shocks,
responding only to civil and military conflict. The results are consistent with US immigration policy
toward Latin America (which is relatively permissive toward illegal entry) being mediated by market
forces and immigration policy in the other countries (which favor skilled workers and asylum seekers,
among other groups) insulating them from labor market shocks in the region.
Gordon H. Hanson
IR/PS 0519
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093-0519
and NBER
gohanson@ucsd.edu
Craig McIntosh
IR/PS 0519
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093-0519
ctmcintosh@ucsd.edu

Puerto Rico . . .
Always the hurricanes blowing,
Always the population growing.
And the babies crying,
And the bullets flying.
I like to be in America!
Stephen Sondheim, Westside Story

1 INTRODUCTION
Latin America and the Caribbean have among the highest emigration rates in the
developing world. In 2000, 3.8% of the region’s population was living in high-income
countries in North America, Europe, or Asia, compared with emigration rates of 3.0% in
the Middle East and North Africa, 2.5% in Eastern Europe and Central Asia, 0.7% in
Asia and the Pacific, and 0.6% in Sub-Saharan Africa (see Table 1). 1 While Mexican
migration to the US captures most of the attention, it is by no means the only significant
flow in the region. There are also sizable flows from the Dominican Republic, El
Salvador, and Haiti to the US; Barbados, Jamaica, and Trinidad and Tobago to Canada
and the UK; and Bolivia, Colombia, and Ecuador to Spain (Fajnzylber and Lopez, 2008).
In this paper, we examine the contribution of demographic changes, geographic
distance, and economic and political shocks in driving emigration from Latin America
and the Caribbean. What makes the region an interesting case is not just the scale of
emigration, but also its concentration. As of 2000, just four countries – the US, Canada,
the UK, and Spain – were host to 75.4% of the region’s emigrants (see Table 2). The
concentration of migration flows to proximate high-income countries (the US) and
countries with a shared colonial heritage (Canada, the UK, Spain) helpfully simplifies
1

All rates are for emigration from developing countries in a particular region to high-income countries.
Among developing-country regions, total emigration rates are highest in Eastern Europe and Central Asia
(as seen in Table 1), largely because of the exodus of individuals (including ethnic Russians) from Former
Soviet Union countries to Russia following the breakup of the Soviet Union.

1

both the measurement and analysis of international labor movements. 2
Among the four main destination countries, there are sharp differences in how
immigration policy treats prospective entrants with regards to skill, refugee status, and
country of origin. These differences are important in light of the low skill levels of most
Latin American emigrants, the propensity of the region for civil and military conflict, and
the variation in countries’ colonial history. In the US, nearly half of immigration from
Latin America is undocumented, with government enforcement only partially impeding
the inflow of illegal migrants (Hanson, 2006). 3 Permissiveness toward illegal entry
creates ample opportunity for low skilled immigration. Canada’s remoteness keeps most
of its immigration legal. 4 The country uses a point system to regulate labor inflows,
which heavily favors skilled applicants, while also allotting slots to refugees and asylees.
In 2000, visas to skilled workers accounted for 58% of legal immigrant inflows in
Canada, compared with 13% in the US (OECD, 2004). Outside of EU members, the UK
restricts immigration, with exceptions for skilled workers, family members of UK
citizens, certain Commonwealth citizens, and asylum seekers. The country also has low
levels of illegal immigration compared to the US. 5 In Spain, large scale immigration is a
recent phenomenon. Agreements with former colonies have enabled individuals from
these countries to enter Spain, with many ultimately obtaining work permits. 6
Surging emigration from Latin America is due in part to the high frequency of

2

Current and former French and Dutch territories in Latin America and the Caribbean (French Guiana,
Guadalupe, Martinique, Netherlands Antilles, and Suriname) have high emigration rates to France and the
Netherlands, but are too small to obtain age-specific emigration rates, as is necessary for our analysis.
3
Throughout the paper we use Latin America to refer to Latin America and the Caribbean.
4
In 2002, for instance, Canada apprehended 9,500 illegal immigrants, compared to over 1 million in the US
(OECD, 2004).
5
In 2001, the UK found and removed 45,000 illegal immigrants from within its borders (OECD, 2004).
6
As distinct from the US, Spain has frequently regularized illegal immigrants in the country, facilitating
their access to work permits (Dolado and Velasquez, 2007).

2

negative wage shocks in the region. Over the last three decades, much of Latin America
has experienced a demographic bulge, with large numbers of young people coming of
working age and entering the labor force (Birdsall, Kelley, and Sinding, 2001). One
would expect this increase in the region’s relative labor supply to have put downward
pressure on local wages and raised the incentive to emigrate. In some Latin American
countries, birth rates have begun to drop sharply (Bongaarts and Watkins, 1996), but in
others they are declining only slowly. While fertility rates in Mexico are on track to drop
below replacement level by 2020 (Tuiran et al., 2002), they remain high in much of
Central America and the Andes. Cross-national differences in fertility are useful
empirically for isolating the effects of labor supply on emigration.
Macroeconomic instability associated with balance of payments crises, civil and
military conflict, and natural disasters are other factors reducing wages and contributing
to emigration from Latin America. While there is extensive literature on how such
shocks have affected the region’s growth performance (e.g., Collier et al., 2003; Raddatz,
2007; Edwards, 2008), much less work examines their importance for labor movements
in the hemisphere. Our approach is to estimate how labor supply and demand shocks at
the time a cohort enters the labor market affect initial and subsequent emigration. Since
individuals are most mobile when they are young, shocks at the time of labor market
entry may have long lasting effects on migration. Much of the work on the relationship
between income and international migration considers the contemporaneous correlation
between living standards and labor flows. 7 By identifying how shocks to young cohorts
affect migration over the mobile period of their working lives, we provide a dynamic

7

See, e.g., Clark, Hatton, and Williamson (2007), Mayda (2009), and Ortega and Peri (2009), and Hanson
(2009) for a review of recent literature.

3

account of how events in origin countries affect international migration. Linking changes
in labor supply to particular birth cohorts requires that we aggregate across skill levels (in
order to successfully track origin country cohorts across both time and national borders),
preventing us from accounting for migrant self-selection, the subject of much recent
literature (see, e.g., Hanson, 2010). The payoff is that we are able to examine
international migration over several decades and exploit sizable cross-country variation in
how the demographic transition to lower fertility affects subsequent labor supply growth.
Related literature includes Hanson and McIntosh (2010), who find that variation
in labor supply across Mexican regions accounts for nearly a third of regional variation in
Mexican emigration rates, and Clark, Hatton, and Williamson (2007), who find that
countries with larger populations of young people have higher rates of legal migration to
the US. Because both papers examine a single destination – the United States – they are
silent on how variation in receiving country immigration policy affects the sensitivity of
migration to events in sending countries, a feature that is central to our analysis. Mayda
(2009) and Ortega and Peri (2009) find that tightening immigration policy reduces
bilateral migration flows. Still unknown is how immigration policy affects the
responsiveness of migration flows to different types of shocks.
To preview our results, we find that migration rates to the US are more sensitive
to fluctuations in relative birth cohort size (i.e., to labor supply shocks), but less sensitive
to origin-country civil conflict than is migration to the other destinations. The raw effect
of distance as well as its interaction with birth cohort size is most pronounced in
migration to the US. The findings suggest that migration from Latin America to the
United States is responsive to labor market shocks that affect origin country relative

4

wages. The responsiveness and distance dependence of US labor inflows to economic
shocks in Latin America reflects the importance of illegal labor movements in regional
migration to the US, as these flows are largely mediated by market mechanisms.
The results for migration to Canada, the UK, and Spain are quite different, with
migration rates to the countries being uncorrelated with origin country labor supply.
Further, origin country balance of payments crises and natural disasters are associated
with lower migration to Canada, the UK, and Spain. The one origin country shock that is
associated with higher migration to these countries is civil and military unrest, which may
facilitate applications for asylum. The results suggest that given the preference of
Canada and the UK for skilled workers and asylum seekers, shocks whose only effect is
to put downward pressure on origin country wages do little to increase Latin American
migration to these destinations. Indeed, given that negative wage shocks may make it
harder for individuals in Latin America to acquire skills (as would be the case if the
financing of education is budget constrained), it is not surprising that they tend to reduce
migration to countries that favor skilled workers.
In section 2, we present a simple dynamic model of migration from a given origin
country to multiple destinations. In section 3, we describe data on labor supply,
migration rates, economic and political shocks, and other variables. In section 4, we
present the empirical results. And in section 5, we offer concluding remarks.

2 THEORY
To understand emigration from Latin America, we construct a model of national
labor markets that are linked by migration. In each economy, there is one sector of
production. Workers from Latin America are differentiated by age but are not otherwise

5

distinguished by their skill. 8 We allow for costs in labor mobility, following models of
internal migration in Blanchard and Katz (1992) and Borjas (2006).
In the origin country, the national wage for age group i at time t is given by,
(1)

Wit = X it ( Lit )η ,

where Wit is the wage, Xit is a labor-demand shifter, Lit is the population of working-age
adults in the country, and η ≤ 0 is the inverse labor-demand elasticity. The supply of
labor in the origin country is the population of group i that has not emigrated, such that
(2)

L=
Li 0 − M it
it

where Li0 is the pre-emigration population of group i and Mit is the number of individuals
in i that have left the country by period t. Putting (1) and (2) together,
(3)

Wit ln X it + η ln Li 0 − ηmit ,
ln=

where mit=Mit/Li0 is the fraction of group i that has moved abroad. 9 In equation (1), we
treat wages as though they are a function of labor supply in a single age cohort. In the
empirical estimation, we also account for the size of neighboring age cohorts.
An individual in the origin country has the option of staying at home or moving to
one of two possible destinations, country A or country B. In the year birth cohort i first
enters the labor market, the wage in country c is given by,
(4)

Wi 0c = X ic0 ( Lci 0 )η ,

where Xci0 is a labor-demand shifter, Lci0 is initial labor supply, and η is the inverse labordemand elasticity. In later periods, we assume the wage in country c is determined by
initial labor supply and subsequent innovations to labor demand, imposing the restriction
8

We ignore other aspects of skill because in order to measure net migration by age in Latin America we
need to track populations by characteristics which are invariant to time.
9
In (3), we utilize the approximation that, for small values of X/Y, ln(X+Y) ≈ lnX + Y/X.

6

that the impact of immigration on the destination country’s wage is negligible. It is
straightforward to extend the model to allow for adjustment in destination-country wages;
we suppress such adjustment solely to simplify the exposition.10
To allow for costs in the mobility of labor between countries, we assume that
migration from the origin country to destination-country c in any period t is an increasing
function of the lagged difference in wages between the two countries:
(5)

vitc =
σc ( ln Wi ,ct −1 − ln Wi ,t −1 − F c ) ,

where vitc = ∆M itc / Li 0 is the net emigration rate to country c for group i at t, σc ∈ [0,1] is

the supply elasticity (specific to the destination country), and Fc is a wage discount that
origin country nationals associate with living in country c. As long as σc is sufficiently

small, it will take multiple periods before migration succeeds in raising the origin country
wage to destination country levels. 11 In the empirical analysis, we will allow the
magnitude of the labor supply elasticity, σc, to depend on origin and destination country
characteristics, including distance and number of countries crossed, as a means of
capturing how immigration policy in or migration costs to the destination may affect the
responsiveness of bilateral migration to labor market shocks.
To solve the model, define the pre-migration effective wage differential between
the origin country and destination c as,
(6)

ωic0 =ln Wi 0c − ln Wi 0 − F c =η ln  ci 0 + ln xic0 − F c .

where ln=
 ci 0 ln Lci 0 − ln Li 0 is initial log relative labor supply and ln
=
xic0 ln X ic0 − ln X i 0 is

10

Allowing for destination-country wage adjustment changes the magnitude of the reduced-form
parameters in the emigration equation but does not change their sign. See Hanson and McIntosh (2010).
11
For a zero migration disamenity, the condition that migration does not cause wage equalization in one
period is that, ln=
Wi1 ln Wi 0 − ησc ( ln Wi 0c − ln Wi 0 ) < ln Wi 0c ⇔ 0 < 1 + ησc , which we assume holds.

7

initial log relative labor demand. The pre-migration wage difference is increasing in the
origin country’s relative labor supply (since η < 0) and decreasing in the origin country’s
relative labor demand. 12 Using (3), (5), and (6), we solve for the t = 0 emigration rate,
and then iterate forward, solving for the wage and emigration rate in each period. In an
appendix, we show that after dropping higher order terms (i.e., those that involve a
minimum of four-way interactions between the model parameters, all of which are
individually less than one in value) and using the approximation that (1+x)t ≈ 1+tx, the
net migration rate from the origin country to country A at time t can be written as,
(7)

vitA =σ AωiA0 1 + ησ A ( t − 1)  + ησ Aσ B ωiB0 ( t − 1) .

Plugging in the determinants of the initial wage differential in (6), we obtain,
(8)

𝐴
𝐴
[𝜃 𝐴 + (𝜃 𝐴 )2 (𝑡 − 1)] + [𝑙𝑛𝑥𝑖0
− 𝐹 𝐴 ][𝜎 𝐴 + 𝜎 𝐴 𝜃 𝐴 (𝑡 − 1)]
𝜈𝑖𝑡𝐴 = 𝑙𝑛ℓ𝑖0
𝐵
+𝑙𝑛ℓ𝐵𝑖0 𝜃 𝐵 𝜃 𝐴 (𝑡 − 1) + [𝑙𝑛𝑥𝑖0
− 𝐹 𝐵 ]𝜎 𝐵 𝜃 𝐴 (𝑡 − 1)

where θc = ησc < 0 . Equation (8) shows the key predictions of the theoretical

framework: emigration to country A is decreasing (increasing) in the relative size of
country A’s initial labor supply (demand) and increasing (decreasing) in the initial
relative labor supply (demand) of country B, where the effects of initial conditions
diminish as a cohort ages, owing to adjustment in wages in the origin country. Since the
dynamic wage adjustment terms (i.e., those that involve t) depend on the square of labor
supply and labor demand elasticities, their effect on attenuating the impact of initial labor
market conditions may be small (which empirical results will confirm). Similarly, since
the effect of labor market conditions in country B on migration to country A depends on

12

Here, we assume that labor demand is constant over time such that Xit=Xi0 and X*it=X*i0. It is easy to
generalize the model to allow for time-varying labor demand shocks, as in Hanson and McIntosh (2010)

8

the three-way product of labor demand and supply elasticities, it may also be small
(which empirical results will also confirm).
It is apparent in equation (8) that to examine the evolution of migration for a
given birth cohort we need to be able to track cohorts over time, preventing us from
accounting for time varying characteristics of individuals, such as education. Also
apparent is that equation (8) is missing the effects of past innovations to labor demand in
the source and destination countries on current migration flows. Allowing innovations to
labor demand to affect wages introduces into (8) a series of distributed lag terms in these
innovations (see note 12). In the estimation, we allow for such effects by including
measures of labor market shocks that occurred between the time a cohort comes of
working age and the current period.
Equation (8) is the basis for the empirical estimation. For individual birth cohorts
in Latin American and Caribbean origin countries, we examine the correlation between
the decadal migration rate to a specific destination country and initial relative labor
supply, initial relative labor demand, and subsequent innovations to labor demand.
Consistent with theory, we allow the responsiveness of migration to labor-market shocks
to vary across destination countries. By pooling data across cohorts, origins, destinations,
and time, we are able to include a rich set of fixed effects in the estimation to control for
unobserved shocks to migration. The fixed effects also help absorb variation in migration
disamenities and migration policy across countries.

3 DATA
The data we require for the estimation include measures of migration rates for
pairs of origin and destination countries, labor supply by birth cohort and country, and

9

measures of economic shocks for origin and destination countries.

3.1 Bilateral migration rates
To calculate bilateral migration rates we use the number of immigrants by age and
origin country in each destination county’s census count, and the size of the relevant birth
cohorts in the origin country, as measured by the World Development Indicators. The
bilateral net migration rate for a given birth cohort and origin-destination pair is then the
change in the stock of immigrants in that cohort from a particular origin country in a
particular destination, divided by the size of the original birth cohort in the origin. In all
regressions, the dependent variable is the annualized bilateral net migration rate for a
birth cohort over the relevant time period (in most cases the ten years between censuses).
For the US, we are able to measure age -specific stocks of immigrants from all but
the very smallest Latin American and Caribbean countries in 1980, 1990, 2000, and
2005, using data from decennial censuses and the American Communities Survey
(2005). 13 For Canada, we have similar measures from decennial censuses for 1981,
1991, and 2001, provided by Statistics Canada.
Data for the UK and Spain are more problematic. For the UK, we have country
specific immigration stocks aggregated by five year birth cohorts in 1981, 1991, and
2001, based on data provided by the UK Census Commission. For Spain, we have
similar data for 1981, 2001, and 2007 (the 1991 census reports region rather than country
of birth for many countries in the sample). The aggregation of immigration stocks into
five year birth cohorts for the UK and Spain means we have fewer observations on cohort
specific migration rates for these countries. A further problem is that the UK provides
13

We can measure immigrant stocks for the US in earlier years as well, but this is of no use since our data
on births do not begin until 1960 (meaning we cannot measure source-country labor supply before 1976).

10

incomplete data on immigration stocks for non-Commonwealth countries in the region, as
does Spain for countries that are not former colonies. Consequently, UK and Spanish
data are a mix of stocks for individual origin countries and aggregates of remaining
countries in the region. In both cases, the residual aggregates are very small in size,
indicating that few individuals from former Spanish colonies migrate to the UK or vice
versa. Because of the limited scope of the UK and Spanish data, we begin the analysis
using data for the US and Canada, for which we have nearly complete data on origin
countries, and then expand the sample to include the two other destinations. The
appendix shows the number of usable cohort-specific bilateral net migration rates we
have for each origin and destination country pair.
To gauge the magnitude of emigration from Latin America and the Caribbean,
Table 2 reports total emigration rates in 2000 by origin country, as well as the fraction of
emigrants residing in the US, Canada, Spain, and the UK, using data from Parsons at al.
(2007). Excluded are Cuba, which severely restricts emigration, and countries with fewer
than 200,000 inhabitants in 2000, all of which are Caribbean islands (on which we have
incomplete data). Evident in Table 2 is variation in the attractiveness of the four
principal destinations to emigrants from the region. In the Caribbean and Central
America, the share of emigrants going to the four destinations is above 50 percent in all
countries, except Nicaragua, 14 and above 70 percent in all other countries except Haiti, a
former French colony, and Antigua and Barbuda.
In the more remote South American region, the share of emigrants going to the
four destinations exceeds 50 percent for only two countries, Ecuador and Guyana. For
Bolivia, Chile, Paraguay, and Uruguay, neighboring Argentina is an important
14

In 2000, 43% of Nicaragua’s emigrants resided in neighboring Costa Rica.

11

destination; the share of emigrants going to the four destinations plus Argentina is above
60 percent for each country. For Colombia, neighboring Venezuela is an important
destination; the share of its emigrants going to the four destinations plus Venezuela is
81.3%. Thus, in South America nearby rich nations appear to compete for migrants with
more distant high-income countries. In Table 2 we also see that Argentina and Brazil –
South America’s largest nations – have low emigration rates, in either case less than 2
percent. Of the countries in Table 2, we exclude from the analysis Argentina, which in
the sample period is more a destination for migration than an origin, and Brazil, which as
a former Portuguese colony sends few migrants to the US, Canada, the UK, or Spain.
In the empirical analysis, we focus on migration rates for individuals aged 16 to
40, as these are peak years for migration (Hanson and McIntosh, 2010). Also, since our
birth cohort data from the World Development Indicators do not begin until 1960, we are
unable to measure migration for cohorts older than 40 years of age. To gauge the
variation in migration rates for the sample cohorts, Table 3 shows the average migration
rate across cohorts by origin and destination country pair in the latest available year.
Emigration rates for small countries are quite high, with over 10 percent of the sample
cohorts of Antigua and Barbuda, the Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, Grenada, and Guyana –
each with fewer than 1 million inhabitants – having migrated to the US alone. Migration
rates into Canada and the UK are highest for former British colonies: Antigua and
Barbuda, the Bahamas, Barbados, Granada, Guyana, Jamaica, and Trinidad and Tobago.
For Spain, migration rates vary considerably across its former colonies, with the highest
rates found in South America, which is relatively distant from the US. Ecuadoran
migration to Spain is a curious outlier, with 17.8% of cohorts having migrated as of 2007.

12

Table 4 provides perspective on the sample variation we will be exploiting in the
estimation, where the dependent variable is the annualized net migration rate calculated
over the interval between the previous and current destination census. The table gives the
net migration rates during the latest available interval. Apparent are sharp differences in
net migration rates across origin countries for given destinations and across destinations
for given origins. While migration rates to the US from Grenada, Honduras, Guyana,
Mexico, and El Salvador are high, they are practically zero for Bolivia, Chile, Colombia,
Nicaragua, and Paraguay, and the 2000-2005 period actually saw reverse net migration to
Antigua and Belize. For the countries with high migration to the US, only Grenada and
Guyana show high net migration rates to Canada. Similarly, among the countries
showing little net migration to the US, Bolivia, Colombia and Paraguay exhibit sharp
increases in migration to Spain. We turn next to facts that might account for this crosssectional variation in changes in migration rates.

3.2 Labor supply in sending and receiving countries
The first labor market shock we consider are changes in labor supply, associated
with earlier differences in birth rates across countries. We measure labor supply using
the number of live births in each country, as reported in World Development Indicators,
which begin in 1960. Assuming that individuals enter the labor force at age 16, the
number of individuals born, say, in El Salvador in 1970 would indicate the number of
individuals coming of working age in 1986. By taking the ratio of origin country and
birth country labor supply, we can take advantage of the cross-destination country
heterogeneity in this dyadic data structure.
In using number of births to measure labor supply, we ignore variation across

13

source countries in both mortality rates and labor force participation rates, data on which
we cannot obtain by age and year. While cross-country variation in mortality rates is a
concern, there are two reasons why it is unlikely to be a significant problem for our
analysis. One is that we focus on migration of those of prime migration age, which is 16
to 40. For individuals out of childhood but not yet in middle age, variation in mortality
across Latin American countries is relatively low. More importantly, much of the
variation in mortality rates is absorbed by the country and time dummies that we include
in the estimation. In a regression of annual mortality rates for nations in Latin America
and the Caribbean on country dummies and year dummies, the adjusted R squared is 0.94
for infant mortality, 0.95 for under-5 mortality, and 0.86 for adult mortality. Thus, most
of the cross-country variation in mortality can be removed by removing country-specific
means and time-specific means from the data, which we do in the empirical analysis.
Figure 1 shows the time series of births for countries in Latin America and the
Caribbean from 1960 to 2005. Immediately apparent is strong variation in the time
pattern of births across countries. In the Andes, births grow steadily between 1960 and
1980 in all countries except Colombia and then flatten out. In Central America, births
grow steadily through the mid 1970s in all countries except Costa Rica and then flatten
differentially, slowing first in El Salvador, followed by Nicaragua and Honduras and
never slowing in Guatemala. By the 1960s, the Southern Cone had already entered an era
of slow population growth and births are flat across time in all countries except Paraguay.
The Caribbean contains a mix of outcomes, with some countries showing growth in births
(Belize, Dominican Republic, Haiti), and others showing declines (Barbados, Guyana,
Jamaica, Trinidad and Tobago). Variation in the growth of births across countries

14

produces variation in the growth of labor supply 15 to 20 years hence. It is this variation
in birth levels we will exploit to identify the impact of labor supply on emigration.
An important question is whether the factors that produce variation in fertility
across countries are correlated with emigration, potentially confounding our empirical
analysis. The literature associates national differences in levels and changes in fertility
with a large set of determinants (see, e.g., Dasgupta, 1995; Galor, 2005; Lehr, 2009).
Because realizations on emigration are observed between 16 and 40 years after the shifts
which caused the changes in birth cohort size, we take these changes to be predetermined for our analysis. We assume that, given country, year, and cohort fixed
effects, the most plausible explanation for correlation between country-level birth cohort
size and subsequent migration is the cohort size itself. Of course, the size of birth cohorts
may summarize more about a country than its labor supply. In section 4, we discuss
alternative interpretations of our results.

3.3 Labor demand shocks in sending and receiving countries
To control for how changes in labor demand affect migration, we include in the
estimation of equation (8) per capita GDP in the year a cohort entered the labor market,
as well as contemporaneous per capita GDP, for both the origin and destination country.
As we control for origin and destination country fixed effects in the regressions, per
capita GDP effectively picks up how differential income values in a given year affect
migration. As it turns out, entry year and contemporaneous per capita GDP tend to be
highly correlated, such that we sometimes include just one of these variables.
Average income is an obvious control, but by no means the only factor that
affects migrant perceptions of living standards at home or abroad. Over the time period

15

we study, which spans the mid 1970s to the mid 2000s, Latin America experienced
multiple balance of payments crises, frequent natural disasters, and episodes of intense
civil unrest. Such events disrupt the lives of individuals, reducing their income and
wealth and often displacing them from their homes. While these shocks are temporary,
they are often severe in nature, sufficient to lead to temporary or permanent emigration.
We construct measures of the incidence of these shocks equal to the number of events
that occur in a country over a given time period divided by the number of years in the
period, which we refer to as the annualized shock incidence.
To capture balance of payments crises, which are typically followed by a banking
crises and collapse in GDP, we use the measures of sudden stops in Cavallo (2007),
which indicates whether a country has a large decline in its current account, with foreign
capital inflows suddenly reversing and becoming capital outflows. Calvo (1998)
associates such episodes with a loss in investor confidence in a country, as occurs when
investors downgrade expectations about a country’s capacity to service its debts or
maintain a pegged exchange rate. Cavallo’s definition of a sudden stop is whether a
country experiences a decline of greater than two standard deviations in a current account
surplus in successive years, where he measures the standard deviation four different
ways. We take the average incidence across the four measures between census intervals.
Table 5 reports the incidence of sudden stops over the sample period. Mexico, Colombia,
and Ecuador are the countries most prone to capital inflow reversals, with 11 other
economies experiencing at least one sudden stop in recent years. Nine countries
experience no sudden stops, with seven of these being Caribbean nations.
Natural disasters are a common occurrence in Latin America, given its proximity

16

to the Ring of Fire and exposure to tropical storms in both the Caribbean and Pacific.
Following Yang (2008), we define a serious natural disaster as an earthquake over 7.5 on
the Richter scale, a windstorm (e.g., hurricane) lasting a week or more, or a landslide or
volcanic eruption that affects more than 1000 people. We count the number of events
that occur between census intervals. Data on these events are from the International
Emergency Event Database (http://www.emdat.be/). Mexico, Ecuador, Nicaragua, and
Honduras have the highest incidence of natural disasters, with only seven countries
escaping a serious disaster during the sample period.
The last three decades have been a time of political transition in Latin America,
with military coups displacing democratically elected governments during the 1960s and
1970s, followed by a return to democracy in the 1980s and 1990s. Armed insurgencies
have occurred in over a half dozen countries, with these conflicts involving thousands of
casualties and lasting for a decade or more. We measure conflict as the number of years
between census intervals in which a serious conflict exists (be it extra-state, intra-state,
internal, or internationalized internal in nature) that resulted in the deaths of over 1000
people. The source is the CSCW Monadic Armed Conflict Database from the
International Peace Research Institute (http://www.prio.no/). Colombia, El Salvador,
Guatemala, and Nicaragua are the most conflict prone countries, with each country being
subject to a conflict of some type in one quarter or more of the sample years.

3.4 Immigration policy in receiving countries
The four main receiving countries for Latin American emigration differ
considerably in their immigration policies. The US, which is the most important
destination for Latin American emigrants, manages immigration through granting

17

permanent residence visas and temporary work visas, and enforcing the US territory
against illegal immigration. The 2,000 mile long US border with Mexico makes illegal
entry an attractive option for migrants from Latin America. In 2005, the last year of our
US sample, there were 18.9 million immigrants from Latin America and the Caribbean
residing in the US (Camarota, 2005), of whom 46.2% were estimated to be in the country
illegally (Passel, 2006). The majority of legal immigrants from Latin America enter as
family members of US citizens and residents. In 2005, family sponsored visas accounted
for 76.6% of US legal inflows from the region, with employer sponsored visas (the
majority of whom are skill workers) accounting for 13.6% and refugees and asylees
accounting for 1.9% (DHS, 2005). 15 While the US is relatively open to inflows of low
skilled labor from Latin America, few individuals in the region qualify as skilled workers
and fewer still (outside of Cuba) as refugees or asylees.
Canada has long managed its immigration policy through a regime that favors
skilled workers, the legal basis for which was established in 1976 and modified several
times since (Mayda and Patel, 2004). Individuals earn points for entry depending on their
youth, education, work experience, ability to speak English or French, and having a job
offer from a Canadian employer. In 2001, the last year in our Canadian sample, skilled
immigrants accounted for 60.6% of permanent immigration visas, family members of
Canadians 26.6%, and refugees and asylees 11.3% (OECD, 2004). Because of the
emphasis on skills, Latin America, where education levels remain relatively low,
accounts for a small share of Canadian immigration, comprising 8.0% of legal inflows in
2001. If an individual from Latin America cannot quality for a Canadian visa on the
basis of skills or family, the primary means of entry would be through asylum.
15

These figures exclude Cuba, for which 90.0% of immigrants are refugees or asylees.

18

The UK belongs to the European Union and allows for the unrestricted movement
of EU citizens. Outside of the EU, immigration is limited to family members of UK
citizens, skilled workers, temporary workers with a job offer from a UK employer,
citizens of Commonwealth countries with UK ancestry, and refugees and asylees.
Commonwealth citizens aged 17 to 30 who lack UK ancestry may qualify for a “working
holiday” in which they spend two years in the UK, with eligibility to work for one of
these. 16 Some individuals may abuse such visas by staying on in the country and
working illegally. In 2001, the last year of our UK sample, asylum seekers accounted for
24.5% of immigration admissions, temporary foreign workers 22.8%, and EU citizens
16.2%, with the remainder made up by family members of UK citizens and skilled
workers (OECD, 2004). In 2002, which is after our sample period, the UK implemented
a point system intended to expand skilled immigration (Mayda and Patel, 2004). For
Latin America, opportunities to migrate to the UK would appear to be limited primarily
to Commonwealth citizens and refugees and asylum seekers.
Spain’s immigration policy is somewhat difficult to specify. As an EU member,
it allows the unrestricted movement of EU citizens. Until the late 1980s, the country was
primarily a source of emigration. Following the sudden increase in immigration inflows
in the 1990s, government policy responded slowly, being concerned initially with how to
treat those who had already found a way into the country. It appears that a large fraction
of non-EU immigrants who entered Spain in the 1990s and 2000s did so illegally or as
visitors (Dolado and Velasquez, 2007). For those able to obtain employment, the
government has been relatively permissive in granting legal work permits, offering
multiple amnesties to undocumented workers in the last two decades. The most
16

See http://www.ukvisas.gov.uk.

19

significant barrier to migrants from Latin America entering Spain may not be obtaining a
visa but the cost associated with travel, establishing residence, and finding initial
employment as an undocumented worker. Recently, Spain has expanded the number of
work visas it supplies in an attempt to direct immigration through legal channels,
requiring prospective migrants to line up a job before entering the country.
Immigration policy mediates how labor demand and supply shocks affect
migration rates between origin and destination countries. In the absence of barriers to
immigration, the only barrier to moving between countries is the travel expense of
relocating from one place to another, which is likely to be positively related to the
distance between locations. Where illegal immigration is an option, distance is likely to
have an even more pronounced role. For individuals in Mexico, migrating illegally to the
United States is a matter of crossing the US-Mexico border. For individuals in
Guatemala, illegal migration is more difficult as they must successfully pass through
Mexico before negotiating the US border. And for individuals from countries further to
the south, illegal migration is likely to be more problematic still. Given the complication
of crossing multiple borders, it is perhaps not surprising that Mexico accounts for 56% of
illegal immigrants in the US, Central America 15%, and South America only 7% (Passel,
2006). Where legal immigration regulated by binding quotas is the only option, as in
Canada and the UK, distance may be a much less important factor. There is likely to be
greater weight on whether individuals have family members in the destination, ancestral
ties to the destination, sufficient skills, or claims on asylum.
To consider the interaction between distance and immigration policy, Figure 2
shows how net migration rates to destinations change with distance from the origin

20

country, where we plot this relationship for each destination separately. For the US, in
which nearly half of Latin American immigration is illegal, migration rates decline
strongly with distance. Moving further away from the US appears to complicate
migrating to the country. For Canada, in which skill based immigration and asylum are
the primary options for most Latin Americans, migration rates change little with distance
from the origin. The relationship for Spain is similarly flat. Only for the UK do we also
see a negative association between migration rates and distance, where this relationship
may be attributable to British former colonies being concentrated in the Caribbean, which
is located relatively close to Europe. The variation in the distance-migration relationship
is initial evidence of how immigration policy may mediate the underlying drivers of
migration. In the next section, we examine a range of shocks more formally.

4 RESULTS
4.1. Partitioned Analysis
Table 6 provides a first comparative overview of the results by estimating the
migration effects of labor supply and demand shocks separately for each destination.
The dependent variable in all specifications is the annualized net migration rate for a
given birth cohort and origin-destination pair (the change in the stock of immigrants in
that cohort from a particular origin country in a particular destination, divided by the size
of the original birth cohort in the origin). The first two columns present impacts in the
US and Canada using annual birth cohorts (meaning we measure migration rates in each
birth year separately). Data from Spain and the UK come aggregated into 5-year birth
cohorts, and when we perform pooled analysis we will aggregate the US and Canada in a
similar way. Table 6 presents partitioned results under both aggregation schemes.

21

The analysis features variables that enter at the origin country level, the origin
birth cohort level, the destination birth cohort level, and interactions with destination
country dummies. The data therefore have a non-nested multi-level structure, and it is
not perfectly clear how we should handle our standard errors. The number of clusters is
relatively small across most of the primary dimensions (26 birth countries, 4 destinations,
10 destination census waves, and 12 aggregated birth cohorts), and so our ability to
estimate consistent cluster level covariance terms is limited. 17 As a conservative way of
estimating standard errors that nonetheless provides a sufficient number of observations
for consistent estimation, we cluster our analysis at the dyad level (origin * destination),
for 73 dyads in an aggregated dataset of 832 usable observations. 18 In the segregated
data structure of Table 6 this is equivalent to clustering by origin country.
For the US, we find a strong impact of a demographic push created by large origin
birth cohorts.

The log birth cohort size ratio (birth cohort size in origin/birth cohort size

in destination) enters positively and highly significantly. Emigration to the US is
increasing and strongly concave in age, with the peak migration age being 28. There is
evidence of a complex relationship between initial income of a cohort, which increases
migration to the US, and current income, which weakly retards it. Canada displays
patterns that are similar but considerably muted in absolute terms; the marginal effect of a
given labor supply shock is one twenty-fifth as large for migration to Canada, and
insignificant. While migration to the US is increasing and concave in age, it is interesting
to note that Canadian immigration generates migration rates that are weakly increasing

17

Cluster asymptotics are based on the number of clusters and not the number of observations per cluster
(Cameron, Gelbach, and Miller 2008).
18
We have experimented with different clustering structures, and all results discussed here are robust to the
alternative strategy of clustering by origin country.

22

and convex in age, perhaps reflecting the bias of the country’s point system in favor of
individuals who have completed their education and are therefore older.
Columns 3-6 of Table 6 present results using birth cohorts aggregated at the fiveyear level, as is found in the raw data from Spain and the UK. We collapse the North
American origins to match the age aggregation used in the UK census, and then define all
dummies effectively shifting the Spanish birth structure off by one year so that there is
full agreement between the census years, ages, and birth years in the aggregated cohorts
across all four destinations. 19 This aggregation makes little difference in the answers for
the impact of labor supply shocks on migration into Canada and the US; point estimates
and t-statistics are both very similar. We have little explanatory power in the partitioned
regressions over migration to Spain or the UK, although if anything the effect of labor
supply shocks appears to have an opposite sign in the UK as it does in the US. That the
results for the US are similar for one- and five-year birth cohorts suggests that the size of
neighboring cohorts, first discussed in Section 2, carries little weight in identifying how
initial labor supply affects later migration. We return to neighboring cohorts below.
Figure 2 suggests a sharply different role of geographic distance for the US and
Canada. The basic role of the US in buffering Canada from overland migration implies
that the issue of contiguity of migration origins may also play less of a role. To
investigate this possibility, Table 7 interacts measures of proximity with labor supply
shocks to see whether they modulate the migration impact of demographic push factors.
As described in Section 3.1, the data from the US and Canada provide a more
19

This is done to assure comparability when we move to pooled analysis. While the weighting of the
regressions by the size of the cohort takes care of any mechanical objections over correct sample inference,
there may additional problems arising from the error in the estimates differing, or the smoothing in the
impact that arises from aggregation of birth cohorts. We therefore transform the structure of the US and
Canadian data to match that of the other countries.

23

comprehensive view of migration across origins. While all four destinations record a
complete set of origins in their final census, only the North American countries have
done so consistently over time. 20

Data from the US and Canada allow us to test for

marginal effects across the whole distribution of origins and not just those with strong
links to the destination. We therefore focus first on an analysis of heterogeneity in the
response to labor market conditions, using data from these two countries alone.
The first four columns of Table 7 present results for the US and Canada
separately, taking advantage of the large set of origins available for these two countries.
For the US, the impact of labor supply shocks is lower for island nations, weakly lower
with great circle distance, and much smaller for non-island countries based on the number
of other countries that must be crossed to reach the US by land. Hence, proximity plays a
role in determining the impact of variation in labor supply, particularly for origins where
migrants make an overland trip to reach the US. For Canada, in contrast, birth cohort
sizes are insignificant overall as well as having no differential slope across any of our
measures of proximity. 21 Note that the uninteracted coefficients on labor supply shocks
are of real interest here as they represent the projected impact of a labor supply in an
idealized origin that is ‘on top of’ the destination, with no distance between them and no
countries to cross. Even in such an idealized case, immigration to Canada does not
respond to birth cohort size.
20

The most obvious form of attrition bias caused by the UK and Spain recording only high-migration
origins in early years is that by definition a dyad with zero observed migration has demonstrated no
sensitivity to the shocks measured here. This would suggest that the UK and Spain would have marginal
effects that are biased upwards by attrition. Our results show precisely the opposite, namely that the US
(which records the most complete set of origins) is much more sensitive to a wide variety of shocks, and
hence we conclude that if anything this attrition problem is causing us to underestimate the true degree of
‘American exceptionalism’.
21
Note that with only a single destination, we cannot include raw distance in combination with origin fixed
effects, and so the uninteracted impact of distance is omitted in columns 1-4. Countries crossed is not
defined for Spain and the UK, and so we do not include this variable in the pooled regressions.

24

Columns 5-8 of Table 7 pool together all destinations, a data structure that forces
us to consider the substantial heterogeneity present across destinations in the sample.
The US population is ten times that of Canada, and hence even with comparable
proportional migration the flow of migration measured relative to the size of origincountry birth cohorts will differ by an order of magnitude. Furthermore, as seen in Table
3, migration to the US as a fraction of origin population is substantially higher than it is
to the other destinations. In order to prevent this cross-sectional heterogeneity in birthcohort ratios and migration rates from informing coefficients, we always include
destination-country fixed effects when multiple destinations are pooled together.
The pooled analysis confirms the uniqueness of the US as a destination. Column
5 of Table 7 shows that birth cohort size is a stronger driver of migration to the US than
to the other destinations, and column 6 shows that proximity to the US is more important
as well. Column 7 combines these two effects and shows that the rate at which the
sensitivity to labor supply shocks falls off with distance is again greatest for migration to
the US. In column 8 we again confirm the unique sensitivity to labor supply of nearby
origins with overland migration routes to the US, but also find that for the (Caribbean)
island origins where overall migration to the US is lower, sensitivity to birth cohort size
is also lower. This poses an interesting geographic divide, suggesting that population
growth in Mexico and Central America primarily pushes migrants to the US, while
growth in labor supply in the Caribbean, equally close to the US but tied to the UK and
Canada through historical bonds, pushes migrants to those destinations instead.

4.2. Shocks
We next consider how a broader set of shocks may drive migration, and may

25

modulate the effect of labor supply shocks themselves. Our data provide an intuitive way
to examine the impact of shocks on migration because we have long time series over
many countries, and so observe a sufficiently large number of shocks in the data to
estimate precise impacts. The three shocks we consider in Table 8 are:
•

Number of Serious Natural Disasters is the annualized count, over census intervals,
of earthquakes over 7.5 Richter, windstorms lasting a week or more, or landslides or
volcano eruptions affecting more than 1000 people in origin country. In order to
remove heterogeneity introduced by the raw size of the country, we divide the
number of shocks by land area (thousand square kilometers).

•

Number of Sudden Stops is the annualized count, over census intervals, of Sudden
Stops 1-4 from Cavallo (2007), defined as a year-on-year fall in the current account
surplus of at least 2 standard deviation from the sample mean, with standard
deviations calculated four alternative ways.

•

Civil Conflict is from CSCW Monadic Armed Conflict data, calculated as a the
number of years between census intervals in which conflict exists in the origin
country in which more than 1000 people died.

Table 8 takes the pooled data structure to the analysis of origin-country shocks in driving
emigration from the Americas. The table can be read by taking the ‘Shock’ referred to in
the third row from the column title, so the first two columns examine the effect of and
interactions with natural disasters, and so on.
Negative shocks that are not political in nature will likely increase the desire for
emigration from origin countries, but will not alter the access to legal immigration in
asylum-driven destinations. Civil conflict, on the other hand, both increases the ‘push’
factor behind emigration and creates the ability to apply for asylum. Correspondingly, in
Table 8 we find that non-political shocks (weakly) increase migration to the US (columns
1 and 3), while political shocks increase migration to all other destinations (column 5).
The uninteracted coefficient on civil conflict is 0.25, indicating that average migration
rates to all three other destinations will go up by 2.5% over ten years, or an additional

26

7.5% of the birth cohort emigrated to all three destinations over the 10 years around the
conflict. Even here the US is distinct; in the case of civil conflict migration rates to the
US are significantly lower, both relative to the other destinations and in absolute terms.
The even-numbered columns in Table 8 intersect the two families of shocks by
examining whether the responsiveness of migration to labor supply and income shocks is
larger when these coincide with shocks of other types. In other words, perhaps an
individual in a large, low-wage cohort would have stayed put had economic times been
good, but in the face of a downturn will choose to migrate. Large cohorts that also face
non-political shocks are far more likely to migrate to the US (columns 2 and 4), and large
cohort facing political shocks are far more likely to migrate to the other destinations
(column 6). Labor supply does interact with other shocks in powerful ways. The
heterogeneous response of migration to origin-country shocks across destinations is most
pronounced when labor supply pressures are increasing the incentives to migrate.
Columns 3 and 4 of Table 8 present a nuanced picture of the ways in which
income and national economic shocks interact to drive migration to the US, because they
allow us to separately identify the impact of the overall initial wealth of a cohort (GDP pc
at age 16) independently from a sudden macroeconomic shock (sudden stops). We see
that when a cohort does experience an economic shock, the higher is income at the time
when the shock occurs, the greater is the impact of the shock on migration to the US.
Combined with the results in the second row of Table 6, this suggests that on the whole
income is a sharper determinant of the ability to undertake the economically costly move
to the US, but that underlying there is a stronger tendency for a downturn in a migrant’s
economic prospects in the origin country to trigger migration to the US.

27

Column 6 of Table 8 continues to provide evidence of the uniqueness of political
shocks across the destinations. While labor supply plays a relatively larger role in driving
migration to the US under all the other shocks, here we see it playing a much weaker role
when there is a civil conflict. That is to say, once a political shock has opened up the
asylum conduit for migration to Canada, Spain, and the UK, birth cohort sizes become
more influential, again in both absolute and relative terms.

4.3 Network Effects
A different cut on Table 8 is that where shocks deliver a comparatively large
direct effect on the number of migrants going to a destination, further migration to that
destination becomes more sensitive to birth cohort size. One interpretation of this result
is that network effects begin to lower the costs of further migration once it has begun, and
so the constant pressure that birth cohort sizes exert on the incentive to migrate becomes
more visible. We now proceed to examine these network effects more directly.
A standard way to investigate heterogeneity that arises from network effects is to
use the historical stock of migrants as a proxy for the strength of networks (see the survey
in Hanson, 2010). The analogy in our data is to use the earliest census year in which we
have an observation on migration between an origin and a destination, and calculate the
dyadic stock of migrants across cohorts in that year. This is then the first available
observation on the number of people from each origin living in each destination.
Column 1 of Table 9 gives a base specification for comparison purposes. Column
2 illustrates the strong overall effect of initial migrant stocks on subsequent migration
rates across the sample. Column 3 shows that the full-sample sensitivity to labor supply
shocks is not significantly higher when a large base stock of migrant exists, although the

28

interaction between labor supply shocks and initial migrant stock is positive and is
significant at the 90% level. The final column tests whether the raw effect of base
migrant stocks is stronger in the US; the results indicate that these stocks matter about
twice as much in the US as elsewhere. 22 Our results thus demonstrate a role of network
effects that is strong overall and substantially stronger in the US. While variables that
proxy for the strength of network effects explain migration overall, they are particularly
critical in determining the predominantly economically-driven migration to the US.

4.4. Extensions and Robustness Checks
A first concern that may arise when considering these results relates to the use of
relatively fine-grained birth cohorts (even our most aggregated analysis uses five-year
cohorts). While the comparison of aggregated (five-year birth cohorts) and disaggregated
(one-year birth cohorts) results in Table 6 does not incline us to think that this
aggregation will be the source of major measurement problems, a question remains as to
the relationships between adjacent cohorts. To the extent that the size of a given cohort
has strong effects over the behavior of its neighbors, at the very least we will encounter
problems with the independence of observations, and may even find biased answers to
the extent that these cohort sizes are correlated.
Issues of multicollinearity prevent us from simply controlling for the size of the
preceding and following cohort, because these neighboring cohorts will be highly
correlated with the size of one’s own cohort in the data. As a way of getting around this
22

Additional analysis not presented here draws on the extension of the model presented here in Hanson and
McIntosh (2010). This work explicitly considers the role of network effects, showing that the dynamic
adjustment path of migration as a given cohort ages presents a tension between the dampening effects of
wage arbitrage on further migration (which would decrease the effect of a shock with age) and the
formation of migration networks with peers as your cohort is increasingly in that destination. Our results
here show little heterogeneity in the impact of shocks across cohort age, indicating that these two forces on
average are in balance both in the overall sample and to the US specifically.

29

problem, we calculate the growth rate from the previous cohort to this one, and the
growth rate from this cohort to the next, and control for these rates rather than for the raw
cohort size itself. Table 10 repeats the analysis of Table 6 using aggregated cohorts and
controlling for these cross-cohort growth rates. No significant effects of the size of
adjacent cohorts are found in the US (the only country in which the raw effects are
significant) and while the coefficient on the growth rate from the last cohort to the current
one is significant in the overall sample, it is not significantly negative in any individual
country. Most importantly, the coefficient estimates on the contemporaneous effects
remain very stable when we control for cross-cohort effects. Hence we find no evidence
that spillover effects across cohorts are likely to be causing major measurement errors.
A similar concern could arise in our analysis of shocks if it were the case that
countries that had shocks in one period always had them in later periods, or if the impact
of the shocks themselves displayed sufficient persistence. To analyze this Table 11
calculates annualized shock variables over the preceding census interval and includes
them in a specification similar to Table 7. We find natural disasters to be the only type of
shock with any persistence in migration impacts, but the lagged effects are always of the
same sign and with a reduced magnitude from the original shock. The heterogeneity
observable in the response to shocks for migration to the US is very similar in the
response to lagged shocks. Again, inclusion of these lags does not change our overall
read on the results, which is that natural disasters disproportionately increase migration to
the US and political shocks increase it to the other destinations.
In unreported results, we examined whether the results may be driven by Mexico,
which is the largest source country for immigrants in the US. All of our results are robust

30

to dropping Mexico from the estimation sample. In other results, we considered whether
the importance of agriculture may mediate the impact of labor market shocks. Since the
supply of agricultural land is relatively inelastic, increases in labor supply may have a
more negative effect on wages in agriculture dependent economies than in economies
specialized in manufacturing (which is intensive in relatively elastic capital). We found
no evidence that the level of agricultural development in origin countries, on its own or
interacted with labor supply or labor demand shocks, matters for emigration.

5 DISCUSSION
We intersect data on the size of birth cohorts in origin countries with data on the
size of immigrant stocks by age and origin country in the US, Canada, Spain and UK to
examine factors associated with emigration from 25 Latin American and Caribbean
countries over the period 1980 to 2005. We find that for migration to the US labor
supply shocks, in the form of abnormally large or small birth cohorts, are a significant
push factor, while they are uncorrelated with migration to Canada, Spain, or UK. The
effect of labor supply shocks decreases with distance from the destination for the case of
the US but not for the other countries.
Our cohort panel data cover a long time span over a broad set of countries and
therefore provide a good platform for examining how large but relatively rare shocks may
contribute to migration. We find that natural disasters and balance of payments crises
increase the impact of labor supply shocks on migration to the US, but not to the other
destinations, whereas civil and military conflict have the reverse effect, decreasing
migration to the US but raising it to Canada, Spain and the UK.
These results draw a picture of one destination, the US, that is uniquely engaged
31

in a demographic dance with its neighbors. Inaccessibility by land, along with
immigration regimes that are more formulaic and asylum-based, have effectively turned
off a susceptibility to labor supply-driven migration in Canada, the UK, and Spain. The
United States displays a similar insensitivity with respect to the far-off countries of South
America. With its close neighbors, migration rates to the US respond strongly to
shocks; larger or richer cohorts are most likely to migrate to the US, with this sensitivity
heightened by economic volatility in the destination.

32

REFERENCES
Birdsall N., A. C. Kelley, and S. W. Sinding, eds. 2001. Population Matters:
Demography, Growth, and Poverty in the Developing World. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Blanchard, Oliver, and Lawrence Katz. 1992. “Regional Evolutions.” Brookings Papers
on Economic Activity, 1-75.
Bongaarts, J. and S. Watkins. 1996. "Social Interactions and. Contemporary Fertility
Transitions," Population and Development Review, 22: 639-682.
Borjas, George J. “Native Internal Migration and the Labor Market Impact of
Immigration,” Journal of Human Resources 41 (Spring 2006): 221-258.
Camarota, Steven. 2005. “Immigrants at Mid Decade: A Snapshot of America’s
Foreign Born Population in 2005,” Center for Immigration Studies.
Calvo, Guillermo A. 1998. “Capital Flows and Capital-Market Crises: The Simple
Economics of Sudden Stops.” Journal of Applied Economics, 1(1): 35-54.
Cameron, A. Colin, Jonah Gelbach, Douglas Miller. 2008. “Robust Inference with
Multi-way Clustering,” mimeo, University of California, Davis.
Cavallo, Eduardo. 2007. “Trade, Gravity and Sudden Stops: On How Commercial
Trade Can Increase the Stability of Capital Flows,” mimeo, Harvard University.
Clark, Ximena, Timothy Hatton, Jeffrey Williamson. 2007. “Explaining U.S. Immigration,
1971-1998.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 89(2): 359-373.
Collier, Paul, V. L. Elliott, Håvard Hegre, Anke Hoeffler, Marta Reynal-Queral and
Nicholas Sambanis. 2003. Breaking the conflict trap: civil war and development policy.
Washington: The World Bank and Oxford University Press.
Dasgupta, Partha. 1995. “The Population Problem: Theory and Evidence.” Journal of
Economic Literature, 33(4): 1879-1902.
Dolado, Juan, and Pedro Velasquez. 2007. Ensayos sobre los efectos económicos de la
inmigración en España. Madrid: FEDEA.
Edwards, Sebastian. 2008. “Globalization, Growth and Crises: The View from Latin
America.” NBER Working Paper No. 14034.
Fajnzylber, Pablo, and Humberto Lopez. 2008. Close to Home, Washington, DC: The
World Bank.

33

Galor, Oded. 2005. “The Transition from Stagnation to the Growth.” In, Philippe
Aghion and Steven N. Durlauf, eds., Handbook of Economic Growth, Amsterdam:
Elsevier, pp. 171-294.
Hanson, Gordon. 2010. “International Migration and the Developing World,” in Dani
Rodrik and Mark Rosenzweig, eds., Handbook of Development Economics, Volume III.
Amsterdam: North-Holland, forthcoming.
Hanson, Gordon, and Craig McIntosh. 2010. “The Great Mexican Emigration.” Review
of Economics and Statistics, forthcoming.
Lehr, Carol Scotese. 2009. “Evidence on the Demographic Transition.” Review of
Economics and Statistics, 91(4): 871-887.
Mayda, Anna Maria. 2009. “International migration: A panel data analysis of the
determinants of bilateral flows,” Journal of Population Economics, forthcoming.
Mayda, Anna Maria, and Krishna Patel. 2004. “OECD Countries Migration Policy
Changes,” Georgetown University.
Parsons, Christopher, Ronald Skeldon, Terrie Walmsley, and L. Alan Winters. 2007.
“Quantifying International Migration: A Database of Bilateral Migration Stocks.” World
Bank Policy Research Working Paper 4165.
OECD. 2004. Trends in International Migration. OECD: Paris.
Ortega, Francesc, and Giovanni Peri. 2009. “The Cause and Effects of International
Migrations: Evidence from OECD Countries, 1980-2005.” NBER Working Paper No.
14833.
Passel, Jeffrey. 2006. “The Size and Characteristics of the Unauthorized Population in
the US,” Pew Hispanic Center.
Raddatz, Claudio. 2007. “Are External Shocks Responsible for the Instability of Output
in Low-Income Countries?” Journal of Development Economics, 84(1): 155-187.
Tuiran, Rodolfo, Virgilio Partida, Octavio Mojarro, and Elena Zuniga. 2002. “Fertility
in Mexico: Trends and Forecast.”. Report of the United Nations Population Division.
U.S. Department of Homeland Security. 2005. Yearbook of Immigration Statistics.
http://www.dhs.gov/ximgtn/statistics/publications/yearbook.shtm.
Yang, Dean. 2008. “Coping with Disaster: The Impact of Hurricanes on International
Financial Flows, 1970-2002.” B. E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy: 8(1)
(Advances), Article 13.

34

Appendix
A. Deriving the estimating equation
Using equations (3), (5), and (6), we solve for the t = 0 emigration rate, and then iterate
forward, solving for the wage and emigration rate in each period. After some algebra, the
emigration rate to country A for age group i in period t can be shown to be,
vitA = σ AωiA0 (1 + ησ A )
+ ωiB0 η ( σ A )

2 t −2

t −1

t −1
+ σ AωiB0 (1 + ησ B ) − 1


t −3

(1 + ησ B )s − 1 + ωB η2 ( σ A )3 + ( ησ A )2 σ B  (1 + ησ B )s − 1
∑
i0 

 ∑




s 1=
s 1 

t −3

t −2

2
2
s
s
+ ωiA0 ησ Aσ B ∑ (1 + ησ A ) − 1 + ωiA0 ( ησ A ) σ B + ( ησ B ) σ A  ∑ (1 + ησ A ) − 1 + 



s 1

s 1=
(A1)

where there is a continuing series of high-order interactions of the model coefficients up
to the power t-1. The expression for country B is analogous. While the expression
appears complicated, the determinants of current emigration from the source country are
simply initial wage differences between the origin and the two destinations, ωiA0 and ωiB0 .
The large number of terms in (A1) comes from the fact that positive emigration occurs
only along the transition from an initial period in which there are large international wage
differences to a final equilibrium of small wage differences. 23 Migration from the origin
country to destination A today affects migration to B tomorrow, which affects migration
to A in the following period, and so on. Since these higher order effects depend on a
minimum of four-way interactions in the labor demand elasticity and labor supply
elasticities (which are each less than one in absolute value), they are likely to be very
small in practice; to simplify the expression, we exclude these terms.
To interpret (A1), consider each term in the expression. The first term on the right
indicates that the current emigration rate to country A is higher the larger is the initial
wage gap between the origin country and destination-country A. Note that the emigration
rate declines over time (owing to the assumption that 1 + ησ A < 1 ), as the exodus of labor
pushes up source-country wages. The second term on the right indicates that the current
emigration rate to country A is lower the larger is the initial wage gap between the source
country and destination-country B, as the availability of an alternative location siphons
off migrants who would have otherwise gone to A. The terms on the second and third
lines of (A1) are the initial terms in a series of higher order effects, which capture the
implications for current migration to country A of how past migration to country A has
affected migration to country B and of how past migration to country B has affected
migration to country A. Excluding the higher-order terms and using the approximation
that (1+x)t ≈ 1+tx, we can rewrite (A1) in much simpler form as

23

Because of the migration disamenity, international wage differences may not be fully eliminated.

35

(A2)

vitA =σ AωiA0 1 + ησ A ( t − 1)  + ησ Aσ B ωiB0 ( t − 1) .

Plugging in the determinants of the initial wage differential in (6), we obtain,
(A3)

𝐴
𝐴
[𝜃 𝐴 + (𝜃 𝐴 )2 (𝑡 − 1)] + [𝑙𝑛𝑥𝑖0
𝜈𝑖𝑡𝐴 = 𝑙𝑛ℓ𝑖0
− 𝐹 𝐴 ][𝜎 𝐴 + 𝜎 𝐴 𝜃 𝐴 (𝑡 − 1)]
𝐵
+𝑙𝑛ℓ𝐵𝑖0 𝜃 𝐵 𝜃 𝐴 (𝑡 − 1) + [𝑙𝑛𝑥𝑖0
− 𝐹 𝐵 ]𝜎 𝐵 𝜃 𝐴 (𝑡 − 1)

where θc = ησc < 0 . Equations (A2) and (A3) are the basis for estimation.

B. No. of usable bilateral migration rates (five year birth cohorts)
Destination Country:
Origin Country:
Canada
Spain
UK USA
Antigua-Barbuda
10
0
0
16
Bahamas
10
0
0
15
Belize
10
0
8
18
Bolivia
10
5
0
18
Barbados
10
0
8
16
Chile
10
9
0
18
Colombia
10
5
0
18
Costa Rica
10
5
0
18
Dominican Republic
10
5
0
18
Ecuador
10
5
0
18
Grenada
2
0
0
5
Guatemala
10
5
0
18
Guyana
10
0
8
16
Honduras
10
5
0
18
Haiti
10
0
0
18
Jamaica
10
0
8
18
Mexico
10
9
0
18
Nicaragua
10
5
0
18
Panama
10
5
0
18
Peru
10
9
0
18
Paraguay
10
5
0
17
El Salvador
10
5
0
18
Trinidad & Tobago
10
0
8
18
Uruguay
10
5
0
17
Venezuela
10
9
0
18
Total

252

96

40

444

36

Table 1: Emigration from Developing Countries, 2000

East Asia & Pacific

Emigration to high income countries
Population
Emigrants
Emigration rate
1,804,027,262
12,315,945
0.0068

Emigration to all countries
Emigrants Emigration rate
16,646,474
0.0092

Europe & Central Asia

444,417,646

11,096,197

0.0250

40,475,642

0.0911

Latin America & Caribbean

513,924,769

19,446,628

0.0378

24,212,595

0.0471

Middle East & North Africa

276,357,816

8,359,017

0.0302

12,914,533

0.0467

1,358,784,470

8,794,178

0.0065

23,906,281

0.0176

672,823,767

4,291,261

0.0064

17,434,890

0.0259

South Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa

High-income countries include Canada and the US; Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Iceland, Ireland,
Italy, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, and Switzerland; Australia, Hong Kong, Korea, New Zealand, Singapore,
Taiwan, and Japan; and Kuwait, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, and the United Arab Emirates. Source: Authors’ calculations based on data
from Parsons, Skeldon, Walmsley, and Winters (2007).

Table 2: Emigration rates in Latin America and the Caribbean, 2000

Origin Country
Antigua & Barbuda
Bahamas
Barbados
Dominican Republic
Grenada
Haiti
Jamaica
Trinidad & Tobago
Mexico
Belize
Costa Rica
El Salvador
Guatemala
Honduras
Nicaragua
Panama
Argentina
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Ecuador
Guyana
Paraguay
Peru
Uruguay
Venezuela
Total

Emigration rate
0.625
0.124
0.401
0.111
0.678
0.096
0.371
0.258
0.105
0.214
0.030
0.163
0.055
0.058
0.107
0.066
0.017
0.047
0.006
0.036
0.040
0.058
0.503
0.079
0.029
0.076
0.015
0.051

Share of emigrants from
US, Can, Spain, UK
0.562
0.895
0.852
0.828
0.711
0.643
0.884
0.878
0.928
0.857
0.736
0.871
0.835
0.822
0.448
0.820
0.410
0.188
0.304
0.249
0.443
0.768
0.840
0.053
0.491
0.233
0.558
0.754

The emigration rate is the share of emigrants (as measured by Parsons et al., 2007) in the
total population. Very small countries in Latin America and the Caribbean are excluded.

Table 3:
Average stock of migrants from each origin to each destination, latest year

Origin Country:
Antigua-Barbuda
Bahamas
Belize
Bolivia
Barbados
Chile
Colombia
Costa Rica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Grenada
Guatemala
Guyana
Honduras
Haiti
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Peru
Paraguay
El Salvador
Trinidad & Tobago
Uruguay
Venezuela
Census years
available:

% of Cohort in Destination Country:
Canada
Spain
UK
USA
1.98
5.02
19.51
0.68
4.82
14.48
0.75
1.75
10.47
0.03
4.47
0.05
0.58
2.77
9.28
13.38
0.16
1.00
0.15
0.53
0.04
3.41
1.04
0.10
0.13
0.07
2.75
0.06
4.41
0.03
6.88
0.08
17.81
0.13
2.58
5.40
5.09
15.40
0.12
0.06
0.01
5.69
5.60
2.92
18.72
0.08
0.48
0.03
6.52
0.43
0.01
3.47
3.18
7.78
14.39
0.04
0.07
0.03
11.55
0.19
0.19
0.02
3.11
0.10
0.21
0.09
3.74
0.06
2.27
0.07
1.12
0.07
1.63
0.02
0.31
0.57
0.18
0.03
14.35
3.44
4.56
11.98
0.18
6.19
0.13
1.81
0.04
0.82
0.10
0.69
1981, 1991,
2001

1981, 2001,
2007

1981,
1991, 2001

1980, 1990,
2000, 2005

Notes: The years for which the above figures correspond are 2001 for Canada and the
UK, 2005 for the US, and 2007 for Spain.

39

Table 4: Average annualized net migration rates (fraction of a percent)
from each origin to each destination, latest available year

Origin Country:
Antigua-Barbuda
Bahamas
Belize
Bolivia
Barbados
Chile
Colombia
Costa Rica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Grenada
Guatemala
Guyana
Honduras
Haiti
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Peru
Paraguay
El Salvador
Trinidad & Tobago
Uruguay
Venezuela

Destination Country:
Canada
Spain
UK
0.073
0.001
0.020
0.027
0.001
0.624
0.031
0.346
0.001
0.081
0.003
0.212
0.003
-0.013
0.002
0.366
0.003
1.347
0.434
0.004
-0.003
0.173
0.107
0.002
0.047
0.014
0.081
0.481
0.002
0.000
0.001
0.021
0.000
-0.028
0.003
0.250
-0.001
0.242
0.009
0.014
0.081
0.230
0.003
0.499
0.002
-0.098

USA
-0.281
0.224
-0.280
0.032
0.179
0.021
0.027
0.180
0.186
0.132
0.976
0.380
0.974
0.462
0.129
0.215
0.505
-0.020
0.059
0.076
0.023
0.670
0.347
0.247
0.038

Notes: The years for which the above figures correspond are 2001 for Canada and the
UK, 2005 for the US, and 2007 for Spain.

40

Table 5: Annualized values of shocks

Origin Country:
Antigua-Barbuda
Bahamas
Belize
Bolivia
Barbados
Chile
Colombia
Costa Rica
Dom. Republic
Ecuador
Grenada
Guatemala
Guyana
Honduras
Haiti
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Peru
Paraguay
El Salvador
Trin. & Tobago
Uruguay
Venezuela

# of Serious
Natural
Disasters

# of Sudden
Stops

0.05
0.04
0.05
0.13
0.00
0.16
0.02
0.10
0.04
0.34
0.00
0.15
0.00
0.18
0.04
0.01
0.42
0.20
0.00
0.18
0.00
0.12
0.00
0.00
0.03

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.03
0.03
0.11
0.09
0.06
0.00
0.07
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.12
0.03
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.01
0.03
0.04
0.04

Fraction of
years in
which Civil
Conflict
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.42
0.00
0.04
0.00
0.26
0.00
0.08
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.23
0.00
0.31
0.00
0.31
0.00
0.00

# of Serious Natural Disasters: The sum, over census intervals, of earthquakes over
7.5 Richter, windstorms lasting a week or more, or landslides or volcano eruptions
affecting more than 1000 people.
# of Sudden Stops: The sum, over census intervals, of Sudden Stops 1-4 from Cavallo
(2007), defined as a year-on-year fall in the current account surplus of at least two
standard deviations from the sample mean, with the standard deviation calculated four
alternative ways.
Civil Conflict: Calculated as the number of years between census intervals in which a
serious conflict exists (Extra-state, Intra-state, Internal, or Internationalized Internal)
that killed over 1000 people in a country.

41

Table 6: Partitioned results on bilateral migration rates
One-year Birth
Cohorts
Dependent Variable:
Annualized migration rate over
census interval, percent.
Log Birth Cohort Size Ratio

Log GDP pc Ratio at Age 16

Log GDP pc in year of census

Years since cohort turned 16

Years since 16 squared

USA

CAN

Five-year Birth Cohorts
USA

CAN

SPN

UK

0.430

0.014

0.404

0.016

-0.191

-0.261

(4.76)**

(1.23)

(4.14)**

(1.18)

(1.10)

(2.14)

0.145

0.011

0.157

0.012

-0.031

-0.056

(2.18)*

(1.90)

(2.08)*

(1.76)

(0.72)

(1.59)

-0.00003

0.00000

-0.00003

0.00000

0.00002

-0.00020

(0.53)

(0.35)

(0.55)

(0.36)

(0.06)

(1.77)

0.037

0.001

-0.027

-0.001

0.017

0.008

(2.45)*

(1.65)

(0.67)

(0.62)

(1.33)

(0.97)

-0.0014

0.0000

-0.0013

0.0000

-0.0008

-0.0005

(2.14)*

(1.86)

(2.33)*

(1.72)

(1.99)

(1.19)

Observations
1804
1082
444
252
96
40
Birth country, birth cohort, and census wave fixed effects included in all specifications. Regressions are weighted by
the size of the birth cohort.
* significant at 95%, ** significant at 99%, t-statistics in parentheses and SEs clustered by origin/destination dyad.

42

Table 7: Effects of distance from the US and Canada on bilateral migration rates
Dependent Variable:
Annualized migration rate over census
interval, percent.
Log Birth Cohort Size Ratio
Log GDP pc Ratio at Age 16
Log Birth Cohort Ratio * Distance
Log Birth Cohort Ratio * Island
Log Birth Cohort Ratio
* Countries Crossed
Birth Cohort Ratio, US Only

USA
Countries
Distance Crossed
InterInteractions
actions
0.672
0.485
(4.26)** (3.00)**
0.051
-0.042
(0.70)
(0.41)
-0.072
(1.79)
-0.436
-0.650
(2.37)* (3.76)**
-0.0636
(3.91)**

Canada
Countries
Distance Crossed
InterInteractions
actions
0.012
0.012
(1.20)
(1.16)
0.010
0.011
(1.62)
(1.67)
0.0005
(0.37)
-0.008
-0.002
(1.08)
(0.24)
0.00108
(0.90)

All Destinations Pooled

Labor
Supply
0.077
(1.44)
0.034
(0.76)

Distance
0.121
(2.17)*
0.031
(0.66)

-0.112
(3.02)**

0.062
(1.45)

0.128
(3.94)**

Dyadic Distance

-0.041
(0.67)
-0.098
(4.20)**

Dyadic Distance, US Only
Birth Cohort Ratio * Distance, US only

Distance
Interactions
0.166
(1.71)
0.034
(0.70)
-0.014
(0.94)
-0.043
(0.97)

0.278
(4.27)**
-0.012
(0.25)
-0.245
(5.08)**
-0.055
(4.12)**

Island, US Only
Birth Cohort Ratio * Island , US only
Observations

1804

1804

1082

1082

3022

3022

3022

Island
Interactions
0.073
(1.34)
0.015
(0.33)

-0.100
(1.21)

0.141
(4.48)**

-0.830
(3.75)**
-0.257
(6.56)**
3022

All regressions use birth year, origin country, and census year fixed effects plus linear and quadratic age terms. The pooled
.regressions include destination fixed effects. Regressions are weighted by the size of the birth cohort.
* significant at 95%, ** significant at 99%, t-statistics in parentheses and SEs clustered by origin/destination dyad.

43

Table 8: Economic and political shocks and bilateral migration rates
Type of Shock:
Dependent Variable:
Annualized # of Serious
Annualized # of Sudden
Annualized migration rate over census
Natural Disasters
Stops
interval, percent.
(per '000 square km.)
Log Birth Cohort Size Ratio
Log GDP pc Ratio at Age 16
Shock
Shock, US only

0.116
(1.61)

0.076
(1.23)

0.047
(0.59)

0.152
(1.72)

Annualized Civil
Conflict
0.062
(0.71)

0.054
(0.58)

0.025

-0.097

0.046

0.097

0.036

-0.018

(0.47)

(1.57)

(0.88)

(1.64)

(0.55)

(0.29)

-2.373

-82.024

-0.793

-1.701

0.255

0.151

-0.64

(2.26)*

(1.61)

(1.87)

(2.48)*

(0.42)

10.962

203.542

1.205

3.285

-0.404

-1.237

(1.46)

(3.53)**

(1.81)

(3.55)**

(2.81)**

(2.21)*

Cohort Size Ratio * Shock
GDP Ratio * Shock
Cohort Size Ratio * Shock, US only
GDP Ratio * Shock, US only

-14.819

-1.034

0.156

(2.94)**

(4.39)**

(1.44)

1.852

-1.066

0.013

(0.20)

(3.11)**

(0.08)

27.480

1.394

-0.498

(4.64)**

(4.49)**

(5.21)**

12.127

1.462

-0.108

(0.80)

(3.67)**

(0.50)

Years since cohort turned 16

-0.006

0.014

-0.061

-0.047

-0.051

-0.028

Years since 16 squared

-0.18
-0.001
(1.52)

(0.52)
-0.001
(1.63)

(2.74)**
-0.001
(1.56)

(2.26)*
-0.001
(1.69)

(2.21)*
-0.001
(1.63)

(1.08)
-0.001
(1.74)

Observations
832
832
724
724
642
642
p-value on F-Test that the shock or the
interaction between the shock and the
0.0004
0.0036
0.1540
0.0253
0.1057
0.0022
cohort size effect is significant in U.S.:
All regressions calculated using five-year birthyear cohorts, with birth cohort, birth country, destination country, and
census wave fixed effects included in all specifications. Interactions of Cohort Size ratio*US only and GDP ratio*US
are included in columns 2,4,and 6 but not reported. Regressions are weighted by the size of the birth cohort.
* significant at 95%, ** significant at 99%, t-statistics in parentheses and SEs clustered by origin/destination dyad.
# of Serious Natural Disasters is the sum, over census intervals, of earthquakes over 7.5 Richter, windstorms lasting a
week or more, or landslides or volcano eruptions affecting more than 1000 people in sending country.
# of Sudden Stops is the sum, over census intervals, of Sudden Stops 1-4 from Cavallo data, defined as a fall in the
CA surplus of at least 2 SD from sample mean, with standard deviations calculated four different ways.
Civil Conflict is from CSCW Monadic Armed Conflict data, calculated as the number of years between census
intervals in which a serious conflict exists (Extra-state, Intra-state, Internal, or Internationalized Internal) that killed
over 1000 people in the sending country.

44

Table 9: Migration networks and bilateral migration rates
(3)
Labor
Supply &
Migrant
Stocks
-0.053

US
Migrant
Stocks

(1.86)

(0.55)

(2.33)*

0.020

-0.052

0.036

(0.67)

(0.39)

(0.45)

(0.72)

GDP pc as of year of census

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

-0.34

(0.25)

(0.31)

(0.43)

Years since 16

-0.021

-0.029

-0.028

-0.017

(0.59)

(1.03)

(0.98)

(0.62)

-0.001

-0.001

-0.001

-0.001

(1.61)

(1.63)

(1.65)

(1.67)

0.108

0.124

0.059

(6.52)**

(6.82)**

(2.70)**

Dependent Variable:
Annualized migration rate over census
interval, percent.
Log Birth Cohort Size
Log GDP pc Ratio at Age 16

Years since 16 squared
Log earliest observable stock of migrants

(1)

(2)

Basic

Migrant
Stocks

0.114

0.088

(1.84)
0.038

Earliest stock * Log Birth Cohort Size

(4)

0.106

0.013
(1.80)

Earliest stock * LogGDP Ratio

0.007
(0.69)

US * Earliest stock

0.065
(4.31)**

Observations
832
832
832
832
All regressions calculated using five-year birthyear cohorts, with birth country, birth cohort,
destination, and census wave fixed effects. Regressions are weighted by the size of the birth
cohort.
* significant at 95%, ** significant at 99%, t-statistics in parentheses and SEs clustered by
origin/destination dyad.
Weighted mean of dependent variable in Canada (omitted country): .006

45

Table 10: Effect of adjacent cohorts on bilateral migration rates
Dependent Variable:
Annualized migration rate over
census interval, percent.
Log Birth Cohort Size Ratio
Log GDP pc Ratio at Age 16
Log GDP pc in year of census
Log origin birth cohort size, (next/this)
Log origin birth cohort size, (this/last)
Years since cohort turned 16
Years since 16 squared

All

USA

CAN

SPN

UK

0.071

0.473

0.026

-0.508

0.008

(0.97)

(4.16)**

(1.26)

(1.92)

(0.03)

0.022

0.186

0.013

-0.091

-0.053

(0.41)

(3.45)**

(1.75)

(1.70)

(0.74)

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

(0.36)

(0.64)

(0.33)

(0.10)

(1.03)

7.343

24.069

4.452

-6.899

6.438

(1.19)

(0.89)

(1.24)

(1.58)

(1.92)

-12.286

-58.153

-4.183

7.842

-1.264

(1.87)

(2.05)

(1.33)

(2.19)*

(0.52)

-0.021

-0.023

-0.001

0.009

0.013

-0.59

(0.58)

(0.55)

(0.53)

(1.03)

-0.001

-0.001

0.000

-0.001

-0.001

(1.61)

(2.35)*

(1.74)

(1.68)

(0.74)

Observations
805
443
252
80
30
All regressions calculated using five-year birthyear cohorts. Birth country, birth cohort, and census
wave fixed effects included in all specifications, plus Destination country FE in the first column.
Regressions are weighted by the size of the birth cohort.
* significant at 95%, ** significant at 99%, t-statistics in parentheses and SEs clustered by
origin/destination dyad.

46

Table 11: Lagged effects of shocks and bilateral migration rates
Type of Shock:
Dependent Variable:
Annualized migration rate over census Annualized # of Serious Annualized # of Sudden
Natural Disasters
Stops
interval, percent.
Log Birth Cohort Size Ratio
Log GDP pc Ratio at Age 16

0.173
(1.61)

0.089
(0.50)

0.436
(2.89)**

0.367
(1.95)

Annualized Civil
Conflict
0.377
(2.01)

0.356
(1.88)

0.035

0.038

0.163

0.155

0.145

0.121

(0.37)

(0.32)

(1.90)

(1.55)

(1.19)

(0.80)

Shock

-0.337

-0.407

-0.417

-1.312

0.287

0.857

-1.93

(0.37)

(1.19)

(1.22)

(2.44)*

(1.02)

Shock, US only

0.677

1.228

0.842

0.821

-0.398

-0.642

(3.68)**

(2.56)*

(1.43)

(0.72)

(2.72)**

(2.18)*

-0.234

-0.388

-1.006

0.578

0.036

0.123

(3.49)**

(1.48)

(1.25)

(0.97)

(0.26)

(0.22)

Lagged Shock
Lagged Shock, US Only

0.256

1.269

(2.96)**

-0.107

(1.67)

(0.76)

Age

0.004

-0.012

-0.033

-0.023

-0.027

-0.030

-0.08

(0.18)

(0.89)

(0.67)

(0.80)

(0.77)

Age Squared

0.001

0.001

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

(2.26)*

(2.17)*

(1.60)

(0.93)

(0.53)

Cohort Size Ratio * Shock
GDP Ratio * Shock
Cohort Size Ratio * Lagged Shock
GDP Ratio * Lagged Shock

(1.00)

0.177

-0.084

-0.141

(0.75)
0.065
(0.15)
0.006
(0.09)
-0.191

(0.30)
-0.358
(0.88)
-0.055
(0.29)
0.232

(1.08)
0.268
(0.77)
0.056
(1.10)
0.018

(1.06)

(0.72)

(0.09)

Observations
515
515
434
434
376
376
All regressions calculated using five-year birthyear cohorts, with birth cohort, birth country, destination country, and
census wave fixed effects included in all specifications. Interactions of Cohort Size ratio*US only and GDP ratio*US
are
. included in columns 2, 4, and 6 but not reported. Regressions are weighted by the size of the birth cohort.
* significant at 95%, ** significant at 99%, t-statistics in parentheses and SEs clustered by origin/destination dyad.
# of Serious Natural Disasters is the sum, over census intervals, of earthquakes over 7.5 Richter, windstorms lasting a
week or more, or landslides or volcano eruptions affecting more than 1000 people in sending country.
# of Sudden Stops is the the sum, over census intervals, of Sudden Stops 1-4 from Cavallo data, defined as a fall in the
CA surplus of at least 2 SD from sample mean, with standard deviations calculated four different ways.
Civil Conflict is from CSCW Monadic Armed Conflict data, calculated as the number of years between census
internals in which a serious conflict exists (Extra-state, Intra-state, Internal, or Internationalized Internal) that killed
over 1000 people in the sending country.

47

7

7.5

Log births
8

8.5

9

Figure 1: Number of births by country, 1960-2005
(a) Smaller Caribbean Basin Countries

1960

1970

2000

1990

1980
Year

Antigua and Barbuda
Barbados
Grenada

The Bahamas
Belize

9

10

Log births
11

12

13

(b) Larger Caribbean Basin Countries

1960

1970

1990

1980

2000

Year
Dom Republic
Haiti
Trinidad & Tobago

Guyana
Jamaica

48

11

11.5

Log births
12

12.5

13

(c) Central America

1960

1970

2000

1990

1980
Year
Costa Rica
Guatemala
Nicaragua

El Salvador
Honduras

12

Log births
12.5
13

13.5

14

(d) Andes

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

Year
Bolivia
Ecuador
Venezuela

Colombia
Peru

49

11

12

Log births
13

14

15

(e) Southern Cone

1960

1970

1990

1980

2000

Year
Argentina
Chile
Uruguay

Brazil
Paraguay

50

Figure 2: Average Migration by Distance from US

Out-Migration Rates by Distance

0

% of origin cohort in destination
5
10
15

Quadratic fit over distance to origin, by destination

2

4

6
Distance to origin (km)
US
Spain

8

10

Canada
UK

51

