NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHY ISN'T MEXICO RICH?
Gordon H. Hanson
Working Paper 16470
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16470

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2010

Thanks to Daniel Chiquiar, Eduardo Engel, Roger Gordon, and Santiago Levy for helpful comments
and suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Gordon H. Hanson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Why Isn't Mexico Rich?
Gordon H. Hanson
NBER Working Paper No. 16470
October 2010
JEL No. F1,O4
ABSTRACT
Over the last three decades, Mexico has aggressively reformed its economy, opening to foreign trade
and investment, achieving fiscal discipline, and privatizing state owned enterprises. Despite these
efforts, the country’s economic growth has been lackluster, trailing that of many other developing
nations. In this paper, I review arguments for why Mexico hasn’t sustained higher rates of economic
growth. The most prominent suggest that some combination of poorly functioning credit markets,
distortions in the supply of non-traded inputs, and perverse incentives for informality creates a drag
on productivity growth. These are factors internal to Mexico. One possible external factor is that
the country has the bad luck of exporting goods that China sells, rather than goods that China buys.
I assess evidence from recent literature on these arguments and suggest directions for future research.

Gordon H. Hanson
IR/PS 0519
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093-0519
and NBER
gohanson@ucsd.edu

Introduction
In 1994, Mexico joined the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development.
Its admission, at the time unusual for a club of primarily rich nations, was recognition from
OECD members that the country was on the road to success. After a sovereign default in 1982,
which precipitated a currency collapse and sharp contraction in GDP, Mexico was forced to
make significant changes in its economy. Presaging reform efforts elsewhere in Latin America
and a decade later in Eastern Europe, the country proceeded aggressively to reduce the role of
the state in the economy and to embrace global markets.
Mexico’s approach was nothing if not ambitious. After its default, it faced a difficult
macroeconomic stabilization, from which it emerged with an independent central bank and more
developed financial markets (Aspe, 1993). Concomitantly, the country liberalized foreign trade
and investment, first unilaterally, by acceding to the General Agreement on Trade and Tariffs,
and later regionally, through the North American Free Trade Agreement. In the span of a few
years, it privatized a disparate collection of nearly 1,000 state-owned enterprises, including the
communications behemoth, Teléfonos de México (Telmex), and the country’s banks, which had
been nationalized in a failed effort to impede capital outflows leading up to the 1982 crisis
(Lustig, 1998). By 1994, the year NAFTA was implemented, Mexico’s transformation seemed
complete. Under the guidance of three successive technocratic governments, in which PhD
economists trained at US universities managed economic policy, the country had become a prime
exemplar of the Washington Consensus (Kuczynksi and Williamson, 2003).
All that was missing was economic growth. Alas, the growth never came. Mexico
succeeded in lowering inflation, maintaining fiscal discipline, reducing its external debt burden,
and increasing trade as a share of GDP. But its growth has been lackluster. Figure 1 plots log

1

per capita GDP in Mexico against a set of comparison countries roughly similar in population
and initial income. Within Latin America, Mexico has kept pace with Argentina, but not Chile
or, more recently, Brazil (panel a). Its growth is well below Southeast Asia (panel b) and Eastern
and Central Europe (panel c). Between 1985 and 2008, Mexico managed an annual average
growth rate in per capita GDP of just 1.1%, lower than all of the comparison countries except
Venezuela (0.8%). Given the vigor of its reforms, it is hard not to sense that Mexico has
underachieved (Ortiz, 2003). Managing to best only Venezuela, with its ongoing domestic
economic and political turmoil, is hardly the future the country had envisioned. In 2006, it was
in part disillusionment with the economy that brought Mexico within a hair’s breadth of electing
a populist president who campaigned on reversing earlier liberalizations.
In this paper, I review arguments for why Mexico hasn’t sustained higher rates of
economic growth. Much has been made of development disappointments in lower income
countries (e.g., Easterly, 2002; Stiglitz, 2003). The 1990s, during which Latin America suffered
from continued macroeconomic instability and a severe financial crisis rocked Asia, appeared to
belie the promise of market-oriented economic reform. However, in the 2000s such concerns
receded, as the expansion of China and India, among other emerging nations, created a surge in
global trade and contributed to broad-based income growth in export-oriented economies
(Hanson, 2010). Though the recent global recession brought a severe contraction in world
imports in 2008 and 2009, robust trade growth has now resumed.
In the 2000s trade boom, Mexico again seemed to miss out. Between 2001 and 2008,
while the other comparison countries managed annual growth rates of 2.3% or higher, Mexico
was stuck at 1.3% (Table 1). After three decades of sluggishness, the country’s growth record
looks idiosyncratic, reflecting deep structural impediments rather than short term problems, such

2

as real exchange rate overvaluation, which appeared responsible for the country’s weak
performance in the early 1990s (Dornbusch and Werner, 1994). Recent literature provides a host
of explanations for Mexico’s laggard status. 1 The most prominent suggest that some
combination of poorly functioning credit markets, distortions in the supply of non-traded inputs,
or perverse incentives for informality creates a drag on productivity growth. These are factors
internal to Mexico. One possible external factor is that Mexico has the bad luck of exporting
goods that China sells, rather than goods that China buys, meaning that China’s expansion has
put downward pressure on Mexico’s terms of trade. Clearly, none of these mechanisms is
unique to Mexico. For one or more of them to be able to explain Mexico’s growth record, they
must afflict the country in a particularly severe manner.
Before examining the arguments for Mexico’s stagnation, it is worth reviewing common
explanations for slow growth that are insufficient to explain the Mexican case. Because some
countries in Latin America have done well in the last decade, Mexico’s performance does not
appear to be solely attributable to the region-wide institutional deficiencies that are often blamed
for the hemisphere’s slow development. These include a legacy of Spanish and Portuguese
colonialism, high levels of wealth inequality, and factor endowments that facilitated the early
emergence of a landed elite (e.g., Sokoloff and Engerman, 2000; Edwards, Esquivel, and
Marquez, 2007; Edwards, 2009). The gap between average income in the United States and
Latin America first manifested itself in the 18th century and later widened in the 19th and 20th
centuries. Between 1950 and 2001, there was zero convergence between Latin America and the
US in per capita GDP. Latin America’s decline relative to Asia and Europe, which during the
1

For more in depth summaries of Mexico’s growth performance and possible explanations see Lustig (1998), which
focuses on macroeconomic stabilization and the absence of growth in the immediate aftermath of economic reforms;
the volumes in Levy and Walton (2009), which address the political economy of economic growth in Mexico; and
Chiquiar and Ramos-Francia (2009) and Aria, Azuara, Bernal, Heckman, and Villareal (2010), which examine the
microeconomic foundations of Mexico’s low productivity growth.

3

second half of the 20th century did converge toward US income levels, was due primarily to TFP.
The region has long been plagued by disappointingly low productivity growth (Cole, Ohanian,
Riascos, and Schmitz, Jr., 2005). Latin America’s common history is surely important for
understanding many aspects of its economic development. Yet, in recent decades the region has
not moved in lock step. Chile has performed decently since the late 1980s and Brazil, Colombia,
and Peru have since 2000. Mexico, despite its market friendly reforms, has not joined the group,
with its performance closer to Argentina and Venezuela, the region’s black sheep in terms of
economic policy. Its story must, then, have plot lines distinct from other Latin nations.
In low income countries, Collier (2007) identifies common pitfalls that contribute to
poverty traps. None apply to Mexico, itself a middle income nation. For the last 80 years,
Mexico has avoided military and political conflict, which enveloped the country in the early 20th
century. Indeed, after the 1982-1994 period of intensive economic reform, the country ended
seven decades of single party rule and transitioned to a functioning if combative democracy.
There has been a recent upsurge in violence associated with drug trafficking, but intense conflict
did not emerge until 2006, too late to account for Mexico’s sluggishness. 2 Despite being an oil
exporter, the resource curse does not seem to have hit Mexico. Oil as a share of exports peaked
in 1982 at 77% and has declined steadily since, falling below 40 percent by 1988 and below 15
percent by 1993. In 2009, oil accounted for just 13% of Mexico’s total exports. Over the last
two decades, Mexico’s trade growth has been heavily concentrated in manufacturing (MorenoBrid, Santamaria, and Rivas Valdivia, 2005). If anything, Mexico has invested too little in
petroleum exploration and production, partly as a consequence of constitutional limitations on
foreign investment in the sector (Manzano and Monaldi, 2008). And Mexico cannot be said to
2

The growth of the drug trade may distort GDP figures for Mexico. It is likely that value added in cultivating and
exporting marijuana and opium, manufacturing and exporting methamphetamine, and distributing cocaine from
South America to the United States is not fully represented in the country’s national income accounts.

4

suffer from residing in a poor neighborhood. NAFTA affords the country access to two nearby
large, rich markets. In 2009, Mexico’s exports to the US as a share of its total foreign shipments
were 81%. Mexico’s problems, it seems, lie elsewhere.

1. Faulty Provision of Credit
The provision of credit is central to the process of economic development (Rajan and
Zingales, 1998). Without mechanisms that move savings from lenders to borrowers, a country
has poor prospects for taking advantage of productive investment opportunities. Mexico stands
out for channeling low levels of private credit to firms or households. Over the period 20012008, domestic credit to the private sector as a share of GDP averaged 18% in Mexico, lower
than all comparison countries except Argentina and Venezuela (Table 2). A growing body of
literature cites the weakness of Mexico’s credit markets as an important factor behind the
country’s low productivity growth.
Poorly developed financial markets have plagued Mexico since its independence from
Spain (Haber, 1991). One problem has been risk of expropriation. In the last 40 years, the
government has expropriated the assets of private banks twice (Haber, 2005). The first episode
was a de facto nationalization that occurred in the mid 1970s, when the government increased the
reserves banks were required to hold in the central bank to over 40 percent and paid an interest
rate on these deposits that trailed the rate of inflation. The second expropriation was an explicit
bank nationalization in 1982, which occurred in the midst of Mexico’s sovereign default.
Another problem has been poor oversight of bank lending. Shortly after Mexico’s banks were
privatized in 1991, credit provision spiked. Haber (2005) argues that in Mexico’s haste to
privatize its banks it failed to establish mechanisms that would impede the abuse of deposit

5

insurance or lending to bank directors or other insiders. Consequently, bank credit expanded
rapidly, financed in part by interbank lending, which the government insured. Rapidly
accumulating non-performing loans and the 1994 peso collapse contributed to widespread bank
failures. 3 The government was later obligated to recapitalize the banking system.
Since the 1994-1995 banking crisis, Mexico has overhauled its financial regulations. It
has modernized accounting standards, permitted foreign ownership of banks, set reserves
according to the riskiness of bank loan portfolios, modified deposit insurance, and sought to
prevent insider lending. While bankruptcy provisions were also modified, Haber (2005) suggests
that these reforms primarily affected easily collateralizable loans, such as for autos or homes, but
did little to spur commercial lending. As a result, the difficulty lenders have in seizing assets
from borrowers continues to hinder credit provision. In the 2004 World Bank Doing Business
Indicators, Mexico scored a 0 out of 4 in protections provided to creditors, putting it among just
11 countries (out of 132) in the lowest category. In Table 2, one sees that despite Mexico’s
reforms domestic credit to the private sector actually declined from the 1990s to the 2000s, with
its performance relative to comparison countries showing no improvement. 4
Turning to how credit markets affect growth, Bergoeing, Kehoe, Kehoe, and Soto (2002)
suggest that Mexico’s bankruptcy laws account for Mexico’s poor performance relative to Chile.
Beginning in the 1970s, both countries suffered government debt crises and bouts of high
inflation which they addressed by imposing fiscal austerity and monetary restraint. Each

3

Tornell, Westermann, and Martinez (2004) suggest that because the credit crunch was accompanied by a
significant real exchange rate depreciation the non-traded sector was hit particularly hard, with the contraction in
non-tradables ultimately creating bottlenecks in the supply of inputs that inhibited export growth.
4
Chiquiar and Ramos-Francia (2009) and Haber (2009) suggest that while these reforms did not appreciably lower
interest rates to borrowers they did lead to greater concentration in the banking sector and to higher profit margins
(both in absolute terms and relative to a comparison group of 12 other countries, among which only Brazil and Peru
had higher bank profitability). Mexico’s government competition commission, out of concern that the country’s
banking system is imperfectly competitive, has ruled that Mexico’s banks should make their services more
transparent and reduce costs to consumers of switching banks. It has also moved to lower bank entry barriers.

6

liberalized trade and privatized state owned companies. Subsequently, Chile enjoyed high
productivity and income growth while Mexico did not. Provisions for seizing assets of
borrowers in default are an important remaining difference between the two nations. Chile’s
laws are relatively favorable toward lenders. Through process of elimination, Bergoeing et al.
(2002) conclude that the differences in bankruptcy laws are the most likely explanation for
Chile’s superior performance. While differences in bankruptcy provisions are certainly a
plausible explanation for the two countries’ divergence, the evidence is circumstantial.
Bergoeing et al. (2002) make a convincing case that differences in fiscal or trade policy cannot
account for Chile’s relative success, but a host of other factors, including those mentioned below,
remain outside consideration. Additionally, Bergoeing et al. (2002) argue that Chile and Mexico
privatized state-owned companies to a comparable degree. But other literature (e.g., Levy and
Walton, 2009) suggests that it is how Mexico privatized its companies that matters, in particular
the country’s failure to prevent the formation of private monopolies.
For credit markets to be a factor in Mexico’s low growth rates, they must affect
productivity. To gauge the extent of barriers to investment in Mexico, McKenzie and Woodruff
(2008) conducted an experiment in which they randomized the provision of cash grants to small
retail firms in Mexico, the results from which allow them to estimate the marginal rate of return
to investment. They find that rates of return to capital are 20% to 32% per month, which were
three to five times market interest rates during the sample period. Rates of return are highest
among firms that report being financially constrained (but, surprisingly, also remain above
market rates for firms that do not report being constrained). Their results suggest that there are
imperfections in Mexico’s financial markets, which impede the flow of credit to profitable
undertakings, particularly for small scale entrepreneurs. Other evidence, some experimental and

7

some not, suggests that in Ghana, India, Kenya, and Sri Lanka rates of return to capital in small
scale enterprises are also well above market rates (see discussion in McKenzie and Woodruff,
2008), implying that Mexico’s situation is not unique.
Could weak protections for creditors be responsible for limited access to credit in
Mexico? In the United States, Gropp, Scholz, and White (1997) find that in states that provide
higher personal exemptions for debtors in bankruptcy, which limits the assets that creditors can
seize, a lower fraction of credit is held by low-asset households, suggesting that weak creditor
protections divert lending away from relatively poor borrowers. Yet, diverting credit away from
the poor, while a concern for poverty alleviation, does not necessarily translate into diminished
productivity growth. Fan and White (2003) find that higher exemptions for personal bankruptcy
in US states operate as a form of wealth insurance, which increases the level of entrepreneurship,
even as high risk borrowers are cut off from loans. 5
How important, then, are Mexico’s credit problems in explaining its growth
performance? Based on a survey of 4,000 firms in 54 countries during the late 1990s, Beck,
Demirguc-Kunt, and Maksimovic (2005) report that the fraction of firms saying they face severe
obstacles in obtaining finance is highest in Mexico. Their work also finds that firm sales growth
is lower in countries that have greater obstacles in obtaining financing, measured in terms of
collateral requirements, bank paperwork, or interest rates. These findings, while intriguing,
represent indirect evidence on economic growth, as they relate to firm sales and not productivity
and do not account for why financial policies vary across countries.
One could imagine two approaches to estimate the impact of bankruptcy provisions on
5

For firms in the informal sector, the incentives for entrepreneurship from generous bankruptcy provisions may be
undermined by other aspects of the tax code. Informal entrepreneurs, by virtue of their tax status, reap no tax
savings from losses to income or capital. However, they may only be able to realize substantial gains to income or
capital by shifting into the formal sector, which brings with it an increase in tax liabilities. The asymmetric
treatment of gains and losses may be a disincentive to innovation among informal enterprises.

8

productivity growth in Mexico. One would be a cross country approach, similar to Beck,
Demirguc-Kunt, and Maksimovic (2005) but extended over longer time period, in which one
regressed firm or industry growth in productivity on measures of creditor protection, exploiting
cross country and cross time variation in bankruptcy provisions. The obvious problem with such
regressions is that in order for them to be well identified one would have to find sources of
exogenous variation in countries’ financial provisions, which could be difficult. A second
approach would be for Mexico itself to experiment with changing its bankruptcy provisions,
perhaps by varying the timing of adjustments in protections to creditors across states within the
country. One could then estimate how firm, industry, or regional outcomes change in response
to the policy change. Such an experiment would clearly be a significant undertaking, but given
the low apparent return to Mexico from its extensive financial reforms to date the benefits from
identifying which features of credit markets continue to inhibit growth may yield
commensurately large returns.

2. Social policy and informality
The size of the informal sector in Latin America is frequently cited as a drag on economic
development. Aside from de Soto’s (1989) so-called romantic perspective, in which informal
firms are a vibrant and underappreciated part of the productive economy, many commentators
see informality as the result of firms remaining small in order to avoid onerous government
regulations (La Porta and Schleifer, 2008). Informality keeps firms in existence that would be
forced to exit, either because of poor management or outdated technology, if they had to compete
for inputs with formal sector firms on a level playing field. One consequence of informality is,
therefore, the survival of small, unproductive enterprises. The dispersion in productivity across

9

plants in Mexico is much higher than in the United States. In 2004, 36% of manufacturing
employment in Mexico was in establishments with fewer than 50 workers and 22% was in
establishments with fewer than 10 workers. Enterprises with under 10 employees tend to have
very low TFP (Pages, 2010), with 91% of these plants having productivity levels below their
industry average. The majority of these micro-enterprises are informal.
Hsieh and Klenow (2009) use micro data on Mexican non-agricultural establishments to
examine how aggregate TFP in the country would change were productivity equalized across
establishments by moving factors toward more productive plants, while accounting for
endogenous changes in productivity at the plant level. Based on data for 1999 and 2004, they
estimate that such a reallocation would raise TFP in Mexico by 100% in the manufacturing
sector and by 250%-300% in non-manufacturing. The aggregate productivity gain from factor
reallocation for Mexico is, interestingly, comparable to that for China but 1.5 to 2 times larger
than for Argentina, Bolivia, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, or Uruguay.
For these counterfactual exercises to be meaningful, there must be distortions in the
economy that prevent factor reallocation from occurring naturally. Hsieh and Klenow find that
TFP is higher in firms that make payments into Mexico’s social security system, which is Levy’s
(2008) preferred definition of formality, suggesting that evasion of payroll taxes is among the
distortions contributing to productivity dispersion. Formal sector firms make contributions to
social security equal to 18% of the total wagebill. Hsieh and Klenow estimate that reallocating
factors to establishments that pay into social security would raise aggregate productivity by 19%
in manufacturing, or one fifth of the total productivity gain from factor reallocation, implying
informality is an important source of cross-plant differences in TFP.
Levy (2008) makes an explicit argument for how informality affects productivity in

10

Mexico. The starting point for his critique is Mexico’s dual system of social insurance. One
system governs the formal economy, in which workers and employers are subject to obligatory
payroll taxes that cover social security benefits, including retirement pensions, health care,
disability and life insurance, child care, and housing loans. Formal sector employment is also
subject to regulations that govern firing and severance pay. A second system of social insurance
covers the workers that Levy defines as informal, including illegally employed salaried workers
(i.e., workers that by law should be enrolled in social security but are not), workers paid on
commission, the self employed, and unpaid workers. These individuals have the option of
participating in social protection programs, subject to a nominal contribution, which provide
health care, retirement pensions, housing subsidies, child care, and life insurance. Importantly,
the participation of informal workers in social protection programs is voluntary and a la carte,
allowing individuals to select into the specific programs which suite their needs. Formal
workers, whose contributions to social security are mandatory, have no such option. Further, the
monetary contributions of informal workers do not cover the full cost of social protection
programs, with the difference met in part by consumption taxes.
In theory, the tax on formal sector employment and the subsidy to informal sector
employment results in a relatively low (high) marginal productivity of labor in the informal
(formal) sector, creating static inefficiency and depressing aggregate TFP. Empirical evidence,
as seen, is consistent with such outcomes. Additionally, informality may have negative dynamic
effects on productivity, and therefore growth, if keeping wages of formal establishments
artificially high reallocates investment toward lower productivity informal firms. In Mexico it
appears that the returns to labor market experience are lower in informal than in formal
employment, which may indicate that informality suppresses the accumulation of human capital

11

(Arias, Asuara, Bernal, Heckman, and Villarreal, 2010). While the theoretical linkages between
informality and growth are clear, making the empirical connection is more problematic.
Informality appears to result in a lower level of TFP but does it suppress TFP growth? In
Mexico’s case, one would want to know whether raising the benefits to informal workers
through social protection programs (financed by consumption taxes) lowers the growth rate.
Research has yet to provide a definitive answer to this question.
What research has examined is whether the recent expansions of social protection
programs available to informal workers have reallocated employment toward the informal sector.
The aggregate data show no upward trend in informality (Arias, Asuara, Bernal, Heckman, and
Villarreal, 2010). Between 1995 and 2009, the fraction of workers employed outside of the
social security system in Mexico actually declined, from 66% to 62%, though informality did
rise among urban workers. Among the different categories of informal workers, only the share
of illegal salaried labor in employment has increased over time. The employment share of selfemployed workers has been stable and the share for workers paid on commission has fallen.
In micro-level analysis of whether Mexico’s dual system of social insurance has
increased informality, Barros (2008) exploits regional variation in the timing of the role out of
Seguro Popular, a large health insurance program available to workers who are not covered by
social security which is the centerpiece of Mexico’s new system of social protection. The
program amounted to a substantial increase in the quality and quantity of health insurance to
qualifying individuals, who account for roughly half the population, forcing the government to
phase in the program gradually. The timing of the roll out favored small states and states not in
control of the main opposition political party. Barros finds that in repeated cross section data the
probability a household head works in the informal sector is uncorrelated with the government

12

projected enrollment intensity of Seguro Popular (i.e., the planned enrollment in a state in a
given year based on the roll out strategy), meaning that individuals in states exposed to earlier
roll out of Seguro Popular were not more likely to be employed informally. Because program
intensity is not random, the results are hard to interpret. The estimation strategy would
underestimate the effect of Seguro Popular on informality if the planned roll out of the program
was more rapid in states subject to shocks that disfavor formality.
Knox (2008) addresses similar questions using panel data on 800 families, exploiting
temporal variation in which families were eligible for Seguro Popular (thus allowing her to
control for household fixed effects in informal status). Becoming eligible for the program
increases labor force participation, which implies an increase in employment in the informal
sector given that eligible households are those that do not qualify for social security. Juarez
(2008) focuses on the roll out of a free health care program in Mexico City, finding that for
females (in salaried employment with no more than 12 years of education) expanded health
benefits reduces the likelihood of being employed formally (i.e., being covered by social
security). Though the literature is still young, there is some evidence that expanded health
insurance for informal workers increases employment in the informal sector.
The level of TFP in informal establishments in Mexico is low relative to formal plants.
Mexico’s social protection programs may be raising the incentive for informality, possibly
hindering growth. However, the newness of these programs suggests they cannot account for
Mexico’s poor growth performance prior to the late 1990s. Social protection programs for the
poor in Mexico have accommodated informality, thereby contributing to its persistence, but
cannot explain the origins of informality in Mexico or why the growth effects of informality in
the country would be worse than elsewhere in Latin America.

13

3. Too little regulation (or too much)
In comparing production costs across countries, Mexico stands out for having high prices
for electricity, high prices for telecommunications services, expensive and spotty internet
services, and a scarcity of skilled labor. In each of these input markets, specific interest groups
are blamed either for impeding the government from enforcing anti-monopoly regulations or for
convincing the government to regulate markets in a way that preserves their capacity to earn
rents (Levy and Walton, 2009). While I discuss just three input markets, these arguments have
been applied to other sectors of Mexico’s economy, as well (see Guerrero, Lopez-Calva, and
Walton, 2009). While unfavorable conditions in Mexico’s input markets are well documented, it
is less clear whether they can account for Mexico’s poor relative growth.
The most maligned industrialist in Mexico is perhaps Carlos Slim, the world’s richest
person and the largest shareholder in Telmex, Mexico’s telecommunications giant. Slim is
blamed for using his acquisition of Telmex from the government first to establish and later to
protect monopoly power in markets for landline telephone services, mobile telephony, and
internet access. In data for 2006-2008, Mexico compares poorly to other countries in the costs of
its telecom services. Among a group of developing and developed nations, 6 it has the highest
levels of single-firm concentration in fixed and mobile telephone industries (with Telmex
controlling over 90 percent in the former and over 70 percent in the latter), the highest costs of
fixed line business telephone services (which are two and half times the level in the United
States), and the lowest number of broadband internet subscribes per capita (Chiquiar and RamosFrancia, 2009). While it is plausible that Telmex’s dominant market position allows it to earn

66

The comparison countries are Brazil, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, the Czech Republic, EU nations, Hungary,
Japan, Korea, New Zealand, Poland, the Slovak Republic, Turkey, and the United States.

14

supra-normal profits, it is unclear whether such an outcome matters for Mexico’s growth rate.
The argument would have to be that high prices for telecom services depress capital
accumulation or innovation. A causal link between the price and availability of
telecommunications services and economic growth has yet to be established.
Surprising as it may seem for a country that exports oil, Mexico has relatively high prices
for electricity. Since 2000, electricity prices per kilowatt hour in Mexico have exceeded those in
the United States by 1.1 to 1.7 times. Among comparison countries, Mexico has the highest rate
of energy loss, measured as energy produced but not paid for as a percentage of total energy
handled (Chiquiar and Ramos-Francia, 2009). Electricity production in Mexico is the sole
provenance of two state owned companies, which have historically had strong labor unions. The
proximate causes for Mexico’s high costs and low quality in electricity generation include
reliance on oil based production, low labor productivity, and high wages for electricity workers,
who are among the most highly paid workers in the country and whose average wage rates are
over three times the average for formal sector workers. Holding output constant, were electricity
generation in Mexico to operate with the same labor productivity as in Chile, Mexico would have
62% fewer workers in the sector. As with telecommunications services, high electricity prices
raise production costs relative to other countries. Again, however, it is unclear how the price of
electricity affects the rate of economic growth.
An input market whose functioning does have well established effects on growth is the
supply of skilled labor. If Mexico’s public schools or labor market regulations somehow reduce
the incentive to attain education, then Mexico may have lower growth rates, resulting either from
a reduced supply of innovation-producing scientists and engineers (e.g., Jones, 1995) or from
missing out on positive externalities in the accumulation of human capital (e.g., Lucas, 1988). In

15

2007, only 50% of Mexicans 15-19 years old were enrolled in public or private educational
institutions, slightly above levels for Turkey but 20% to 42% below Brazil, Chile, Estonia,
Hungary, Korea, Portugal, the Slovak Republic, and Slovenia (Arias et al., 2010). Mexico’s
poor education performance may be attributable to the capture of its education system by
powerful labor unions. Close to 90% of public education expenditure in Mexico is on
compensation of staff, leaving little left over for buildings, computers, or other educational
infrastructure. However, other countries in Latin America also have unionized public education,
which raises the question of why Mexico’s would have consequences that are more deleterious
for growth. Mexico’s labor unions have strongly opposed linking teacher pay to student
performance but this hardly makes them unique.
Beyond rates of tertiary education, Mexican students perform poorly in standardized tests
relative to students in other nations at roughly similar income levels. Combining PISA scores for
math, reading and science, Mexico does worse than all developing countries except Brazil,
scoring well below Chile, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Korea, Poland, Russia, and the
Slovak Republic, both in absolute terms and relative to what one would predict based on
expenditure per student in the country (Arias et al., 2010). Pritchett and Viarengo (2009) suggest
that what may matter for country’s economic development is not the average performance of
students but the number of high achievers. Here again, Mexico’s does not compare well. A
PISA score of 625 qualifies a student as advanced. Only 0.3% of Mexican students attain a score
of 625 or higher, relative to 18% in Korea, 9% in the Slovak Republic, and 2% in Thailand. If
such high achievers are used intensively in developing or applying new technology, Mexico may
face supply constraints in R&D relative to other countries.
Another factor potentially affecting Mexico’s supply of skilled labor is emigration to the

16

United States. As of 2008, there were 11.4 million individuals born in Mexico residing in the
US, equal to 9.5% of the total Mexico born population (defined as the sum of Mexico born
individuals in Mexico and the United States). Emigrants are overrepresented among the young.
In 2000, 18% of Mexico born men aged 16 to 25 were residing in the United States, compared to
9% of 46 to 55 year olds. However, the skill profile of emigrants differs only modestly from
individuals that remain in Mexico. Chiquiar and Hanson (2005) compare the earnings of nonmigrants in Mexico with the earnings that emigrants would earn were they to return to the
country and be paid according to prevailing wage patterns. Emigrant men are drawn
disproportionately from the middle of Mexico’s wage distribution, whereas emigrant women are
modestly positively selected. These results are based on 1990 and 2000 censuses for Mexico and
the United States, in which one might be concerned about the undercount of illegal immigrants.
Kaestner and Malamud (2010) largely replicate Chiquiar’s and Hanson’s findings using the
Mexican Family Life Survey, which tracks individuals in Mexico over time, including those that
migrate to the US, whether legally or illegally.
We know little about how emigration affects skill or capital accumulation in Mexico.
Higher emigration puts upward pressure on Mexican wages (Mishra, 2007: Aydemir and Borjas,
2007), reducing the incentive for capital inflows. Since the majority of Mexican migrants enter
the United States illegally (Hanson, 2006), they may perceive weak incentives to continue their
education beyond secondary school. Thus, emigration may be contributing to Mexico’s
observed low rates of school attendance among 15 to 19 year olds. In rural Mexico, McKenzie
and Rapoport (2010 find that the likelihood of completing secondary school or beginning high
school is lower for youths in households that have sent migrants abroad.
While we see that Mexico produces few highly educated students relative to other

17

countries, the literature has yet to explain why or quantify the implications of this fact for
economic growth. Garcia-Verdu (2007) estimates that rising educational attainment –
specifically, the decline in the share of workers with no schooling or primary schooling and in
the increase in the share with secondary or tertiary schooling – accounts for 74% of Mexico’s
GDP growth over 1988-1994 and 65% over 1995-2005. However, aggregate TFP growth was
negative in both time periods. If educational attainment was rising, why was TFP declining?
This question cannot be answered in a standard growth accounting framework, in which TFP
growth is taken as given. Obvious directions for future research are to examine the link between
schooling, academic performance, emigration, and TFP levels and growth rates in Mexico.

4. The perils of competing with China
In the 1980s, as Mexico embarked upon a strategy of export-led development it sought to
emulate the successful industrializers of East Asia. Then President Carlos Salinas cited Korea, in
particular, as a model for Mexico, with hopes that the country would create its own chaebol –
Korea’s large industrial groups characterized by vertical integration in production, horizontal
differentiation in output, and rapid export growth – to lead the country into the global economy.
The reality turned out to be far different. Exports have grown dramatically in Mexico, rising
from 12% of GDP in 1982 to 28% in 2008. However, it is not large, vertically integrated firms
that export the bulk of Mexico’s goods. Instead, nearly half of the country’s manufacturing
exports and over 20 percent of its manufacturing value added (as of 2006) are produced by
maquiladoras, or export assembly plants, which import inputs from abroad, primarily the United
States, assemble or process the inputs into final outputs, and then export the finished goods,
again primarily to the US (Bergin, Feenstra, and Hanson, 2010). Hong Kong and Taiwan also

18

began their industrial development with heavy reliance on export assembly. Their firms later
graduated into original-equipment manufacture and own-brand production, which involves
greater in-house fabrication of inputs and design of outputs (Enright, Scott, and Dodwell, 1997).
Mexico has not made such a transition. While the country has progressed from assembling
apparel to assembling electronics and auto parts, it remains specialized in the labor-intensive
processing of inputs for the US economy.
Mexico’s failure to graduate from export assembly has left it exposed to competition
from China, whose abundance in low skilled labor has given it a strong comparative advantage in
labor-intensive manufacturing. By the late 1990s, export processing plants in China, which are
similar to Mexico’s maquiladoras, accounted for over half of the country’s manufacturing
exports (Feenstra and Hanson, 2005). For Mexico, China’s growth is more threatening than it is
for other countries in Latin America. Other large Latin nations tend to export the minerals,
agricultural goods, and other commodities that China imports. In Mexico, as already mentioned,
petroleum now accounts for less than 15 percent of exports. For better or worse, Mexico’s
fortunes in the global economy are tied to manufacturing. Over the period 2000-2005,
manufacturing accounted for 88% of exports in China and 83% in Mexico, but only 54% in
Brazil, 34% in Colombia, 20% in Peru, and 16% in Chile.
Figure 2 shows that over the period 1991 to 2007, China’s share of US manufacturing
imports rose steadily, whereas Mexico’s share rose through the 1990s and then begin to decline.
For both countries, there is an inflection point in 2001, at which time China’s increase in US
market share accelerated and Mexico changed from having a rising share to a declining one. The
significance of 2001 is that this year marks China’s accession to the World Trade Organization,
giving it most favored nation status among WTO members. It is plausible that China’s joining

19

the WTO helped it to capture foreign market share from Mexico (see, e.g., Brambilla,
Khandelwal, and Schott, 2010, on the apparel and textile industries).
The challenge of China’s export growth for Mexico is that the two countries specialize in
similar goods. Chiquiar and Ramos-Francia (2009) calculate correlations between indices of
revealed comparative advantage for Mexico and for other developing countries. Mexico’s
ranking of goods by revealed comparative advantage is most strongly correlated with Hungary,
followed by in close order by Thailand, the Philippines, Korea, Turkey, Poland, and China.
They find further that in the last decade Mexico has been losing comparative advantage vis-à-vis
China in around 40% of its manufacturing exports (including electrical machinery, computers
and electronics, furniture, and non-metallic minerals), while maintaining a comparative
advantage in another third of its products (including automobiles and auto parts, industrial
machinery, and beverages). Hanson and Robertson (2010) use results from a gravity model of
trade to estimate the change in demand for Mexico’s exports that would have occurred had
China’s export supply capacity remained constant over the period 1995 to 2005. For Mexico,
nullifying the improvement in China’s export capability would mean a 2% to 4% increase in the
global demand for Mexico’s exports, an effect that is larger than for any other manufacturing
oriented developing economy. 7 Hsieh and Ossa (2010) take a more theoretical approach,
introducing Ricardian productivity differences into a Melitz (2003) model of trade, deriving
comparative statics for changes in wages and prices resulting from productivity changes in
different countries, calibrating the model to data, and then calculating the counterfactual income
levels that would have obtained had productivity growth in China over 1993-1994 to 2004-2005
been zero. Not surprisingly, slower productivity growth in China means higher real incomes in

7

The comparison countries are Hungary, Malaysia, Pakistan, the Philippines, Poland, Romania, Sri Lanka,
Thailand, and Turkey.

20

Mexico. Had China’s productivity been flat, Mexico’s welfare would have been 0.8% higher, a
larger effect than for any other economy that Hsieh and Ossa consider.
Aside from effects on the level of income in Mexico, could competition from China
explain Mexico’s lackluster economic growth? If so, the argument would go as follows. Since
the late 1980s, China has been undergoing a transition from a rural economy dominated by state
owned enterprises to an urban and more market-oriented one. The transition is protracted, as it
involves moving over a 150 million workers from the countryside to cities, importing foreign
technology, opening China’s markets to the rest of the world, and allowing private firms to
replace the state in production. China’s size, high rate of growth, and increasing outward
orientation mean that its emergence is surely changing international prices, improving the terms
of trade for countries that produce its importables and deteriorating the terms of trade for
countries that produce its exportables. Mexico fits squarely in the latter camp, whereas
Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, and Peru fit in the former. Nevertheless, the downward
pressure on the price of Mexico’s export goods is unlikely to be permanent. It will abate once
China completes its transition or accumulates enough human and physical capital to graduate
from the cone of diversification that Mexico now occupies and to move to a cone specializing in
more skill and capital intensive products, a process which may already be underway. The impact
of China on Mexico, then, is not about long run growth but a prolonged transitional period in
which China has been realizing its latent comparative advantage.
The main problem with the China hypothesis for Mexico’s growth record is timing. In
Figure 2, it is apparent that competition from China became most acute after 2001, suggesting
China may have had only a modest role in Mexico’s slow growth in the 1980s and early 1990s.
While China’s continued rise may be not good news for Mexico, it cannot be the sole factor

21

behind Mexico’s performance over the last three decades.

5. Final discussion
Any discussion of growth and development in Mexico ends up resembling a Diego
Rivera mural, overstuffed with historical characters that collide in repeated and unexpected
ways. Mexico’s underperformance is overdetermined. The faulty provision of credit,
persistence of informality, control of key input markets by elites, continued ineffectiveness of
public education, and vulnerability to adverse external shocks each may have a role in explaining
Mexico’s development trajectory over the last three decades. We do not yet know the relative
importance of these factors for the country’s growth record.
Perhaps what is most striking about Mexico’s recent experience is that the country has
tried so hard but achieved so little. The breadth and depth of reform in the country is astounding,
yet Mexico does not have much to show for it. Going forward, one would hope that future
research would focus on providing guidance to policy makers about which specific policy
interventions may be effective. One can imagine individual research agendas to estimate the
impact of changes in bankruptcy provisions, social insurance programs, anti-monopoly
regulations, government regulation of electricity markets, or public education on industrial or
regional productivity. Such research would undoubtedly be of use to Mexican policy makers.
But there is a danger in focusing exclusively on individual policies and ignoring their
interactions. Even a cursory examination of Mexico’s economic structure suggests the country is
deep in the world of the second best, meaning that models based on a single distortion may be a
poor guide to how future reform would change economic outcomes in the country.
An example from the discussion in this paper helps drive the point home. Bankruptcy

22

provisions that are overly protective of borrowers inhibit the flow of credit to individuals whose
observable characteristics suggest they are poor credit risks. The high rate of return to
investment in small-scale enterprises suggests that credit market imperfections impede
productive investments. Yet, the high rate of return to capital exists in small-scale enterprises
that other data suggest have very low TFP and whose survival depends in part on evading payroll
taxes that formal sector firms do not escape. If the distortions that cause informality are
maintained, reforming bankruptcy provisions could be counter-productive in that it would shift
investment towards the country’s least productive establishments. If one wants to consider
reforming bankruptcy provisions in Mexico, one should also seek to understand how these
provisions interact with social insurance programs that may promote informality. Research,
then, would benefit from proceeding along two tracks, one that performs rigorous
microeconomic analysis of individual policy interventions and another that uncovers the general
equilibrium interactions of these policies.

23

REFERENCES
Aspe, Pedro. 1993. Economic Transformation the Mexican Way. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Aydemir, Abdurrahman, Borjas, George J. 2007. “A comparative analysis of the labor market
impact of international migration: Canada, Mexico, and the United States.” Journal of the
European Economic Association, 5(4): 663–708.
Barros, Rodrigo. 2008. “Wealthier but Not Much Healthier: Effects of a Health Insurance
Program for the Poor in Mexico.” Mimeo, Stanford University.
Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirguc-Kunt, and Vojislav Maksimovic. 2005. “Financial and Legal
Constraints to Growth: Does Firm Size Matter?” Journal of Finance, 60(1): 137-177
Bergin, Paul, Robert C. Feenstra, and Gordon H. Hanson. 2009. “Offshoring and Volatility:
Evidence from Mexico’s Maquiladora Industry,” American Economic Review, 99: 1664-1671
Bergoeing, Raphael, Patrick J. Kehoe, Timothy J. Kehoe, Raimundo Soto. 2002. “A Decade
Lost and Found: Mexico and Chile in the 1980s.” Review of Economic Dynamics, 5: 166205.
Brambilla, Irene, Amit Khandelwal, and Peter Schott. 2010. “China’s Experience under the
Multifiber Arrangement (MFA) and the Agreement on Textiles and Clothing (ATC).” In
Robert Feenstra and Shang Jin Wei, eds., China’s Growing Role in World Trade, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press and the NBER.
Chiquiar, Daniel, and Gordon Hanson. 2005. “International Migration, Self-Selection, and the
Distribution of Wages: Evidence from Mexico and the United States,” Journal of Political
Economy, April 113: 239-281.
Chiquiar, Daniel, and Ramos-Francia. 2009. “Competitiveness and Growth of the Mexican
Economy.” Banco de Mexico Working Paper No. 2009-11.
Cole, Harold L., Lee E. Ohanian, Alvaro Riascos, and James A. Schmitz, Jr. 2005. “Latin
America in the Rear View Mirror.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 52: 69-107.
Collier, Paul. 2007. The Bottom Billion: Why the Poorest Countries Are Failing and What Can
Be Done about It. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
de Soto, Hernando. 1989. The Other Path: The Invisible Revolution in the Third World. New
York: Harper & Row.
Dornbusch, Rudiger, and Alejandro Werner. 1994. “Mexico: Stabilization, Reform and No
Growth.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1: 253-315.
Edwards, Sebastian. 2009. “Latin America’s Decline: A Long Historical View.” NBER
Working Paper No. 15717.
24

Edwards, Sebastian, Gerardo Esquivel, and Graciela Marquez. 2007. The Decline of Latin
American Economies. Chicago: University of Chicago and NBER.
Easterly, William. 2002. The Elusive Quest for Growth. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Enright, Michael J., Edith E. Scott, and David Dodwell. 1997. The Hong Kong Advantage.
Hong Kong: Oxford University Press.
Fan, Wei, and Michelle White. 2003. “Personal Bankruptcy and the Level of Entrepreneurial
Activity.” Journal of Law and Economics, 46(2): 543-568.
Feenstra, Robert C. and Gordon H. Hanson. 2005. “Ownership and Control in Outsourcing to
China: Estimating the Property Rights Theory of the Firm,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
May 120: 729-762.
Garcia-Verdu, Rodrigo. 2007. “Demographics, Human Capital and Economic Growth in Mexico,
1950-2005.” Mimeo, The World Bank.
Gropp, Reint, John Karl Scholz, and Michelle White. 1997. “Personal Bankruptcy and Credit
Supply and Demand.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(1): 217-251.
Guerrero, Isabel, Luis Felipe Lopez-Calva, and Michael Walton. 2009. “The Inequality Trap
and Its Links to Low Growth in Mexico.” In Santiago Levy and Michael Walton, eds., No
Growth without Equity? Inequality, Interests, and Competition in Mexico. Washington, DC:
Palgrave MacMillan and the World Bank, 111-156.
Haber, Stephen. 1991. “Industry Concentration in Capital Markets: A Comparative Study of
Brazil, Mexico, and the United States, 1830-1930.” Journal of Economic History, 51(3):
559-580.
Haber, Stephen. 2005. “Why Institutions Matter: Banking and Economic Growth in Mexico.”
Mimeo, Stanford University.
Haber, Stephen. 2009. “Why Banks Do Not Lend: The Mexican Financial System.” In
Santiago Levy and Michael Walton, eds., No Growth without Equity? Inequality, Interests,
and Competition in Mexico. Washington, DC: Palgrave MacMillan and the World Bank,
283-320.
Hanson, Gordon. 2006. “Illegal Migration from Mexico to the United States,” Journal of
Economic Literature, 44: 869-924.
Hanson, Gordon. 2010. “Sources of Export Growth in Developing Countries.” Mimeo, UC San
Diego.
Hanson, Gordon, and Raymond Robertson. 2010. “China and the Manufacturing Exports of Other
Developing Countries,” in Robert Feenstra and Shang Jin Wei, eds., China’s Growing Role in
World Trade, Chicago: University of Chicago Press and the NBER, 137-159.

25

Hsieh, Chang Tai, and Ralph Ossa. 2010. “A Global View of Productivity Growth in China.”
Mimeo, University of Chicago.
Jones, Charles. 1995. “R&D Based Models of Economic Growth.” Journal of Political
Economy, 103(4): 759-784.
Juarez, Laura. 2008. “Are Informal Workers Compensated for the Lack of Fringe Benefits?
Free Health Care as an Instrument for Formality.” Mimeo, ITAM.
Kaestner, Robert, and Ofer Malamud. 2010. “Self Selection and International Migration: New
Evidence from Mexico.” NBER Working Paper No. 15765.
Knox, Melissa. 2008. “Health Insurance for All: An Evaluation of Mexico’s Seguro Popular
Program.” Mimeo, University of Washington.
Kuczynski, Pedro-Pablo, and John Williamson. 2003. After the Washington Consensus:
Restoring Growth and Reform in Latin America. Washington, DC: Institute for International
Economics.
La Porta, Rafael, and Andrei Schleifer. 2008. “The Unofficial Economy and Economic
Development.” Brookings Papers on Microeconomic Activity, 1.
Levy, Santiago. 2008. Good Intentions, Bad Outcomes: Social Policy, Informality, and
Economic Growth in Mexico. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press.
Levy, Santiago, and Michael Walton. 2009. “Equity, Competition and Growth in Mexico.” In
Santiago Levy and Michael Walton, eds., No Growth without Equity? Inequality, Interests,
and Competition in Mexico. Washington, DC: Palgrave MacMillan and the World Bank, 144.
Lucas, Robert. 1988. “The Mechanics of Economic Growth.” Journal of Monetary Economics.
22(1): 3-42.
Lustig, Nora. 1998. Mexico: The Remaking of an Economy. Washington, DC: Brookings
Institution Press.
Manzano, Osmel, and Francisco Monaldi, 2008. “The Political Economy of Oil Production in
Latin America.” Economia, 9(1): 59-98.
McKenzie, David, and Hillel Rapoport. 2010. “Can Migration Reduce Educational Attainment?
Evidence from Mexico.” Journal of Population Economics, forthcoming.
McKenzie, David, and Christopher Woodruff. 2008. “Experimental Evidence on Returns to
Capital and Access to Finance in Mexico.” World Bank Economic Review, 22(3): 457-482.
Moreno-Brid, Juan Carlos, Jesus Santamaria, and Juan Carlos Rivas Valdivia. 2005.
“Industrialization and Economic Growth in Mexico after NAFTA: The Road Less
Travelled.” Development and Change, 36(6): 1095-1119.
26

Mishra, Prachi. 2007. “Emigration and wages in source countries: Evidence from Mexico.”
Journal of Development Economics, 82(1): 180–199.
Ortiz, Guillermo. 2003. “Overcoming Reform Fatigue.” Finance and Development, September,
14-17.
Pages, Carmen. 2010. La Era de Productividad. Washington, DC: Inter-American
Development Bank.
Rajan, R. and Luigi Zingales. 1998. “Financial Dependence and Growth.” American Economic
Review, 88: 559-586.
Sokoloff, Kenneth L., and Stanley L Engerman. 2000. “History Lessons: Institutions, Factor
Endowments, and Paths of Development in the New World.” Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 14(3): 217-232.
Stiglitz, Joseph. 2003. Globalization and Its Discontents. New York: W.W. Norton.
Tornell, Aaron, Frank Westermann, and Lorenza Martinez. 2004. “NAFTA and Mexico’s Less
than Stellar Performance.” NBER Working Paper No. 10289.

27

FIGURE 1: ECONOMIC GROWTH IN COMPARISON COUNTRIES

-.5

log per capita GDP (1980=0)
0
.5

1

(a) Latin America

1980

1985

1995
year

1990

Mexico
Brazil
Venezuela

2000

2005

Argentina
Chile

-.5

log per capita GDP (1980=0)
0
.5
1

1.5

(b) Southeast Asia

1980

1985

1990

1995
year

Mexico
Malaysia
Thailand

28

2000
Indonesia
Philippines

2005

-.2

log per capita GDP (1980=0)
0
.2
.4
.6

.8

(c) Eastern and Central Europe

1980

1985

1990

1995
year

Mexico
Hungary
Turkey

29

2000
Bulgaria
Romania

2005

.02

.04

.06

.08

.1

FIGURE 2: SHARE OF US MANUFACTURING IMPORTS

1990

1992

1994

1996

2000
1998
Year
Mexico

30

2002
China

2004

2006

2008

TABLE 1: RATE OF ECONOMIC GROWTH

Country
Argentina
Brazil
Bulgaria
Chile
Colombia
Czech Republic
Hungary
Indonesia
Malaysia
Mexico
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Romania
Thailand
Turkey
Venezuela

Average annual change
log per capita GDP
1985-2008
2001-2008
0.016
0.032
0.014
0.023
0.022
0.062
0.042
0.031
0.019
0.031
0.020
0.040
0.018
0.035
0.035
0.038
0.035
0.031
0.011
0.013
0.015
0.044
0.013
0.028
0.039
0.042
0.012
0.068
0.045
0.037
0.027
0.033
0.008
0.027

31

TABLE 2: DOMESTIC CREDIT TO PRIVATE SECTOR (% OF GDP)

Country

1991-2000

2001-2008

20.16
56.42
32.72
65.72
27.82
45.73
163.44
25.62
19.13
42.09
21.73
9.33
127.55
19.90
16.93

13.79
36.89
27.03
39.32
49.22
24.24
130.94
17.98
21.16
33.58
32.80
20.95
103.01
21.90
14.63

Argentina
Brazil
Colombia
Czech Republic
Hungary
Indonesia
Malaysia
Mexico
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Romania
Thailand
Turkey
Venezuela

Notes: Domestic credit to private sector refers to financial resources provided to the private sector, such
as through loans, purchases of nonequity securities, trade credits and other accounts receivable. Source:
WDI.

32

