                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           RAILROADS OF THE RAJ:
         ESTIMATING THE IMPACT OF TRANSPORTATION INFRASTRUCTURE

                                           Dave Donaldson

                                        Working Paper 16487
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16487


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2010




I am extremely grateful to Timothy Besley, Robin Burgess and Stephen Redding for their encouragement
and support throughout this project. My thesis examiners, Richard Blundell and Chang-Tai Hsieh,
and discussants, Costas Arkolakis and Samuel Kortum, provided detailed and valuable advice, and
seminar audiences at Berkeley, BU, Brown, the CEPR (Development Economics Conference), Chicago,
CIFAR, the Econometric Society European Winter Meetings, Harvard, the Harvard-Hitotsubashi-Warwick
Economic History Conference, IMF, LSE, MIT, Minneapolis Federal Reserve (Applied Micro Workshop),
NBER Summer Institute (ITI), Northwestern, Nottingham, NYU, Oxford, Penn, Penn State, Philadelphia
Federal Reserve, Princeton, Stanford, Toronto, Toulouse, UCL, UCLA, Warwick, Wharton, World
Bank, and Yale made thoughtful comments that improved this work. I am also grateful to Erasmus
Ermgassen, Rashmi Harimohan and Sritha Reddy for their help with the data; to the British Academy,
the Nuffield Foundation, the Royal Economic Society, and STICERD for funding the data collection;
and to the Bagri Fellowship and the DFID Program on Improving Institutions for Pro-Poor Growth
for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Dave Donaldson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Railroads of the Raj: Estimating the Impact of Transportation Infrastructure
Dave Donaldson
NBER Working Paper No. 16487
October 2010
JEL No. F15,N15,N75,O1,R13,R4

                                              ABSTRACT

How large are the benefits of transportation infrastructure projects, and what explains these benefits?
To shed new light on these questions, this paper uses archival data from colonial India to investigate
the impact of India's vast railroad network. Guided by four predictions from a general equilibrium
trade model, I find that railroads: (1) decreased trade costs and interregional price gaps; (2) increased
interregional and international trade; (3) increased real income levels; and (4), that a sufficient statistic
for the effect of railroads on welfare in the model (an effect that is purely due to newly exploited gains
from trade) accounts for virtually all of the observed reduced-form impact of railroads on real income
in the data. I find no spurious effects from over 40,000 km of lines that were approved but - for four
different reasons - were never built.


Dave Donaldson
MIT Department of Economics
50 Memorial Drive, E52-243G
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
ddonald@mit.edu
1     Introduction
In 2007, almost twenty percent of World Bank lending was allocated to transportation infras-
tructure projects, a larger share than that of education, health and social services combined
(World Bank, 2007). These projects aim to reduce the costs of trading. In prominent models
of international and interregional trade, reductions in trade costs will increase the level of real
income in trading regions. Unfortunately, despite an emphasis on reducing trade costs in both
economic theory and contemporary aid efforts, we lack a rigorous empirical understanding of
the extent to which transportation infrastructure projects actually reduce the costs of trading,
and how the resulting trade cost reductions affect welfare.
    In this paper I exploit one of history’s great transportation infrastructure projects—the
vast network of railroads built in colonial India (India, Pakistan and Bangladesh; henceforth,
simply ‘India’)—to make three contributions to our understanding of transportation infras-
tructure improvements. In doing so I draw on a comprehensive new dataset on the colonial
Indian economy that I have constructed. First, I estimate the extent to which railroads im-
proved India’s trading environment (ie, reduced trade costs, reduced interregional price gaps,
and increased trade flows). Second, I estimate the reduced-form welfare gains (higher real
income levels) that the railroads brought about. Finally, I assess, in the context of a general
equilibrium trade model, how much of these reduced-form welfare gains could be plausibly
interpreted as newly exploited gains from trade.
    The railroad network designed and built by the British government in India (then known to
many as ‘the Raj’) brought dramatic change to the technology of trading on the subcontinent.
Prior to the railroad age, bullocks carried most of India’s commodity trade on their backs,
traveling no more than 30 km per day along India’s sparse network of dirt roads (Deloche,
1994). By contrast, railroads could transport these same commodities 600 km in a day, and at
much lower per unit distance freight rates. As the 67,247 km long railroad network expanded
from 1853 to 1930, it penetrated inland districts (local administrative regions), bringing them
out of near-autarky and connecting them with the rest of India and the world. I use the
arrival of the railroad network in each district to investigate the economic impact of this
striking improvement in transportation infrastructure.
    This setting is unique because the British government collected detailed records of eco-
nomic activity throughout India in this time period—remarkably, however, these records have
never been systematically digitized and organized by researchers. I use these records to con-
struct a new, district-level dataset on prices, output, daily rainfall and interregional and
international trade in India, as well as a digital map of India’s railroad network in which each
20 km segment is coded with its year of opening. This dataset allows me to track the evolution
of India’s district economies before, during, and after the expansion of the railroad network.

                                                1
The availability of records on interregional trade is particularly unique and important here.
Information on trade flows within a country is rarely available to researchers, yet the response
of these trade flows to a transportation infrastructure improvement says a great deal about
the potential for gains from trade (as I describe explicitly below).
    To guide my empirical analysis I develop a Ricardian trade model with many regions,
many commodities, and where trade occurs at a cost. Because of geographical heterogeneity,
regions have differing productivity levels across commodities, which creates incentives to trade
in order to exploit comparative advantage. A new railroad link between two districts lowers
their bilateral trade cost, allowing consumers to buy goods from the cheapest district, and
producers to sell more of what they are best at producing. There are thousands of interacting
product and factor markets in the model. But the analysis of this complex general equilibrium
problem is tractable if production heterogeneity takes a convenient but plausible functional
form, as shown by Eaton and Kortum (2002).
    I use this model to assess empirically the importance of one particular mechanism linking
railroads to welfare improvements—that railroads reduced trade costs and thereby allowed
regions to gain from trade. The model makes four predictions that drive my four-step empirical
analysis:

  1. Inter-district price differences are equal to trade costs (in special cases): That is, if a
     commodity can be made in only one district (the ‘origin’) but is consumed in other
     districts, then that commodity’s origin-destination price difference is equal to its origin-
     destination trade cost. Empirically, I use this result to measure trade costs (which, like
     all researchers, I cannot observe directly) by exploiting widely-traded commodities that
     could only be made in one district. Using inter-district price differentials, along with a
     graph theory algorithm embedded in a non-linear least squares routine, I estimate the
     trade cost parameters governing traders’ endogenous route decisions on a network of
     roads, rivers, coasts and railroads. This is a novel method for inferring trade costs in
     networked settings. My resulting parameter estimates reveal that railroads significantly
     reduced the cost of trading in India.

  2. Bilateral trade flows take the ‘gravity equation’ form: That is, holding constant exporter-
     and importer-specific effects, bilateral trade costs reduce bilateral trade flows. Empir-
     ically, I use the estimate from a gravity equation, in conjunction with the trade cost
     parameters estimated in Step 1, to identify all of the relevant unknown parameters of
     the model.

  3. Railroads increase real income levels: That is, when a district is connected to the railroad
     network its real income rises. Empirically, I find that railroad access raises real income

                                               2
       by 16 percent. This reduced-form estimate could arise through a number of economic
       mechanisms. A key goal of Step 4 below is to assess how much of the reduced-form
       impact of railroads on real income can be attributed to gains from trade due to the
       trade cost reductions found in Step 1.

   4. There exists a sufficient statistic for the welfare gains from railroads: That is, despite the
      complexity of the model’s general equilibrium relationships, the impact of the railroad
      network on welfare in a district is captured by its impact on one endogenous variable:
      the share of that district’s expenditure that it sources from itself. A prediction similar to
      this appears in a wide range of trade models but has not, to my knowledge, been tested
      before.1 Empirically, I test this prediction by regressing real income on this sufficient
      statistic (as calculated using the model’s parameter estimates obtained in Steps 1 and
      2) alongside the regressors from Step 3 (which capture the reduced-form impact of
      railroads). When I do this, the estimated reduced-form coefficients on railroad access
      (from Step 3) fall to a level that is close to zero. This finding provides support for
      Prediction 4 of the model and implies that decreased trade costs account for virtually
      all of the real income impacts of the Indian railroad network.

    These four results demonstrate that India’s railroad network improved the trading envi-
ronment (Steps 1 and 2) and generated welfare gains (Steps 3), and suggest that these welfare
gains arose predominantly because railroads allowed regions to exploit gains from trade (Step
4).
    A natural concern when estimating the impact of infrastructure projects is that of bias
due to a potential correlation between project placement and unobserved changes in the local
economic environment. These concerns are likely to be less important in my setting because
(as described in Section 2) military motives for railroad placement usually trumped economic
arguments, the networked nature of railroad technology inhibited the ability of planners to
target specific locations precisely, and planning documents reveal just how hard it was for
technocrats to agree on the efficacy of railroad plans. Nevertheless, to mitigate concerns of
selection bias I estimate the ‘effects’ of over 40,000 km of railroad lines that reached advanced
stages of costly surveying but—for four separate reasons that I document in Section 6—were
never actually built. Reassuringly, these ‘placebo’ lines never display spurious effects.
    This paper contributes to a growing literature on estimating the economic effects of large
infrastructure projects,2 as well as to a literature on estimating the ‘social savings’ of rail-
   1
    Arkolakis, Costinot, and Rodriguez-Clare (2010) show that this prediction applies to the Krugman (1980),
Eaton and Kortum (2002), and Chaney (2008) models of trade, but these authors do not test this prediction
empirically.
  2
    For example, Dinkelman (2007) estimates the effect of electrification on labor force participation in South


                                                      3
road projects.3 A distinguishing feature of my approach is that, in addition to estimating
reduced-form relationships between infrastructure and welfare, as in the existing literature, I
fully specify and estimate a general equilibrium model of how railroads affect welfare.4 The
model makes auxiliary predictions and suggests a sufficient statistic for the role played by
railroads in raising welfare—all of which shed light on the economic mechanisms that could
explain my reduced-form estimates. Using a model also improves the external validity of my
estimates because the primitive in my model—the cost of trading—is specified explicitly, and
is portable to a range of settings (such as tariff liberalization or road construction) in which the
welfare benefits of trade cost-reducing polices might be sought. By contrast, my reduced-form
estimates are more likely to be specific to the context of railroads in colonial India.
    This paper also contributes to a rich literature concerned with estimating the welfare
effects of openness to trade, because the reduction in trade costs brought about by India’s
railroad network rapidly increased each district’s opportunities to trade.5 Again, the fact that
my empirical approach connects explicitly to an estimable, general equilibrium model of trade
offers advantages over the existing literature. The model suggests a theoretically-consistent
way to measure ‘openness,’ sheds light on why trade openness raises welfare, and provides a
natural way to study changes in openness to both internal and external trade at the same
time.
    The next section describes the historical setting in which the Indian railroad network was
constructed and the new data that I have collected from that setting. In Section 3, I outline a
model of trade in colonial India and the model’s four predictions. Sections 4 through 7 present
four empirical steps that test the model’s four predictions qualitatively and quantitatively.
Section 8 concludes.
Africa, Duflo and Pande (2007) estimate the effect of dam construction in India on agriculture, Jensen (2007)
evaluates how the construction of cellular phone towers in South India improved efficiency in fish markets,
and Michaels (2008) estimates the effect of the US Interstate Highway system on the skilled wage premium.
An older literature, beginning with Aschauer (1989), pioneered the use of econometric methods in estimating
the benefits of infrastructure projects.
   3
     Fogel (1964) first applied the social savings methodology to railroads in the United States, and Hurd
(1983) performed a similar exercise for India. In Section 6.5 I compare my estimates to those from using a
social savings approach.
   4
     The use of general equilibrium modeling, on its own, to evaluate transportation projects here is not novel.
For example, both Williamson (1974) and Herrendorf, Schmitz, and Teixeira (2009) use calibrated general
equilibrium models to study the impact of railroads on the antebellum US economy.
   5
     Frankel and Romer (1999), Alcala and Ciccone (2004), Feyrer (2009) and others use cross-country regres-
sions of real GDP levels on ‘openness’ (defined in various ways) to estimate the effect of openness on welfare.
Pavcnik (2002), Trefler (2004), and Topalova (forthcoming) among others instead analyze trade liberalizations
within one country by exploiting cross-sectional variation in the extent of liberalization across either industries
or regions.




                                                        4
2       Historical Background and Data
In this section I discuss some essential features of the colonial Indian economy and the data
that I have collected in order to analyze how this economy changed with the advent of railroad
transport. I go on to describe the transportation system in India before and after the railroad
era, and the institutional details that determined when and where railroads were built.


2.1     New Data on the Indian Economy, 1870-1930
In order to evaluate the impact of the railroad network on economic welfare in colonial India
I have constructed a new panel dataset on 235 Indian districts. The dataset tracks these
districts annually from 1870-1930, a period during which 98 percent of British India’s current
railroad lines were opened. Table 1 contains descriptive statistics for the variables that I use
in this paper and describe throughout this section. Appendix A contains more detail on the
construction of these variables.
    During the colonial period, India’s economy was predominantly agricultural, with agricul-
ture constituting an estimated 66 percent of GDP in 1900 (Heston, 1983).6 For this reason,
district-level output data were only collected systematically in the agricultural sector. Data on
agricultural output were recorded for each of 17 principal crops (which comprised 93 percent
of the cropped area of India in 1900).7 Retail prices for these 17 crops were also recorded at
the district-level. I use these price figures to construct a nominal agricultural output series
for each district and year and then a real agricultural income per acre figure by dividing nom-
inal output by a consumer price index and district land area. The resulting real agricultural
income per acre variable provides the best available measure of district-level economic welfare
in this time period.
    Real incomes were low during my sample period, but there was 22 percent growth between
1870 and 1930.8 Real incomes were low because crop yields were low, both by contemporaneous
international standards and by Indian standards today.9 One explanation for low yields, which
featured heavily in Indian agricultural textbooks of the day (such as Wallace (1892)), was
    6
      Factory-based industry—which Atack, Haines, and Margo (forthcoming) argue benefited from access to
railroads in the United States—amounted to only 1.6 percent of India’s GDP in 1900.
    7
      These crops are: bajra, barley, bengal gram, cotton, indigo, jowar, kangni, linseed, maize, opium, ragi,
rape and mustard seed, rice, sesamum, sugarcane, tur and wheat.
    8
      For comparison, Heston (1983) estimates that in 1869, on the basis of purchasing power exchange rates,
per capita income in the United States was four times that in India. This income disparity rises to ten if
market exchange rates are used instead of PPP rates.
    9
      For example, the yield of wheat in India’s ‘breadbasket’, the province of Punjab, was 748 lbs/acre in 1896.
By contrast, for similar types of wheat, yields in Nevada (the highest state yields in the United States) in
1900 were almost twice as high (see plate 15 of United States Census Office (1902)) and yields in (Indian)
Punjab in 2005 were over five times higher than those in 1896 (as calculated from the Indian District-wise
Crop Production Statistics Portal, http://dacnet.nic.in/apy/cps.aspx).


                                                       5
inadequate water supply. Only 12 percent of cultivated land was irrigated in 1885 and while
this figure had risen to 19 percent in 1930, the vast majority of agriculture maintained its
dependence on rainfall.10
    Because rainfall was important for agricultural production, 3614 meteorological stations
were built throughout the country to record the amount of rainfall at each station on every
day of the year. Daily rainfall data were recorded and published because the distribution
of rainfall throughout the year was far more important to farmers and traders than total
annual or monthly amounts. In particular, the intra-annual distribution of rainfall governed
how different crops (which were grown in distinct stretches of the year) were affected by a
given year’s rainfall. In Sections 5 and 7 below, I use daily rainfall data collected from India’s
meteorological stations to construct crop-specific measures of rainfall and use these as a source
of exogenous variation in crop-specific productivity.
    Commensurate with the increase in real agricultural income levels in India was a significant
rise in interregional trade. The final component of the dataset that I have constructed on
colonial India consists of data on these internal trades whenever they occurred via railroad,
river or sea (data on road trade was only very rarely collected). The role that these data play
in my analysis is explained in Section 5 below.


2.2     Transportation in Colonial India
Prior to the railroad era, goods transport within India took place on roads, rivers, and coastal
shipping routes.11 The bulk of inland travel was carried by bullocks, along the road network.
On the best road surfaces and during optimal weather conditions, bullocks could pull a cart
of goods and cover 20-30 km per day. However, high-quality roads were extremely sparse and
the roads that did exist were virtually impassable in the monsoon season. For this reason
most trade was carried by ‘pack’ bullocks (which carried goods strapped to their backs and
usually traveled directly over pasture land), which were considerably slower and riskier than
cart bullocks.
    Water transport was far superior to road transport, but it was only feasible on the Brahma-
putra, Ganges and Indus river systems.12 In optimal conditions, downstream river traffic (with
additional oar power13 ) could cover 65 km per day; upstream traffic needed to be towed from
  10
     These figures encompass a wide definition of irrigation, including the use of tanks, cisterns, and reservoirs
as well as canals. See the Agricultural Statistics of India, described in Appendix A. 1885 is the first year in
which comprehensive irrigation statistics were collected.
  11
     The description of pre-rail transportation in this section draws heavily on the comprehensive treatments
of Deloche (1994), Deloche (1995), and Derbyshire (1985).
  12
     Navigable canals either ran parallel to sections of these three rivers or were extremely localized in a small
number of coastal deltas (Stone, 1984).
  13
     Steamboats had periods of success in the colonial era, but were severely limited in scope by India’s seasonal


                                                        6
the banks and struggled to cover 15 km per day. Extensive river travel was impossible in the
rainy monsoon months or the dry summer months and piracy was a serious hazard. Coastal
shipping, however, was perennially available along India’s long coastline. This form of ship-
ping was increasingly steam-powered after 1840. Steamships were fast and could cover over
100 km per day but could only service major ports (Naidu, 1936).
    Against this backdrop of costly and slow internal transportation, the appealing prospect
of railroad transportation in India was discussed as early as 1832 (Sanyal, 1930)—though it
was not until 1853 that the first track was actually laid. From the outset, railroad transport
proved to be far superior to road, river or coastal transport (Banerjee, 1966). Trains were
capable of traveling up to 600 km per day and they offered this superior speed on predictable
timetables, throughout all months of the year, and without any serious threat of piracy or
damage (Johnson, 1963). Railroad freight rates were also considerably cheaper: 4-5, 2-4, and
1.5-3 times cheaper than road, river and coastal transport, respectively. A principal goal of
Section 4 below is to estimate how much railroad technology reduced total trade costs, costs
which combine all of these attractions of railroads over other modes.


2.3     Railroad Line Placement Decisions
Throughout the history of India’s railroads, all railroad line placement decisions were made
by the Government of India. It is widely accepted that the Government had three mo-
tives for building railroads: military, commercial, and humanitarian—in that order of priority
(Thorner, 1950; Macpherson, 1955; Headrick, 1988). In 1853, Lord Dalhousie (head of the
Government of India) wrote an internal document to the East India Company’s Court of
Directors that made the case for a vast railroad network in India and military motives for
railroad-building appeared on virtually every page of this document14 . These arguments gath-
ered new momentum when the 1857 ‘mutiny’ highlighted the importance of military commu-
nications (Headrick, 1988). Dalhousie’s 1853 minute described five “trunk lines” that would
connect India’s five major provincial capitals along direct routes and maximize the “political
advantages” of a railroad network.
    Between 1853 and 1869, all of Dalhousie’s trunk lines were built—but not without signifi-
cant debate over how best to connect the provincial capitals. Dalhousie and Major Kennedy,
India’s Chief Engineer, spent over a decade discussing and surveying their competing—and
and shifting rivers.
  14
     For example, from the introduction: “A single glance...will suffice to show how immeasurable are the
political advantages to be derived from the system of internal communication, which would admit of full
intelligence of every event being transmitted to the Government...and would enable the Government to bring
the main bulk of its military strength to bear upon any given point in as many days as it would now require
months, and to an extent which at present is physically impossible.” (House of Commons Papers, 1853).



                                                    7
very different—proposals for a pan-Indian network (Davidson, 1868; Settar, 1999). This de-
bate indicates the vicissitudes of railroad planning in India and it was repeated many times
by different actors in Indian railroad history. I have collected planning documents from a
number of railroad expansion proposals that, along with Kennedy’s proposal, were debated
and surveyed at length, but were never actually built. As discussed in Section 6.4 below, I
use these plans in a ‘placebo’ strategy to check that unbuilt lines display no spurious ‘impact’
on the district economies in which they were nearly built.
     As is clear from Figure 1, the railroad network in place in 1930 (by and large, the same
network that is open today) had completely transformed the transportation system in India.
67,247 km of track were open for traffic, constituting the fourth-largest network in the world.
From their inception in 1853 to their zenith in 1930, railroads were the dominant form of
public investment in British India. But influential observers were highly critical of this public
investment priority—the Nationalist historian, Romesh Dutt, argued that they did little to
promote agricultural development,15 and Mahatma Gandhi argued simply that, “there can be
little doubt that [railroads] promote evil” (Gandhi, 1938). In the remainder of this paper I
use new data to assess quantitatively the effect of railroads on India’s trading environment
and agricultural economy.


3      A Model of Railroads and Trade in Colonial India
In this section I develop a general equilibrium model of trade among many regions in the
presence of trade costs. The model is based on Eaton and Kortum (2002), but with more
than one commodity, and serves two purposes. First, it delivers four predictions about the
response of observables to trade cost reductions. Second, I estimate the unknown parameters
of the model and use the estimated model to assess whether the observed reduction in trade
costs due to the railroads can account, via the mechanism stressed in this model, for the
observed increase in welfare due to railroads. Both of these features inform our understanding
of how transportation infrastructure projects can raise welfare.


3.1     Model Environment
The economy consists of D regions (indexed by either o or d). There are K commodities
(indexed by k), each available in a continuum (with mass normalized to one) of horizontally
differentiated varieties (indexed by j). In my empirical application I work with data on prices,
  15
    For example, on page 174 of his landmark textbook on Indian economic history: “Railways...did not add
to the produce of the land.” (Dutt, 1904)




                                                   8
output and trade flows that refer to commodities, not individual varieties. While my empir-
ical setting will consider 70 years of annual observations, for simplicity the model is static; I
therefore suppress time subscripts until they are necessary.

Consumer Preferences:
Each region o is home to a mass (normalized to one) of identical agents, each of whom owns Lo
units of land. Land is geographically immobile and supplied inelastically. Agents have Cobb-
Douglas preferences over commodities (k) and constant elasticity of substitution preferences
over varieties (j) within each commodity; that is, their (log) utility function is

                                            K                  Z   1
                                            X   µk
                                  ln Uo =                   ln           (Cok (j))εk dj,                    (1)
                                            k=1
                                                   εk            0

                                 .
where Cok (j) is consumption, εk = σkσ−1
                                      k
                                         (where σk is the constant elasticity of substitution),
     P
and k µk = 1. Agents rent out their land at the rate of ro per unit and use their income
ro Lo to maximize utility from consumption.

Production and Market Structure:
Each variety j of the commodity k can be produced using a constant returns to scale produc-
tion technology in which land is the only factor of production. Let zok (j) denote the amount
of variety j of commodity k that can be produced with one unit of land in region o. I follow
Eaton and Kortum (2002) in modeling zok (j) as the realization of a stochastic variable Zok
drawn from a Type-II extreme value distribution whose parameters vary across regions and
commodities in the following manner

                                         .
                                 Fok (z) = Pr(Zok ≤ z) = exp(−Ako z −θk ),                                  (2)

where Ako ≥ 0 and θk > 0. These random variables are drawn independently for each variety,
commodity and region.16 The exogenous parameter Ako increases the probability of high
productivity draws and the exogenous parameter θk captures (inversely) how variable the
(log) productivity of commodity k in any region is around its (log) average.
    There are many competitive firms in region o with access to the above technology; conse-
quently, firms make zero profits.17 These firms will therefore charge a pre-trade costs (ie, ‘free
  16
     Costinot, Donaldson, and Komunjer (2010) show that the key features of the Eaton and Kortum (2002)
model hold locally around a symmetric distribution of exogenous productivity terms Ako for any continuous
productivity distribution.
  17
     My empirical application is primarily to the agricultural sector. This sector was characterized by millions
of small-holding farmers who were likely to be price-taking producers of undifferentiated products (varieties j
in the model). For example, in the 1901 census in the province of Madras, workers in the agricultural sector


                                                        9
on board’) price of pkoo (j) = ro /zok (j), where ro is the land rental rate in region o.

Opportunities to Trade:
Without opportunities to trade, consumers in region d must consume even their region’s worst
draws from the productivity distribution in equation (2). The ability to trade breaks this
production-consumption link. This allows consumers to import varieties from other regions
in order to take advantage of the favorable productivity draws available there, and allows
producers to produce more of the varieties for which they received the best productivity
draws. These two mechanisms constitute the gains from trade in this model.
      However, there is a limit to trade because the movement of goods is subject to trade
costs (which include transport costs and other barriers to trade). These trade costs take the
convenient and commonly used ‘iceberg’ form. That is, in order for one unit of commodity
                                k
k to arrive in region d, Tod       ≥ 1 units of the commodity must be produced and shipped in
                                      k
region o; trade is free when Tod         = 1. (Throughout this paper I refer to trade flows between
                                                                                          k
an origin region o and a destination region d; all bilateral variables, such as Tod         , refer to
quantities from o to d.) Trade costs are assumed to satisfy the property that it is always
(weakly) cheaper to ship directly from region o to region d, rather than via some third region
               k       k   k                           k                                             k
m: that is, Tod   ≤ Tom  Tmd . Finally, I normalize Too  = 1. In my empirical setting I proxy for Tod
with measures calculated from the observed transportation network, which incorporates all
possible modes of transport between region o and region d. Railroads enter this transportation
                                                k
network gradually over time, reducing Tod         and creating more gains from trade.
      Trade costs drive a wedge between the price of an identical variety in two different re-
gions. Let pkod (j) denote the price of variety j of commodity k produced in region o, but
shipped to region d for consumption there. The iceberg formulation of trade costs implies
                                                  k
that any variety in region d will cost Tod          times more than it does in region o; that is,
pkod (j) = Tod
            k k               k
               poo (j) = ro Tod  /zok (j).

Equilibrium Prices and Allocations:
Consumers have preferences for all varieties j along the continuum of varieties of commodity
k. But they are are indifferent about where a given variety is made—they simply buy from
the region that can provide the variety at the lowest cost (after accounting for trade costs).
I therefore solve for the equilibrium prices that consumers in a region d actually pay, given
that they will only buy a given variety from the cheapest source region (including their own).
    The price of a variety sent from region o to region d, denoted by pkod (j), is stochastic
(67.9 percent of the almost 20 million strong workforce) were separately enumerated by their ownership status,
and 35.7 percent of these workers were owner-cultivators, or proprietors of extremely small-scale farms (Risley
and Gait, 1903).


                                                      10
because it depends on the stochastic variable zok (j). Since zok (j) is drawn from the CDF in
equation (2), pkod (j) is the realization of a random variable Pod
                                                                k
                                                                   drawn from the CDF

                                    .                                 k −θk θk
                                          k
                           Gkod (p) = Pr(Pod ≤ p) = 1 − exp[−Ako (ro Tod ) p ].                                       (3)

This is the price distribution for varieties (of commodity k) made in region o that could
potentially be bought in region d. The price distribution for the varieties that consumers in d
will actually consume (whose CDF is denoted by Gkd (p)) is the distribution of prices that are
the lowest among all D regions of the world:

                                                 D
                                                 Y
                             Gkd (p)   = 1−            [1 − Gkod (p)],
                                                 o=1
                                                             "   D
                                                                                    #       !
                                                                 X
                                                                                k −θk
                                       = 1 − exp −                     Ako (ro Tod )  pθk       .
                                                                 o=1


    Given this distribution of the actual prices paid by consumers in region d, it is straight-
forward to calculate any moment of the prices of interest. The price moment that is relevant
for my empirical analysis is the expected value of the equilibrium price of any variety j of
commodity k found in region d, which is given by
                                                       " D                #−1/θk
                                           .            X
                                                                    k −θk
                                E[pkd (j)] = pkd = λk1     Ako (ro Tod )         ,                                    (4)
                                                            o=1

            .
where λk1 = Γ(1 + θ1k ).18 In my empirical application below I treat these expected prices as
equal to the observed prices collected by statistical agencies.19
    Given the price distribution in equation (3), Eaton and Kortum (2002) derive two im-
portant properties of the trading equilibrium that carry over to the model here. First, the
price distribution of the varieties that any given origin actually sends to destination d (ie,
the distribution of prices for which this origin is region d’s cheapest supplier) is the same
for all origin regions. This implies that the share of expenditure that consumers in region d
allocate to varieties from region o must be equal to the probability that region o supplies a
                                                         R∞
  18
     Γ(.) is the Gamma function defined by Γ(z) = 0 tz−1 e−t dt.
  19
      A second price moment that is of interest for welfare analysis is the exact price index over all varieties
                                                                                                                 i1/1−σk
                                                                                            . R1
                                                                                               h
of commodity k for consumers in region d. Given CES preferences, this is pekd = 0 (pkd (j))1−σk dj                       ,
which is only well defined here for σk < 1 + θk (a condition I assume throughout). The exact price index is
                                    . k            .
given by pekd = λk2 pkd , where λk2 = λγ k and γ k = [Γ( θk +1−σ
                                                             θk
                                                                k
                                                                  )]1/(1−σk ) . That is, if statistical agencies sampled
                                         1
varieties in proportion to their weights in the exact price index, as opposed to randomly as in the expected
price formulation of equation (4), then this would not jeopardize my empirical procedure because the exact
price index is proportional to expected prices.


                                                            11
variety to region d (because the price per variety, conditional on the variety being supplied to
                                               k
d, does not depend on the origin). That is Xod   /Xdk = πod k
                                                               , where Xodk
                                                                            is total expenditure in
                                                      k .          k
                                                            P
region d on commodities of type k from region o, Xd = o Xod is total expenditure in region
                                     k
d on commodities of type k, and πod    is the probability that region d sources any variety of
                                                          k
commodity k from region o. Second, this probability πod       is given by

                               k
                              Xod    k                 k −θk
                                  = πod = λk3 Ako (ro Tod )  (pkd )θk ,                         (5)
                              Xdk

where λk3 = (λk1 )−θk , and this equation makes use of the definition of the expected value of
prices (ie, pkd ) from equation (4).
    Equation (5) characterizes trade flows conditional on the endogenous land rental rate, ro
(and all other regions’ land rental rates, which appear in pkd ). It remains to solve for these land
rents in equilibrium, by imposing the condition that each region’s trade is balanced. Region
o’s trade balance equation requires that the total income received by land owners in region o
(ro Lo ) must equal the total value of all commodities made in region o and sent to every other
region (including region o itself). That is:
                                     XX              XX
                                              k                k
                           ro Lo =           Xod =            πod µk rd Ld ,                    (6)
                                     d   k            d   k


where the last equality uses the fact that (with Cobb-Douglas preferences) expenditure in
region d on commodity k (Xdk ) will be a fixed share µk of the total income in region d (ie,
of rd Ld ). Each of the D regions has its own trade balance equation of this form. I take the
rental rate in the first region (r1 ) as the numeraire good, so the equilibrium of the model is
the set of D-1 unknown rental rates rd that solves this system of D-1 (non-linear) independent
equations.


3.2    Four Predictions
In this section I state explicitly four of the model’s predictions. These predictions are pre-
sented in the order in which they drive my empirical analysis (ie, Steps 1-4) below.

Prediction 1: Price differences measure trade costs (in special cases):
In the presence of trade costs, the price of identical commodities will differ across regions. In
general, the cost of trading a commodity between two regions places only an upper bound on
their price differential. However, in the special case of a homogeneous commodity that can
only be produced in one origin region, equation (4) predicts that the (log) price differential
between the origin o of this commodity and any other region d will be equal to the (log) cost

                                                 12
of trading the commodity between them. That is:

                                           ln pod − ln poo = ln Tod
                                                                 o
                                                                    ,                                      (7)

where the commodity label k is replaced by o to indicate that this equation is only true for
commodities that can only be made in region o. This prediction is important for my empirical
                                              o
work below because it allows trade costs (Tod   ), which are never completely observed, to be
inferred. But it is important to note that this prediction—essentially just free arbitrage over
space, net of trade costs—is common to many models of spatial equilibrium.20

Prediction 2: Bilateral trade flows take the ‘gravity equation’ form:
Equation (5) describes bilateral trade flows explicitly, but I re-state it here in logarithms for
reference: (log) bilateral trade of any commodity k from any region o to any other region d is
given by
                      k
                 ln Xod  = ln λk + ln Ako − θk ln ro − θk ln Tod
                                                              k
                                                                 + θk ln pkd + ln Xdk .       (8)

This is the gravity equation form for bilateral trade flows, which is common to many widely-
used trade models: bilateral trade costs reduce bilateral trade flows, conditional on importer-
and exporter-specific terms.

Prediction 3: Railroads increase real income levels:
In this model, welfare in district o is equal to its real income (per unit land area), Wo , which
is given by real land rents:21
                                                ro        . ro
                                    Wo = QK              = .                                  (9)
                                                   k  µ
                                             k=1 (e
                                                  po ) k    Peo
Unfortunately, the multiple general equilibrium interactions in the model are too complex to
admit a closed-form solution for the effect of reduced trade costs on welfare. To make progress
in generating qualitative predictions (to guide my empirical analysis) I therefore assume a
much simpler environment for the purpose of obtaining Prediction 3 only. I assume: there are
only three regions (called X, Y and Z); there is only one commodity (so I will dispense with the
k superscripts on all variables); the regions are symmetric in their exogenous characteristics
(ie, Lo and Ao ); and the three regions have symmetric trade costs with respect to each other.
  20
     A class of exceptions is those with some form of imperfect competition and in which producers can
charge separate prices in separate markets, as in Brander and Krugman (1983) or Melitz and Ottaviano
(2007). However, my empirical application of this prediction will be to salt, which was produced under strict
government license at a small number of locations and then had to be sold (under conditions of the license) to
an unrestricted trading community at the ‘factory’ gate (United Provinces of Agra and Oudh, 1868). That is,
in this setting, producers only charged one factory gate price and could not price discriminate across markets.
  21
     Recall that peko is the CES price index for commodity k in region o, defined in footnote 19.



                                                      13
I consider the comparative statics from a local change around this symmetric equilibrium
that reduces the bilateral trade cost symmetrically between two regions (say X and Y ). It is
straightforward to show (as is done in Appendix B) that:

                                            dWX
                                                  < 0.                                        (10)
                                            dTY X

That is, real income in a region (say, X) rises when the bilateral cost of trading between that
region and any other region (say, Y ) falls.

Prediction 4: There exists a sufficient statistic for the welfare gains from railroads:
Using the bilateral trade equation (5) evaluated at d = o, (log) real income per unit of land
can be re-written as
                                          X               X
                                              µk      k       µk     k
                           ln Wo = Ω +        θk
                                                 ln A o −     θk
                                                                 ln πoo ,                (11)
                                           k              k
           .
where Ω = − k µk ln γ k . This result states that welfare is a function of only two terms,
               P

one involving (exogenous) local productivity levels (Ako ), and a second term that I will refer
to as ‘autarkiness’ (ie, the fraction of region o’s expenditure that region o buys from itself,
  k
πoo , which equals one in autarky). Because of the complex general equilibrium relationships
in the model, the full matrix of trade costs (between every bilateral pair of regions), the full
vector of productivity terms in all regions, and the sizes of all regions all influence welfare
in region o. But these terms (that is, every exogenous variable in the model other than
local productivity) affect welfare only through their effect on autarkiness. Put another way,
                                                    k
autarkiness (the appropriately weighted sum of πoo    terms over goods k) is a sufficient statistic
for welfare in region o, once local productivity is controlled for. If railroads affected welfare
in India through the mechanism in the model (by reducing trade costs, giving rise to gains
from trade), then Prediction 4 states that one should see no additional effects of railroads on
                             k
welfare once autarkiness (πoo  ) is controlled for.


3.3    From Theory to Empirics
To relate the static model in Section 3 to my dynamic empirical setting (with 70 years of annual
data) I take the simplest possible approach and assume that all of the goods in the model
cannot be stored, and that inter-regional lending is not possible. Furthermore, I assume that
the stochastic production process described in Section 3.1 is drawn independently in each
period. These assumptions imply that the static model simply repeats every period, with
independence of all decision-making across time periods. Throughout the remainder of the
paper I therefore add the subscript ‘t’ to all of the variables (both exogenous and endogenous)


                                                14
in the model, but I assume that all of the model parameters θk , σk , and µk are fixed over time.
    The four theoretical predictions outlined in Section 3.2 take a naturally recursive order,
both for estimating the model’s parameters, and for tracing through the impact of railroads
on welfare in India. I follow this order in the four empirical sections that follow below (ie,
Steps 1-4). In Step 1, I evaluate the extent to which railroads reduced trade costs within India
                                                                                  k
using Prediction 1 to relate the unobserved trade costs term in the model (Todt      ) to observed
features of the transportation network. In Step 2, I use Prediction 2 to measure how much
the reduced trade costs found in Step 1 increased trade in India. This relationship allows
me to estimate the unobserved model parameter θk (the elasticity of trade flows with respect
to trade costs), and to relate the unobserved productivity terms (Akot )22 to rainfall, which is
an exogenous and observed determinant of agricultural productivity. Steps 1 and 2 therefore
deliver estimates of all of the model’s parameters.
    In Step 3, I test Prediction 3 by estimating how the level of a district’s real income is
affected by the arrival of railroad access to the district. However, the empirical finding in Step
3 is reduced-form in nature and could arise through a number of possible mechanisms (such
as enhanced mobility labor, capital or technology). Therefore, in Step 4 I use the sufficient
statistic suggested by Prediction 4 to compare the reduced-form effects of railroads on the
level of real income (found in Step 3) with the effects predicted by the model (as estimated
in Steps 1 and 2).


4      Empirical Step 1: Railroads and Trade Costs
In the first step of my empirical analysis I estimate the extent to which railroads reduced the
cost of trading within India. Because this paper explores a trade-based mechanism for the
impact of railroads on welfare, it is important to assess whether railroads actually reduced
trade costs. Further, the relationship between railroads and trade costs, which I estimate in
this section, is an important input for Steps 2 and 4 that follow.


4.1     Empirical Strategy
Researchers never observe the full extent of trade costs.23 But Prediction 1 suggests a situation
in which trade costs can be inferred : If a homogeneous commodity can only be made in one
  22
     The productivity terms Akot are unobserved because they represent the location parameter on region o’s
potential productivity distribution of commodity k, in equation (2). The productivities actually used for
production in region o will be a subset of this potential distribution, where the scope for trade endogenously
determines how the potential distribution differs from the distribution actually used to produce.
  23
     Even when shipping receipts are observed, as in Hummels (2007), these may fail to capture other barriers
to trade, such as the time goods spend in transit, or the risk of damage or loss in transit.



                                                     15
region, then the difference in retail prices (of that commodity) between the origin region and
any other consuming region is equal to the cost of trading between the two regions.24
    Throughout Northern India, several homogeneous types of salt were consumed, but each
of these types could only be made in one unique location. Traders and consumers would speak
about ‘Kohat salt’ (which could only be produced at the salt mine in the Kohat region) as a
different commodity from ‘Sambhar salt’ (which could only be produced at the Sambhar Salt
Lake).25 I have collected data on salt prices in Northern India, in which the prices of eight
regionally-differentiated types of salt are reported in 124 districts annually from 1861-1930.
Crucially, because salt is an essential commodity, it was consumed (and therefore sold at
markets where its price could be easily recorded) throughout India both before and after the
construction of railroads.
    I use these salt price data, with the help of Prediction 1, to estimate how Indian railroads
reduced trade costs. To do this I estimate equation (7) of Prediction 1 as follows:

                         ln podt = βot
                                     o
                                       + β o + δ ln LCRED(Rt , α)odt + εoodt .                              (12)
                                   |{z} | od            {z                 }
                                   =ln poot                        o
                                                              =ln Todt


In this equation, podt is the price of type-o salt (that is, salt that can only be made in region
o) in destination district d in year t. I estimate this equation with an origin-year fixed effect26
   o
(βot ) to control for the price of type-o salt at its origin o (ie, poot ) because I do not observe
salt prices exactly at the point where they leave the source. (My price data are at the district
level and are based on records of the price of a commodity averaged over 10-15 retail markets
in a district.)
     The remainder of equation (12) describes how I model the relationship between trade costs
  o
Todt , which are unobservable, and the railroad network (denoted by Rt ), which is observable.
The core of this specification is the variable LCRED(Rt , α), which I describe in detail below.
                                                                           o
This specification also includes an origin-destination fixed effect (βod     ) which controls for all
of the time-invariant determinants of the cost of trading salt between districts o and d (such
  24
      In their survey of attempts to estimate trade costs, Anderson and van Wincoop (2004) suggest (on p. 78)
the solution I pursue here: “A natural strategy would be to identify the source [region] for each product. We are
not aware of any papers that have attempted to measure trade barriers this way.” Recent work by Keller and
Shiue (2008) on 19th Century Germany and Andrabi and Kuehlwein (2010) on colonial India documents that
when two markets are connected by railroad lines, these markets’ prices (for similar commodities) converge.
This approach demonstrates that railroads lowered trade costs, but does not aim to estimate the level of trade
costs or the magnitude of the effect of railroads on trade costs.
   25
      The leading (nine-volume) commercial dictionary in colonial India, Watt (1889), describes the market for
salt in this manner, as do Aggarwal (1937) and the numerous provincial Salt Reports that were brought out
each year.
   26
      That is, each salt origin o has its own fixed effect in each year t. I use this notation when referring to
fixed effects throughout this paper.



                                                       16
as the distance from o to d, or caste-based or ethno-linguistic differences between o and d
that may hinder trade). Finally, εoodt is an error term that captures any remaining unobserved
determinants of trade costs (or measurement error in ln podt ).27
    The variable LCRED(Rt , α) in equation (12) measures the lowest-cost route effective
distance between the origin o and destination d districts in any year t. This variable models
the cost of trading goods between any two locations under the assumption that agents take
the lowest-cost route—using any mode of transportation—available to them. Two inputs are
needed to calculate the effective length of the lowest-cost route between districts o and d
in year t. The first input is the network of available transportation routes open in year t,
which I denote by Rt . A network is a collection of nodes and arcs. In my application, nodes
are finely-spaced points in space, and arcs are available means of transportation between the
nodes (hence an arc could be a rail, river, road or coast connection). In modeling this network
(detailed in Appendix A) I allow agents to travel on navigable rivers, the coastline, the road
network, and the railroad network open in year t.
    The second input is the cost of traveling along each arc, which depends on which mode
of transportation the arc represents. I model these costs as being proportional to distance,
where the proportionality, the per unit distance cost, of using each mode is denoted by the
                          .
vector of parameters α = (αrail , αroad , αriver , αcoast ). I normalize αrail = 1 so the other three
elements of α represent costs relative to the cost of using railroads. Because of this nor-
malization, LCRED(Rt , α)odt is measured in units of railroad-equivalent kilometers; in this
sense, a finding that all of the non-rail elements of α are greater than one would imply
that India’s expanding railroad network shrunk ‘effective distance,’ or distance measured in
railroad-equivalent units.
    The parameter α is unknown, so I treat it as a vector of parameters to be estimated.
Conditional on a value of α, it is possible to calculate LCRED(Rt , α)odt quickly using Dijk-
stra’s shortest-path algorithm (Ahuja, Magnanti, and Orlin, 1993). But since α is unknown,
I estimate it using non-linear least squares (NLS). That is, I search over all values of α, re-
computing the lowest-cost routes at each step, to find the value that minimizes the sum of
squared residuals in equation (12).


4.2     Data
I use data on retail prices of 8 types of salt, observed annually from 1861-1930 in 124 districts
of Northern India (in other regions reported salt prices were not broken down by region of
origin). Further details on the data I use in this and other sections of this paper are provided
  27
    In this specification and all others in this paper I allow this error term to be heteroskedastic and serially
correlated within districts (or trade blocks, in Section 5) in an unspecified manner.


                                                       17
in Appendix A.


4.3    Results
Table 2 presents OLS estimates of equation (12). In column 1 I estimate the effect of the
lowest-cost route effective distance on trade costs when the relative costs of each mode (α) are
set to observed historical relative freight rates. I use the relative per unit distance freight rates
described in Section 2.2 (at their midpoints): αroad = 4.5, αriver = 3.0, and αcoast = 2.25 (all
relative to the freight rate of railroad transport, normalized to 1). Column 1 demonstrates that
the elasticity of trade costs with respect to the lowest-cost route effective distance, calculated
at observed freight rates, is 0.135.
    However, as argued in Section 2.2, it is possible that these observed relative freight rates do
not capture the full benefits (such as increased certainty or time savings) of railroad transport
relative to alternative modes of transportation. For this reason the NLS specification in column
2 estimates the relative freight rates (ie, the parameters α) that minimize the sum of squared
residuals in equation (12). Column 2 is my preferred specification. When the mode-wise
distance costs (ie, α) are not restricted to be equal to the observed freight rates, the elasticity
of trade costs with respect to effective distance (ie, δ) rises to 0.247. Even when controlling
for all unobserved, time-constant determinants of trade costs between all salt sources and
destinations, as well as unrestricted shocks to the source price of each salt type, reductions
in trade costs along lowest-cost routes (estimated from time variation in these routes alone)
have a large effect on reducing salt price gaps over space.
    The non-linear specification in column 2 also estimates the relative trade costs by mode
that best explain observed salt price differentials. The relative cost of each of the three al-
ternative modes of transport is larger than one, implying that these alternative modes are
more expensive (per unit distance) than rail travel. Further, each of these non-rail modes
has higher estimated (per unit distance) costs, relative to railroads, than historically observed
freight rates. This suggests that the advantages of railroads to encouraging trade were signif-
icant, and not entirely reflected in observed freight rates.
    To summarize, the results in column 2 of Table 2 contain two important findings. First, the
coefficient on the lowest-cost route effective distance (δ)b is positive, which implies that trade
costs increase with effective distance (in railroad-equivalent kilometers). And second, the
estimated mode-specific per-unit distance costs (α)   b are all much greater than one, implying
that railroads were instrumental in reducing effective distance when compared to alternative
modes of transportation. This railroad trade cost premium is especially large relative to roads,
the most important form of pre-rail transport, which I estimate to be almost eight times more
costly to use (per unit distance) than railroads. I use the estimates in column 2 in Steps 2

                                                 18
and 4 to follow.


5     Empirical Step 2: Railroads and Trade Flows
The first step of my empirical strategy demonstrated that India’s railroad network reduced
trade costs. I now estimate the extent to which this reduction in trade costs affected trade
flows within India. This step is important for two reasons. First, an expansion of trade
volumes as a result of the railroad network is a necessary condition for the mechanism linking
railroads to welfare gains in the model. Second, as I show below, estimating the model’s
gravity equation allows all of the model’s parameters to be inferred. Equipped with these
parameter estimates I am able to test Prediction 4 in Section 7 below.


5.1    Empirical Strategy
Prediction 2 of the model suggests a particular relationship between bilateral trade flows and
bilateral trade costs—a gravity equation describing trade between any two regions. Substi-
                                        k
tuting the empirical specification for Todt introduced in equation (12) into equation (8) yields

                       k      k
                   ln Xodt = βod + ln Akot − θk ln rot − θk δ ln LCRED(Rt , α)odt
                                 + θk ln pkdt + ln Xdt
                                                    k
                                                       + εkodt .                                 (13)

            k
Here, Xodt     refers to the value of exports of commodity k from region o to region d in year t
and the other variables were defined in Section 3.
     I estimate a version of equation (13) in two stages, with two goals in mind. My first
goal is to estimate the unknown parameters θk . As is typical in the empirical gravity equation
literature, estimation of equation (13) is complicated by the presence of endogenous regressors
(rot , pkdt and Xdtk
                     ). Fortunately, because my interest here lies in the coefficient θk —that is, in
how the trade cost reductions brought about by railroads translated into expansions in trade
flows—I estimate this equation in the following manner:

                        k      k     k     k
                    ln Xodt = βot + βdt + βod + θk δ ln LCRED(Rt , α)odt + εkodt .               (14)

                                    k                                                k
In this specification, the term βot   is an origin-year-commodity fixed effect and βdt is a destination-
year-commodity fixed effect (the inclusion of these two fixed-effects absorbs the terms ln Akot ,
θk ln rot , ln pkdt and ln Xot
                            k
                               in equation (13)) and βod k
                                                           is an origin-destination-commodity fixed
effect (the inclusion of which was motivated in Section 4 by the concern that some costs
of trading may be unobservable). I then assume that the trade cost parameters (δ and α)


                                                  19
that I estimated in Step 1 above in relation to salt apply to all commodities. (Below I dis-
cuss some evidence that is consistent with this assumption.) Applying this assumption to
equation (14) implies that the coefficient on total trade costs (ie, on the generated regressor,
                 b odt ) is identified as exactly θk .28 Intuitively, the scope for comparative
δb ln LCRED(Rt , α)
advantage (ie, the inverse of θk ) governs how much a reduction in trade costs translates into
an expansion of trade. I estimate this equation separately for each of the 17 agricultural
commodities in my trade flows dataset, in order to estimate 17 values of θk (one for each
commodity k).
    My second goal in estimating equation (13) is to estimate the determinants of the under-
lying productivity terms, Akot . Armed with estimates of θbk , obtained from estimating equation
(14) above, it is possible to estimate the determinants of Akot in a second stage as follows. I
relate Akot to observables by assuming that Akot is a function of a crop-specific rainfall shock,
denoted by RAINotk . As argued in Section 2, rainfall was an important determinant of agricul-
tural productivity in India because most land was unirrigated. However, a given distribution
of annual rainfall would affect each crop differently because each crop has its own annual
timetable for sowing, growing and harvesting, and these timetables differ from district to dis-
trict. To shed light on these crop- and district-specific agricultural timetables, I use the 1967
edition of the Indian Crop Calendar (Directorate of Economics and Statistics, 1967), which
lists sowing, growing and harvesting windows for each crop and district in my sample. To
construct the variable RAINotk , I use daily rainfall data to calculate the amount of rainfall in
year t that fell between the first sowing date and the last harvest date listed for crop k in
district o.
    It is then possible to estimate the relationship between rainfall and productivity by noting
                                                     k
that the exporter-commodity-year fixed effect (βot     ) in equation (14) can be interpreted in
                 k          k
the model as βot = ln Aot − θk ln rot , by comparing equations (13) and (14). I model the
relationship between productivity (Akot ) and rainfall (RAINotk ) in a parsimonious semi-log
manner: ln Akot = κRAINotk . Guided by this relationship, I estimate the parameter κ in the
following estimating equation:

                             k
                           βbot + θbk ln rot = βok + βtk + βot + κRAINotk + εkodt .                         (15)

                           k
    In this equation, βbot   is the estimated exporter-commodity-year fixed effect, and θbk is the
estimated technology parameter, both of which are estimated in equation (14) above. The
terms βok , βtk , and βot represent exporter-commodity, commodity-year and exporter-year fixed
effects, respectively. I include these terms to control for unobserved determinants of exporting
  28
    Because δb ln LCRED(Rt , α)b odt is a generated regressor I correct the standard errors in this regression to
account for the presence of a generated regressor using a two-step bootstrap procedure.


                                                       20
success that do not vary across regions, commodities and time. For example, the exporter-
commodity fixed effect (βok ) controls for all time-invariant factors that make region o successful
at exporting commodity k (such as the region’s altitude). As a result, the coefficient κ is
estimated purely from the variation in rainfall over space, commodities and time. The final
term in equation (15) is an error term (εkodt ) that includes any determinants of exporting
success, other than rainfall, that vary across regions, commodities and time.
    In summary, the two-stage method described above estimates the parameter θk for each
of the 17 goods k for which I have trade data. This method also estimates the relationship
between the unobserved productivity terms Akot and crop-specific rainfall RAINotk (governed
by the parameter κ).


5.2     Data
I estimate equations (14) and (15) using over 1.3 million observations on Indian trade flows
that I have collected. The trade flow data relate to internal trade data (between 45 regions
known as trade blocks), over rail, river and coastal transport routes, for 17 commodities,
annually from 1880 to 1920. When estimating equation (15), I use the crop-specific rainfall
measure (RAINotk ) described briefly above (and in more detail in Appendix A) and, lacking
reliable data on land rental rates, I use nominal agricultural output per acre as a measure of
rot (since in the model these two measures are equivalent).


5.3     Results
Table 3 presents OLS estimates of variants of equation (14). While the ultimate reason for
estimating equation (14) is to estimate the unknown parameters θk for each commodity k, I
begin by reporting estimates from a specification that pools estimates of equation (14) across
commodities. I do this to explore the plausibility of my assumption that the parameter δ,
which relates the lowest-cost route effective distance variable (LCRED(Rt , α) b odt ) to trade
                                       29
costs, is constant across commodities.
  29
     A second potential concern with the application of the cost of trading salt to other commodities is that
the relative per unit distance cost of using each mode of transportation (α) may also vary across commodities,
so that my parameter estimates of α, also obtained from salt, do not carry over to other commodities. One
piece of evidence that is inconsistent with this concern comes from data on district-to-district trade flows (for
each of 15 goods, one of which is salt) in Bengal from 1877 to 1881, observed separately along each of the
three modes of transport available in that area (rail, river and road). I regress log bilateral exports by road
relative to exports by rail on exporter-importer-year fixed effects, and a fixed effect for each commodity. The
F-test that these commodity-level fixed effects are all equal to each other has a p-value of 0.34, so it cannot
be rejected at the 5 percent level. A similar test for a regression with exports by river relative to exports by
rail has a p-value of 0.28. These results are consistent with the view that, within an exporter-importer-year
cell, goods do not have systematically different trade costs.



                                                       21
    Column 1 of Table 3 presents estimates of equation (14) pooled across commodities. The
results in column 1 provide support for Prediction 2 of the model, as the lowest-cost route
measure is estimated to reduce bilateral trade (conditional on the fixed effects used) with a
statistically significant elasticity of (minus) 1.14. This pooled point estimate is in line with a
large body of work on estimating gravity equations reported in Head and Disdier (2008).
    In column 2 of Table 3 I investigate the possibility that the elasticity of trade flows with
respect to lowest-cost route effective distance varies by commodity in a manner that would
suggest that trade costs differ in an important way across commodities. I do this by including
interaction terms between the LCRED(Rt , α)      b odt variable and two commodity-specific char-
acteristics: weight per unit value (as observed in 1880 prices, averaged over all of India), and
‘freight class’ (an indicator used by railroad companies in 1880 to distinguish between ‘high-
value’ and ‘low-value’ goods). The results in column 2 are not supportive of the notion that
commodities had elasticities of trade with respect to distance that depend on either weight or
freight class; that is, neither of these interaction terms is significantly different from zero (nor
are they jointly significantly different from zero). This lends support to the maintained as-
sumption throughout this paper that trade cost parameters for the shipment of salt (obtained
in Step 1 above) can be applied to other commodities, without doing injustice to the data.
    Finally, I estimate equation (14) one commodity at a time (for each of the 17 agricultural
commodities in the trade flows data), in order to obtain estimates of the comparative ad-
vantage parameters θk for each commodity. The mean across all of these 17 commodities is
3.8 (with a standard deviation across commodities of 1.2). This is lower than the preferred
estimate of 8.28 in Eaton and Kortum (2002) obtained from intra-OECD trade flows in 1995,
treating all of the manufacturing sector as one commodity. However, by relaxing assumptions
in Eaton and Kortum (2002), as I do in the present paper, Simonovska and Waugh (2010)
and Costinot, Donaldson, and Komunjer (2010) obtain lower estimates of θ (ranging from 4.5
to 6.5) for the OECD in the 1990s.
    As described above, the second goal in estimating equation (14) in this section is to estimate
κ, the parameter that relates crop-specific rainfall to (potential) productivity (Akot in the
model). I do this by estimating equation (15) and obtain a value of κ            b = 0.441 (with a
standard error of 0.082), implying that a one standard deviation (ie, 0.605 meters) increase
in crop-specific rainfall causes a 27 percent increase in agricultural productivity (as defined
by Akot in the model). This suggests that rainfall has a positive and statistically significant
effect on productivity, as expected given the importance of water in crop production and the
paucity of irrigated agriculture in colonial India (as discussed in Section 2).
    In summary, the results from this section demonstrate that railroads significantly expanded
trade in India. This finding is in line with Prediction 2 and suggests that the expansion of


                                                22
trade brought about by the railroad network could have given rise to welfare gains due to
increasingly exploited gains from trade. A second purpose of this section was to use the
empirical relationship between trade costs (estimated in Step 1) and trade flows to estimate
the remaining unknown model parameters, θk and Akot . These parameters are important inputs
for Step 4 below.


6     Empirical Step 3: Railroads and Real Income Levels
Steps 1 and 2 above have established that Indian railroads significantly reduced trade costs and
expanded trade flows—findings which suggest that railroads improved the trading environment
in India. I now go on to investigate some of the welfare consequences of railroad expansion in
India by estimating the effect of railroads on real income levels.


6.1     Empirical Strategy
Prediction 3 of the model states that a district’s real income will increase when it is connected
to the railroad network. This prediction motivates an estimating equation of the form
                                                 
                                           rot
                                  ln       Peot
                                                      = βo + βt + γRAILot + εot .                           (16)

In this estimating equation, Preot represents real agricultural income per acre (the appropriate
                                 ot
welfare metric in the model) in district o and year t. There exist no systematic data on land
rents or values in this time period, but in the model nominal land rents are equal to nominal
output per unit area. As described in Section 2, plentiful output data were collected in the
agricultural sector (the dominant sector of India’s colonial economy), so I use this to measure
rot .30 Finally, I construct a consumer price index to measure Peot .31
   30
      Real income per acre is equal to welfare (for a representative agent) in the model, but may not be in my
empirical setting because output per acre may diverge from output per capita if the population of each district
is endogenous, and related to railroad expansion. Population could be endogenous for two reasons. First,
fertility and mortality may have been endogenous to railroad expansion in colonial India—in a Malthusian
limit, fertility and mortality would adjust to any agricultural productivity improvements (eg due to railroads)
and hold output per capita constant. However, the potential for endogenous fertility and mortality responses
is likely to vary from setting to setting so while an effect of railroads on output per acre is transferable to
alternative settings, an effect on output per capita is potentially less so. Second, migration could respond to
differential productivity improvements over space. Migration, however, was extremely limited in colonial India
when compared to other countries in the same time period (a feature that is still true today, and that Munshi
and Rosenzweig (2009) argue is due to informal insurance provided by localized caste networks), and the little
migration that occurred was vastly skewed toward women migrating to marry (Davis, 1951; Rosenzweig and
Stark, 1989).
   31
      In the model this price index is given in equation (9). However, it would be unsurprising if a price index
calculated strictly as suggested by a theory fits that theory well. To perform a more powerful test of the model
I therefore use a flexible price index (the Törnqvist price index, of which the price index in equation (9) is a


                                                             23
    The key regressor of interest in equation (16) is RAILot , a dummy variable that is equal to
one in all years t in which some part of district o is on the railroad network. I estimate equation
(16) using fixed effects at the district (βo ) and year (βt ) levels, so that the effect of railroads
is identified entirely from variation within districts over time, after accounting for common
shocks affecting all districts. The district fixed effect is particularly important because it
controls for permanent features of districts that may have made them both agriculturally
productive, and attractive places in which to build railroads.
    Prediction 3 states that the coefficient γ on district o’s railroad access will be positive. A
number of alternative theories (whether stressing the gains from goods trade or otherwise)
could make similar predictions about the sign of this coefficient. For this reason, in Step 4
below I go beyond the qualitative test of the model provided by the sign of γ and assess the
quantitative performance of the model in predicting real income changes due to the expansion
of the railroad network.
    I begin below (in Section 6.3) by estimating equation (16) using OLS. Unbiased OLS
estimates require there to be no correlation between the error term (εot ) and the regressor
(RAILot ), conditional on the district and year fixed effects. This requirement would fail if
railroads were built in districts and years that were expected to experience real agricultural
income growth, or if railroads were built in districts that were on differing unobserved trends
from non-railroad districts. For this reason, in Section 6.4 below I also estimate four different
‘placebo’ specifications in order to assess the potential magnitude of bias in my OLS results
due to non-random railroad placement.


6.2     Data
I estimate equation (16) using annual data on real agricultural income (per acre of land) in
235 districts, from 1870 to 1930. This variable (calculated as nominal agricultural output
calculated from the physical output of each of 17 crops valued at local retail prices, deflated
by a local consumer price index and then divided by the district’s land area) was described
briefly in Section 2 and in more detail in Appendix A. The variable RAILot is a dummy
variable for the presence of a railroad line anywhere in district o in year t.


6.3     Baseline Results
Column 1 of Table 4 presents OLS estimates of equation (16). The coefficient estimate is
0.164, implying that in the average district, the arrival of the railroad network raised real
agricultural income by over sixteen percent. This OLS estimate is in line with Prediction 3
special case) as is commonly done when constructing real GDP measures from national income accounts.


                                                  24
and suggests that railroads had a large effect on real income in India. In the following sub-
section I investigate the robustness of this finding to concerns over the non-random placement
of railroads.


6.4     Four ‘Placebo’ Checks
In this subsection I explore the plausibility of concerns about bias due to endogenous rail-
road placement by estimating the effects of ‘placebo’ railroad lines: over 40,000 km of railroad
lines that came close to being constructed but—for four separate reasons—were never actually
built. I group these placebo lines into four categories as follows:

Four-stage planning hierarchy:
From 1870-1947, India’s Railways Department used one constant system for the evaluation of
new railroad projects. Line proposals received from the Indian and provincial governments
would appear as ‘proposed’ in the Department’s annual Railway Report. This invited further
discussion, and if the proposed line survived this criticism it would be ‘reconnoitered.’ Pro-
viding this reconnaissance uncovered no major problems, every meter of the proposed line
would then be ‘surveyed,’ this time in painstaking and costly detail (usually taking several
years to complete).32 These detailed surveys would provide accurate estimates of expected
construction costs, and lines whose surveys revealed modest costs would then be passed on to
the Government to be ‘sanctioned,’ or given final approval. The railroad planning process was
therefore arranged as a four-stage hierarchy of tests that proposed lines would have to pass.
    Column 2 of Table 4 presents an estimate of equation (16) that additionally includes re-
gressors for railroad lines abandoned at each of these four planning stages (with separate
coefficients on each). If line placement decisions were driven by unobservable determinants
of changes in agricultural income then unbuilt lines would exhibit spurious effects (relative
to the excluded category, areas in which lines were never even discussed) on agricultural in-
come in OLS regressions with district fixed effects. Further, it is likely that lines that reached
later planning stages would exhibit larger spurious effects than the lines abandoned early on
(because higher expected benefits would be required to justify the increasingly costly survey
process). However, the coefficients on unbuilt lines reported in column 2 are never statistically
significantly different from zero, or of the same order of magnitude as built lines. Importantly,
  32
    Reconnaissance was a form of low-cost survey of possible track locations (typically within 100 m of their
eventual location), along with a statement of all necessary bridges, tunnels, cuttings and embankments. As
Davidson (1868) and the standard engineer’s textbook of the day, Wellington (1877), make clear, surveying
was much more detailed. The goal of a survey was to identify the exact position of the intended lines and
to provide a precise statement of all engineering works (down to the estimated number of bricks required to
build each bridge).



                                                     25
the coefficients on each hierarchical stage of the approval process do not display a tendency to
increase as they reach advanced stages of the planning process. These findings cast doubt on
the extent to which India’s Railways Department was selecting districts for railroad projects
on the basis of correlation with the error term in equation (16).

Lawrence’s proposal:
In 1868, Viceroy John Lawrence (head of the Government of India) proposed and had surveyed
a 30-year railroad expansion plan, broken into 5-year segments, that would begin where Dal-
housie’s trunk lines (described in Section 2.3) left off.33 Lawrence consulted widely about the
optimal routes for this railroad expansion, and drew upon his twenty-six years of experience
as an administrator in India. Upon his retirement in 1869, construction on Lawrence’s plan
had just begun. But Lawrence’s successor, the Earl of Mayo, immediately halted construction
and vetoed Lawrence’s proposal. Mayo was a newcomer to administration in India and a fiscal
conservative, and he wasted no time in criticizing the high costs of railroad construction in
India. Instead, Mayo followed a more cautious approach to railroad expansion and Lawrence’s
plan was never built. However, Lawrence’s plan provides a useful window on the trajectory
that he and his Government expected in the districts where they planned to expand the rail-
road network. If anyone was capable of forecasting developments in each district’s trading
environment, developments that may be correlated with the error term in equation (16), it
was likely to be Lawrence.
    To check for this, I estimate equation (16) and additionally include lines that were part of
Lawrence’s proposal. Because Lawrence’s proposal was broken into six five-year segments, I
allow for separate coefficients on each of these segments and assume that the stated lines in
a given five-year period would have opened at the beginning of the period. This provides an
additional check: lines that Lawrence proposed to be built in relatively early time segments
were presumably more attractive, higher priority proposals, that in addition were made under
a shorter forecast horizon. Therefore, to the extent that Lawrence was able to forecast district-
level developments, larger spurious effects should be found on these segments.
    Column 3 of Table 4 presents estimates of coefficients on the lines that were identified in
Lawrence’s proposal. The coefficients on these lines are all close to zero, an order of magni-
tude smaller than the coefficient on built lines, and never statistically significant. Further, the
estimated coefficients on Lawrence’s early proposals are no larger on average than those on
his later proposals. This is in contrast to what one would expect if Lawrence were attempting
to allocate railroads to districts he expected to grow, but where his ability to forecast growth
was weaker at more distant forecast horizons.
  33
    These segments appear in the plan (published in 1868) as “to be built over the next 5 years,” “to be built
between 6 and 10 years from now,” etc.


                                                     26
Bombay and Madras Chambers of Commerce proposals:
In 1883, the Bombay and Madras Chambers of Commerce (bodies representing commercial
interests) were invited to submit railroad expansion proposals. Their proposals recommended
railroad expansion into areas with unrealized commercial potential (where the Chambers’ in-
terests lay). However, the Chambers’ proposals were dismissed for paying too little attention
to the potential costs of building these lines (costs that the Chambers would not incur). Be-
cause it is plausible that the Chambers possessed a great deal of expertise in the identification
of commercial opportunities,34 the Chambers’ expansion proposals provide a unique window
on the expected commercial trajectory in the regions where the Chambers recommended con-
struction.
    Column 4 of Table 4 presents estimates of equation (16) that additionally include lines
that were mentioned in the Bombay and Madras Chambers of Commerce proposals. The
coefficients on the two Chambers’ proposed lines are positive but very close to zero and not
statistically significantly different from zero. And, as in columns 2 and 3, the coefficients
on unbuilt lines here are an order of magnitude smaller than the (statistically significant)
coefficients on built railroad lines. It thus appears that a group whose explicit remit was
to choose commercially attractive railroad projects was not allocating lines to districts with
growing unobserved determinants of agricultural prosperity. This finding calls into question
the ability for less commercially-interested agents, such as the Government of India (which
planned India’s railroad network), to systematically forecast commercial developments in In-
dia’s districts.

Kennedy’s proposal:
India’s early line placement followed the suggestions of Lord Dalhousie (then head of the Gov-
ernment of India), but only after Dalhousie’s decade-long debate with Major Kennedy (then
India’s Chief Engineer, who was charged with planning India’s first railroad lines) over optimal
route choice. Kennedy was convinced that railroad construction would be extremely expensive
in India (Davidson, 1868). He therefore sought to connect Dalhousie’s chosen provincial capi-
tals with a network of lines that followed the gentlest possible gradients, along river gradients
and the coastline wherever possible.35
   34
      The potential for such expertise is clear in histories of the Bengal, Madras, Upper India, and Indian
Chambers of Commerce in Tyson (1953), Times of India (1938), Tirumalai (1986), and Namjoshi and Sabade
(1967), respectively.
   35
      The network that was built, by contrast, took straight lines in almost all circumstances, requiring in many
cases (such as the Thal and Bhor Ghats) some of the most advanced railroad engineering works the world had
ever seen (Andrew, 1883). By 1869 it was clear that Kennedy’s pessimistic construction cost estimates were,
if anything, underestimates. Indeed, high construction costs were a major factor in Mayo’s decision to abort
Lawrence’s plan, as described above when introducing my second placebo variable.


                                                       27
     Kennedy’s 1848 proposal is useful for my identification strategy because it singles out
districts with low perceived railroad construction costs. Geographical features that favor low
construction costs (such as topography, vegetation, and climate) may also favor agricultural
production, and may result in differential unobservable trends in the real agricultural income
of districts with favorable construction conditions; if favorable construction conditions drove
railroad placement decisions then OLS estimates of equation (16) would erroneously attribute
unobserved trends to railroad construction. I therefore estimate equation (16) while including
a variable that is an interaction between an indicator variable that captures districts that
would have been penetrated by Kennedy’s proposed network and a time trend. If this variable
predicts real agricultural income then this would be a concern for my identification strategy
as it would suggest that the features that Kennedy found favorable for railroad construction
(features that are presumably just as favorable to his successors) are correlated with real
agricultural income growth. Because Kennedy’s subdivided his proposal into high and low
priority lines I also look for differential trends across these designations.
     Column 5 of Table 4 presents these results, which examine the extent to which locations
identified in Major Kennedy’s proposal—inexpensive districts in which to construct a vast
railroad network—display different real agricultural income trends from other districts. The
coefficients on Kennedy’s two types of identified lines (high and low priority) are both close
to zero and not statistically significantly different from zero. Crucially, the inclusion of this
variable does not change appreciably the coefficient on built railroads. This is reassuring,
as it suggests that controlling for the (time-varying effects of the) unobserved geographical
features that India’s chief engineer thought were important for building railroads cheaply has
little bearing on the results estimated above.


6.5    Summary and Relation to ‘Social Savings’ Methodology
The four sets of ‘placebo’ results in Table 4 display a consistent pattern. Regardless of the
expert choosing potential railroad lines (India’s public works department, India’s most senior
administrator at the height of his 26-year Indian career, the main commercial interest groups,
or India’s chief engineer), or their motivation in doing so (lines attractive to the government
for many potential reasons, commercially attractive lines, or low costs of construction) un-
built lines that these experts wanted to build are uncorrelated with time-varying unobservable
determinants of real agricultural income growth. These results cast doubt on the extent to
which the Government of India was willing or able to allocate railroads to districts on the
basis of their expected evolution (or factors correlated with this evolution) in real agricultural
income. This is perhaps unsurprising given the strong military motivations for building rail-
roads in India outlined in Section 2, the difficulty in forecasting the attractiveness of competing

                                                28
railroad plans (as evidenced by the stark disagreements among top-level Indian administra-
tors described in Section 6.4), and the challenges of targeting precisely a highly networked
infrastructure such as railroads.
    Taken together, the results in Table 4 suggest that my key estimate in column 1—that
railroads caused a large (16 percent) increase in real agricultural income in India—can be
interpreted as a plausibly unbiased estimate of the effect of railroads on real agricultural
income in India. This finding is also plausible when considered in the context of the large ‘social
savings’ literature on railroads. A social savings calculation in my context would estimate the
benefits of railroads to be a 14.8 percent rise in real agricultural income.36 However, because
numerous authors have pointed out that the social savings methodology suffers from both
positive bias (due, for example, to the typical assumption of elastic transport demand) and
negative bias (due, for example, to a neglect of returns to scale as in David (1969)), estimates
of the benefits of railroads from conventional econometric methodologies, like that I pursue
here, are of additional value.
    The final step of my empirical analysis below explores whether the benefits due to railroads
estimated in this section (a 16 percent rise in real income) are plausible in the context of the
model in Section 3. That is, I explore whether it is plausible that the reduction in trade
costs due to railroads (estimated in Step 1 above), when introduced into the environment of
heterogeneous technologies that existed in colonial India (estimated in Step 2 above), could
have raised living standards by 16 percent.


7      Empirical Step 4: A Sufficient Statistic for Railroad
       Impact
Steps 1 and 2 of this paper have argued that railroads significantly improved the trading
environment in India. Step 3 demonstrated that railroads also significantly raised the level
of real agricultural income. These two sets of results are qualitatively consistent with each
other, in the context of the model in Section 3 above—that is, when trade costs fall (and
trade flows expand) there should be gains from trade, and these gains will show up as a rise in
real income. In this section I explore whether these two sets of results are also quantitatively
  36
     The social savings approach (Fogel, 1964) seeks to estimate the decrease in national income that would
have resulted had railroads not existed, and if the factors of production used in the railroad sector had instead
been employed in their next-best substitute (Fishlow (2000) reviews this literature). Hurd (1983) performs a
social savings calculation for India, which I adapt here. Hurd uses a transportation price reduction of a factor
of four due to railroads; my results from Table 2 suggest that this was an underestimate, so I instead us a
reduction of a factor of 5.3 (the average reduction between any pair of districts in my sample). Using this
reduction of 5.3 rather than four leads to a social savings of 9.7 percent of aggregate GDP; expressed as a
fraction of real agricultural income this is 14.8 percent.


                                                       29
consistent with each other in the context of the model. Because the reduced-form impact
estimated in Step 3 above could arrive through a number of mechanisms, the exercise in this
section can also be thought of as determining the share of the observed reduced-form impact
of railroads that can be explained by the trade-based mechanism in the model.


7.1     Empirical Strategy
In order to compare the reduced-form impact of the railroad network on each district’s real
agricultural income (estimated in Step 3 above) to the impact that is predicted by the model,
I exploit Prediction 4. This prediction is equation (11), restated here for convenience:
                                                      X                    X
                                                            µk                   µk
                                ln       rot
                                         Peot
                                                    =       θk
                                                                 ln Akot −       θk
                                                                                          k
                                                                                      ln πoot .           (17)
                                                        k                    k


Prediction 4 thus states that real agricultural income ( Preot ) is a function of only two terms:
                                                                ot
technology (Akot ) and ‘autarkiness’ (πoot
                                         k
                                            , the share of district o’s expenditure that it buys from
itself), each appropriately summed over all commodities k. The former term is taken to be
exogenous (and driven by rainfall), while the latter term is endogenous and captures all of the
(heterogeneous, general equilibrium) effects that railroads could generate in this model.
    To estimate this equation I substitute in observable equivalents for the unobserved produc-
tivity terms Akot , the unknown parameters θk and µk , and the unobserved ‘autarkiness’ term
  k
πoot ; I discuss these in turn. First, the goal of Step 2 above was to estimate the parameter κ in
the modeled relationship ln Akot = κRAINotk as well as the parameters θk ; I use the estimates
obtained in Step 2 (in conjunction with the data on RAINotK ) here.37 Second, the parameters
µk are simply consumer expenditure shares and I estimate these as such.38 Finally, I obtain a
                           k
measure of predicted πoot     by solving for this variable in the model equilibrium (ie, by solving
                                                                   . b
equation (6)) conditional on all estimated parameters (Θ       b =   (θ, µ
                                                                         b , α,
                                                                             b δ,
                                                                                bκb) ) and the value of
all exogenous variables (all districts’ rainfall series, denoted by the vector RAINt , the entire
transportation network, Rt , and all districts’ land sizes, L). I refer to the estimated autark-
                  k
iness term as πoot  (Θ,
                      b RAINt , Rt , L) to denote its dependence on both estimated parameters
and all exogenous variables.
    Prediction 4 (ie, equation (17)) states that, once rainfall (through the relationship, ln Akot =
κRAINotk , estimated in Step 2 above) is controlled for (and weighted over commodities k in
  37
     One exception concerns the estimated values of Akot I use for the four main port cities (Bombay, Calcutta,
Karachi, and Madras) in India, whose exports to inland Indian destinations include all sea trade imported from
foreign countries (in which I do not observe rainfall). Appendix C below discusses my method for obtaining
estimates of Akot , as well as of Lo , for these regions.
  38
     I estimate these Cobb-Douglas weights as the average (over trade blocks and years) expenditure share for
commodity k, where expenditure is calculated as output plus net imports.



                                                                 30
                                                             k
the manner suggested by this equation), autarkiness (πoot       ) in year t is a sufficient statistic
for the impact of the entire railroad network open in year t on real income in year t. To test
Prediction 4 I estimate equation (16) from Step 3 above but additionally include the sufficient
                                  k
statistic variable, autarkiness (πoot ), and adjust for rainfall:
                                  "                       #
                                    X
                                          µˆk
          ln       rot
                   Peot
                              −           θˆk
                                              κ̂RAINotk       = βo + βt + γRAILot
                                      k
                                                                    "                                        #
                                                                        X
                                                                             µˆk       k
                                                              + ψ            θˆk
                                                                                   ln πoot (Θ,
                                                                                            b RAINt , Rt , L) + εot .   (18)
                                                                         k

                        k
   If autarkiness (ie, πoot ) is truly a sufficient statistic for the impact of railroads, as predicted
by the model, then when autarkiness is included in equation (18) all other railroad variables
should lose predictive power. That is, Prediction 4 states that the coefficient γ should be
zero in this regression while it was significantly and economically different from zero in Step
3 above. Further, taking the model equation (17) literally, Prediction 4 also states that the
coefficient ψ will equal minus one.39


7.2     Results
The results from this section are presented in Table 5. As a benchmark, column 1 esti-
                                                                         k
mates equation (18) while omitting the ‘autarkiness’ variable (ie, πoot     (Θ,
                                                                             b RAINt , Rt , L)).
The coefficient on the railroad access dummy (ie, RAILot ) is large and statistically signifi-
cant. Further, this coefficient estimate is very similar to that estimated in column 1 of Table
4 (which columns 2 through 5 of Table 4 argued did not appear to be driven by unobservable
determinants of agricultural income change that were correlated with railroad placement).
Given the effectively random nature of rainfall, this similarity should not come as a surprise.
While the reduced-form result in column 1 could reflect the increased opportunities to trade
that railroads brought about (an effect for which I found evidence in Step 1), other possible
mechanisms could also be at work.
    Following the strategy laid out in equation (18), column 2 of Table 5 adds the ‘autarkiness’
               k
variable (ie, πoot (Θ,
                    b RAINt , Rt , L)) to the regression in column 1. Consistent with Prediction
4 of the model, the coefficient γ on the railroad access dummy variable—which was statistically
and economically significant in column 1—falls to a level that is close to zero (and whose 95
percent confidence interval includes zero). This is consistent with the notion that autarkiness
  39                                    k
     The computed autarkiness term, πoot   (Θ,
                                            b RAINt , Rt , L), is a generated regressor, so conventional standard
errors obtained when using it will be incorrect. This is of little consequence here, however, because the empirical
procedure in this section is concerned primarily with the magnitude of point estimates rather than statistical
inference about these estimates.


                                                                    31
is a sufficient statistic for the impact of railroads on real agricultural income, as predicted by
the model.
    In further agreement with Prediction 4, the coefficient on the autarkiness term is close
to minus one, implying that autarkiness, when measured in a model-consistent manner, is a
strong determinant of real agricultural income. Notably, the model parameters that enter the
autarkiness term were not estimated using data that enters the current estimating equation,
so the impressive fit of the autarkiness term was not preordained.
    Finally, taking the point estimate of 0.023 on railroad access (RAILot ) seriously, implies
that only 14 percent (ie, 0.023 divided by 0.169) of the total impact of the railroads estimated in
column 1 cannot be explained by the mechanism of enhanced opportunities to trade according
to comparative advantage, represented in the model. That is, 86 percent of the total impact
of the railroads on real income in an average district can be explained by the model.
    The results in Table 5 establish a firm, quantitative connection between the earlier results
in this paper—that railroads improved the ability to trade within India (Steps 1 and 2) and
that railroads raised real incomes (Step 3). These results suggest that the important welfare
gains that railroads brought about can be well accounted for by the specific mechanism of
comparative advantage-based gains from trade.


8     Conclusion
This paper has made three contributions to our understanding of the effects of large trans-
portation infrastructure projects in the context of an enormous expansion in transportation
infrastructure—the construction of colonial India’s railroad network. Using a new panel of
district-level data that I have collected from archival sources, my first contribution is to es-
timate the effect of India’s railroads on the trading environment there. I find that railroads
reduced the cost of trading, reduced inter-regional price gaps, and increased trade volumes.
    My second contribution is to estimate the effect of India’s railroads on a proxy for economic
welfare in colonial India. I find that that when the railroad network was extended to the
average district, real agricultural income in that district rose by approximately 16 percent.
While it is possible that railroads were deliberately allocated to districts on the basis of
time-varying characteristics unobservable to researchers today, I find little evidence for this
potential source of bias to my results in four separate placebo checks. These reduced-form
findings suggest that railroads brought welfare gains to colonial India, but say very little about
the economic mechanisms behind these gains.
    Finally, my third contribution is to shed light on the mechanisms at work by relating
the observed railroad-driven reduction in trade costs to the observed railroad-driven increase


                                                32
in welfare. To do so requires an estimable, general equilibrium model of trade with many
regions, many goods, and unrestricted trade costs. I extend the work of Eaton and Kortum
(2002) to construct such a model and estimate its unknown parameters using auxiliary model
equations. The model identifies a sufficient statistic for the effect of trade cost reductions
on real income, which, when estimated and computed according to the model’s equilibrium,
accounts empirically for virtually all of the observed real income effect of railroads. This
is consistent with a mechanism in which railroads raised real income in India because they
reduced the cost of trading, and enabled India’s heterogeneous districts to enjoy previously
unexploited gains from trade due to comparative advantage.
    While the findings in this paper argue that railroads caused an increase in the level of real
incomes in India, a component of economic welfare about which this paper has been silent
concerns the volatility of real incomes over time. As in much of the developing world today,
colonial India’s precarious monsoon rains and its rain-fed agricultural technologies made real
income volatility extremely high. Famines were a perennial concern. An important question
for future research concerns the extent to which transportation infrastructure systems, like
India’s railroad network, can help regions to smooth away the effects of local weather extremes
on local well-being.




                                               33
References
Aggarwal, S. (1937): The Salt Industry in India. Delhi: Government of India Press.
Ahuja, R. K., T. L. Magnanti, and J. B. Orlin (1993): Network Flows: Theory,
  Algorithms, and Applications. New Jersey: Prentice Hall.
Alcala, F., and A. Ciccone (2004): “Trade and Productivity,” Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 119(2), 613–646.
Anderson, J. E., and E. van Wincoop (2004): “Trade Costs,” Journal of Economic
  Literature, 42(3), 691–751.
Andrabi, T., and M. Kuehlwein (2010): “Railways and Price Convergence in British
  India,” Journal of Economic History, 70, 351–377, mimeo Pomona.
Andrew, W. P. (1883): Indian Railways. London: W. H. Allen & Co.
Arkolakis, C., A. Costinot, and A. Rodriguez-Clare (2010): “New Trade Models,
  Same Old Gains?,” MIT Working Paper.
Aschauer, D. A. (1989): “Is Public Expenditure Productive?,” Journal of Monetery Eco-
  nomics, 23(2), 177–200.
Atack, J., M. R. Haines, and R. A. Margo (forthcoming): “Railroads and the Rise
  of the Factory: Evidence for the United States, 1850-1870,” in Economic Evolution and
  Revolutions in Historical Time, ed. by P. Rhode, J. Rosenbloom, and D. Weiman. Palo
  Alto, CA: Stanford University Press.
Banerjee, T. (1966): Internal Market of India (1834-1900). Calcutta: Academic Publishers.
Brander, J., and P. R. Krugman (1983): “A “Reciprocal Dumping Model of International
  Trade”,” Journal of International Economics, 15, 313–321.
Chaney, T. (2008): “Distorted Gravity: the Intensive and Extensive Margins of International
  Trade,” American Economic Review, 98(4), 1707–1721.
Costinot, A., D. Donaldson, and I. Komunjer (2010): “What Goods Do Countries
  Trade? A Quantitative Exploration of Ricardo’s Ideas,” MIT working paper.
David, P. A. (1969): “Transport Innovation and Economic Growth: Professor Fogel on and
  off the Rails,” The Economic History Review, 22(3), 506–524.
Davidson, E. (1868): The railways of India: with an account of their rise, progress and
  construction. London: E. and F. Spon.
Davis, K. (1951): The Population of India and Pakistan. Princeton: Princeton University
  Press.
Deloche, J. (1994): Transport and Communications in India Prior to Steam Locomotion:

                                            34
   Volume I: Land Transport. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
       (1995): Transport and Communication in India Prior to Steam Locomotion: Volume
   2: Water Transport. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Derbyshire, I. (1985): “Opening Up the Interior: The Impact of Railways upon the North
  Indian Economy and Society, 1860-1914,” Ph.D. thesis, University of Cambridge.
Dinkelman, T. (2007): “The Effects of Rural Electrification on Employment: New Evidence
   from South Africa,” Princeton University working paper.
Directorate of Economics and Statistics (1967): Indian Crop Calendar. Delhi: Gov-
   ernment of India Press.
Duflo, E., and R. Pande (2007): “Dams,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(2), 601–
  646.
Dutt, R. (1904): The Economic History of India in the Victorian Age. London: Kegan.
Eaton, J., and S. Kortum (2002): “Technology, Geography and Trade,” Econometrica,
  70(5), 1741–79.
Feyrer, J. (2009): “Trade and Income: Exploiting Time Series in Geography,” NBER
  working paper 14910.
Fishlow, A. (2000): “Internal Transportation in the Nineteenth and Early Twentieth Cen-
   turies,” in Cambridge Economic History of the United States (vol II), ed. by S. L. Enger-
   man, and R. E. Gallman. Cambridge University Press.
Fogel, R. (1964): Railways and American Economic Growth. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
  Press.
Frankel, J. A., and D. Romer (1999): “Does Trade Cause Growth?,” American Economic
  Review, 89(3), 379–399.
Gandhi, M. (1938): Indian Home Rule. Ahmedabad: Navajivan Publishing House.
Head, K., and A.-C. Disdier (2008): “The Puzzling Persistence of the Distance Effect on
  Bilateral Trade,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 90(1), 37–48.
Headrick, D. R. (1988): The Tentacles of Progress: Technology Transfer in the Age of
  Imperialism, 1850-1940. New York: Oxford University Press US.
Herrendorf, B., J. A. Schmitz, and A. Teixeira (2009): “Transportation and Devel-
  opment: Insights from the U.S, 1840-1860,” Minneapolis Federal Reserve report 425.
Heston, A. (1983): “National Income,” in The Cambridge Economic History of India, Vol-
  ume 2, ed. by D. Kumar, and M. Desai. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
House of Commons Papers (1853): “Correspondence from Governor General in India, rel-


                                            35
   ative to Railway Undertakings,” British Parliamentary Papers, 1852-53 (787), LXXVI.481.
Hummels, D. (2007): “Transportation Costs and International Trade in the Second Era of
  Globalization,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Summer 2007, 131–154.
Hurd, J. (1983): “Chapter VIII.2: Railways,” in Cambridge Economic History of India,
  volume 2, ed. by D. Kumar. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Jensen, R. T. (2007): “The Digital Provide: Information (Technology), Market Perfor-
   mance, and Welfare in the South Indian Fisheries Sector,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
   122(3), 879–924.
Johnson, J. (1963): The Economics of Indian Rail Transport. Bombay: Allied Publishers.
Keller, W., and C. H. Shiue (2008): “Institutions, Technology, and Trade,” University
  of Colorado working paper.
Krugman, P. (1980): “Scale Economies, Product Differentiation, and the Pattern of Trade,”
  American Economic Review, 70(5), 950–970.
Macpherson, W. J. (1955): “Investment in Indian Railways, 1845-1875,” The Economic
  History Review, 8(2), 177–186.
Melitz, M. J., and G. I. P. Ottaviano (2007): “Market Size, Trade, and Productivity,”
  Review of Economic Studies, 75(1), 295–316.
Michaels, G. (2008): “The Effect of Trade on the Demand for Skill — Evidence from the
  Interstate Highway System,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 90(4).
Munshi, K., and M. Rosenzweig (2009): “Why is Mobility in India so Low? Social
  Insurance, Inequality, and Growth,” Brown University working paper.
Naidu, N. (1936): Coastal Shipping in India. Madras.
Namjoshi, M., and B. Sabade (1967): Chambers of Commerce in India. Poona: Gokhale
  Institute of Politics and Economics.
Pavcnik, N. (2002): “The Long and Short of the Canada-U.S. Free Trade Agreement,”
   Review of Economic Studies, 69(1), 245–276.
Risley, H., and E. Gait (1903): Census of India 1901, Volume 15, Madras. Calcutta:
   Superintendent of Government Printing.
Rosenzweig, M. R., and O. Stark (1989): “Consumption Smoothing, Migration, and
  Marriage: Evidence from Rural India,” The Journal of Political Economy, 97(4).
Sanyal, N. (1930): Development of Indian Railways. Calcutta: University of Calcutta Press.
Settar, S. (ed.) (1999): Railway Construction in India: Selected Documents (3 vols). New
   Delhi: Northern Book Centre.


                                            36
Simonovska, I., and M. Waugh (2010): “The Elasticity of Trade: Estimates and Evi-
   dence,” NYU Stern working paper.
Stone, I. (1984): Canal Irrigation in British India. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Thorner, D. (1950): Investment in Empire; British Railway and Steam Shipping Enterprise
  in India, 1825-1849. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Times of India (1938): Upper India Chamber of Commerce: 1888-1938. Bombay: Times of
   India Press.
Tirumalai, R. (1986): The Voice of Enterprise: 150 Years of the Madras Chamber of
   Commerce & Industry. Bangalore: Macmillan India.
Topalova, P. (forthcoming): “Factor Immobility and Regional Impacts of Trade Liberaliza-
  tion: Evidence on Poverty from India,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics.
Trefler, D. (2004): “The Long and Short of the Canada-U.S. Free Trade Agreement,”
  American Economic Review, 94(4), 870–895.
Tyson, G. (1953): The Bengal Chamber of Commerce & Industry: 1853-1953, a Centenary
  Survey. Calcutta: D.A. Lakin.
United Provinces of Agra and Oudh (1868): Report on the Administration of the
  Northern India Salt Revenue Department. Allahabad: Salt Revenue Department.
United States Census Office (1902): United States Census; Volume VI (Agriculture),
  Part II. Washington: United States Census Office.
Wallace, R. (1892): Indian Agriculture. Calcutta: Thacker, Spink and Co.
Watt, G. (1889): A dictionary of the products of India. London: J. Murray.
Wellington, A. M. (1877): The Economic Thory of the Location of Railways. New York:
  John Wiley & Sons.
Williamson, J. G. (1974): Late Nineteenth-Century American Development: A General
  Equilibrium History. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
World Bank (2007): Evaluation of World Bank Support to Transportation Infrastructure.
  Washington DC: World Bank Publications.




                                            37
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              hick lines) in
                                                                                                                                                                                                    These figures

                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ndia (the outline of which is depicted with thin lines). The first railroad liness were laid in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1853. This figure is based on a GIS database in which eacch (approximately) 20 km long railroad
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        pening variable. Source: Author’s calculations bassed on official
1870
   0




                                  1890
                                     0




                                                                  1910
                                                                     0




                                                                                                   1930
                                                                                                      0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ailroads depicted with th
                                                                                                                                                                                 etwork, 1860-1930: T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              he decadal evolution of the railroad network (ra
                                                                                                                                   Figure 1: The evolution off India’s railroad ne



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        details.
 860




                                   880




                                                                   900




                                                                                                    920




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    publications. See Appendix A for d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    segment iis coded with a year of op
18




                                  18




                                                                  19




                                                                                                   19




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    colonial In
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    display th
       Table 1: Descriptive Statistics
                                                                                  Number of    Beginning of      End of
                                                                                 Observations Available Data Available Data

       Real agricultural income per acre (1870 rupees)                               14,111             27.3               38.0
                                                                                                       (10.4)             (13.8)
       Price of salt, all sources (current rupees per maund)                         7,329              5.19              3.45
                                                                                                       (1.96)            (0.465)
       Crop-specific rainfall shock (meters)                                         73 000
                                                                                     73,000             0 638
                                                                                                        0.638             0 662
                                                                                                                          0.662
                                                                                                       (0.614)           (0.602)
       Exports per trade block (millions of 1870 rupees)                           1,315,079            0.701             3.512
                                                                                                       (0.631)           (2.339)
       Notes : Values are sample means over all observations for the year and question, w ith standard deviations in parentheses.
       Beginning and end of available data are: 1870 and 1930 for agricultural output and real agricultural income; 1861 and 1930 for
       salt prices; 1870 and 1930 for all rainfall variables; and 1880 and 1920 for trade data. A 'maund' is equal to 37.3 kg and w as
       the standardized unit of w eight
                                    g in colonial India. Data sources and construction are described in full in Appendix
                                                                                                                 pp      A.
Table 2: Railroads and Trade Costs (Step 1)
Dependent variable: Log salt price at destination                                                       (1)                  (2)
Log effective distance to source
                            source, along lowest-cost route                                          0 135
                                                                                                     0.135
            (at historical freight rates)                                                          (0.038)***
Log effective distance to source, along lowest-cost route                                                                  0.247
            (at estimated mode costs)                                                                                    (0.063)***
              Estimated mode costs per unit distance:
                           Railroad (normalized to 1)                                                                        1
                                                                                                                            N/A
                           Road                                                                                            7 880
                                                                                                                           7.880
                                                                                                                         (1.913)***
                           River                                                                                           3.821
                                                                                                                         (1.034)***
                           Coast                                                                                           3.942
                                                                                                                          (2.581)
Observations                                                                                          7,329                7,329
R-squared                                                                                             0.960                0.974
Notes : Regressions estimating equation (12) using data on 8 types of salt (listed in Appendix A), from 124 districts in 5 Northern
Indian provinces (listed in Appendix A), annually from 1861 to 1930. Column 1 and column 2 estimated by OLS and NLS
respectively; both include salt type x year, salt type x destination fixed effects and salt type x destination trends. 'Effective
distance to source, along low est-cost route' measures the railroad-equivalent kilometres (because railroad freight rate is
normalized to 1) betw een the salt source and the destination district, along the low est-cost route given relative mode costs per
unit distance. 'Historical freight rates' used are 4.5, 3.0 and 2.25 respectively for road, river and coastal mode costs per unit
distance, all relative to rail transport. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors corrected for clustering at the destination district
level (block-bootstrapped by destination district in column 2) are reported in parentheses. *** indicates statistically significantly
different from zero at the 1% level; ** indicates 5% level; and * indicates 10% level.



Table 3: Railroads and Trade Flows (Step 2)
Dependent variable: Log value of exports                                                                      (1)              (2)

Log effective distance beween origin and destination along lowest-cost route                             -1.141             -1.194
                                                                                                       (0.203)***         (0.446)***
(Log effective distance beween origin and destination along lowest-cost route)                                               -0.052
             x (Weight per unit value of commodity in 1880)                                                                 (0.041)
(Log effective distance beween origin and destination along lowest-cost route)                                               0.035
             x (High-value railroad freight class of commodity in 1880)                                                     (0.053)

Observations                                                                                          1,315,079           1,315,079
R-squared                                                                                                0.949               0.955

Notes : Regressions estimating equation (14) using data on 17 commodities and 45 trade blocks annually from 1880 to 1920.
Regressions include origin and destination fixed effects, separately for each commodity and year. 'Effective distance betw een
origin and destination along low est-cost route' measures the railroad-equivalent kilometres (due to the normalized railroad freight
rate to 1) betw een the centroid of the origin and destination trade blocks in question, along the low est-cost route given relative
freight
     g rates for each mode of transport  p ((as estimated in Table 2). ) 'Weight
                                                                              g p   per unit value in 1880' is the w eight
                                                                                                                       g ((in maunds)) p
                                                                                                                                       per
rupee, as measured by 1880 prices. 'Railroad freight class in 1880' is an indicator variable for all commodities that w ere
classified in the higher (more expensive) freight class in 1880; salt w as in the omitted category (low -value commodities).
Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors adjusted for clustering at the exporting block level and bootstrapped standard errors
(using a tw o-stage block bootstrap at the exporting block level) are reported in parentheses for columns 1 and 2 respectively.
*** indicates statistically significantly different from zero at the 1% level; ** indicates 5% level; and * indicates 10% level.
Table 4: Railroads and Real Income Levels (Step 3)
Dependent variable: log real agricultural income per acre                            (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)         (5)

R il d iin di
Railroad   district
              ti t                                                                 0 164
                                                                                   0.164     0 170
                                                                                             0.170     0 188
                                                                                                       0.188     0 157
                                                                                                                 0.157     0 182
                                                                                                                           0.182
                                                                                 (0.056)*** (0.095)* (0.095)** (0.079)** (0.073)**
Unbuilt railroad in district, abandoned after proposal stage                                    0.008
                                                                                               (0.020)
Unbuilt railroad in district, abandoned after reconnaissance stage                             -0.004
                                                                                               (0.050)
Unbuilt railroad in district, abandoned after survey stage                                      0.012
                                                                                               (0.037)
                                                                                               (0 037)
Unbuilt railroad in district, abandoned after sanction stage                                    0.008
                                                                                               (0.075)
(Unbuilt railroad in district, included in Lawrence Plan 1869-1873)                                         0.013
             x (post-1869 indicator)                                                                       (0.057)
(Unbuilt railroad in district, included in Lawrence Plan 1874-1878)                                        -0.051
             x (post-1874 indicator)                                                                       (0.067)
(Unbuilt railroad in district,
                     district included in Lawrence Plan 1879-1883)
                                                        1879 1883)                                          0 005
                                                                                                            0.005
             x (post-1879 indicator)                                                                       (0.054)
(Unbuilt railroad in district, included in Lawrence Plan 1884-1888)                                         0.073
             x (post-1884 indicator)                                                                       (0.098)
(Unbuilt railroad in district, included in Lawrence Plan 1889-1893)                                        -0.096
             x (post-1889 indicator)                                                                       (0.088)
(Unbuilt railroad in district, included in Lawrence Plan 1894-1898)                                         0.044
             x (post-1894
                (post 1894 indicator)                                                                      (0.066)
                                                                                                           (0 066)
(Unbuilt railroad in district, in Bombay Chamber of Commerce plans)                                                      0.004
             x (post-1883 indicator)                                                                                    (0.041)
(Unbuilt railroad in district, in Madras Chamber of Commerce plans)                                                     -0.059
             x (post-1883 indicator)                                                                                    (0.094)
(Unbuilt railroad in district, included in Kennedy plan, high-priority)                                                              0.001
             x (year-1848)                                                                                                          (0.025)
(U b ilt railroad
(Unbuilt   il d iin di
                    district,
                       t i t iincluded
                                 l d d iin K
                                           Kennedy
                                                d plan,
                                                   l    llow-priority)
                                                               i it )                                                               -0.003
                                                                                                                                     0 003
             x (year-1848)                                                                                                          (0.029)
Observations                                                                       14,111      14,111       14,111      14,111       14,111
R-squared                                                                          0.744        0.766       0.768        0.764       0.764
Notes : OLS Regressions estimating equation (16) using real income constructed from crop-level data on 17 principal agricultural crops
(listed in Appendix A), from 235 districts in India, annualy from 1870 to 1930. All regressions include district fixed effects and year
fixed effects. 'Railroad in district' is a dummy variable w hose value is one if any part of the district in question is penetrated by a
railroad line. 'Unbuilt
                Unbuilt railroad in district, abandoned after X stage
                                                                stage' is a dummy variable w hose value is one if a line that w as abandoned
after 'X' stage penetrates a district, in all years after then line w as first mentioned as reaching stage 'X' in official documents. Stages
'X' are: 'proposal', w here the line w as mentioned in official documents; 'reconnaissance', w here the line route w as explored by
surveyors in rough detail; 'survey', w here the exact route of the line and nature of all engineering w orks w ere decided on after detailed
survey; and 'sanction', w here the surveyed line w as given official permission to be built. 'Law rence 1868 plan' w as a proposal for
significant railroad expansion by India's Governor General that w as not implemented; the plan detailed proposed dates of construction
(in 5-year segments) over the next 30 years, w hich are used in the construction of this variable. 'Chambers of Commerce plans' w ere
invited expansion proposals by the Madras and Bombay Chambers of Commerce in 1883, w hich w ere never implemented. 'Kennedy
plan' w as an early construction-cost minimizing routes plan draw n up by India's chief engineer in 1848 (divided into high- and low -
priorities) w hich w as rejected in favor of Dalhousie
priorities),                                       Dalhousie's
                                                             s direct routes plan.
                                                                              plan Heteroskedasticity-robust
                                                                                    Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors corrected for
clustering at the district level are reported in parentheses. *** indicates statistically significantly different from zero at the 1% level; **
indicates 5% level; and * indicates 10% level.
Table 5: A Sufficient Statistic for Railroad Impact (Step 4)
                            Log real agricultural income per acre,
Dependent variable:                                                                           (1)                      (2)
                                     corrected for rainfall

Railroad in district                                                                        0.169                    0.023
                                                                                          (0.051)***                (0.054)
"Autarkiness", as computed in model                                                                                  -0.936
                                                                                                                   (0.131)***

Observations                                                                                14,111                  14,111
R-squared                                                                                   0.610                    0.634

Notes : OLS Regressions estimating equation (18) using real income constructed from crop-level data on 17 principal
agricultural crops (listed in Appendix A), from 235 districts in India, annualy from 1870 to 1930. Dependent variable is log
real income, corrected for crop-specific rainfall of each of 17 crops, w eighted across crops as in equation (18).
Regressions include district fixed effects and year fixed effects. 'Railroad in district' is a dummy variable w hose value is
one if any part of the district in question is penetrated by a railroad line. 'Autarkiness' is the share of a district's expenditure
that it buys from itself; this varible is computed in the equilibrium of the model, w here the model parameters are set to those
estimated in Steps 1 and 2,  2 and the exogenous variables (the transportation netw ork,ork rainfall,
                                                                                             rainfall and district land sizes) are as
observed. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors corrected for clustering at the district level are reported in
parentheses. *** indicates statistically significantly different from zero at the 1% level; ** indicates 5% level; and * indicates
10% level.
A      Data Appendix (Not for Publication)
This appendix provides information (supplementary to that in Section 2) on the data used
in this paper.

Sample of Districts:
The data cover the areas of modern-day India, Pakistan and Bangladesh, most of the area
known as British India. I work with a panel of 235 geographic units of analysis that I refer
to as districts, for as much of the period 1870 to 1930 as possible.1

Trade Cost Proxy Variables:
I construct trade cost proxy variables using a newly constructed GIS database on the Indian
transportation network, from 1851 to 1930. The database covers four modes of transporta-
tion: railroads, roads, rivers and coastal shipping. To construct this database, I begin with a
GIS database that contains the locations of contemporary railroad, river and coast lines from
the Digital Chart of the World. Each segment (approximately 20 km long) of the railroad
network is coded according to the year in which it was opened.2 For river transport I keep
only those rivers that are reported in Schwartzberg (1978) or Bourne (1849) as navigable in
1857. The final component of the colonial India GIS database that I construct is the location
of each district and salt source. To calculate district locations I digitize a map of the district
borders in India (as they existed in 1891) based on maps in the Indian Administrative Atlas
and Constable’s Hand Atlas of India (Bartholomew, 1893). I use this to calculate district
centroids, which I take to be the ‘location’ of each district. Finally, I obtain the location of
each salt source from contemporary maps.
    I then convert the GIS database of transportation lines and district/salt source locations
into a graph of nodes and arcs, as is common in the transportation literature (Black, 2003).
   1
      The majority of British India was under direct British control, and was divided into nine large, admin-
istrative units known as provinces. Each province was further sub-divided into a total of 223 districts, but
4 of these districts represent the four major port cities of colonial India (Bombay, Calcutta, Karachi and
Madras) which do not report agricultural output consistently and I therefore leave these city-districts out
of my sample (see Appendix C, however). Areas not under direct British control were known as ‘Princely
States’. For administrative purposes these were grouped into divisions similar to the provinces and districts
described above, so in princely state areas I use the lower administrative units as my units of analysis and
refer to them as districts, following the Indian Administrative Atlas (Singh and Banthia, 2004). There were
251 of these districts in my sample area, but data collection in the princely states was extremely incomplete
and I include only 16 districts from the princely state regions in my final sample. In sum, I track 219
agricultural districts of British districts plus 16 princely state districts annually from 1870-1930.
    2
      To do this I use the publication History of Indian Railways, Constructed and in Progress (1918 and
1966 volumes), the 1966 volume of which refers to railroad lines in modern-day India only. To obtain years
of opening for line segments in modern-day Pakistan and Bangladesh from 1919 to 1930 I use the annual
Railway Reports published by the Railways Department, which list all line section openings in each year.


                                                     1
I work with a simplified graph representation of the Indian transportation network, where
the number of nodes and the sparsity of arcs is low enough for network algorithms to be
feasibly operated on it using a desktop computer (the resulting network has 7651 nodes).
To do this, I use the ‘simplify’ command in ArcGIS. A line in ArcGIS is a series of vertices
connected by straight lines. The ‘simplify’ command removes vertices in such a way as to
minimize the sum of squared distances between the original line and the simplified line. The
original Digital Chart of the World railroad layer, for example, consists of approximately
33,000 vertices; I simplify the railroad layer to one of only 5616 vertices.
    Because the density of informal roads was extremely high (Deloche, 1994), I allow road
transport to occur along the straight line between any two nodes on the network, but only if
the two nodes either represent districts or salt sources, or the two nodes are within 1000 km
of each other.3 The result is a network with 7651 nodes, 5616 of which represent the railroad
network, 660 of which represent the navigable river network, 890 of which represent coastal
shipping routes, 477 of which represent the centroids of the 477 districts in India (in 1891
borders), and 8 of which represent the locations of the sources of 8 different types of salt.
Because the railroad arcs are coded with a year of opening indicator, this network can be
restricted to represent the transportation network for any year from 1851 to 1930 by simply
turning these arcs on or off.
    Finally, I use this network representation of the Indian transportation system to calculate
the variable LCRED(α, Rt ), described in Section 4. This variable is a measure of the cost
of traveling between any two points (where a point is either a district or a salt source) in a
year using the lowest-cost route along the network (available in that year). The lowest-cost
route depends on the value of the relative per unit distance costs of using each mode (rail,
river, coast, or road), α, and the available transportation network, Rt , whose construction
was described above. Conditional on values of α, I use a standard algorithm from graph
theory and transportation science (Dijkstra’s algorithm, implemented using the Boost Graph
Library for Matlab) to calculate the shortest path between every pair of points, along the
transportation network available in each year from 1870 to 1930. The resulting measure,
LCREDodt (α, Rt ), is in units of railroad-equivalent kilometers due to the normalization of
αrail = 1.

Bilateral Trade Flows:
   3
    Allowing straight-line road travel between any two nodes would yield a network with over 58 million
arcs. The shortest path between each of the nodes on such a dense network cannot be calculated using a
desktop computer, so I restrict many of these arcs to be non-existent; the result is that the 7651-by-7651
matrix representing the network can be stored as a sparse matrix, and analyzed using sparse matrix routines
(that increase computation speed dramatically) in Matlab.



                                                    2
The data I use on bilateral trade flows was collected from a variety of different sources, one
for each mode of transportation. I describe here each of these modes in turn, and then how
they were combined into aggregate data on trade flows.
    Data on railroad trade within India were published separately for each province. The
geographic unit of analysis in these records is the ‘trade block’, which spans between four and
five districts.4 Four of these trade blocks represented the four major ports of colonial India
(Bombay, Calcutta, Karachi and Madras). When a port was represented in this publication
its imports included the sum of imports from other regions of India destined for export
out of the port city by sea (for either international export or export by coasting trade to
another port within India), or destined for consumption/absorption within the port city;
an analogous situation held for exports. After subtracting trade destined for coast-wise
trade (using the coasting trade data described below) I therefore treat these four port city
trade blocks as four economic units whose trade demands and supplies represent the sum of
both intra-city and international demands and supplies for and of goods. (This treatment
is described in detail in Appendix C below.) The railroad trade flow data, like that on all
modes of transportation described below, represents final shipments between two regions
(even if a shipment changed railroad companies).5 Only if a shipment was taken off the
railroad system and re-shipped onwards would it be counted as two separate shipments. I
collect this data from various annual, provincial publications from 1880 onwards.6
    Data on river-borne trade within India were published in a similar manner to (and often
along side) the railroad trade data, for the Brahmaputra, Ganges and Indus river systems.
I collect the river-borne trade data from the railroad trade statistics publications for the
riverine provinces of Assam, Bengal, Northwestern Provinces, and Sind, and follow similar
procedures to those described for the rail data above.
    Data on trade within India that occurred via coastal shipping were published by each of
the coastal provinces (Bengal, Bombay, Madras and Sind) in a similar manner to the railroad
   4
      Trade blocks split into smaller blocks over time, but I aggregate over these splits to maintain constant
geographic units. The trade blocks were always drawn so as to include whole numbers of districts.
    5
      All bilateral block-to-block intra-provincial trade flows were published, except that from a block to itself
(which was always unreported). Inter-provincial trade flows were published from each internal block to each
external province (and vice versa), but not by trade block within the external province. I therefore create a
full set of inter-provincial block-to-block flows by assigning a province’s trade block’s imports from each of
another province’s trade blocks in proportion to the exporting blocks’ stated exports to the entire importing
province (and vice versa for exports).
    6
      The titles of these publications changed over time, from Returns of the Rail [and River-borne] Trade
of [Province] to Report on the trade carried by rail [and river] in [Province] to Report on Inland Trade of
[Province]. In the province of Madras, these statistics were only published from 1909 onwards. Railroad
trade statistics were not published by the princely states themselves, but each province’s external trade
to/from each of the large princely states were published. I therefore treat each large princely state (Central
India Agency, Hyderabad, Mysore, Rajputana and Travancore) as a single trade block.



                                                        3
trade data. I collect the coastal trade data from various annual, provincial publications.7
    Trade data by all modes of transport discussed above were published disaggregated by
commodities. In order to compare commodities across these different levels of aggregation,
I aggregate all data to the level of the 17 commodities (listed below) for which agricultural
output and price data are available. Finally, I aggregate the trade data on each of the modes
(for each commodity separately) into one trade dataset. All of the above trade data are
available from at least 1865 onwards, except for the railroad and river trade data which
starts in a coherent manner in 1880 and was discontinued in 1920. I therefore use bilateral
                                                                    k
trade data from 1880 to 1920 only. This generates the variable Xodt    in the text.

Rainfall Data:
A thick network of 3614 rain gauges at meteorological stations scattered throughout colo-
nial India recorded daily rainfall amounts from 1891-1930. From 1901 onwards, these records
have been digitized by the Global Historical Climatology Network (Daily) project; the GHCN
dataset also provides the latitude and longitude of each station. For the years 1891-1900, I
collect the data from the publication, Daily Rainfall for India in the year.... In the years 1870
to 1890, very little daily rainfall data were published in colonial India, but monthly data from
365 stations (spread throughout India) were published by each province.8 I convert monthly
station-level data to daily station-level data using a modeling procedure that is common in
the meteorological statistics literature (eg, Ngo-Duc, Polcher, and Laval (2005)).9 I convert
station-level data to district-level data by simply averaging over the many stations in each
district.10 Finally, as described in Section 5, I use the Indian Crop Calendar (Directorate of
Economics and Statistics, 1967) to compute the total amount of rain that fell during each
crop’s growing season (as defined in the Crop Calendar ), in each district and year.11 This
   7
      The coastal trade data were published in publications whose titles changed from Annual Statement of
the Sea-borne Trade and Navigation of [Province] to Report on the Maritime Trade of [Province].
    8
      These publications included the Administration Reports for each province, described in the agricultural
price data section below. I use additional data (to increase the number of stations) that were published in
selected provinces’ Sanitary Reports.
    9
      Specifically, using daily data from 1891 to 1930, I estimate the district-specific relationship between the
pattern of monthly rainfall in a year and the rainfall on any day of that year; I then use these estimated
relationships to predict the rainfall on any day in a given district and year from 1870 to 1890, conditional
on the pattern of monthly rainfall actually observed in that district and year. While these daily rainfall
predictions are likely to be imprecise, much of the imprecision is averaged over when I construct crop-
specific rainfall shocks, which are measures of the total rainfall in a given period (a length ranging from 55
to 123 days.)
  10
      If a given district-day has no reported rainfall observations I impute this missing observation by using an
inverse distance-weighted average of that day’s rainfall in the 5 closest reporting stations (know as “Shepard’s
method” in the meteorological literature (Shepard, 1968)).
  11
      This crop calendar covers the regions of colonial India that are in modern-day India, but not Bangladesh
or Pakistan. For districts in Bangladesh and Pakistan I assign growing seasons (to each crop) that reflect



                                                       4
generates the variable RAINotk used in the text.

Prices of Salt and Agricultural Commodities:
I use data on eight different types of salt12 for each of the six provinces in Northern India
as well as data on 17 agricultural commodities13 from all of India. I collect this price data
from various annual, provincial publications.14 Prices reported in these publication were an
average of observations taken by district officers once per fortnight at each of 10-15 leading
retail markets per district.

Real Agricultural Income:
I use data that present the area under each of 17 crops (the 17 for which price data are
available), and the yield per acre for each of these crops, in each district and year.15 I take
the product of each area and yield pair to create a measure of real output for each crop,
district and year. I then evaluate this bundle of 17 real output measures at the retail prices
prevailing for these crops (from the agricultural price data described above), in each district
and year, to create a measure of total nominal agricultural output for each district and year.
Finally, I divide nominal output by a consumer price index (the Törnqvist index) to create
a measure of real income.16
an average of the start and end dates (of the reported growing season) in the five nearest Indian districts.
   12
      These eight salt types are those from: the Bombay sea salt sources near the city of Bombay, salt from
the UK distributed via Calcutta, the Didwana salt source in Punjab, the Kohat mines in Punjab (principally
the Jatta mine, according to Watt (1889)), the Mandi mine in Punjab, the Salt Range mines in Punjab
(principally the Mayo mine, according to Watt (1889)), the Sambhar Salt Lake in Rajputana, and the
Sultanpur source in the Central India Agency.
   13
      These crops are: bajra, barley, bengal gram, cotton, indigo, jowar, kangni, linseed, maize, opium, ragi,
rape and mustard seed, rice, sesamum, sugarcane, tur and wheat.
   14
      These publications are: Prices and Wages in India; Administration Reports from all provinces; the
Salt Report of Northern India; the Statistical Atlas of Andhra State with agricultural price data (for the
Madras Presidency); the Season and Crop Reports from various provinces with agricultural price data; and
the Sanitary Reports from various provinces with data on prices of food grains.
   15
      These data were published in Agricultural Statistics of India from 1884 to 1930. For the years 1870-1883
I use data on crop areas and yields in the provincial Administration Reports, as described in the agricultural
prices data section above. Data on agricultural output were published in each province’s Administration
Report except for Punjab and Bengal. For supplementary data I use each province’s Season and Crops
Report between 1904 and 1930. While Blyn (1966), Heston (1973), and Dewey (1979) have discussed the
potential for measurement error in these sources, these authors have not been concerned with mechanisms
through which measurement error might be correlated (conditional on the fixed effects in place) with the
regressors I use in this paper.
   16
      In order to compute this consumer price index I use district and year specific consumption weights,
computing consumption as output minus net exports (assigning net exports, within each commodity, pro-
portionally across districts within each trade block).




                                                      5
B      Proof of Prediction 3 (Not for Publication)
Consider the simplified version of the model, as in Section 3.2 (the simplified version of which
was only assumed to obtain Prediction 3). That is, there are only three regions o (X, Y and
Z), one commodity, and the regions are initially symmetric (Lo = 1, Ao = Aλθ1 , Tod = T
for all o 6= d, and Tod = 1 for all o = d). Now consider a symmetric change in trade costs
between regions X and Y only (ie dTXY = dTY X 6= 0) and solve for the change in region
X’s real income (dWX = drX − dpX ). Let rX = 1 at all times (ie drX = 0) by choice of the
numeraire; by symmetry the same holds true for rY . Solving for the change in real income
is then simply a matter of solving for dpX , since dWX = −dpX .
    Totally differentiating the price equation for pX (equation (4)) and evaluating this around
the symmetric initial equilibrium we obtain

                            p−(θ+1) dpX = AT −(θ+1) dTY X + AT −θ drZ ,                     (1)

where po = p = A−1/θ (1 + 2T −θ )−1/θ . To obtain an expression for drZ , totally differentiate
region Z’s land market clearing condition (equation (6)) around the symmetric equilibrium
to obtain
                   [(1 + θ)A−1 − pθZ ]drZ = 2θpθ−1 T −θ dpX + θpθ−1 dpZ ,                   (2)

where this step uses the fact that, because of symmetry, dpX = dpY . Finally, note from
the price equation for region Z (ie equation (4)), total differentiation around the symmetric
equilibrium again implies
                                      dpZ = Apθ+1 drZ .                                   (3)

    Substituting equations (2) and (3) into equation (1) we obtain

                                 2θT −2θ
                                                   
                   1−                                 dpX = pθ+1 AT −(θ+1) dTXY .           (4)
                      (1 + θ)A−2 p−2θ − θ − A−1 p−θ

Noting that A−1 p−θ = (1 + 2T −θ ), this simplifies to

                                  2θT −2θ
                                                    
                 1−                                    dpX = pθ+1 AT −(θ+1) dTXY .          (5)
                        4(1 + θ)T −2θ + (4θ + 2)T −θ

Since the expression in square brackets is positive (for θ > 0, as maintained throughout the
paper) the change in region X’s prices (dpX ) is of the same sign as the change in trade costs
(dTXY = dTY X ). That is, real income in region X rises as trade costs between region X and
another region (here, region Y ) fall, which is Prediction 3. This concludes the proof.



                                                 6
C      Including Port Cities (Not for Publication)
The four main port cities of colonial India (Bombay, Calcutta, Karachi and Madras) present
a number of circumstances that require them to be handled differently from other regions of
India. I describe here how these cities entered my analysis, section by section.

Section 4:
The 124 districts of Northern India that are included in my analysis of salt price data include
the two relevant Northern port cities of Karachi and Calcutta.

Section 5:
The 45 trade blocks included in my analysis of bilateral trade patterns include 4 blocks
that refer to the four main port cities. These blocks included, as described above, trade
data reporting each Indian region’s total trade with the given port city with no distinction
between whether that trade was with inhabitants of the city or with the wider world via
the particular port in question. Because of this, the four trade blocks should be interpreted
as representing the composite economic activity of two sub-economies: (i) the port city in
question, and (ii) the segments of the rest of the world that choose to trade with India via
the port in question. This decision has no bearing on the estimation of θk in equation (14)
due to the inclusion of importer and exporter fixed effects (separately for each commodity
and year). However, when estimating κ in equation (15) the four port city blocks are not
included. This is because I lack data on rot (nominal agricultural output per acre) for cases
                                                                         k
in which o is a port city block, so I cannot equate the estimate, ln βbot  + θ ln rot , to ln Akot .
Further, I do not observe the appropriate international equivalent of RAINotk required to
estimate equation (15) for these port city blocks. (Note that even if equivalent international
data on rainfall by crop were available, using this data would require me to take a stand on
the trade costs that separate each port city block from each country in the world. Estimating
these international trade costs would be challenging due to the absence of internationally
comparable price data like that used in Section 4. By contrast, the strategy I employ here
does not require data on these international trade costs.)

Section 6:
As discussed above, while the four port cities were each contained in eponymous districts of
British India, I do not include these four districts in my panel of 235 districts that are used
in the regressions in Sections 6 and 7. The reason for this is that my analysis is focused
on the determinants of real agricultural income, and these four port cities did not report


                                                 7
agricultural output data (because so little agriculture was taking place in these city-districts).

Section 7:
A final challenge presented by the four port cities (which, recall, are treated as a composite of
domestic and international economic regions) is that their demand for and supply of goods is
likely to have had important effects on the 235 non-port Indian districts in whom my interest
lies, and these effects will have changed as interior districts became connected by railroads
to the port cities and thence the wider world. For this reason, I compute the equilibrium to
the model with 239 separate regions: 235 Indian districts plus four port cities (which include
the rest of the world). Doing this requires data on the key exogenous variables—the effective
productivities (Akot ) and land areas (Lo )—from the four port city regions, but such data are
unavailable. These exogenous variables are required to compute equation (6) (which depends
                                                               k
explicitly on Lo and implicitly, through the definition of πod   , on Ako ). To circumvent this
data shortage I use the structure of the model to proceed as follows. To begin, note that
                    bk                                                                       −θk
the estimates of eβot obtained (in Section 5) for the port city regions are equal to Akot rot    .
                                                               −θ
Since Akot appears in equation (6) only when multiplied by rot k I substitute the estimates of
  bk
eβot (for the four port city blocks only) from Section 5 into equation (6). After this substitu-
tion has been made, the system of equations defined by equation (6) contains the unknown
endogenous variable ro for cases in which o is a port city region only when ro is multiplied
by Lo (which, for port city regions, is also unknown due to lack of data on land areas). I
therefore simply solve for the composite ro Lo (but only for the regions o referring to port
city regions) that satisfies the system of equations defined by equation (6).




                                                8
Appendix References (Not for Publication)
Bartholomew, J. G. (1893): Constable’s Hand Atlas of India. London: A. Constable.
Black, W. R. (2003): Transportation: A Geographical Analysis. Guilford: The Guilford
  Press.
Blyn, G. (1966): Agricultural Trends in India, 1891-1947: Output, Availability, and Pro-
  ductivity. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Bourne, J. (1849): Indian River Navigation. London: W. H. Allen.
Deloche, J. (1994): Transport and Communications in India Prior to Steam Locomotion:
  Volume I: Land Transport. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Dewey, C. (1979): “Patwari and Chaukidar: Subordinate Officials and the Reliability of
  India’s Agricultural Statistics,” in The Imperial Impact in Africa and South Asia, ed. by
  C. Dewey, and A. Hopkins. London.
Directorate of Economics and Statistics (1967): Indian Crop Calendar. Delhi:
   Government of India Press.
Heston, A. (1973): “Official Yields per Acre in India, 1886-1947: Some Questions of
  Interpretation,” Indian Economic and Social History Review, 10(40), 303–334.
Ngo-Duc, T., J. Polcher, and K. Laval (2005): “A 53-year Forcing Data Set for Land
  Surface Models,” Journal of Geophysical Research, 110, 1–13.
Schwartzberg, J. E. (1978): A Historical Atlas of South Asia. Chicago: University of
  Chicago Press.
Shepard, D. (1968): “A Two-Dimentional Interpolation Function for Irregularly-Spaced
   Data,” Proceedings of the National Conference, ACM, 23, 517–524.
Singh, R., and J. Banthia (2004): India administrative atlas, 1872-2001. New Delhi:
   Conroller of Publications.
Watt, G. (1889): A dictionary of the products of India. London: J. Murray.




                                            9
