NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHAT ARE THE COSTS OF MEETING DISTRIBUTIONAL OBJECTIVES FOR
CLIMATE POLICY?
Ian W.H. Parry
Roberton C. Williams III
Working Paper 16486
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16486

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2010

We are grateful to Don Fullerton, Bill Randolph, an anonymous referee, and participants in the ChicagoRFF-Illinois Symposium on Distributional Aspects of Energy and Climate Policy for helpful comments
and suggestions. And we thank Fanqing Ye for her excellent research assistance. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Ian W.H. Parry and Roberton C. Williams III. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

What Are the Costs of Meeting Distributional Objectives for Climate Policy?
Ian W.H. Parry and Roberton C. Williams III
NBER Working Paper No. 16486
October 2010
JEL No. H22,H23,Q48,Q54,Q58
ABSTRACT
This paper develops an analytical model to quantify the costs and distributional effects of various fiscal
options for allocating the (large) rents created under prospective cap-and-trade programs to reduce
domestic, energy-related CO2 emissions. The trade-off between cost effectiveness and distribution
is striking.
The welfare costs of different policies, accounting for linkages with the broader fiscal system, range
from negative $6 billion/year to $53 billion/year in 2020, or between minus $12 to almost $100 per
ton of CO2 reductions! The least costly policy involves auctioning all allowances with revenues used
to cut proportional income taxes, while the most costly policies involve recycling revenues in lump-sum
dividends or grandfathering emissions allowances. The least costly policy is regressive, however, while
the dividend policy is progressive, and grandfathering permits is both costly and regressive. A distribution-neutral
policy entails costs of $18 to $42 per ton of CO2 reductions.

Ian W.H. Parry
Resources for the Future
1616 P Street, NW
Washington, DC 20036
parry@rff.org
Roberton C. Williams III
Department of Agricultural and Resource Economics
University of Maryland,
Symons Hall
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
rwilliams@arec.umd.edu

1. Introduction
One of the most important issues in the design of domestic, market-based climate policy
is what to do with the rents or revenues created under cap-and-trade or emissions tax systems.1
How these policy rents are allocated and used critically affects not only the distributional impacts
of the policy, but also its overall cost-effectiveness.
There are many ways to allocate policy rents. One is to grandfather allowances in a capand-trade system, that is, give them away free to existing sources, typically based on their
historical emission rates. The main motivation for this approach is political—providing
compensation for producers affected by the regulation may make it easier to move legislation
forward. Almost all of the allowances in the US program to cap SO2 emissions from power
plants were given away for free and similarly in the initial phases of the European Union’s CO2
trading program. However, more recent European and US federal climate initiatives have moved
away from full grandfathering, as it is widely appreciated that this approach substantially
overcompensates emitters for their compliance costs.2
More recently, the distributional concern in the United States has been on the household
side, particularly insulating low-income households from the prospective increase in energy
prices from climate policy. Some proposals involve granting free allowances to local distribution
companies with the expectation that the value of these allowances will be rebated to households
in the form of lower electricity bills. Another approach that has recently gained traction is known
as “cap-and-dividend”, which involves a cap-and-trade program with full allowance auctions
with all the revenue returned in equal lump-sum transfers for all individuals. An argument for
this approach is that all individuals have equal ownership rights to the environment and therefore
proceeds from charging for use of the environment should be shared equally.
A key drawback of both of these approaches is that they forgo the potentially large
efficiency gains from using allowance auction revenues to cut other distortionary taxes. Personal
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
1

Other key issues include the overall stringency of the policy, its sectoral coverage (including provisions for
emission offsets), whether cap-and-trade should include price stabilization mechanisms, and to what extent
supplementary instruments are warranted to address other possible market failures (e.g., technology spillovers). For
a general discussion of these issues see, for example, Aldy et al. (2010).
2

Power companies in the European Union earned large windfall profits when the CO2 cap was first introduced (e.g.,
Sijm et al., 2006). At least for a moderately scaled CO2 permit system, only about 15-20 percent of allowances are
needed to compensate energy intensive industries for their loss of producer surplus, so the huge bulk of the
allowances could still be auctioned (e.g., Bovenberg and Goulder, 2001, Smith et al., 2002).

1

income and other taxes distort capital and labor markets by depressing net factor returns. They
also distort household consumption decisions by allowing exemptions or deductions for
particular types of spending (e.g., employer medical insurance). Therefore, using revenues to
lower the rates of these distortionary taxes produces gains in economic efficiency that can
substantially lower the overall welfare costs of climate policy (though this approach may do little
to help with distributional objectives). In fact, without this counteracting revenue-recycling
effect, the welfare costs of market-based climate policies are substantially higher in the presence
of distortionary taxes, because those distortions raise production costs and product prices, and
thereby lower real factor returns and factor supply (e.g., Goulder et al., 1999, Fullerton and
Metcalf, 2001).
To date, no climate bills have been introduced in the US Congress that would use policy
revenues to reduce marginal income tax rates, though some include uses that would have similar
effects.3 Moreover, considering this case helps clarify the quite striking trade-offs involved in
allocating climate policy rents.
In this paper, we develop and parameterize an analytical general-equilibrium model that
synthesizes two different strands in the literature on domestic climate policy, one focusing on the
cost-effectiveness of alternative market-based policies in a homogeneous agent framework and
the other that looks at distributional effects in multi-agent models but with no attention to
efficiency. While some of our results—such as the low cost-effectiveness of cap-and-dividend
and grandfathered permits—have been recognized for some time, our analysis offers a more
complete picture of efficiency/distributional trade-offs than can be gleaned from prior literature.4
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
3

The Waxman-Markey, bill for example, devotes a portion of revenue to deficit reduction. If that deficit reduction
would otherwise have been accomplished by raising marginal rates, then this would have the same effect as
lowering marginal rates. In addition, a bill sponsored by Rep. Larson (HR 1337) would have used revenues to
exempt a portion of income from payroll taxes. While this form of recycling would increase the return to labor force
participation it would be less efficient than cutting marginal income tax rates. The latter would also increase effort
on the job and reduce the bias towards tax-preferred spending. CO2 taxes which are largely revenue neutral have
been implemented in British Columbia and in Scandinavian countries, though a tax proposal for France (with very
limited coverage) was recently ruled unconstitutional.
	  
4
Prior analyses by Burtraw et al. (2009), Dinan and Rogers (2002), and Parry (2004) have studied the distributional
impacts of various options for recycling climate policy revenues through the tax system. And many papers have
been written on the linkages between environmental policies and the broader tax system and how these affect the
overall costs of policy (see, for example, Goulder et al., 1999, Fullerton and Metcalf, 2001, Bovenberg and Goulder,
2002, and Schöb, 2006, among many others).
Our analysis is more than just the sum of findings from these two literatures, however. Most importantly,
the efficiency and distributional results come from the same model, and thus are directly comparable. This model
has several additional advantages. Unlike in most prior literature we account for broader distortions of the tax

2

Our analysis considers three bounding cases for rent allocation and use under cap-andtrade systems. These include full grandfathering of allowances; full auction of allowances with
revenues returned in lump-sum-transfers; and full auctions with revenues recycled in equal,
proportionate cuts in marginal income taxes across all household groups. We also consider a
“distribution neutral” policy where the tax and benefit system is adjusted to neutralize any
distributional effects of the cap-and-trade policy on households, leaving the overall policy
change neither progressive nor regressive. Policymakers are more likely to choose combinations
of the bounding cases studied here, rather than using 100 percent of rents for one purpose alone,
however the implications of these combinations are easily inferred by taking the appropriate
weighted averages of our bounding cases. Furthermore, although our discussion is couched in
terms of cap-and-trade, each cap-and-trade variant has an emissions tax counterpart in our
analysis.5
New revenue sources might be used in many ways other than those studied here. These
run the gamut from program enhancing measures like clean technology programs, incentives for
energy efficiency, and capacity investments to facilitate adaptation to climate change, to general
increases in public spending and federal deficit reduction. However, it is difficult to make
general statements about the potential efficiency implications from these broader alternatives for
revenue use, without specific evidence on the benefit and costs of the spending measures,
accounting for possible market failures that they might address. Even the effects of deficit
reduction are opaque, as it is unclear whether lower debt burdens for future generations will lead
to lower taxes or more public spending.

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
system beyond those in factor markets, so we can integrate empirical findings from recent public finance literature
on the taxable income elasticity (see below). Furthermore, our distributional analysis takes into account implicit
burdens on households from the changes in deadweight loss from the broader fiscal system. Moreover, we account
for inflation indexing of the tax/benefit system, which provides some (albeit limited) automatic adjustment to higher
energy prices. In addition, the type of multi-agent model used here is needed to avoid aggregation bias when
households face different tax rates, benefit differently from revenue-recycling schemes, and have different
behavioral responses to tax changes. Finally, the distribution-neutral approach described below has not previously
been analyzed in the context of carbon policy.
5

For example, a carbon tax with revenues returned in lump-sum transfers to firms in proportion to their historical
emissions would be equivalent to cap-and-trade with grandfathered allowances. The tax and cap-and-trade
approaches would differ if our analysis were extended to incorporate uncertainty over future emissions abatement
costs (e.g., Pizer, 2003).
	  

3

We find that the allocation of rents under cap-and-trade (or use of revenues under carbon
taxes) can have huge efficiency and distributional consequences for carbon policy, effects that
can be much larger than the direct effects of the carbon policy itself.
Within the range of options we consider, the direct cost of reducing CO2 emissions to 9%
below business-as-usual levels in the year 2020 is $9 billion (all figures are in year 2007 $).
However, the overall welfare costs of different policies, taking into account linkages with the
broader fiscal system, ranges from negative $6 billion/year to $53 billion/year. In terms of
average cost of CO2 reductions this is a huge range—from minus $12 to almost $100 per ton.
The distribution of that cost ranges from highly progressive (with the bottom two income
quintiles bearing a negative burden) to highly regressive (with the top two quintiles bearing a
negative burden). There are stark trade-offs between cost-effectiveness and distribution in the
design of market-based climate control policies. A cap-and-dividend approach makes carbon
policy more progressive at the expense of dramatically raising the overall cost, and conversely,
using revenue to fund a proportional income tax cut lowers overall cost but leads to a regressive
distribution of those costs. A distribution-neutralizing tax change represents a middle ground for
both efficiency and distributional effects. Cap-and-trade with grandfathered allowances performs
poorly on both cost and distributional grounds, though it may reduce industry opposition and
thus be more politically feasible.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 develops our analytical
framework and key formulas for the efficiency cost and distributional burden of different
policies. Section 3 describes the model parameterization. Section 4 presents the main quantitative
findings and sensitivity analysis. Section 5 offers concluding remarks.

2. Analytical Framework
A. Model Assumptions
We use a long run, comparative static model with multiple agents, each representing an
average over all households within a particular income class. Households choose consumption of
general goods, products that are energy intensive, products that receive favorable treatment from
the tax system, and labor supply. The government prices carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions,
through a cap-and-trade system, which in turn drives up energy costs and product prices in

4

general. Rents created by climate policy may accrue to the private sector (e.g., through free
allowance allocation) or to the government. In the latter case, revenues are used to adjust the
income tax and transfer system.
(i) Household utility. We divide households into 5 equal-sized income groups, indexed by i,
where i = 1 and 5 denote the lowest and highest income quintiles, respectively. Each group is
modeled as a single representative household, with the utility function:
(1)

ui (XiE , XiF , XiC , Li ,G PUB )

XiE denotes consumption of an aggregate of goods whose production or use is energy intensive
(e.g., electricity-using durables, auto travel, home heating fuels). XiF is consumption of goods
that are favored through the broader tax system, such as employer-provided medical insurance or
owner-occupied housing. XiC is an aggregate of all other (non-energy-intensive, non-tax-favored)
goods. Li is work effort, implicitly combining labor force participation rates and average hours
worked on the job by households in that group. GPUB is government spending on public goods,
which is fixed, and is included only to scale income tax rates to their observed levels. ui is quasiconcave, twice differentiable, decreasing in labor supply, and increasing in all other arguments.
(ii) Household budget constraint. The household budget constraint is given by:
(2)

!p X
j

ij

= Ii

j

where j = E, F, C indexes the three goods and pj is the market price of good j.
The tax and transfer system, reflecting state and federal personal income taxes, employer
and employee payroll taxes, and sales taxes, minus government transfers, is represented as a
piecewise-linear function with five segments and each of the five income groups falling on a
different segment. For simplicity, we assume that any policy-induced changes in taxable income
will be sufficiently small that no group will move to a different segment of the tax schedule.
Under this assumption, the tax schedule group i faces is equivalent to a linear tax with rate ti and
intercept !Gi (which can be found by extending the relevant segment of the piecewise-linear tax
schedule out to a point with zero pre-tax income). Disposable income (Ii) consists of taxable
income ( ! i ), net of taxes paid on that income. This gives

5

(3a)

I i = (1 ! ti )" i + Gi
Taxable income consists of the wage wi times labor supply, plus lump-sum net-of-tax

profit income πi, less spending on tax-favored goods. Profit income accrues to households via
their ownership of firms and reflects any producer rents created by cap-and-trade policy.
(3b)

! i = wi Li + " i # pF XiF
The (pre-existing) tax system causes two sources of distortion. First, it distorts labor

supply by depressing the returns to work effort. Second, it creates a bias towards tax-preferred
spending. The combined effect of carbon policies on these two distortions can be summarized by
changes in taxable income.6
(iii) Production, CO2 emissions, prices and rents. All goods are produced under constant returns
to scale under perfect competition (hence there are no pure profits in the absence of carbon
policy). Market prices of goods, which implicitly incorporate any energy costs associated with
their use, are determined by:
(4)

p j = ! j pH + " j

Here ρj is the energy intensity of good j, where !E > !C , !F ; pH is the price of energy; and ! j is a
parameter representing non-energy costs.7
The price of energy is determined as follows
(5)

pH = c(z 0 ! z) + " z + pH0

where z is CO2 emissions per unit of energy, c(.) is a positive, convex abatement cost function
(c(0) = 0) and a superscript 0 denotes the initial value of a variable (prior to the introduction of
carbon policy). A reduction in z represents a switch to lower carbon but more expensive fuels in
energy production (e.g., a switch from coal to renewables or nuclear power). Emissions are
priced at rate τ, which reflects the allowance price. Our assumptions also imply that emissions
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
6

We implicitly assume that that tax preferences do not address any market failures, and thus are purely
distortionary.
7

For simplicity
below.

ρj is taken as fixed though relaxing this would not affect the results, given our parameterization

6

prices and abatement costs will be fully passed through into energy prices. As discussed below,
this assumption is debatable, although it does not affect the key focus of our paper, which is the
trade-off between costs and distributional goals in allowance allocation.
Economy-wide CO2 emissions, Z, are the product of the emissions intensity of energy and
energy use aggregated over all products and households:
(6)

Z = z " ! j " Xij
j

i

For simplicity, we focus on a policy covering CO2 only, which accounts for about 80 percent of
total US greenhouse gases. In addition, the (energy-related domestic) CO2 reductions, and the
emissions price, are approximately consistent with those projected under recent climate
legislation.8
Profit income to household group i is given by:
(7)

! i = " i#$ Z

! i is the fraction of (economy-wide) energy capital owned by household group i (implicitly, this
includes both retirement and non-retirement bond and stockholdings), where ! i" i = 1 and ! i is
larger for higher income groups. ! is the portion of policy rents that are left in the private sector,
as opposed to accruing to the government in revenue. ! = 0 represents a cap-and-trade system
with full allowance auctions. ! = 1 represents a system with 100 percent free allowance
allocation to energy firms, where entire policy rents τZ are reflected in higher firm equity values
and stockholder wealth, and such income is not taxed. Intermediate cases might represent partial
taxation of allowance rents or partial auctioning of allowances. Outcomes for these cases are
easily inferred by taking weighted averages of the results below.
(iv) Government Constraints and Policy. The government is subject to the budget constraint
(8)

G PUB = & ti ! " i # & Gi + (1 # $ )% Z
i

i

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
8

Although under current legislation firms may purchase offsets in other domestic sectors (e.g., forestry and
agriculture) and in other countries we do not count those as part of the emission reduction, nor do we include the
deadweight losses (in other sectors or countries) associated with those broader reductions. A key concern with
offsets is the difficulty of verifying whether or not these broader emission reductions would have occurred anyway,
and whether they might be negated through increased emissions elsewhere (e.g., slowed deforestation in one country
might accelerate deforestation in other countries through a rise in global timber prices).

7

This constraint requires that spending on public goods equals revenue from the income tax
system, plus revenue from the carbon policy.
Following the introduction of a carbon policy, the intercept terms in the tax schedule are
adjusted as follows:
(9)

Gi = Gi0 p + Ĝi ,

p = ! µ j pj , µ j
j

!X
=
!X

0
ij

i

0
ij

ij

where we have normalized all initial product prices to unity. p is the general price level, a
weighted average of market prices where the weight µ j is the (initial) share of economy-wide
spending (or consumption) on good j.
According to (9), the nominal tax schedule is automatically “inflation-indexed” to reflect
increases in the general price level (this implies that marginal and average tax rates depend on
real income). In addition, some schemes devote a portion of the new revenues to making the
policy more progressive, which implies an additional adjustment Ĝi to transfer payments.
More specifically, we consider four bounding cases for the allocation/use of policy rents
(each defined for the same emissions reduction/emissions price):
Proportional income tax cut ( ! = 0 , Ĝi = 0 ). In this case, all policy rents go to the government
and, after indexing the nominal tax schedule, all other revenue is used to finance an equal
reduction in the marginal tax rate faced by all income groups, that is, dti / d! = dt / d! < 0, "i .
Cap and dividend ( ! = 0 , Ĝi = Ĝ > 0 ). For this policy, allowances under a cap-and-trade policy
are fully auctioned with revenues (after indexing) returned in equal lump-sum transfers to
households.
Grandfathered permits ( ! = 1 , Ĝi = 0 ). Here all allowances are given away for free and all
policy rents accrue to households through their ownership of firms. (Again, we abstract from
taxation of rents).
Distribution-neutral ( ! = 0 , Ĝi ! 0 ). Whereas the tax change in the proportional tax cut case
entails the same change to all marginal tax rates, the distribution-neutral case requires changing
marginal income tax rates by different amounts at different points in the income distribution, in

8

order to equalize the net burden as a percentage of income across all quintiles.9 The efficiency
gains from revenue recycling are smaller in the distribution-neutral case than in the case with
proportional tax rate reductions. This occurs primarily because marginal rates fall by less in this
case than in the proportional tax cut case. Cutting tax rates on low income groups leads to a
relatively large drop in tax revenue, because all higher income groups also benefit from the rate
reductions for the lower income brackets. Consequently, a tax cut disproportionately targeted at
lower income groups will yield a smaller reduction in marginal rates than would a proportional
tax cut.
In all four cases we assume that any indirect revenue losses are made up through equal,
proportionate adjustments to all marginal income tax rates.10 These losses stem from reductions
in taxable income as households, for example, reduce labor supply in response to lower real
wages as higher energy prices drive up the general price level.
One noteworthy limitation of our analysis is that the model does not capture distortions
from taxes on capital income. In this regard we mischaracterize, though perhaps only
moderately, the efficiency gains from, and the incidence of, proportional cuts in marginal income
taxes. More generally, incorporating taxes on capital income would admit a wider range of
possibilities for changes in the taxation of personal and corporate income in response to
recycling revenue from allowance sales.

B. Formulas for Efficiency Costs and Distributional Burdens of Carbon Policies
Here we go straight to the main formulas of interest. These are general expressions for
the components of the efficiency costs and distributional burdens of carbon policies, and how
those components vary under the allocation/recycling options just described. The formulas below
are (reasonable) approximations given the scale of emission reductions considered and would be

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
9

This is similar to the approach taken in Williams (2009a and 2009b) when considering a distribution-neutralizing
tax change in other policy contexts, but while those papers assume a continuous income distribution, this paper
works with a discrete distribution made up of five quintiles. The approach in those papers in turn draws on earlier
work by Kaplow (2004).
10

Alternatively, we could assume that indirect revenue losses are deducted from the amount of revenue returned in
transfers under cap-and-trade, or the size of the allowance giveaway under grandfathered permits, with significant
implications for distributional incidence. However, our assumption is more in keeping with actual policy proposals
(not least, given the difficulty of accurately projecting indirect revenue losses).

9

exact if demand and marginal abatement cost curves were linear over the relevant range.
Derivations for the formulas are provided in the Appendix.
(i) Efficiency costs. The (approximate) efficiency cost of a carbon policy that reduces aggregate
CO2 emissions by an amount !Z = Z 0 " Z , with associated emissions price τ, can be
decomposed into the following four components:
(10a) WC HT ! WG RR + WC TI + WC INC
WC HT =

'
*
WG RR = MEB ! ((1 " # )$ E " & %Gi + ,
i
)
,

1
! " ! #Z ,
2

WC TI = (1 + MEB) ! $ ti
i

"# i
%Z )
&
%p = (1 + MEB) ! , " iI ti # ip$ ( Z +
+,
'
"p
2 *
i

WC INC = !(1 + MEB) " % ti
i

#$ i
%
(&Gi + ' i ) = !(1 + MEB) " ' # iI ti $ iI i &Gi
#Gi
Ii
i

where

"# i
t
! i" # it i
%
"ti
1 $ ti
i
,
MEB =
= i
"# i
ti
" t
$ # i + $ ti "t 1 $ % ! i # i 1 $ t
i
i
i
i
i
! $ ti

(10b)

! it =

"# i 1 $ ti
,
"(1 $ ti ) # i

! ip =

"i
"# i p
"# I
, ! iI = i i , ! i" =
,
"p # i
"I i # i
# "i
i

! iI =

"i
# Ii
i

Beginning with (10b), ! it , ! ip , and ! iI denote three different taxable income elasticities
for household i defined with respect to changes in marginal tax rates, changes in the general
price level, and changes in (taxable) household income, respectively. ! i" is the share of
household group i’s taxable income in economy-wide income.
MEB is the marginal excess burden of taxation, the efficiency cost of raising an extra
dollar of revenue through a proportionate increase in marginal income taxes. The numerator of
MEB is the efficiency loss from an incremental increase in the marginal income tax for group i,
aggregated over all households. The efficiency loss for group i is the induced reduction in
taxable income (reflecting both reductions in labor supply and increases in tax-preferred
spending) times the marginal tax rate. The denominator of the MEB is the extra revenue from the
tax increase, summed over all households. Alternatively, the MEB can be expressed as a function
10

of the weighted sum of taxable income elasticities (with respect to tax rates) for different
household groups, with weights equal to the households’ share in economy-wide taxable income.
Note that, according to the way we have defined it in (10b), behavioral responses underlying the
MEB are uncompensated.
In equation (10a), the first component of the welfare cost, WC HT , corresponds to the
Harberger triangle under the economy-wide marginal abatement cost curve. This curve
represents the envelope of other marginal abatement cost curves for each margin of behavior for
reducing emissions—reducing emissions per unit of, and reducing overall consumption of,
energy-intensive products.11 The Harberger triangle is the same under all four policy scenarios.
The second component in (10a), WG RR , termed the revenue-recycling effect (e.g.,
Goulder 1995), is the efficiency gain that results to the extent that revenues are used to reduce
marginal income taxes. This component is the product of the MEB and the amount of revenue
recycled in this fashion, where the latter is the policy rents retained by the government less what
is spent on transfer payments and indexing.
The third welfare cost component, WCTI, is the tax-interaction effect. In most prior work
this referred to the welfare loss from the reduction in labor supply as policy-induced increases in
the general price level reduced the real return to work effort (e.g., Goulder 1995). The welfare
loss was the change in labor earnings, multiplied by the labor tax distortion, and multiplied by
1+MEB, as lost labor tax revenues must be made up through higher (distortionary) taxes to
maintain budget balance. In these models, the change in labor earnings depends on both the
responsiveness of labor supply to higher prices, and the loss of worker surplus from the price
increase. The latter is (approximately) equal to allowance rent plus the Harberger triangle under
the marginal abatement cost curve, and corresponds to ! (Z + "Z / 2) in our formula for WCTI.
However, in our case the tax-interaction effect is measured with respect to changes in taxable
income, in response to higher product prices, rather than labor earnings, and hence it is the
taxable income, rather than labor supply, elasticity that appears in our formula. The taxinteraction effect (as defined here) is also constant across different policies.
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
11

These marginal cost curves all come out of the origin given that our model abstracts from other distortions
affecting the production and use of energy, such as fuel taxes, automobile congestion, and non-competitive pricing
of electricity.

11

Our expression for WCTI embeds a number of simplifying assumptions that might, to
some degree, be open to question (see the Appendix). One is that we assume all goods are equal
substitutes for leisure and therefore not deserving of any Ramsey tax or subsidy from an optimal
tax perspective. In the absence of evidence to the contrary however, this seems a reasonable,
neutral assumption. Another simplification is that compliance costs are fully passed forward into
higher prices. To the extent, for example, that compliance costs come at the expense of inframarginal rent earned on base load power generation, the price effect and tax-interaction effect
will be weaker.12 In short, the reader should bear in mind that the absolute value of the taxinteraction effect is difficult to pin down accurately, though this is not relevant for the
cost/distributional tradeoffs involved in allocating cap-and-trade rents, which is the main focus
of our paper.
The final component of welfare cost, WCINC, reflects efficiency losses from the reduction
in taxable income in response to higher lump-sum income—through higher government transfers
and/or profit income. This largely reflects a reduction in labor supply as households take more
leisure, which is a normal good.
(ii) Distributional burden. The distributional burden of the emissions pricing policy on
household group i, relative to income, is fairly straightforward and can be approximated by (see
the Appendix for derivations):
(11)

"
j

!p 0j Xij0
I

0
i

+

!Gi + " i !ti " i
+ 0
I i0
Ii

The first terms reflects the (first order) consumer surplus loss from the induced increase in
energy prices. The second term picks up possible benefits from dividends and rent income
through stock ownership under grandfathered permits. And the third term reflects gains from
reductions in marginal tax rates. The efficiency consequences from the revenue-recycling, taxinteraction, and income effect on labor supply are all included in the distributional analysis,
through overall changes in marginal income tax rates, in the third term. We omit the Harberger

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
12

The price pass through may also be imperfect in states that retain cost-of-service regulation for power
generation—in this case, utilities receiving free allowance allocations cannot pass forward the opportunity cost of
such allowances in higher generation prices. See Parry (2005) for more discussion of these issues.

12

triangle from the distributional analysis, as this is small relative to the first order loss of surplus
to households from higher energy prices.

3. Parameterization of the Model
Our baseline parameter assumptions are summarized in Table 1. We focus on projections
for year 2020. All monetary figures are expressed in year 2008 dollars (or thereabouts).
Income distribution. To obtain the income distribution we use data from the Consumer
Expenditure Survey (CEX) for years 2007 and 2008, for households that completed their year in
the survey panel during 2008.13 As is standard in incidence analysis we divide households into
quintiles in two different ways: based on their pre-tax annual income and based on their total
consumption.14 To the extent that households are able to smooth consumption over time, the
consumption-based measure will more accurately reflect lifetime income. Distributional
differences are more muted when measured based on consumption quintiles than based on
income quintiles.
Under either measure, quintile 1 is the lowest 20 percent of income earners, quintile 2 the
next lowest 20 percent, and so on. For simplicity, we assume the real income and real
consumption of each household group grows at the same 1.5 percent annual rate out to 2020. In
2020, income per household varies from $11,307 for the lowest income quintile to $181,626 for
the top quintile, and consumption varies from $19,253 for the lowest consumption quintile to
$126,173 for the highest (Table 1).
Budget shares for energy-intensive goods. In the analytical model, goods are either energyintensive or non-energy intensive. In the real world and in the data, goods vary widely in their
energy (and thus carbon) intensity. One could simply divide goods into energy-intensive and
non-energy-intensive categories and assign all energy-intensive goods the same embodied carbon
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
13

The CEX uses a rotating panel design: each calendar quarter, one fourth of the households in the sample are
rotated out, so each household appears in the data for four quarters. To obtain a full year of data on each household
that completed its time in the panel during 2008 therefore requires using data from both 2007 and 2008.
14

Because income in the CEX is known to be poorly measured for low-income households, it is customary for
incidence studies to drop some very low-income households to minimize the effects of that measurement problem.
We follow the same approach as Grainger and Kolstad (2010), dropping households with reported income below
$7,500, but not altering the quintile cutoff levels of income and expenditure as a result of dropping those
households.

13

content and all non-energy-intensive goods a lower or zero embodied carbon content. But given
the wide variation in embodied carbon across goods, this could introduce substantial inaccuracy
when measuring the distributional burden of a carbon tax.
Instead, we estimate the total carbon embodied in all of the goods a household consumes,
and then define the consumption of energy-intensive goods in the model to be proportional to
that total. In effect, this treats consuming a particular good from the CEX as consuming some of
the energy-intensive good and some of the non-energy-intensive good, with the relative
proportions being determined by the embodied carbon content of that good. We take the
estimates of embodied carbon for goods in the CEX from Hassett et al. (2007), who calculate
those estimates based on input-output tables from the US Bureau of Economic Analysis.
Stock ownership. We calculate stock ownership by aggregating for each quintile the value of
estimated market value of all stocks, bonds, mutual funds, and other such securities reported by
each household in the CEX. According to this calculation, the top-income quintile owned 59.8
percent of stockholdings, while the lowest income quintile owned 2.6 percent. Stock ownership
shares are assumed to be the same in 2020 as in 2007-08.15
Household tax rates and transfers. Marginal and average rates of federal and state income taxes
(accounting for the earned income tax credit and child tax credits), and sales taxes, were obtained
by running each household from the CEX data for 1997-1999 through the NBER’s TAXSIM
model, using the tax laws for those years, and then aggregating for each quintile.16 We add to
these employer and employee payroll taxes (based on statutory rates) to obtain the overall
income tax rates (assumed to apply in 2020) shown in Table 1. Marginal tax rates vary from 0.17
for the bottom income quintile to 0.41 for the top income quintile and average (weighted by
taxable income) 0.40.
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
15

Ideally, we would use information on the pattern of stock ownership across energy-intensive firms (rather than all
firms) to gauge the distribution of rent income under grandfathered permits. However, this is difficult to obtain
given that most stocks are owned indirectly through large investment firms.
16

These years pre-date the federal income tax cuts of 2001 and 2003, and thus will approximate the taxes that will
apply if those tax cuts are allowed to expire (which seems increasingly likely over time, given budgetary pressures).
We feel this provides a better approximation to the tax laws in 2020 than would using the 2008 tax laws. To the
extent that this over- or underestimates marginal tax rates in 2020, the magnitudes of the revenue-recycling and taxinteraction effects will also be over- or underestimated.

14

Taxable income elasticities. During the last decade, a substantial number of papers have
estimated the elasticity of taxable income with respect to tax rates, both for the economy as a
whole, and for high-income taxpayers. Although initial estimates of this elasticity were quite
large (e.g., Feldstein 1999), more recent estimates are considerably smaller, in part reflecting
better data and improved methods of controlling for non-tax factors affecting changes in taxable
income. Based on a careful review of evidence for the United States and other countries, Saez et
al. (2009) put the taxable income elasticity (for the economy as a whole) at 0.12 to 0.40, with
more estimates closer to the top end of this range than the bottom.17
Although we assume that all taxpayers have the same labor supply elasticity, higher
income taxpayers tend to have more scope for exploiting tax preferences, so they tend to have
higher taxable income elasticities. We assume taxable income elasticities with respect to tax rates
vary between 0.2 for the low income quintile and 0.35 for the top income quintile, as shown in
Table 1, where (weighting by household shares in taxable income) the average elasticity is 0.31.
An increase in the general price level (in response to carbon policy) has a comparable
effect on labor supply to a reduction in the real household wage—that is, households substitute
leisure for work, though this is partly offset by an income effect in the opposite direction. The
effect on tax-preferred spending should be small since the price of ordinary spending does not
change relative to the price of tax-favored spending.18 For the same reason, the change in taxable
income in response to higher lump-sum payments should be similar to the change in labor
earnings. We therefore use standard values for the uncompensated labor supply elasticity, and
income elasticity of labor supply, namely 0.15 and -0.2 (e.g., Blundell and MaCurdy, 1999), as
proxies for ! ip and ! iI for all households.

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
17

One caveat here is that there is a slight mismatch between our representation of the taxable income elasticity and
empirical estimates of that elasticity. In our model, this elasticity reflects tax-induced reductions in labor supply and
shifting to tax-preferred consumption, whereas empirical studies summarize a broader range of responses including
shifting to tax-sheltered saving. This mismatch (which we believe is not too important for our purposes) is due to
our characterizing the income tax system as a tax on labor alone, rather than a tax on both labor and capital income.
18

That is, although tax-preferred spending will fall in response to higher energy prices the resulting efficiency gain
(due to offsetting the tax subsidy) is modest relative to the efficiency loss from the reduction in labor supply. This is
because the “market” for tax-preferred spending is small (about 10-15 percent) relative to the labor market.

15

Emissions reductions and prices. These are based on a policy simulation of representative
climate bills reported in Krupnick et al. (2010) using a variant of the Energy Information
Administration’s National Energy Modeling System (NEMS). NEMS is a dynamic, economicengineering model of the economy, with considerable detail on a wide spectrum of existing and
emerging technologies across the energy system. Its projections are widely used by other energy
modeling groups.
Without climate policy, this model projects CO2 emissions to be about 6 billion metric
tons in 2020. The electricity and transport sectors account for about 40 and 33 percent of these
emissions respectively, and other sources (i.e., non electricity emissions from the industrial,
commercial, and residential sectors) account for the remaining 27 percent. With climate policy,
energy-related CO2 emissions are reduced by about 9 percent below business-as-usual levels in
2020, or by 0.54 billion tons, and the allowance price is $33 per ton of CO2 in current dollars
(Krupnick et al. 2010).19 Thus, the Harberger triangle, WCHT, is about $9 billion and policy rents,
τZ, are about $180 billion. The carbon policy increases energy prices in our model by 7.9 percent
or the general price level by 0.5 percent.

4. Results
A. Cost Comparison
Figure 1 shows the overall cost of imposing a carbon policy with an allowance price of
$33 per ton of CO2, under each of the four options for the use of allowance rents: a proportional
income tax cut, lump sum rebates to households, free allocation of permits to firms, and a
distribution-neutralizing tax cut. For this last option, the cost varies substantially based on
whether the tax cut neutralizes distributional effects across income quintiles or across
consumption quintiles, so these are presented separately. Note that Figure 1 provides just an
estimate of policy costs: it does not incorporate any estimates of the climate benefits from lower
CO2 emissions.
For each case, the figure also shows the four components of welfare cost: the Harberger
triangle term (the partial-equilibrium cost, ignoring any interactions with the tax system); the
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
19

This policy run involves a more aggressive emission reduction target, but allows domestic and international
offsets (under an intermediate assumption about the availability of such offsets). Here we assume that the same
emissions price projected by this run is imposed, but is applied only to CO2 with no offsets. In either case, the
reduction in domestic, energy-related CO2 should be essentially the same.

16

revenue-recycling effect (the gain from using allowance rents to finance tax rate cuts); the taxinteraction effect (the general-equilibrium loss resulting when higher energy prices discourage
labor supply); and the income effect on labor supply (a further general-equilibrium loss as the
income effect from the distribution of policy rents further discourages labor supply). The
Harberger triangle is the same across all the policy simulations ($8.9 billion a year in 2020) as is
the tax-interaction effect ($25.0 billion). However, the revenue-recycling effect, in particular,
differs across policies, as does the income effect on labor supply.
When allowance rents are used to finance a proportional income tax cut, the overall cost
of the policy is -$6.4 billion/year. This case yields a “strong” double dividend (Goulder, 1995):
even ignoring the benefits of reduced carbon emissions, the cost of the policy is still negative. As
discussed in Parry and Bento (2000), when certain categories of spending are tax-favored, the
gains from the revenue-recycling effect are magnified (relative to a case without such tax
preferences), but the losses from the tax-interaction effect are approximately unaffected. As a
result, the revenue-recycling effect (a gain of $41.3 billion) exceeds the tax-interaction effect,
and by enough to more than offset the Harberger triangle. This qualitative result is different than
in earlier literature that focused only on the labor market distortion caused by the tax system
(e.g., Goulder, 1995). In the latter models, the revenue-recycling effect typically falls short of the
tax-interaction effect and the overall costs of auctioned cap-and-trade systems (or carbon taxes)
is positive, and exceeds the Harberger triangle.20
The welfare cost of the cap-and-trade policy is much higher under either the cap-anddividend or free permit allocation cases: under each of these options the cost is roughly $50
billion a year in 2020. By giving away the permit rents, these two options give up the large gain
from the revenue-recycling effect ($41.3 billion). In addition they produce a smaller, but still
significant, loss of $6.4 billion (under cap-and-dividend) or $11.6 billion per year (under
grandfathered permits) because the resulting lump-sum income to households reduces labor
supply. This effect is stronger for the grandfathered permit case as higher income households—
who face higher marginal income tax rates—receive a disproportionately larger share of the
policy rents in this case. The overall welfare cost of the cap-and-dividend and grandfathered
permit polices is over five times the Harberger triangle, underscoring the bias in cost analyses
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
20

Similarly, if tax preferences were entirely justified by market failures then the revenue-recycling effect would be
smaller. In this case, the overall cost of our proportional tax cut case would be positive (roughly $15 billion).

17

that omit interactions with the broader tax system.21 Dividing total costs by the CO2 reduction
(0.54 billion tons) the average cost per ton reduced is around $90 under cap-and-trade, compared
with minus $12 in the proportional tax reduction case.
Inflation-indexing of taxes and transfers in the above policy cases requires revenue
outlays of $30 billion/year in 2020, or one-sixth of the policy rents. The implied increase in
marginal tax rates to cover this revenue loss adds $7.4 billion/year to overall welfare costs. In the
proportional income tax case this cost leads to a smaller overall gain from the revenue-recycling
effect, while in the grandfathered permit and cap-and-dividend cases (which give away the entire
$180 billion of policy rents) it is reflected in a negative revenue-recycling effect.22
The overall cost of the distribution-neutral options fall between the cost under the
proportional tax cut and the cost under the cap-and-dividend policy—welfare costs are $9.9 and
$22.6 billion in the consumption-based and annual income-based cases for measuring inequality,
respectively. The distribution-neutralizing tax change lowers tax rates rather than providing a
lump-sum transfer, so it generates a gain from the revenue-recycling effect, which causes the
overall cost to be substantially lower than the overall cost under the cap-and-dividend and
grandfathered permits. However, because the tax cuts are larger for lower-income households (to
offset the regressive incidence of higher energy prices), the marginal tax rate reductions and
corresponding efficiency gains from revenue recycling are smaller than in the proportional tax
cut case. This effect is even more pronounced when inequality is measured using annual income
rather than consumption. In the former case, higher energy prices are more regressive, requiring
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
21

These results implicitly assume that none of the permit rents are taxed under either policy option. This is very
likely to be true in the cap-and-dividend case. However, in the free permit allocation case, the permit rents could
well be taxed, at least in part. To the extent that these rents accrue to stocks held in taxable accounts (as opposed to
retirement or other tax-sheltered accounts), they will be subject to tax. Under either policy option, if the rents are
taxed, then the overall cost will be a linear combination of the cost under that policy option (which assumes that
none of the rents are taxed) and the cost under the proportional tax cut (which is equivalent to a case in which all of
the permit rents are taxed at a rate of 100 percent).
22

Note that because the tax system is indexed such that tax rates depend on real income, the overall results – both
for efficiency and distribution – do not depend on the particular normalization used for prices (i.e., the choice of
numeraire). However, the decomposition of those results into “inflation indexing” and other components does
depend on the price normalization. We use a price normalization that holds the pre-tax wage constant, so a rise in
the price of consumer goods relative to labor shows up as an increase in the overall price level, which produces the
“inflation indexing” results shown here. If instead we were to use a normalization that holds the price of consumer
goods constant, that same relative price change would show up as a reduction in the pre-tax wage. In this case, there
would be no revenue cost for inflation indexing, but instead there would be a reduction in income tax revenue
resulting from the lower wages. Thus, the overall effect would be the same, but the decomposition of that effect
between “inflation indexing” and other effects on revenue would differ.

18

an even greater concentration of tax cuts among lower income households. Thus, the revenuerecycling gains are $15.8 billion in this case, compared with $25.7 billion when inequality is
measured using the consumption approach.

B. Distributional Effects
Figures 2 and 3 summarize the distributional burdens of the different policies across
income quintiles, based on income and consumption quintiles, respectively. Burdens are
expressed as a percent of household income. In addition, the net burden is decomposed into the
burden of the higher energy prices caused by the cap-and-trade program; the gain to households
resulting from inflation-indexing of the tax and transfer system; any gain from reductions in
marginal income tax rates; and possible gains from permit rents or lump-sum dividends.23
All policies impose the same pattern of burdens across households due to higher energy
prices. This burden component falls with income—for example, the bottom quintile bears a
burden of 6.0 percent when inequality is measured on an income basis, falling steadily to 1.2
percent for the top quintile. Lower income groups spend a greater fraction of their income on
energy-intensive consumption. One reason for this is that energy-intensive goods make up a
slightly larger share of spending for lower-income households. Another is that lower-income
households spend a larger fraction of their income due to lower or even negative saving rates (on
average lower income households spend more than their income). Dividing households into
consumption quintiles rather than income quintiles greatly reduces this second effect, and hence
the distributional burden is considerably less regressive when measured based on consumption
quintiles. In this case, the bottom quintile bears a burden of 3.3 percent while the top quintile
bears a burden of 1.5 percent.
Inflation-indexing of the tax and transfer system provides an automatic offset for part of
the burden of the policy and again the pattern of this gain across households is the same across
policy scenarios. As the prices of energy-intensive goods rise, inflation-indexing causes an
increase in transfers (or decrease in taxes paid, for indexing of tax brackets and other elements of
the tax system). Averaged across all households, the benefit from inflation indexing is about 0.3
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
23
The results discussed below are broadly consistent with those in Burtraw et al. (2009) who look at the
incidence of federal cap-and-trade policies under alternative revenue uses using a model with
considerable disaggregation by households and region.

19

percent of income, or about one-seventh of the average burden from higher energy prices (1.9
percent). The portion of the burden of energy prices offset by inflation indexing varies relatively
little across income quintiles—for example, it offsets roughly one-seventh of the burden for the
bottom quintile, about one-fifth for the middle, and one-eleventh for the top quintile.24
For the proportional income tax case (Figures 2a and 3a), by definition the gains from the
tax cut are the same for each quintile, roughly 1.7 percent of income for each group. The overall
net burden under this policy as a percentage of income is highest for the bottom quintile and falls
steadily as one moves up the income distribution, given that revenue-recycling does nothing to
offset the regressive effect of higher energy prices. For income-based quintiles the net burden
varies between 3.5 and minus 0.6 percent across the lowest and highest quintiles, while for
consumption-based quintiles it varies from 1.2 to minus 0.3 percent.
For the cap-and-dividend policy (Figures 2b and 3b) the distribution of the policy
dividend is highly progressive, given that all households receive the same absolute cash rebate.
As a result, even though the overall cost of this policy is much higher than in the proportional
income tax cut case, the bottom three quintiles experience smaller net burdens under cap-anddividend. In fact, the bottom two quintiles actually have a negative net burden (under either
income- or consumption-based quintiles). This illustrates the stark tradeoff between efficiency
and distribution: lower-income groups are much better off under cap-and-dividend than they are
under a proportional income tax cut, but the overall welfare cost of the policy is dramatically
higher.
The policy with free allowance allocation to firms (Figures 2c and 3c) does nothing to
offset the regressive effect of higher energy prices—in fact the distribution of rent income is
itself regressive, for the most part, given that for better off households capital is typically a larger
share of their income. Comparing this case to either the proportional income tax cut or the capand-dividend case reveals no tradeoff between efficiency and distribution. Freely allocating
permits to firms results in a similarly regressive distribution of net burden to the proportional
income tax case, but a much higher overall cost because it fails to exploit the revenue-recycling
effect. In fact, every income quintile is better off under the proportional income tax cut than
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
24

For reasons analogous to those discussed in footnote 22, above, the net burden on each quintile is independent of
the choice of price normalization. But the decomposition of that net burden into “inflation indexing” and other
components does depend on the normalization.

20

under free permits. Conversely, the cap-and-dividend case results in a much more progressive
distribution of net burdens than free permits, but has a similar (even slightly lower) overall cost.
Under the distribution-neutralizing change (Figures 2d and 3d) the tax change is designed
to be sufficiently progressive to exactly offset the regressive burden of higher energy prices, thus
making the distribution of the net burden of the policy proportional to income. This case falls
between the proportional tax cut and cap-and-dividend cases, in terms of both efficiency and
distribution: the overall cost is lower than under cap-and-dividend but higher than under the
proportional tax cut, and the distribution of burden is less progressive than under cap-anddividend but less regressive than under the proportional tax cut.

5. Conclusions
The allocation and use of rents created under cap-and-trade programs (or revenues under
an emissions tax) can hugely affect the overall efficiency and distributional effects of carbon
policy. Within the range of options we consider for the use of revenue, in a case where the direct
cost of the carbon restriction itself is $9 billion/year in 2020, the overall welfare cost of the
policy ranges from negative $6 billion/year to $53 billion/year. And the distribution of that cost
ranges from highly progressive (with the bottom two income quintiles bearing a negative burden)
to highly regressive (with the top two quintiles bearing a negative burden).
In general, there is a clear tradeoff between efficiency and distribution. Using policy
revenues to fund cuts in marginal income tax rates is highly efficient, but leads to a regressive
distribution of the net burden. At the other end of the range, the cap-and-dividend approach has a
far higher overall cost, but leads to a highly progressive distribution. And a distributionneutralizing tax change represents a middle ground for both efficiency and distributional effects.
This tradeoff does not hold for free permit allocation to firms in affected industries,
which has both a high overall cost and regressive distribution of that cost. But this can be viewed
as an efficiency-distribution tradeoff along a different dimension, addressing distributional
concerns across firms in different industries rather than across households in different income
groups. Thus, while this type of allocation is both inefficient and regressive, it may have more
political traction.
More generally, our discussion underscores that the case for cap-and-trade without
revenue recycling is more fragile than generally realized (at least for medium term levels of
21

emissions controls envisioned in recent climate bills). Our calculations imply the average cost of
reducing domestic, energy-related CO2 when policy rents are not used to cut distortionary taxes
is around $90 per ton—far above most estimates of the benefits per ton of CO2 reductions (e.g.,
Aldy et al., 2010, US IAWG, 2010).25 In contrast, the average cost is negative $12 per ton when
efficiency gains from the revenue-recycling effect are fully exploited (without even including
any climate benefits). In our compromise cases where the carbon policy is neither regressive nor
progressive the average cost per ton reduced is $18 to $42.
Given these tradeoffs, and the potentially huge consequences for both efficiency and
distribution, more attention should be paid to the use of revenue when analyzing carbon policy.
And future research on creative policy designs that balance efficiency, distribution, and political
feasibility could be highly valuable.

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
25

Nonetheless, there are many arguments for moving ahead with a cap-and-trade program, even if it fails a narrowly
defined cost-benefit test in the early years. For example, the benefit to cost ratio could easily become favorable over
time as the policy is tightened and a greater share of policy rents are used in efficiency-enhancing ways; putting a
price on carbon could have important long run benefits in terms of encouraging clean technology development; and
action by the United States on climate policy could help to spur similar programs in other countries.

22

Appendix: Analytical Derivations
Deriving equation (10)
We follow the usual two-step procedure for obtaining the marginal welfare effects of
policy changes. First we solve the household’s optimization problem. Then we obtain the welfare
effects of a marginal change in the emissions price by totally differentiating the household’s
indirect utility, accounting for the household’s behavior, and changes in prices, taxes, and lumpsum income. Finally, we integrate over marginal welfare effects to obtain the effects of nonmarginal policy changes.
Household Optimization. From (1)-(3), the optimization problem for household group i is given
by:
(A1)

Vi ( pE , pF , pC ,ti ,Gi , ! i ) =
Max
!

XiE , XiF , XiC , Li

&
)
ui (XiE , XiF , XiC , Li ,G PUB ) + !i ((1 " ti )# i + Gi + $ i " % p j Xij +
j
'
*

where Vi(.) denotes the indirect utility function and λi is the marginal utility of income. Using the
definition of taxable income in (3a), this optimization yields the first order conditions, demand,
and labor supply functions:
(A2)

!ui
!ui
= "i pE ,
= "i pF (1 # ti ) ,
!XiE
!XiF
Xij = Xij ( pE , pF , pC ,ti ) ,

!ui
!ui
= "i pC ,
= "i (1 # ti )wi ,
!XiC
!Li

Li = Li ( pE , pF , pC ,ti )

To manipulate the analytical derivations below, we obtain the following additional
expressions by totally differentiating the expression in (A1) with respect to arguments of the
indirect utility function, and using the conditions in (A2). This gives:
(A3)

!Vi
!Vi
!Vi !Vi
= " #i Xij ,
= " #i $ i ,
=
= #i
!p j
!ti
!Gi !" i

Welfare Effects of Marginal Policy Changes
Aggregate welfare is given by the sum of individual utilities, ! Vi . Totally differentiating
i

this with respect to a change in the emissions price, and expressing in monetary units, gives:

23

1 dVi
1
=#
i !i
i d"

#!

(A4)

i

& $Vi dp j $Vi $ti $Vi dGi $Vi d% i )
+
+
+
(#
+
$ti $" $Gi d" $% i d" +*
(' j $p j d"

Next, we discuss expressions for some of the individual terms in (A4).
First consider dp j / d! . Differentiating (5) with respect to τ gives:
dpH
dz
= (! " c# ) + z
d!
d!

(A5)

However the first term cancels, assuming that firms equate marginal abatement costs c! to the
emissions tax. Differentiating (4) with respect to τ, and using (A5), gives:

dp j

(A6)

= "jz

d!

Using (A6), (A3) and (6), the first term in (A4) simplifies as follows:
1

"Vi dp j
= %Z
j d#

$ ! $ "p

(A7)

i

j

i

Next, take the second and third terms in (A4), and substitute using (A3) to give:
# !Vi !ti !Vi dGi & 1
dt &
# dGi
+
+ ,i i '
' = *$
d" (
i % d"
% i !" !Gi d" ( )i

* $ !t

(A8)

i

Now we totally differentiate the government budget constraint in (8) with respect to τ, holding
GPUB constant but allowing ti and Gi to vary, where dti / d! = dt / d! . This gives, after expressing
changes in Z as a total differential:
(A9)

dGi

" d!
i

#
'
!" dGi
dZ
%& *
"! & dt
+ # ti i
= (1 # $ ) ) Z + !
+ " ti i , + ) % ! i + ti i (
(
"ti ' d*
!Gi d$
d!
%! + i $
i
i

From the definition of the marginal excess burden in (10b):

) !i
#
"! i &
(A10) ) % ! i + ti
= i
(
"ti ' 1 + MEB
i $
Substituting (A10) in (A9), multiplying through by 1+MEB and subtracting

" ! dt / d# gives:
i

i

(A11)

$$
dt '
dZ '
,# '
$ dGi
" # i ) = (1 + MEB) & & Z + !
(1 " + ) + * ti i )
)
%%
d!
d! (
d! (
,! (
i

* &%
i

+(1 + MEB)$ ti
i

24

!" i dGi
"
!Gi d#

!

Finally, from differentiating (7) with respect to τ, and using (A3), the last term in (A4)
can be expressed

(A12)

dZ &
1 "Vi d# i
#
= !%Z +"
(
$
d" '
i "# i d$

%!
i

where we have used "! i = 1 .
i

Substituting (A7), (A8), (A11) and (A12) in (A4), and expressing utility losses as a
positive number (i.e., welfare cost) gives:

(A13) ! $
i

1 dVi
dZ
dZ *
dG 0
'
= !#
! MEB % /(1 ! & ) ) Z + #
!$ i2
,
(
"i d#
d#
d# +
d# 1
.
i

!(1 + MEB) " & ti
i

#$ i
#$ dGi
!(1 + MEB) " & ti i
#%
#Gi d%
i

Welfare Effects of Non-Marginal Policy Changes
Integrating the first term in (A13) between 0 and τ, assuming dZ / d! is constant, gives:
(A14) !

dZ " 2
d" 2

Again, given dZ / d! is constant, !(dZ / d" )" = Z 0 ! Z . Hence we obtain WCHT in (10a).
We take the MEB as constant over the relevant range, which is reasonable given that
proportional changes in income tax rates are relatively small. Integrating marginal emissions tax
revenue (1 ! " )(Z + # $ dZ / d# ) over an emissions tax rising from 0 to τ simply gives revenue
raised by the tax, (1 ! " )# Z . And integrating the marginal change in the transfer payment for
household group i over the tax increase simply gives the total change in transfer
payment Gi ! Gi0 = "Gi . Hence we obtain WCRR in (10a).

25

From the third component of (A13), !" i / !# = (!" i / !p)(!p / !# ) . Taking a small change
in the emissions price this expression becomes (!" i / !p)#p . Hence we obtain the first expression
for WCTI in (10a).
Substituting expressions for !ip and ! iT from (10b), gives:
(A15) WC TI = (1 + MEB)$ ! iT ti"ip #p $ I i
i

i

where the general price level is normalized to unity. The burden of the emissions price

! (Z + "Z / 2) is

fully

passed

forward

into

higher

therefore !p = " (Z + !Z / 2) / # Xij . Making this substitution and
ij

product

!X = !I
ij

ij

i

prices,

in (A15) gives

i

the second expression for WCTI in (10a).
Finally, again if we approximate by taking ti and !" i / !Gi as constant over the relevant
range, then integrating over the last term in (A13) gives

(A16) !(1 + MEB) " & ti
i

#$ i
%Gi
#Gi

Substituting out !" i / !Gi = !" i / !I i using the taxable income elasticity with respect to income
in (10b), gives the last expression WCINC in (10a).

Deriving equation (11)
Equation (11) comes from the effect on utility from small changes in each of the
arguments of Vi(.) in equation (A1), after substituting (A3), and dividing by !i I i .

26

References
Aldy, Joseph, Alan J. Krupnick, Richard G. Newell, Ian W.H. Parry and William A. Pizer, 2010.
“Designing Climate Mitigation Policy.” Journal of Economic Literature, forthcoming.
Blundell, Richard and Thomas MaCurdy, 1999. ”Labor Supply: A Review of Alternative
Approaches.” in Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume III, O. Ashenfelter and D. Card (eds).
New York: North-Holland.
Bovenberg, A. Lans, and Lawrence H. Goulder, 2001. “Neutralizing the Adverse Industry
Impacts of CO2 Abatement Policies: What Does It Cost?” In Behavioral and Distributional
Effects of Environmental Policy. C. Carraro and G. Metcalf ed. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 45-85.
Burtraw, Dallas, Richard Sweeney, and Margaret A. Walls, 2009. “The Incidence of U.S.
Climate Policy: Alternative Uses of Revenues from a Cap-and-Trade Auction”. National Tax
Journal 62: 497-518.
Dinan, Terry M. and Diane L. Rogers, 2002. “Distributional Effects of Carbon Allowance
Trading: How Government Decisions Determine Winners and Losers.” National Tax Journal 55:
199-222.
Fullerton, Don and Gilbert Metcalf, 2001. “Environmental Controls, Scarcity Rents, and PreExisting Distortions.” Journal of Public Economics 80: 249-67.
Goulder, Lawrence H., 1995. “Environmental Taxation and the 'Double Dividend': A Reader's
Guide.” International Tax and Public Finance 2: 157-183.
Goulder, Lawrence H., Ian W. H. Parry, Roberton C. Williams III, and Dallas Burtraw, 1999.
“The Cost-Effectiveness of Alternative Instruments for Environmental Protection in a SecondBest Setting,” Journal of Public Economics, 1999, 72:329-360
Grainger, Corbett A. and Charles D. Kolstad, 2010. “Who Pays a Price on Carbon?”
Environmental and Resource Economics 46: 359-376.
Hassett, Kevin A., Aparna Mathur, and Gilbert E. Metcalf, 2007. “The Incidence of a U.S.
Carbon Tax: A Lifetime and Regional Analysis.” NBER Working Paper 13554.
Kaplow, Louis, 2004. “On the (Ir)Relevance of Distribution and Labor Supply Distortion to
Government Policy.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 18: 159-175.
Krupnick, Alan J., Ian W.H. Parry, Margaret Walls, Tony Knowles and Kristin Hayes, 2010.
Toward a New National Energy Policy: Assessing the Options. Resources for the Future and
National Energy Policy Institute, Washington, DC.

27

Parry, Ian W.H., and Antonio M. Bento, 2000, “Tax Deductions, Environmental Policy, and the
“Double Dividend” Hypothesis,” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 39: 6796.
Parry, Ian W.H., 2004. “Are Emissions Permits Regressive?”
Economics and Management 47:364-387.

Journal of Environmental

Parry, Ian W.H., 2005. “Fiscal Interactions and the Costs of Pollution Control from Electricity.”
RAND Journal of Economics 36: 849-869.
Pizer, William A., 2003. “Combining Price and Quantity Controls to Mitigate Global Climate
Change.” Journal of Public Economics 85: 409-434.
Saez, Emanuel, Joel Slemrod, and Seth Giertz, 2009. “The Elasticity of Taxable Income with
Respect to Marginal Tax Rates: A Critical Review.” NBER Working Paper no. 15012.
Schöb, Ronnie, 2006. “The Double Dividend Hypothesis of Environmental Taxes: A Survey.” In
H. Folmer and T. Tietenberg (eds.), The International Yearbook of Environmental and Resource
Economics 2005/2006. Edward Elgar, Cheltenham, United Kingdom.
Smith, Anne E., Martin E. Ross, and W. David Montgomery, 2002. “Implications of Trading
Implementation Design for Equity-Efficiency Tradeoffs in Carbon Permit Allocations.” Working
paper. Washington, D.C.: Charles River Associates.
Sijm, Jos, Karsten Neuhoff and Yihsu Chen, 2006. “CO2 Cost Pass-Through and Windfall Profits
in the Power Sector.” Climate Policy 6: 49-72.
US IAWG, 2010. Technical Support Document: Social Cost of Carbon for Regulatory Impact
Analysis Under Executive Order 12866. Interagency Working Group on Social Cost of Carbon,
United States Government, Washington, DC.
Williams, Roberton C., 2009a. “An Estimate of the Second-Best Optimal Gasoline Tax,
Considering Both Efficiency and Equity.” Working paper, University of Maryland.
Williams, Roberton C., 2009b. “Distribution, Distortionary Taxation, and the Evaluation of
Public Goods.” Working paper, University of Maryland.

28

.*/'%)01)2#33*-4)"5)6*$%'78%)9*+*
Y;$/Z#.<=/-92@/$2U#%$2(4(42J=<H20/-#<%$U2?%<%2=-2U#%$2(4462?/II%$9[

!"#$%&"'()(*+*
,-./0#123
8/-9:0;<=/-123
>:$?#-2/@2.%$A/-2<%B2
%92;#$.#-<%&#2/@2=-./0#
%92;#$.#-<%&#2/@2./-9:0;<=/F$%.<=/-2/@29</.GH/I?#$2J#%I<H2/J-#?
K:0;L9:02<$%-9@#$2./0;/-#-<2/@2<%B123

,-./0#123
8/-9:0;<=/-123
>:$?#-2/@2.%$A/-2<%B2
%92;#$.#-<%&#2/@2=-./0#
%92;#$.#-<%&#2/@2./-9:0;<=/F$%.<=/-2/@29</.GH/I?#$2J#%I<H2/J-#?
K:0;L9:02<$%-9@#$2./0;/-#-<2/@2<%B123

,-./0#2<%B2$%<#
M%B%AI#2=-./0#2#I%9<=.=<=#9
J=<H2$#9;#.<2</2<%B#9
J=<H2$#9;#.<2</2;$=.#2I#"#I
J=<H2$#9;#.<2</2=-./0#

,+&%-)(*+*
N%$&=-%I2#B.#992A:$?#-2/@2<%B%<=/>!O28P ( 2#0=99=/-912A=II=/-2</-9
Q0=99=/-92;$=.#123R</S#?:.<=/-2=-2#0=99=/-92@$/02>!O
T/I=.U2$#-<9R$#"#-:#9123A=II=/-

'
''1)45
((1+77

,-./0#2X:=-<=I#
(
)
*
+
((166( *717)6 6'1*75 '6'17(7
)*1'65 *516)+ 771(4( '461+5)

7C4)D
)C4(D
(C7)D
*14*6

*C(5D
(C67D
6CE(D
7157(

'C'7D
'CE*D
+EC6*D
51E*E

'C+ED
'CE7D

!"#$%&#

'
'61(4*
'E1(+)

8/-9:0;<=/-2X:=-<=I#
(
)
*
+
)+1*57 +)1(4) 6(15'E '*+145E
)*174+ *E17** 541*(6 '(71'5)

)C(5D
)C4ED
'C74D
)1*+)

(C5*D
(C6'D
)C)4D
515'7

'
'5D
4C(4
4C'+
L4C(4

(C5'D
(C7*D
6C7)D
E1*4*

(C(5D
(C*)D
'(C6+D
''146+

'C65D
(C)'D
'ECEED
''1E4E

'C65D
(C(4D
(*C7)D
')15*)

,-./0#2/$28/-9:0;<=/-2X:=-<=I#
(
)
*
))D
*4D
**D
4C((
4C'+
L4C(4

4C(+
4C'+
L4C(4

4C(6
4C'+
L4C(4

4C(5
7C4
))
EC4D
'64

V/:$.#C2V##2<#B<C
W/<#2<H%<2%"#$%&#92?=@@#$29I=&H<IU2A#<J##-2<H#2=-./0#2%-?2./-9:0;<=/-2X:=-<=I#2.%9#912
?:#2</2?$/;;=-&2H/:9#H/I?92J=<H2./-9:0;<=/-2:-?#$2351+44

29

'C+*D
'C55D
+5C7(D
'41)'*

!"#$%&#
76156*
++165)

614'*

771E)7
7414(4
'C7*D
'C6)D
E1(7(

!"#$%&#
+
*'D

*4D

4C)+
4C'+
L4C(4

4C)'
4C'+
L4C(4

Figure 1. Decomposition of Efficiency Costs under Alternative Policies
"#

$#

%#

#

&'()('*+(,-./ 3-)/4/5+6+57,5 8'77/)7'9+*:
*-0/12*
!%#

;+:*'+<2*+(,/ ;+:*'+<2*+(,/
,72*'-./
,72*'-./
=1(,:29)*+(,> =+,1(97>

!$#

!"#

?-'<7'@7'/*'+-,@.7
D-0!+,*7'-1*+(,/7CC71*
D(*-./7CC71*

A767,27/'71B1.+,@/7CC71*
E,1(97/7CC71*/(,/.-<('/:2)).B

30

Figure 2. Decomposition of Net Burden by Income Quintile under Alternative Policies
(a) Proportional tax cut
*#
)#
(#
'#
"#
$#
%#
&#
!%#

%

$

"

'

(

+,-./0-

!$#
!"#

1/.234563789:

;4<7/=834584>-?840

;493@-5=/?5./=-59A/40-B

C-=52D.>-4

(b) Cap-and-Dividend
&$
'$
($
#$
%$
!#$

"

#

)

(

*

!($
!'$
!&$
!"%$
!"#$

1/.234563789:
@3789:5>8,8>-4>
D-=52E.>-4

;4<7/=834584>-?840
;493A-5=/?5./=-59B/40-C

31

+,-./0-

(c) Free Permit Allocation
*#
)#
(#
'#
"#
$#
%#
&#
!%#

%

$

"

'

(

+,-./0-

!$#
!"#

1/.234563789:
@-.A8=5.-4=B
D-=52E.>-4

;4<7/=834584>-?840
;493A-5=/?5./=-59C/40-B

(d) Distribution-Neutral
'#

"#

$#

%#

&#

(

%

)

$

*

+,-./0-

!%#

!$#

!"#

1/.234563789:

;4<7/=834584>-?840

32

;493@-5=/?59A/40-B

C-=52D.>-4

Figure 3. Decomposition of Net Burden by Consumption Quintile under Alternative
Policies
(a) Proportional tax cut
'#

&#

"#

$#

%#

$

"

&

'

(

)*+,-.+

!$#

!"#

/-,0123415678

92:5-;612362<+=62.

9271>+3;-=3,-;+37?-2.+@

A+;30B,<+2

(b) Cap-and-Dividend
%#

&#

'#

(

&

)

%

*

!&#

!%#

!$#

!"#

1/.234563789:
@3789:5>8,8>-4>
D-=52E.>-4

;4<7/=834584>-?840
;493A-5=/?5./=-59B/40-C

33

+,-./0-

(c) Free Permit Allocation
'#

"#

$#

%#

&#

%

$

"

'

(

)*+,-.+

!%#

!$#

!"#

/-,0123415678
>+,?6;3,+2;@
B+;30C,<+2

92:5-;612362<+=62.
9271?+3;-=3,-;+37A-2.+@

(d) Distribution-Neutral
"#

$#

%#

&#

'#

&

%

$

"

(

)*+,-.+

!&#

!%#

!$#

!"#

/-,0123415678

92:5-;612362<+=62.

9271>+3;-=37?-2.+@

	  

34

A+;30B,<+2

