NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE DECLINE AND RISE OF AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTIVITY IN SUB-SAHARAN
AFRICA SINCE 1961
Steven Block
Working Paper 16481
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16481

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2010

The author wishes to thank the National Bureau of Economic Research Africa Project for supporting
this research. He is particularly grateful to Keith Fuglie and Will Masters for detailed comments and
suggestions, along with the feedback of participants at the NBER Africa Successes Project conference
in Accra, Ghana (July 2010). The author also thanks Marina Dimova for her able assistance in constructing
the dataset. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Steven Block. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

The Decline and Rise of Agricultural Productivity in Sub-Saharan Africa Since 1961
Steven Block
NBER Working Paper No. 16481
October 2010
JEL No. O13,O4,Q16
ABSTRACT
Agricultural productivity growth in sub-Saharan Africa has been a qualified success. Total factor
productivity growth has increased rapidly since the early 1980s. By the early 2000s, average annual
TFP growth was roughly four times faster than it had been 25 years earlier. This period of accelerated
growth, however, followed nearly 20 years of declining rates of TFP growth subsequent to independence
in the early 1960s. Average agricultural TFP growth for sub-Saharan Africa was 0.14% per year during
1960 – 84, and increased to 1.24% per year from 1985 – 2002. The average over this period was approximately
0.6% per year, which accounts for 36% of the increase in total crop output over this period. These
highly aggregated results conceal substantial regional and country-level variation. Expenditures on
agricultural R&D, along with the reform of macroeconomic and sectoral policies shaping agricultural
incentives, have played a substantial role in explaining both the decline and the rise in agricultural
productivity. The case study of Ghana clearly reflects these broader findings.

Steven Block
The Fletcher School
Tufts University
160 Packard Ave
Medford, MA 02155
steven.block@tufts.edu

"Measuring technical change is of interest because, in a sense, it defines our wealth and puts
limits on what we can accomplish...Since our ability to accumulate additional conventional
resources...maybe limited, the growth of the economy and of per capita income and wealth
depends on the rate at which technological knowledge is expanding..." (Zvi Griliches, 1987, p.
1010)

1. Introduction
Agricultural productivity is central to the lives of most Africans. Two-thirds of the
population of sub-Saharan Africa is rural, and the FAO counts nearly half of sub-Saharan
Africa's rural population as "economically active" in agriculture. For some countries, such as
Burundi, Rwanda, Uganda, and Burkina Faso, the rural population share approaches 85-90%,
with 45-50% the total population counted as economically active in agriculture. Even among the
most urbanized countries of sub-Saharan Africa, such as South Africa, one-third of the
population remains rural. In addition, up to 80% of Africa's poor live in rural areas, nearly all of
whom work primarily in agriculture (World Bank, 2000). For these producer groups,
agricultural productivity is the key determinant of welfare, and agricultural productivity growth
is the key hope for poverty reduction (at least in the short- to medium-term). Non-farm rural
employment, too, is often closely linked to agriculture -- either directly (as in the marketing of
agricultural inputs and outputs), or indirectly (as in the provision of other services in rural
markets). The indirect benefits of agricultural productivity growth, in the form of lower food
prices, are also critical to the welfare of Africa's rapidly expanding urban populations, the
poorest of whom devote 60-70% of total expenditures to food (Sahn, et. al., 1997).
From a macroeconomic perspective, as well, agriculture continues to play a central role
in sub-Saharan Africa, accounting for 15% of total value added (20%, excluding South Africa).
Of course, every generalization about sub-Saharan Africa and masks the region’s vast
2

heterogeneity. In Liberia, for example, agriculture accounts for 66% of total value added, while
in other countries, such as oil-rich Angola, agriculture accounts for only 10% of the value added
(World Bank, 2010).
African organizations, themselves, highlight these issues. The Comprehensive Africa
Agriculture Development Program of the New Partnership for Africa's Development has stated
that, "High and sustained rates of agricultural growth, largely driven by productivity growth, will
be necessary if African countries are to accelerate poverty reduction. This is because agricultural
growth has powerful leverage effects on the rest of the economy...The poor performance of the
agricultural sector explains much of the slow progress towards reducing poverty and hunger in
Africa." (CAADP, 2006) Current efforts to promote a "new Green Revolution" in Africa face
myriad environmental, institutional, and physical challenges in their quest to promote
agricultural productivity growth in the region.
This paper provides new estimates of cross-country agricultural productivity growth in
sub-Saharan Africa. The resulting picture is one of qualified success. Total factor productivity
growth in African agriculture has accelerated dramatically since the early 1980s. By the early
2000s, average annual total factor productivity growth in African agriculture was over four times
faster than it had been 25 years earlier. The success is qualified by the finding that much of this
acceleration represents a recovery from the substantial decline in TFP growth rates during the
1960s and early 1970s. In addition, levels of output per hectare and per worker in African
agriculture remain low by global standards. Among a range of potential explanations for
agricultural productivity growth in agriculture, expenditures on agricultural R&D play a
dominant role, followed by policy distortions at both the macroeconomic and sectoral levels.

3

Improvements in the quality of the labor force, as indicated by average years of schooling, have
also played a central role in driving productivity growth in African agriculture.
Many of these findings gleaned from cross-country analysis, are also evident in this
paper's more detailed examination of agricultural productivity in Ghana.
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews related studies. Section 3
describes data used in the cross-country analysis, as well as the approach used to aggregate
agricultural output across multiple commodities. Section 4 provides a preliminary perspective
on agricultural productivity trends in the form of partial productivity ratios (output per worker
and per hectare). Sections 5 and 6 describe, respectively, my methodology for estimating total
factor productivity growth and my results. Section 7 explores various explanations for the
productivity results presented in the previous section. Section 8 presents a brief case study of
agricultural productivity in Ghana, while Section 9 concludes.

2. Related Studies
Within the broader literature on cross-country agricultural productivity, relatively few
papers have focused specifically on sub-Saharan Africa. Block (1994) was the first to report a
recovery of aggregate agricultural TFP in sub-Saharan Africa during the 1980s, a result
confirmed by a number of subsequent studies. Block attributed up to two-thirds of this recovery
to investments in agricultural R&D and to macroeconomic policy reform. Frisvold and Ingram
(1995) provide an early growth accounting exercise for land productivity, concluding that most
of it (up to 1985) resulted from increased input use (labor, in particular). Thirtle, Hadley, and
Townsend (1995) highlight the role of policy choices, finding that an index of real agricultural
protection played a significant role in explaining TFP growth in African agriculture for the
4

period 1971-86. Lusigi and Thirtle (1997) highlight the role of agricultural R&D in explaining
TFP growth in Africa. They also highlight the role of increasing population pressure in driving
increased agricultural productivity in Africa. Chan-Kang, et. al. (1999) focus on the
determinants of labor productivity in a cross-country African setting. They, too, find land per
unit of labor to be an important determinant of labor productivity.
Fulginiti, Perrin, and Yu (2004) estimate agricultural TFP growth for 41 sub-Saharan
African countries from 1960 to 1999, finding an average TFP growth rate of 0.83% per year, and
confirming the finding from Block (1994) of an acceleration of the agricultural TFP growth since
the mid-1980s. Their analysis concentrates on the role of institutions in explaining this growth.
They conclude that former British colonies experienced greater rates of TFP growth, while
former Portuguese colonies experienced lower rates. They also found negative effects for
political conflicts and wars, and positive effects resulting from political rights and civil liberties.
Three more recent papers conclude this review.
Nin-Pratt and Yu (2008) reconfirm the acceleration of African agricultural TFP growth
since the mid-1980s. They find, however, a negative average growth rate of agricultural TFP (0.15% per year) from 1964 to 2003, casting the recovery period as making up for negative
productivity growth during the 1960s and 70s. Specifically, Nin-Pratt and Yu find that average
TFP growth fell at the rate of -2% per year from the mid-1960s to the mid-1980s, then grew by
1.7% per year between 1985 and 2003. They, too, highlight the role policy change in explaining
this reversal in performance. In particular, they find that an indicator of reforms associated with
structural adjustment played a positive role. In addition, they find that agricultural productivity
in East and Southern Africa benefited from the end of internal conflicts, and that agriculture in

5

West Africa benefited from the devaluation of the CFA franc. They also provide suggestive
evidence of the positive effect of investments in agricultural R&D.
Alene (2010) also focuses on the contributions of R&D expenditures to productivity
growth in African agriculture. In contrast to the average TFP growth rate reported by Nin-Pratt
and Yu (2008), Alene finds an average TFP growth rate of 1.8% per year for the period 19702004 (a difference that he attributes to an improved estimation technique). Alene finds strong
positive effects of lagged R&D expenditure on agricultural productivity growth, arguing that
rapid growth in R&D expenditures during the 1970s helped to explain strong productivity
growth after the mid-1980s, while slower growth of R&D expenditures in the 1980s and early
1990s led to slower productivity growth since 2000. Alene (2010) also notes a 33% annual rate
of return on investments in agricultural R&D in Africa.
Most recently, Fuglie (2010) examines agricultural productivity growth in sub-Saharan
Africa from 1961 to 2006. His findings are mixed. While he reports an increased rate of growth
in agricultural output during the 1990s and early 2000s, Fuglie finds that most of this growth in
output is explained by expanding crop land rather than improved productivity. Fuglie (2010)
stands out in this literature for his critical assessment of the standard data sources, for which he
proposes various corrections. In contrast to previous studies, Fuglie does not find a general
recovery of agricultural productivity in recent decades. For the period 1961-2006, he reports an
average TFP growth rate of 0.58% per year, with the lowest rate occurring during the 1970s (0.18% per year), and the highest rate occurring during the 1990s (1.17% per year).
Thus, recent estimates of the rate of agricultural TFP growth in Africa differ widely,
though there is a general consensus surrounding a decline in productivity during the first two

6

decades following independence and a recovery during the past two decades. These studies
applied different methodologies to essentially the same data set, which may explain some of the
conflicting findings cited above. As described below, the methodology applied in the present
study differs from all of the studies cited above.

3. Data and Output Aggregation
This study combines data from a variety of sources. The core data on agricultural outputs
and inputs are drawn from the FAO online database. While often regarded as being of limited
quality, these data are ubiquitous in studies of international agricultural productivity, as they are
the only comprehensive and detailed source of cross-country data over a long period of time.
The central challenge in constructing a data set suitable for estimating a cross-country
agricultural production function lies in aggregating the output of multiple agricultural
commodities in a way that is comparable across both time and space. The fact that national-level
data on key agricultural inputs -- land, labor, fertilizer, tractors, and livestock -- are provided as
national totals, and not disaggregated by the crops to which they are applied, requires that
agricultural output also be aggregated to the national level.
The most comprehensive discussion of agricultural output aggregation for international
comparison is Craig, Pardey, and Roseboom (1991). Drawing on index number theory, they note
that the ideal approach to aggregating multiple commodities for a given country and year would
be to multiply a vector of base-year local commodity prices expressed in dollars by a vector of
quantities of individual commodities. In particular, they specify that the best price weights
would be those most specific to the economic activity and agents in question. Yet, even in the
absence of data constraints, there is no perfect way to implement this ideal. The key dimensions

7

of the problem, in practice, lie in choosing appropriate deflator's for comparisons over time, and
in choosing appropriate exchange rates for comparisons across countries. Severe constraints on
the availability of commodity-specific price data over time for each country in sub-Saharan
Africa add to these challenges of constructing internationally and inter-temporally comparable
agricultural output aggregates.
Given the availability of commodity-specific local currency-denominated prices over
time, the standard approach for converting aggregate output in a given year into internationally
comparable units of measure is to select a numeraire currency, and to use Purchasing Power
Parity exchange rates for conversion.1 For its global agricultural data set, the FAO has
calculated "agricultural exchange rates," or agricultural PPPs, that it applies in creating
internationally comparable aggregates of agricultural output. In practice, virtually every study of
international agricultural productivity (whether global or region-specific) simply uses these FAO
data, based on PPP prices calculated from the global data set. In theory, however, as noted
above, the best price weights to use in aggregating output are those that are most specific to the
particular setting of concern.
The present study thus departs from standard practice by calculating a unique set of
international commodity prices and PPP exchange rates specific to African agriculture.
In order to calculate the Africa-specific international prices and PPP exchange rates used
to construct the data set for this study, I applied the Geary-Khamis method summarized by Rao
(1993). This method requires calculating both a reference set of international commodity prices
based on relevant PPP exchange rates, and calculating the PPP exchange rates based on the
1

Craig, Pardey, and Roseboom (1991) provide an extensive discussion of the trade-offs involved in first deflating
and then converting each year aggregate output versus first converting in any deflating.

8

reference set of international commodity prices. This problem is described by a system of two
simultaneous equations. In the first equation, the international reference price for commodity i is
calculated as a function of its local currency price in each country j = 1,…,m converted by the
PPP exchange rate for country j. In the second equation, the PPP exchange rate for country j is
calculated as a function of the quantities and international reference prices for each commodity i
= 1,…,n in country j. This is done for a given base year. These two equations can be solved
iteratively, ultimately converging on a unique set of reference prices and PPP exchange rates for
the specific countries and commodities to be studied. For purposes of this study, I calculated
international prices and PPP exchange rates using prices and quantities for the n = 35
commodities in the m = 27 sub-Saharan African countries for which data were available from the
FAO.2 I then applied these reference prices in aggregating output across these commodities for
the full set of 44 sub-Saharan African countries for which commodity-specific output data were
available. Output data for each commodity are net of quantities used for seed and feed.
The base year for these reference prices was 2006. I then created a Paasche-type output
index, applying the 2006 prices to aggregate the commodity output data in each country for each
year going back to 1961. The rationale for applying the Paasche approach was that the range
and, in particular, the quality of the price data has tended to improve over time, and that the best
data would thus be the most recent.3
Data for the other standard inputs to be used in estimating the agricultural production
function are also drawn from the FAO database. The land measure is hectares of permanent and
arable crop land; the labor measure is the number of economically active males and females in
2

Appendix 1 presents the list of commodities and countries used in calculating the Africa-specific international
prices. Resulting output data for each country-year are available on request from the author.
3
I am grateful to Philip Pardey for suggesting this approach.

9

agriculture; capital is represented by the number of tractors; fertilizer is measured in tons of
inorganic plant nutrient; and, livestock is measured as the number of “cattle equivalents” held on
farms for productive use.4
Each of these indicators of agricultural inputs falls short of the ideal data for measuring
agricultural productivity. In discussing the measurement problems generically associated
productivity analysis, Griliches (1960, 1987) has noted that proper estimation of production
functions should be based the flow of services of capital (accounting for vintage) in constant
prices, as well as on the flow of labor services (e.g., hours worked) weighting different types of
labor by their marginal prices. Clearly, the input data available for African agriculture,
consisting of counts of the number of tractors and the number of agricultural workers (issues of
data quality aside), fall far short of this ideal. In particular, the assumption in the data that all of
what is counted as agricultural labor is specifically on-farm labor contradicts micro-based
evidence of significant non-farm rural activity (Liedholm, McPherson, and Chuta, 1994). Overcounting labor in this way may impose a downward bias on estimated TFP growth. There must
also be substantial measurement error in fertilizer data that capture only inorganic fertilizer in a
setting where manure is the primary source of added soil nutrients.
In short, the methodological tradeoffs and measurement errors inevitably associated with
constructing both the output and the input data for African agriculture are substantial, and
suggest the potential for significant noise and bias in estimates of total factor productivity. Yet,
as demonstrated in the seminal work of Jorgenson and Griliches (1967), it is possible to mitigate
these problems by introducing explicit controls for the quality of inputs.

4

Craig, Pardey, and Roseboom (1997) note, for example, that up to 70% of total horsepower traction in
African agriculture is provided by livestock.

10

As described below, the quality of inputs differs across countries and over time within
countries. To the limited extent possible, it is important to control for these differences by
including input quality adjustments in productivity estimates. Data used here to adjust for
variations in land quality include the proportion of permanent and arable crop land that is
irrigated, and annual rainfall. The former are drawn from data compiled by Sebastion (2007).
The annual rainfall data used in this study are drawn from Mitchell, et. al. (2003) and Jefferson
and O’Connell (2004), based on the crop-weighting scheme of Ramankutty and Foley (1998).5
Quality adjustments to the agricultural labor force generally rely on literacy rates. This study
takes advantage of newly-released data on average years of schooling from Barro and Lee
(2010). Additional data used in trying to decompose the productivity residual are described
below.

4. Partial Productivity Ratios
Partial productivity ratios (output per worker, and output per hectare) provide a useful
initial overview of both the level and growth rate of agricultural productivity. While these ratios
share the analytical limitation of not controlling for changes in other inputs, they have the virtue
of reflecting the general nature of technical change and agriculture as being predominantly either
land- or labor-saving. The simplicity of partial productivity ratios may also be a benefit in a
preliminary analysis of noisy and often low-quality data.
Hayami and Ruttan (1985) present a useful and intuitive conceptual approach for
analyzing joint trends in partial productivity ratios, based on the simple identity

5

These rainfall data, along with detailed explanations of their construction, are available at:
http://acadweb.swarthmore.edu/acad/rain-econ/Framesets/CountryAggregated.htm

11

(1)

where Y is output, A is area, and L is labor. Taking logarithms of this identity facilitates thinking
in terms of relative changes, as in
log

(2)

log

log

The welfare of Africa's agricultural labor force ultimately depends on increasing output
per worker. Equation (2) illustrates the challenge to that process in an environment characterized
by rapid population growth and limited land area. To the extent that population growth outpaces
the rate of expansion of agricultural area, area per worker (A/L) declines, thus increasing the
challenge of raising average labor productivity (Y/L) by means of increasing average yield (Y/A).
This dynamic has been a major obstacle to agricultural development in sub-Saharan Africa.
Table 1 presents the growth rates of partial productivity ratios for sub-Saharan Africa and
its sub-regions by decade from 1961 to 2007. For the region as a whole over this entire period
the average annual growth rate of output per worker has been only 0.41%, despite an average
annual growth rate of 1.24% in output per hectare. As suggested by equation (2), the limited
ability of yield growth in African agriculture to drive growth in average labor productivity has
been driven by the increasing population density of rural Africa, where the annual growth of the
agricultural labor force has outpaced area expansion by 0.83% per year from 1961 to 2007. Yet,
recent years demonstrate a more optimistic trend. For the period 2001 to 2007, the growth rate
of average labor productivity in African agriculture has increased dramatically (to over 2% per
year) relative to previous periods -- an advance aided by a reversal of the historical trend towards
declining area per worker.

12

In their seminal study of agricultural development, Hayami and Ruttan (1985) also
developed a useful and intuitive graphical presentation of partial productivity ratios. Their
graphical representation of equation (2) simultaneously relates changes over time in average land
and labor productivity by measuring average land productivity along the vertical axis and
average labor productivity along the horizontal axis. Changes in output per hectare and output
per worker over a given period can be illustrated by drawing an arrow between the relevant
beginning and ending coordinates in that space. Scaling the axes in logarithms conveniently
implies that movements along any 45° line represent equal rates of change in both land and labor
productivity. From equation (2), it follows that such equal rates of change imply a constant level
of area per worker. Thus, each 45° line in this space represents a unique and constant level of
A/L. Partial productivity paths steeper than 45° reflect increased rural population density over
time.
Timmer (1988) provides various interpretations of movements over time in this space.
He notes, for example that a movement due north (indicating growth in yield with no growth in
average output per worker) may indicate population growth matched by increased yields through
higher labor inputs and technical change, but no improvement in rural living standards.
Movements to the northwest might suggest population growth faster than technical change in
raising yields, with a consequent deterioration in rural living standards. In contrast, movements
due east in this space might reflect a declining agricultural workforce with no changes in yields,
but with new mechanical technologies needed to maintain output with fewer workers, hence
increasing average labor productivity and rural welfare.
Figure 1 implements this framework, placing African agriculture in a global context. The
partial productivity paths depicted in Figure 1 illustrate changes from 1961/65 (period average)
13

to 2001/05, distinguishing the coordinates also at 1981/85 for sub-Saharan Africa and other
middle-income and advanced economies. The positions of these paths reflect different levels of
land and labor productivity, while their lengths indicate rates of change. It is clear from Figure 1
that Africa begins and ends this period with levels of land and labor productivity that are quite
low in comparison with those found in more advanced economies, as well as in comparison with
the world averages. Stated differently, African agriculture falls well within the meta-production
frontier defined here by Japan, Germany, USA, and Australia. Productivity growth in African
agriculture, as reflected in these partial productivity ratios, has been driven almost entirely by
increased yields per hectare, with little growth of output per worker. This results in a path
substantially steeper than the 45° line, indicating that rural Africa has grown increasingly
crowded.
While during the second half of this period sub-Saharan Africa reflects a slightly
increased rate of growth in average labor productivity, that progress remains quite small by
comparison with the other countries illustrated in Figure 1. Note as well, that those countries
with the most rapid increases in agricultural labor productivity have followed paths shallower
than the 45° lines, indicating increases in area per worker over time.
Figure 2 intensifies the focus on partial productivity ratios in Africa, disaggregating by
five sub-regions and the averages of successive five-year periods.6 Consistent with the data
presented in Table 1, no region of sub-Saharan Africa experienced continuous growth in both
land and labor productivity, though some regions were clearly more successful than others.
Southern Africa, for example, began in the early 1960s at a relatively low level of output per
6

For purposes of global comparison, output in Figure 1 was measured in constant agricultural value-added.
Beginning with Figure 2, as discussed in the text, output is measured as aggregate crop output calculated for this
study.

14

worker, yet experienced the fastest rate of subsequent growth (averaging 1.24% per year, per
Table 1), though with a significant setback between 1986/90 and 1991/95. West Africa, too,
made substantial progress in increasing agricultural labor productivity beginning in the early
1980s. In contrast, Sahelian countries began with the lowest level of average labor productivity
in 1961/65, and saw that level decline consistently (along with yields) until at least the early
1980s. Similarly, countries in Middle Africa experienced slow declines in agricultural labor
productivity until the early 1990s, while countries in Eastern Africa experienced consistent but
relatively slow increases in both land and labor productivity over most of the period.7 These
contrasting experiences, even at the regional level, illustrate the great heterogeneity of African
agriculture. This heterogeneity pertains both to conditions and to rates of progress over time.
(Note, for example, the substantially greater level of average area per worker in southern Africa
as compared with Eastern Africa.)
Figures 3 (a – d) underscore this country-level heterogeneity. Figure 3a presents countrylevel partial productivity paths for Western Africa over the period 1961/65 to 2001/05. Some
countries, such as Nigeria, Côte d'Ivoire, and Benin experienced significant growth in average
labor productivity accompanied by moderate growth in crop yield, while other countries, such as
Togo, Niger, and Liberia experienced gains in crop yield accompanied by small reductions in
average labor productivity. At the same time, Figure 3a depicts rapid declines in agricultural
labor productivity in Senegal, Gambia, and Guinea-Bissau. Among countries in Eastern Africa
(Figure 3b), there was the predominant tendency towards moderate gains in crop yield
accompanied by slow growth in output per worker. Figures 3c and 3d depict a similar
7

Note here that the East African countries begin with relatively high levels of rural population density (reflected in
their position along a higher 45° line) follow a relatively steep path over time, indicating a tendency towards landsaving technical change. This is consistent with the Induced Innovation Hypothesis, associated with Hayami and
Ruttan (1985).

15

heterogeneity of experience among the countries of Middle and Southern Africa, respectively.
Table 2 presents partial productivity growth rates by country, and ranks countries in order of
their growth rates of both land and labor productivity.
In general, these patterns (particularly at the level of regional disaggregation) conform to
what is known of events on the ground. Gabre-Mahdin and Haggblade (2004) provide an
interesting perspective on successes in African agriculture. They conducted a survey of over 100
experts working in various areas related to African agriculture (two-thirds of whom were
Africans), asking them to identify the most important factors in advancing African agriculture.
The majority (62%) pointed to successes tied to specific commodities; 21% identified activities
such as policy reform and enhancement of soil fertility; and, 16% cited successful institutionbuilding efforts as the primary drivers of African agriculture. Maize breeding (followed by
cassava breeding) was the most widely-cited contributor. Byerlee and Jewell (1997) report that
most of the successes in breeding, releasing, in adopting improved maize varieties was in East
and Southern Africa. Between 1966 and 1990, Byerlee and Jewell note the release of over 300
improved varieties and hybrids by national maize research programs.
The release of hybrid maize in Africa dates back to the early 1930s in Zimbabwe (then
Southren Rhodesia), though there were no major successes until the release in Zimbabwe of the
variety SR52 in 1960. Successful hybrid maize releases followed shortly thereafter in Kenya.
Byerlee and Jewell (1997) report widely varying results for the adoption of maize hybrids and
improved open-pollinated varieties. By 1990, nearly all of Zimbabwe's maize area was planted
to hybrids, as was 70% of Kenya's maize area, and 77% of Zambia's maize area. At the same
time however, Malawian farmers had planted only 14% of maize area to improve varieties,
similar to the 18% of Mozambique's maize area, and 13-29% of Ethiopia's maize area under
16

improve varieties. Byerlee and Jewell also note that even in countries with substantial areas
devoted to improved maize varieties, yield gains were often moderated by declining soil fertility
combined with extremely limited application of chemical fertilizer. Kumwenda, et. al. (1997)
cite declining soil fertility as the most widespread limitation on both yield improvement in the
sustainability of the maize-based production systems in Southern and Eastern Africa.
Gabre-Madhin and Haggblade’s (2004) survey reinforces the specific success of maize
breeding programs in East and Southern Africa, where by the turn of the century, they reported
that 58% of maize area planted to improved hybrids with yields gains of about 40% over local
varieties. In contrast, only about 20% of total maize area in West and Central Africa were
planted to improve varieties. Those regions were more dominated by improved open-pollinating
varieties, with output gains of 15-45% over local varieties.
Evenson and Gollin (2003) track the annual rate of varietal releases for all improved crop
varieties. While not disaggregating by regions within Africa, they do report a near doubling of
the number of average annual releases between 1976-80 and 1981-85, from 23 to 43.2 (and to 50
per year by the early 1990s). This accelerated release of improved crop varieties coincides with
the acceleration in the growth of both partial productivity ratios reported in Table 1.
Other important sources of success in African agriculture cited in the survey included
breeding to combat mosaic virus in cassava, as well as improvements in the yield and droughtresistance of that crop (which is particularly important in West and Central Africa); expansion of
horticultural and flower exports from East and Southern Africa; rapid growth of cotton
production and exports from West Africa (the Sahelian countries in particular); and, improved
breeding of bananas in Central Africa. Among activity-led successes, Gabre-Madhin and

17

Haggblade’s survey noted soil fertility enhancement, such as alley cropping in West Africa and
improved water management techniques in Southern Africa. Respondents also noted the positive
effects of market reforms, currency devaluation, and improved institutions as contributors to
Africa's improved agricultural performance.
Partial productivity ratios, while indicative of broad trends in the rate and nature of
productivity growth, are limited by their lack of control for potentially confounding changes in
other inputs. The remaining sections of this paper thus turn to the estimation of total factor
productivity growth in African agriculture.

5. Measuring Total Factor Productivity Growth in Agriculture:
Methodology
The rate of growth of total factor productivity (TFP) is conventionally defined as the
difference between the rate of growth of real product and the rate of growth of real factor input.
Assuming, as in Solow (1957), competitive factor markets and constant returns to scale in the
aggregate production function, a change in total factor productivity can be measured as a vertical
shift in the production function. A variety of methodological approaches have evolved for
estimating total factor productivity growth, including the construction of TFP indices (such as
the Tornquist-Theil), data envelopment analysis (based on the non-parametric Malmquist index),
and stochastic frontier analysis, in addition to the econometric estimation of the aggregate
production function. TFP estimation in the present study is based on the latter approach of
estimating the aggregate agricultural production function for a panel of African countries.8 One

8

Tornquist-Theil indices require detailed factor price data that are unavailable for African agriculture. Stochastic
frontier approaches derive their results entirely by imposing very strong conditions on the error structure of the
estimated production function -- an approach that seems particularly ill-suited to the present setting, which is

18

key benefit of a parametric approach is that it helps to impose order in an otherwise noisy data
set.
Specifying the aggregate agricultural production function requires numerous choices,
beginning with functional form. I adopt the Cobb-Douglas functional form, which has been
repeatedly validated in agricultural studies (Griliches, 1964; Hayami and Ruttan, 1985), as has
been the assumption of constant returns to scale (Hayami and Ruttan, 1985). The "traditional"
inputs included in virtually every cross-country study of agricultural productivity include: land,
labor, fertilizer, tractors, and livestock. As noted above, available data for each of these inputs
almost certainly include significant measurement error. In addition, as emphasized in the early
studies of US agriculture by Griliches (1963, 1964), and for the US economy as a whole by
Jorgenson and Griliches (1967), much of what might mistakenly be attributed to TFP growth
may in reality be changes over time in the quality of inputs.
Whether one puts such adjustments for input quality in the production function or in the
residual is an interesting question. Griliches (1960) takes an agnostic approach, suggesting
"Whether or not we want the input measures to cover all possible quality changes is a semantic
rather than a substantive issue. Hybrid seed corn can be viewed either as improvement in the
quality of seed or as ‘technical change.’ Since we are interested in explaining the growth of
agricultural output, it does not matter much whether we put it into the ‘input change’ category or
the ‘productivity change’ category as long as we put it somewhere and know where it is."
characterized by low quality and quite noisy data. The data envelopment analysis approach, while often used in
recent studies of agricultural productivity (Lusigi and Thirtle, 1997; Fulginiti, Perrin, and Yu, 2004; and Nin-Pratt
and Yu, 2008; and Alene, 2010, among others), is also problematic. Heady, Alauddin, and Prasada Rao (2010),
along with Nin-Pratt, et. al. (2003), note that DEA studies of agricultural TFP often produce anomalous and
implausible results. The DEA approach measures countries' progress relative to a productivity frontier, which
depends arbitrarily on the number and selection of countries included in the sample, and which is poorly suited to
distinguish between TFP growth, noisy data, and measurement error. Coelli, Prasada Rao, O’Donnell, and Battese
(2005) discuss the relative merits of these approaches.

19

Specification
The dependent variable in my aggregate production function is crop output aggregated
(as described above) based on the Africa-specific international commodity prices and PPP
exchange rates calculated for this study. The resulting TFP estimates are thus limited to crop
agriculture. This, too, reflects a departure from most of the literature, which typically includes
both crop and livestock output (summed) for aggregate output. The median share by value of
livestock output in total agricultural output over the entire sample is 0.21, though this share
varies by region and country. The mean livestock share in total agricultural output is highest in
the five countries included from southern Africa (0.48), and lowest among the ten included (nonSahelian) countries of western Africa (0.17). For certain countries, including Botswana, Sudan,
Mali, Mauritania, and Namibia, livestock output accounts for greater than half of the value of
total agricultural output. For such countries, excluding livestock is a potentially significant
omission. Yet, that omission brings with it the broader benefit of more accurate aggregation of
output (based on Africa-specific data, which are not available for livestock output). On average
this omission is relatively small. (Appendix 2 demonstrates the robustness of my main results
compared against those derived from using a broader output aggregate that includes livestock.)
There is also a more theoretical reason for excluding livestock from the output aggregate,
arising largely from the construction and interpretation of the production function itself. As
typically specified, with inputs including tractors, fertilizer, livestock (used both for traction and
as a source of manure), the production function conceptually describes specifically crop output.
The estimated coefficients on these inputs are interpreted as production elasticities and serve as
input weights for productivity measurement. This interpretation of estimated coefficients for
tractors and fertilizer in particular is clouded by the inclusion of livestock in the dependent
20

variable. Indeed, by comparison with crop agriculture, livestock production is less labor
intensive and more land intensive, thus blurring the interpretation of those coefficients, as well.
Yet, excluding livestock from the dependent variable does come at the cost of underemphasizing integrated crop-livestock production systems that have become increasingly
common in Africa. Available cross-country data on inputs and output in agriculture provide no
perfect match between what is included on the left- and right-hand sides of the production
function. For instance, while I can (and do) eliminate permanent pasture from my measure of
land, the labor variable still includes labor applied to livestock production.9
Prior to specifying and estimating the cross-country production function, it is useful to
present the growth rates of output and inputs. Table 3 presents these growth rates, distinguishing
the periods before and after 1985. Crop output for the entire period 1961 to 2007 grew at an
average rate of just over 2% per year, accelerating post-1985. Growth of the agricultural labor
force was also stable, at about 1.65% per year. Agricultural area also expanded at a relatively
stable 0.85% per year. What is striking, however, is the dramatic reversal in the growth rates of
the number of tractors and tons of chemical fertilizers pre- and post-1985, a break-point that may
reflect the widespread onset of structural adjustment and related reforms. From 1961 to 1984,
the average growth rate for tractors and fertilizer were just over 7% and 6%, respectively; yet,
post-1985, consumption of both fell at an average rate of 0.5% per year.
Loosely borrowing notation from Craig, Pardey, and Roseboom (1997), I specify the
initial production function for country i at time t with k conventional inputs

, and a

country-invariant temporal shift of variable A(t) as:
9

Even if the FAO labor data were to distinguish between crop and livestock labor, they would likely grow at the
same rate in any given country and year. As it is ultimately the growth rate of inputs that matters for TFP
estimation, over-stating the level of labor may have little effect on estimated TFP growth.

21

∏

(3)

The presence of both quality change and measurement error in the inputs creates a divergence
between observed inputs and effective inputs. We can separate out measurable country-specific
(but time-varying) quality shifters in input j,
measurement error in input j,

, and country-specific but time-invariant

. In this case, Craig, Pardey, and Roseboom (1997) note that the

relationship between observed input

and effective input

is given by

(4)
Substituting equation (4) into equation (3) and scaling the production function by dividing by
input

(5)

yields

∏

∏

This production function imposes constant returns to scale across the conventional inputs. The
production elasticity for variable X1 can be recovered in estimation as

1

∑

. In

practice, the scaling variable will be labor.10 Equation (5) provides the basic production
function to be estimated in measuring TFP growth, where TFP growth is captured by the
intertemporal shifts in the production function measured by A(t). Once having estimated the rate
of TFP growth, the second stage of the analysis will be to explain that growth. Towards that end,
I add to the production function in equation (5) a vector of m potential explanations,

, for

the observed productivity growth in African agriculture.
The final production function can thus be written as
10

Scaling the production function substantially eliminates the heteroskedasticity that would otherwise result from
combining countries of greatly differing size.

22

∏

∏

(6)

∏

Following Craig, Pardey, and Roseboom (1997), in the empirical representation of equation (6) I
replace A(t) with time period dummies, TD(s). These time dummies track vertical shifts of the
production function over time, and thus provide a basis for estimating the rate of TFP growth. I
also aggregate the input- and country-specific measurement error into composite time-invariant
country-specific dummies, CDh . Expressing all but the dummy variables in natural logs (as
lower-case letters) in per worker terms leads to the estimating equation:
∑

(7)

∑

∑

∑

∑
In practice, data constraints limit the number of input quality adjusting variables to fewer
than the number of inputs. Thus, the Z variables to be used include two adjustments for land
quality (annual rainfall and percentage of land equipped for irrigation), and one variable to adjust
for the quality of the labor force (average years of schooling, from Barro and Lee, 2010).
Estimation Strategy
I implement two different econometric approaches to deriving the rate of TFP growth
from the estimation of equation (7).11 The strategy will be first to estimate the production
function including only conventional inputs and the country and period dummy variables (that is,
imposing the constraints

0). I then derive the input quality-adjusted estimates of TFP

11

In theory there is some risk of endogeneity in estimating production functions if for example farmers choose
observed inputs as a function of unobserved inputs. Estimating fixed effects models, such as that proposed here,
helps to the extent that these unobserved effects are constant over time. Fuglie (2010) estimates a cross-country
agricultural production function both with and without instrumental variables, but finds little difference between the
two approaches.

23

growth by re-estimating equation (7), this time including the Z variables (relaxing the constraint
that

0). The resulting quality-adjusted TFP estimates provide the baseline against which I

decompose this productivity residual into various explanations for productivity growth.
A key practical consideration in deriving TFP growth estimates from equation (7) is to
distinguish trends in true productivity from the substantial noise inherent in these data.
Productivity growth is ultimately measured as a reflection of the deeper process of technical
change, which in principle does not fluctuate dramatically from year to year (Griliches, 1987).
Given the heavy reliance of African agriculture on rainfall in particular, some form of smoothing
is essential. This study applies two alternative econometric approaches to address this problem.
The most common approach for addressing this problem, given the availability of panel
data, has been to collapse the annual cross sections into successive five-year averages. While
somewhat ad hoc and potentially sensitive to the starting and ending years chosen, this approach
is effective in smoothing out annual fluctuations. In deriving TFP measures from the estimation
of equation (7), I begin with this approach. Having annual data from 1961 – 2007 permits the
creation of nine full cross sections of five-year averages. I then introduce a novel approach to
deriving TFP estimates from annual data, based on semi-parametric estimation of the production
function. The core idea shared by both approaches is that one can estimate the rate of TFP
growth directly from vertical shifts in the production function.
The first approach applies seemingly unrelated regression (SURE) to a panel data set
consisting of sequential five-year averages of the annual data. The strategy here is to specify the
same production function for each cross section in the panel, using the SURE estimator to apply
appropriate cross-equation constraints on the parameter estimates for conventional agricultural

24

inputs, leaving the intercept terms unconstrained. Constraining similar slope terms to be equal
across pairs of adjacent production functions ensures that the change in the intercepts of the
production functions between periods reflects vertical shifts of the same production function over
time.12 In this case, we can derive estimates of TFP growth directly from changes in the
intercept terms of adjacent production functions. My SURE system of production functions thus
takes the form:
,

/

/

,

/

,

/

,

/

,

/

,

/

,

/

,

/

,

/

,

/

,

/

/

,

/

,

/

,

/

,

/

,

/

,

/

,

/

,

/

,

/

,

/

/

,

/

,

/

,

/

,

/

,

/

,

/

,

/

,

/

,

/

where (in logs) y is crop output per worker, a is area per worker, tr is tractors per worker, f is
fertilizer per worker, and lv is livestock per worker.
Estimating the rate of TFP growth between 1961/65 and 1966/70 first requires imposing
(and testing) the constraint

,

/

,

/

jointly for all of the conventional inputs. The rate

of TFP growth between these periods can then be calculated as
(8)

/

/

,

where (given this panel structure) T = 5. This econometric approach is not common in the
literature, but was used in Block (1994, 1995).

12

Pair-wise equality constraints of the slope terms in adjacent production functions (e.g., the first two five-year
periods out of nine, then the second and third periods, etc.) is the minimal requirement for this approach. The
maximal approach would be to constrain the slope coefficients for a given inputs to be equal across all time periods
simultaneously. Wald tests reject this maximal constraint, yet, as reported in the text, tend not to reject pair-wise
constraints across adjacent periods.

25

I also introduce in this paper a novel approach to estimating TFP growth from annual
panel data. As noted above, a key concern in estimating TFP growth is to distinguish
productivity trends from noise. For this purpose, I propose a semi-parametric approach to
estimating the production function in equation (7). This approach controls linearly for the
conventional inputs while allowing the residual relationship between output and time to take an
undefined functional form. This revised production function is thus
(9)

The difference between equation (7) and equation (9) lies in the specified functional
relationship between output, yi(t), and the year dummies, TD(s). Equation (7) is fully parametric
and thus imposes a linear relationship between output and time, estimation of which would
provide a basis for calculating a single average rate of TFP growth for the period. In contrast,
equation (9) retains the linear parametric relationship between output and all other variables
included in the production function with the exception of the year dummies. Rather than
imposing linearity on the relationship between output and the year dummies, the semi-parametric
specification of equation (9) allows this relationship to take an undefined functional form

· .13

This approach allows the estimated rate of TFP growth to vary freely over time, as defined by the
data themselves, rather than imposing linearity (or any other pre-defined parametric
specification).

13

Yatchew (2003) provides comprehensive detail on semi-parametric regeression.

26

To clarify the estimation procedure, combine all the linear arguments in (9) into the
matrix x, and write the semi-parametric regression as,
(10)
Yatchew (2003) describes that when the data are sorted by z in increasing order of size (and
assuming that g is a smooth function), then first differencing the data tends to eliminate the
nonparametric term, g(zi), since the first difference,

0 as the sample size

increases.14 In this case, after first differencing, one can consistently estimate

by OLS.

Then, subtracting the estimated parametric portion of the model from both sides of (10) (as
Lokshin, 2006, shows), one is left with
(11)
since

converges to β. What remains is a two-dimensional purely non-parametric

relationship between yi and zi, which is estimated by a locally-weighted kernel density smoother
(using Stata’s lowess command).
Thus, estimation of equation (9) effectively partials out the linear effects of the
conventional inputs and country dummies, leaving a non-parametric kernel regression of output
on the annual time dummies. The resulting estimated function,

, is a smoothed non-

parametric representation of annual shifts in the production function, controlling linearly for all
other variables in equation (9).

14

Also see M. Lokshin (2006) for a detailed exposition of the plreg Stata command commonly used to implement
this estimator.

27

Transforming this continuous function into estimates of the instantaneous rate of TFP
growth requires a calculation analogous to that described by equation (8). Equation (8) converts
discrete shifts over time in the intercept of the production function into a rate of change – an
estimate of the average rate of TFP growth during the period of estimation. In the semiparametric case, the analogous task is to convert the estimated non-parametric effect of time on
output into rates of change (or estimates of the growth rate of TFP). In this case,

is a

non-parametrically smoothed representation of the annual shifts of the production function,
estimated from the year dummies. For arbitrarily small changes in time, the analogy to equation
(8) is implemented by differentiating

with respect to time:

(12)
That is, the slope of

with respect to time provides a point estimate of the instantaneous

rate of TFP growth. Taking this derivative at every point of

thus results in a smoothed

non-parametric path that describes the rate of TFP growth as a continuous function of time.
The following section presents estimates of TFP growth rates derived from both the
SURE and semi-parametric approaches described above.

6. Measuring Total Factor Productivity Growth in Agriculture: Results
An African success emerges from Figure 4, which presents the rates of TFP growth in
African crop agriculture, averaged over successive five-year periods from 1961/65 to 2001/06.

28

These results reflect vertical shifts in the successive production functions based on five-year
averages of annual panel data, estimated by the SURE regression procedure described above.15
Thus, for example, the first bar in Figure 4, marked 63-68 describes the average rate of TFP
growth between "1963" (designating data averaged over the period 1961-65) and "1968"
(designating data averaged over the period 1966-70). These baseline results control only for the
conventional inputs, unadjusted for quality.
These preliminary results are encouraging in their reflection of a broad recovery of
productivity growth in African crop agriculture beginning in the mid-1980s, re-confirming the
results by Block (1994). Figure 4 depicts a history in which the early years of independence
were characterized, on average, by a slow yet positive rate of productivity growth in African
crop agriculture. This relatively auspicious start, however, was followed by 15 years of
stagnation and decline, as TFP growth rates became increasingly negative on average from the
late 1960s through the early 1980s. In contrast, TFP growth rates since the mid-1980s, at least in
this preliminary view, reflect a substantial turnaround, approaching 2.8% per year on average
between the five-year periods centered around 1998 and 2003. The challenge, then, is to explain
this reversal of fortune for African agriculture. I begin by examining the effect of changes in the
quality of inputs, in particular land and labor. First, however, it is useful to review estimates of
the underlying production function.
Table 4 presents estimates of the basic production function for African crop agriculture
described by equation (7). The estimates in column (1) include only the conventional inputs.
15

Estimating TFP growth based on vertical shifts of the production function, as noted above, requires equality of the
production elasticities for given conventional inputs across the production functions for the beginning and ending of
the period being measured. Joint tests of the quality of the estimated coefficients on conventional inputs,
implemented pair-wise for each of the eight sets of adjacent production functions failed to reject the equality of the
production functions for all but one period (1968-73), and in that case the rejection was only at the .10-level. These
tests are thus highly supportive of this SURE approach to TFP estimation.

29

Column (2) adds controls for annual rainfall and the share of land equipped for irrigation to
adjust for differences in land quality; and column (3) adds average years of schooling to control
for changes in the quality of labor. In keeping with the inclusion of country dummies in equation
(7) to control for, among other things, time-invariant measurement error, the production
functions in Table 4 are estimated as fixed-effects models.
The coefficient estimates in column (1) are all statistically significant and have the
expected signs. By comparison with estimates in other studies of African agriculture (such as
Fuglie, 2010), the production elasticity of land is quite high (and by implication, that of labor,
quite low). The higher estimate for land in the present study may reflect in part the exclusion of
livestock production from the output aggregate (described above). Historically, much of the
increase in African crop output has been the result of land extensification. The implication that a
10% increase in land area per worker would result in a roughly 8% increase in crop output is thus
plausible. Rainfall and share of land equipped for irrigation (which often differs from the share
of land actually irrigated in any given year due to water constraints), both present significant
positive effects on per capita output (column (2)). In addition, column (3) demonstrates the
significant positive effect of average years of schooling of the labor force on agricultural output,
suggesting that improvements in the quality of the labor force has been an important positive
factor for African agriculture.
Figure 5 illustrates the non-parametric pattern of TFP growth rates over time, estimated
from annual data and controlling linearly for (only) the five conventional inputs. These
smoothed continuous results are consistent with the initial results presented in Figure 4 in
suggesting that the stagnation and decline of African crop productivity of the late 1960s through
the early 1980s has been followed by two decades of substantial recovery and progress. While
30

that progress appears to have stalled during the early and mid-1990s, average TFP growth rates
for African crop agriculture have trended steeply upwards since the late 1990s. By 2005, this
growth rate exceeded 2% per year.
The average TFP growth rate of the path illustrated in Figure 5 is 0.97% per year. This
measurement is based on the period 1961 – 2000 for 29 countries in sub-Saharan Africa. It is not
adjusted for differences in the quality of inputs. Over this same period and set of countries, crop
output grew at the average rate of 1.68% per year. As a first cut, then, TFP appears to explain
58% of the growth in Africa’s crop output (though this estimate will be revised downward with
the incorporation of adjustments for input quality).
Is interesting, as well, to disaggregate this average SSA result to the regional level (as
presented above in Figures 3a-d for the partial productivity analysis). Here too, Figure 6
demonstrates substantial heterogeneity across the regions of sub-Saharan Africa, though with a
trend towards convergence in growth rates. Southern Africa has maintained a consistently high
rate of TFP growth throughout this period, though the TFP growth rate for West Africa
(excluding the Sahel) turned positive around 1975 and surpassed the growth rate for Southern
Africa between 1980 and 1995. On the low end, Sahelian and Middle African countries began
the post-independence period with negative rates of TFP growth, which turned positive only in
the early and late 1980s, respectively. These results, summarized in Table 5, are consistent with
those of the partial productivity analysis presented above. Comparing, in Table 5, the regional
average TFP growth rates for the periods 1961-84 and 1985-2002, it is clear that every region
except East Africa enjoyed a substantially greater rate of TFP growth in the later period.

31

Returning to the SSA average, the next step is to measure the contributions of changes in
input quality to these initial estimates of TFP growth. Figure 7 repeats the semi-parametric
procedure underlying Figure 5, adjusting first for changes in land quality, and then adjusting for
labor quality as well.16 Changes in the quality of land and labor emerge as significant
contributors to TFP growth.
Table 6 quantifies these contributions by calculating the percentage change in the mean
TFP growth rate over the entire period resulting from the inclusion of these additional
explanatory variables. The mean TFP growth rate for the baseline estimates illustrated in Figure
5 (and in the highest path in Figure 7) for the period 1961 to 2000 was 0.97% per year.17 After
adjusting for land quality, this estimate falls to 0.87% per year. (This difference is significant at
the .10-level in a one-sided t-test.) That is, adjustments for land quality explain just over 10% of
the baseline growth rate of agricultural TFP. The non-parametric approach reveals that most of
this difference has occurred since the mid-1980s, reflecting, in part, expansion of irrigation.
Controlling in addition for improvements in the quality of the agricultural labor force reduces the
mean TFP residual to 0.59% per year. Together, adjusting for changes in the quality of land and
labor inputs thus account for 0.38 percentage points difference in, or 39% of, the baseline growth
rate of agricultural TFP.

16

Note that the baseline (unadjusted) TFP growth path depicted in Figure 7 is shifted up relative to the baseline
growth TFP path depicted in Figure 5. This difference results from the loss of observations, given the availability of
data for the adjustments to land and labor. Figures 4 and 5 use the same set of all available observations; whereas
the three TFP growth paths presented in Figure 7 all use the same, but more limited, sample of observations.
17
Note that this growth is greater than the unadjusted growth rate reported in Table 5. This higher rate was
estimated over a sample that was limited by the availability of data for land and labor quality adjustments, while the
rate reported in Table 5 was for the largest possible sample.

32

In terms of the broader growth accounting, this adjusted baseline TFP growth rate
estimate of 0.59% per year accounts for 36% of the 1.68% per year growth rate of aggregate crop
output.
Even net of these adjustments, however, it is clear from Figure 7 that TFP growth in
African crop agriculture has generally accelerated since reaching its nadir in the late 1970s.
Despite a modest deceleration in TFP growth during the early and mid-1990s, aggregate TFP
growth for African crop agriculture in 2000 was 4 to 5 times greater than it had been 25 years
earlier.
The following section continues the task of decomposing and explaining the TFP residual
measured here, expanding that task to consider a wider range of potential explanations. My
starting point for these additional decompositions is the TFP residual estimated net of
adjustments for input quality.
7. Explanations for Total Factor Productivity Growth in Agriculture
This section considers several potential explanations for productivity growth in African
crop agriculture, including: expenditures on agricultural research and development,
infrastructure (roads), the effects of civil war, and incentives (agricultural and macroeconomic
policy distortions). Severe data constraints, however, preclude a complete decomposition in
which all of these potential explanations are considered together. The best one can do, then, is to
compare the baseline TFP residual (net of adjustments for input quality) individually against
each of these potential explanations. In each case, it is necessary to re-estimate the "baseline"
TFP growth rate based on the sample of observations available for each potential explanation of
productivity growth. This approach provides estimates of the share of TFP growth explained by
33

each of these factors; yet, these results will not be strictly additive across the potential
explanations (as the explanatory variables are not orthogonal to one another), and the
generalizability of these results must be qualified (as each decomposition must be estimated over
a slightly different sub-sample of the full data set). It may be reasonable, then, to think of the
following results as reflecting upper-bounds on the role of any individual explanation for
productivity growth.
As in my previous accounting for input quality adjustments, my approach to measuring
the contribution of a given explanatory variable to TFP growth is first to estimate the qualityadjusted production function with and without the additional variable, and then to calculate the
percentage difference in the means of the resulting non-parametric TFP growth paths as the
contribution of that variable to TFP growth.
Agricultural R&D
Ultimately, measured productivity growth is intended to reflect a deeper process of
technological change. Expenditures on agricultural R&D are thus a potentially important driver
of productivity growth, as numerous studies have shown for Africa and for other developing and
developed regions (most recently for Africa, Alene, 2010). Data on agricultural research
expenditures for 27 sub-Saharan African countries since 1971 have been collected by the
Agricultural Science and Technology Indicators (ASTI) Initiative, housed at the International
Food Policy Research Institute.18 Beintema and Stads (2006) describe the rapid postindependence growth in funding for agricultural R&D in Africa, followed by slower growth in
research expenditures during the 1980s, and near stagnation during 1990s. Table 7, from

18

The ASTI data are available for download at http://www.asti.cgiar.org/data/.

34

Beintema and Stads (2006, p. 4), disaggregates agricultural R&D expenditures in Africa by
region and decade. By region, the average growth rate of R&D expenditures from 1971 to 2000
has been greatest in East Africa -- exceeding the growth rate of expenditures in West Africa by a
factor of nearly eight. These are annual expenditures by governments in each country. They thus
reflect a flow of inputs into R&D. While much of the national funding for agricultural R&D in
Africa is donor-funded, these data do not include the benefits for any given country of
expenditures by the international agricultural research centers. Thus, to the extent that national
funding and the benefits of international research are correlated, the present estimates may be
biased upwards.
Substantial lags exist between the time expenditures on R&D occur and the time they
affect productivity. Alene (2010) examines alternative lag structures on R&D expenditures, with
lags ranging from 2 to 16 years. His finding that the maximum effect of agricultural R&D
occurs around lag 10 leads him to conclude that the slowdown in agricultural TFP growth during
the 1990s is partially explained by the reduced growth rate of agricultural R&D expenditures in
the 1980s. This is consistent with the prediction by Block (1995), which also found that
agricultural research expenditures, lagged by ten years, were significant in explaining the
recovery of African agricultural productivity during the 1980s (but which expressed concern for
the future impact of reduced R&D expenditures by the late 1980s).
Adding the 10-year lag of log agricultural R&D expenditures to the production function
estimated above (net of input quality adjustments) results in a production elasticity of
approximately 0.2 (P = 0.000), suggesting that doubling the level of agricultural R&D
expenditures at time t would boost agricultural output per worker by 20% at time t+10 -- a
substantial effect, and one that is consistent with studies that find high rates of return to
35

agricultural research expenditures in Africa (Alene, 2010).19 Including the 10-year lag of R&D
expenditures limits the estimation period to1981-2000. For that period, the 10-year lag of R&D
expenditures explains 75% of estimated TFP growth. Extending the estimation period back to
1976-2000 by including only the 5-year lag of R&D expenditures results in only a small
reduction in the estimated production elasticity (to 0.18). In this case, agricultural R&D
expenditures still explain 45% of estimated TFP growth.
Roads
The potential benefits of increased road density for agricultural productivity have been
explored in a variety of developing-country settings. These benefits, according to Zhang and
Fan (2004) include: increased profitability of farming resulting from reduced transportation
costs; greater purchases of inputs and marketing of output resulting from reduced transportation
costs; and, the potential to shift land from low-value cereals to higher-value horticulture with
reduced risks of perishability. Zhang and Fan (2004) demonstrate significant contributions of
roads to crop TFP in rural India, as do Mendes, Teixeira, and Salvato (2009) for Brazil, and
Suphannachart and Warr (2009) for Thailand, among many others. In a simulation model of
Uganda, Gollin and Rogerson (2010) also find significant complementarities between road
density and agricultural TFP. Most recently, Dorosh, et. al. (2010) provide evidence from subSaharan Africa that agricultural production is higher in areas with lower travel times to urban
markets, and that adoption of modern technologies is negatively correlated with travel time to
urban centers.

19

Including R&D expenditures in the production function required excluding the country dummies, as virtually all
of the variation in R&D expenditure is in the cross-section dimension of the data (rendering the “within” estimator
impractical).

36

Such findings are consistent with both intuition and with the broadly held presumption
that roads are a critical ingredient for growth in agricultural productivity in Africa. For instance,
in its Framework for African Agricultural Productivity, the Comprehensive African Agriculture
Development Program (2006, p. 16) presents it as a given that, "... investment in infrastructure,
particularly rural feeder roads, can also lead to large productivity growth and poverty reduction
efforts." It is difficult, however, to demonstrate this contribution with available cross-country
country data.
To account for the potential contributions of roads to agricultural TFP in Africa, I reestimate my baseline semi-parametric production function to include countries' share of paved
roads as a proportion of total roads. These roads data, drawn from the World Bank's World
Development Indicators, are quite limited in their country coverage and only begin in 1990. The
median paved road share for 1990-2007 was 16%. Perhaps owing to either the small sample size
or to the general lack of paved roads, the estimated production elasticity for paved road share is
effectively zero, and its inclusion makes virtually no difference to the estimated rate of TFP
growth. Replacing the paved road share of total roads with the ratio of road kilometers to arable
land does not change this result. One cannot conclude from this that the broad intuition
regarding roads' potential contribution to agricultural TFP is wrong. Rather, available crosscountry data and historical experience in Africa do not yet provide the expected statistical
support for that intuition.
Civil War
Civil conflict has been endemic in much of sub-Saharan Africa in the post-independence
period. Sambanis and Elbadawi (2000) report that between 1960 and 2000, 40% of sub-Saharan

37

African countries had experienced at least one period of civil war, and that in the year 2000 alone
20% of sub-Saharan Africa's population lived in countries that were formally at war (with
endemic low-intensity conflict in any other countries). They attributed this problem to high
levels of poverty, failed political institutions, and economic dependence on natural resources. It
is reasonable to suppose that endemic civil war (and perhaps even the expectation of civil war)
could negatively affect agricultural productivity. Physical destruction of crops, damaged
infrastructure inhibiting both the purchase of inputs and the marketing of outputs, the diversion
and destruction of human capital, and the potential reticence of households to invest in
agricultural improvement given the threat of these disruptions, could all lead to reductions in
agricultural productivity. I test this hypothesis by including in the production function data on
the incidence of civil wars, carefully constructed by Sambanis (2006).20
A dummy variable equal to one during years of civil war enters the production function
negatively, with a coefficient equal to -.04 (P = 0.11), suggesting that average crop output across
the sample falls by 4% during years of civil war. Its effect on productivity is greater.
Comparing the averages of the non-parametric TFP growth paths with and without the incidence
of civil wars suggest that average TFP growth in African crop agriculture for the period 1960 to
2000 would have been over 11% greater in the absence of civil wars. This is the average effect
based on the occurrence of civil war in 13% of the country-year observations included in the
regression. A cautious interpretation of this result might consider the possibility that the
incidence of civil war acts as a proxy for broader (and excluded) institutional failures.
Given this qualification, one can gain additional insight into the effect of civil war on
agricultural productivity in Africa by dividing the sample into observations with and without
20

I am grateful to Nicholas Sambanis and to Robert Bates for making these civil war data available.

38

civil war, observing their distinct experiences over time as opposed to the average effect of civil
war across the entire sample. This approach reveals that the average rate of agricultural TFP
growth was 0.74 percentage points lower (and negative on average) in the presence of civil war.
Figure 8 illustrates these differences, which (given the inclusion of country fixed effects) are
identified by countries moving in or out of the state of civil war.21
Macroeconomic Policy Distortions (Black Market Premium)
It is well-documented that African economies have historically experienced high degrees
of distortion in macroeconomic policy. It has also been documented, first by Krueger, Schiff,
and Valdes (1988), that macroeconomic distortions in developing countries have often imposed
indirect taxes on agricultural producers in excess of their rates of direct taxation. That story
highlighted the role of real exchange rates, which were often overvalued to the detriment of
African farmers (who tended to produce import-competing tradables or exportables). By
undermining agricultural incentives, macroeconomic policy distortions might also have affected
agricultural productivity. To test that hypothesis, I use data on the black market premium for
foreign currency, often employed as a proxy for such distortions. Over the period 1961-2004,
the mean black market premium for sub-Saharan Africa was approximately 66% (though this
mean falls to 30% if one excludes as outliers observations with black market premia greater than
500%).
The estimated coefficient on the log black market premium in the production function is
not statistically different from zero, indicating that this proxy for macroeconomic distortions did

21

It is possible that this over-estimates the difference between settings with and without civil war if TFP is underestimated during civil wars. This could be the case if the data simply count the number of workers in the sector,
some of whom are prevented from working by war. The author is grateful to Keith Fuglie for noting this.

39

not affect crop output, per se.22 Yet, including the log black market premium in the specification
accounts for 29% of measured TFP growth. Figure 9 illustrates this result. It is interesting to
note that the productivity cost of this macroeconomic distortion diminishes over time relative to
the baseline TFP growth path, given that black-market currency premia in Africa over this period
fell on average by 12% per year (and was half the level post-1990 that had pertained pre-1990).
Agricultural Policy Distortions (Relative Rate of Assistance)
Producer incentives might also exert a substantial effect on agricultural productivity,
particularly as regards farmers' choices on production intensity, crop mix, and input use. In a
recent and major update to the earlier work by Krueger, Schiff, and Valdes (1988), the World
Bank has released an extensive data set on trade-based agricultural price distortions (Anderson
and Valenzuela, 2008). This data set provides commodity-specific indicators of the policyinduced divergence between domestic and international prices, covering 30 different
commodities in 68 countries (including 13 countries from sub-Saharan Africa) since 1955. The
key analytical building block of this data set is the nominal rate of assistance (NRA) for each
commodity-year observation, essentially measuring the rate of tax or subsidy at the border.
Anderson and Valenzuela (2008) also aggregate these nominal rates of assistance into
agricultural and non-agricultural categories. By calculating the ratio of the rate of assistance to
agricultural versus non-agricultural commodities, they create a relative rate of assistance (RRA)
indicator, which measures the extent to which agriculture is either favored or disfavored by trade
policy.23 Historically, African governments have discriminated heavily against their agricultural
sectors (Bates, 1981). This discrimination peaked around 1980, and though reduced during the
22

This regression excludes outliers on black-market premia (over 500%).
An RRA less than zero indicates relative discrimination against agriculture; an RRA greater than zero indicates a
relative discrimination in favor of agriculture.
23

40

subsequent years of structural adjustment, was still present in 2005 (Masters and Garcia, 2010;
Bates and Block, 2010).
Figure 10 juxtaposes the TFP growth paths (with and without controlling for RRA) with
the nonparametric time path of the RRA, itself. The similarity of these patterns is striking. The
RRA is negative throughout this period. The fact that TFP growth rates and the RRA decline
and then rise together suggests the possibility that it is the first-difference (rather than the level)
of the RRA that drives TFP growth. With this motivation, I include the first-difference of RRA
in the semi-parametric production function. The RRA, however, is a policy choice and thus
potentially vulnerable to reverse causation. This would require that governments choose to
discriminate more heavily against sectors that perform worse over time, and discriminate less
heavily against sectors as their performance improves. Such a perspective runs contrary to the
logic found in much of the political economy literature on this subject (Bates, 1981), and ignores
the external pressures for reform that characterized much of the 1980s and 1990s in Africa.
Nonetheless, to provide at least some degree of protection against the potential for reverse
causation, I specify the production function to include the lagged first-difference of the RRA.
The point estimate (as expected) is positive, yet not statistically different from zero (0.037, P =
.62).
The effect of RRA on TFP growth, however, is statistically significant (P = .016), as the
lagged first-difference of RRA explains 16% of TFP growth over this period (as illustrated in
Figure 10).24, 25

24

Headey, Alauddin, and Prasada Rao (2010) find positive contributions to agricultural TFP growth with the same
RRA indicator in a broader sample of mostly non-African developing countries. This is consistent, as well, with
earlier evidence based on the use of the nominal protection coefficient in a small sample of non-African developing
countries by Fulginiti and Perrin (1999).

41

Table 8 summarizes the results described in this section. This list of potential
explanations for agricultural productivity growth in Africa is far from comprehensive, yet it
represents the broad categories that have been addressed in the literature. Ideally, one would
incorporate all of these potential explanations into a single decomposition. In practice, data
constraints preclude such a comprehensive approach, requiring instead the pair-wise
comparisons presented above. I take at least a small step towards that ideal by estimating the
contributions of each potential explanation for productivity growth against baseline estimates
that are adjusted for variations in the quality of land and labor. Nonetheless, this approach
supports only broad statements regarding the relative importance of various explanations for
productivity growth. As Table 8 reflects, expenditures on agricultural R&D, albeit with
substantial lags, play the largest role in explaining agricultural TFP growth. Policy distortions,
both at the macroeconomic and sectoral level, have also played an important, though smaller,
role. Africa's agricultural TFP growth, on average, would have been 11% faster in the absence
of civil wars (though the difference is much greater in the specific comparison of country-year
observations with and without civil wars). And, contrary to expectations, available data suggest
that infrastructure as represented by paved roads has contributed little to Africa's agricultural
TFP growth.
Ghana, in many ways, reflects the experience of sub-Saharan Africa over this period.
The following section draws on the broader cross-country analysis to highlight key aspects and
determinants of Ghana’s agricultural productivity.

25

The black market premium and the first difference of the RRA are only loosely correlated (ρ = -0.11). While this
negative correlation suggests that countries with distorted currency regimes also tended to discriminate against
agriculture, the small magnitude of this correlation suggests that these two indicators do indeed reflect different
impacts on agricultural productivity.

42

8. The Case of Ghana
This brief review is not intended to be a comprehensive analysis of Ghana’s agricultural
productivity experience. Rather, the primary objective is to explore in greater detail key findings
from the cross-country analysis regarding the drivers of productivity growth. A secondary
objective of this brief review of Ghana is to highlight some the issues that arise in country-level
analysis – issues that are generally invisible at the cross-country level, but which may suggest
caution in interpreting of cross-country findings.
Partial & Total Factor Productivity in Ghana
Ghana typifies the decline and rise pattern of agricultural productivity seen in the broader
African sample. Figure 11 summarizes Ghana’s experience as reflected in the time path of its
partial productivity ratios. The first decade of independence saw small gains in crop yield
combined with declining output per worker. The country’s decline into economic chaos during
the 1970s is reflected in the rapid deterioration of both land and labor productivity depicted in
Figure 11. For agriculture, the country’s economic nadir in 1983 was exacerbated by severe
drought (starting in 1981), widespread bushfires, and the forced repatriation of one million
Ghanaians from Nigeria.
These negative trends were strikingly reversed in the early 1980s, leading to a sustained
(and continuing) period of growth in the productivity of both land and labor. Clearly, looking
only at a path connecting the first and last periods (from which we would conclude that the
annual growth rates of average land and labor productivity were 1.35% and 0.6%, respectively)
would obscure the dramatic decline and resurgence seen by tracing out successive 5-year period
averages. The narrative of Ghana’s agricultural productivity is thus much more complex than
43

would be implied by the moderate rates of growth in land and labor productivity observed on
average over the period 1961 – 2007. The challenge is to explain the decline and rise.
The semi-parametric estimation approach developed above is not well-applied to a single
country time series of only 40 observations. The estimated (input quality-adjusted) production
elasticities are not statistically significant. Yet, controlling linearly for the conventional inputs
results in a TFP growth path, depicted in Figure 12, which is statistically different from zero and
suggests an average rate of crop TFP growth of 1.03% per year from 1961 – 2000. This pattern
of TFP growth rates is also consistent with the pattern of partial productivity ratios for Ghana
shown in Figure 11.
For the period 1961 – 2000, aggregate crop output in Ghana grew at the average annual
rate of 2.37%. Growth accounting thus suggests that a TFP growth rate of 1.03% accounts for
approximately 43% of the growth in crop output.
One way to summarize the current levels of crop productivity is to compare current yields
against potential yields. Such analysis by Ghana’s Ministry of Agriculture (2007) suggests that
the yields gaps remain substantial. For example, average maize yield of 1.5 MT/Ha is reported
to be 40% short of the achievable yield. Yield gaps calculated for other staple grains are
reported on the same order of magnitude, while the yield gap for cassava in Ghana is reported to
be 57.5% (Breisinger, et. al., 2008). The challenge is to identify the constraints to reducing these
yield gaps.
One critical constraint to reducing the yield gap is the great heterogeneity of conditions
that characterize agriculture in Ghana (and virtually every other country in sub-Saharan Africa).
Figure 13 shows that Ghanaian agriculture is spread across six distinct agro-ecological zones,
44

each listed here with its mean annual rainfall in millimeters: Rain Forest (2,200), Deciduous
Forest (1,500), Transitional (1,300), Coastal (800), Guinea Savanna (1,100), and Sudan Savanna
(1,000). These zones differ in their average annual rainfall by a factor of nearly four (Figure 14);
unlike the first four zones, which have two growing seasons, the two Savanna zones have only
one. Ghana’s agro-ecological zones also differ in their soil types and in the length of their
growing seasons, as a result of which they also differ widely in the mix of crops produced. In
addition, the productivity levels and growth rates for individual crops also vary widely across
agro-ecological zones.
Figures 15 (a – d) illustrate this diversity for maize, cassava, sorghum, and plantains.
Maize is grown widely across Ghana, yet maize yields also vary widely across agro-ecological
zones. The greatest concentration of relatively high-yield maize production is in the southern
Guinea savanna in transitional zones, while the greatest concentration of relatively low-yield
maize production lies just south of there in the forest zone. Average yields in the former are
approximately twice those of the latter. Cassava production is similarly widespread (with the
exception of the northernmost savanna areas), with a spatial distribution of yields similar to that
of maize. In contrast, sorghum is grown exclusively in the Guinea and Sudan savanna zones,
and districts with vastly different yields border one another; while plantain is grown exclusively
in the forest and coastal zones, with somewhat less spatial variation in yields.
R&D
The cross-country analysis identified expenditure on agricultural R&D as a key
determinant of productivity growth. The diversity of agricultural conditions within Ghana
multiplies the technical challenges to increasing agricultural productivity. Broadly, however, the

45

relationship between R&D expenditures and TFP growth in Ghana is consistent with the crosscountry evidence.
While the poor estimation of the underlying production function renders the estimated
TFP growth rates for Ghana as merely suggestive, their conformity with a 10-year lag of
expenditures on agricultural R&D is striking.26 Figure 12 juxtaposes the growth path of crop
TFP with R&D expenditures. The transition to positive rates of TFP growth in the early 1980s
follows by roughly 10 years the increased expenditures on agricultural R&D of the early 1970s;
the peak in TFP growth rates seen in the mid-1990s similarly follows the peak of R&D
expenditures of the mid-1980s; and, the decline in TFP growth rates in the late 1990s also lags
by approximately 10 years the reduced R&D expenditures of the late 1980s. The main anomaly
to this pattern is that the reduced expenditures of the late 1970s and early 1980s are not reflected
in the estimated TFP growth path.
R&D expenditure is a blunt proxy for specific research outputs. The main research
output of interest here is improved varieties of staple grains. As Figure 15a demonstrates, maize
is grown is all of Ghana’s agro-ecological zones. The diversity of growing conditions, however,
implies that improved maize varieties must be adapted to specific settings. Ghana’s Crop
Research Institute takes the lead in developing and releasing improved varieties. During the
critical period of reversal in crop productivity trends, the Crop Research Institute, in
collaboration with the International Maize and Wheat Improvement Center (CIMMYT), the
International Institute of Tropical Agriculture (IITA), and the Canadian International
Development Agency (CIDA) implemented the Ghana Grains Development Project. Between

26

The TFP growth path for Ghana is not statistically different from zero when lagged R&D expenditures are
included in the production function (though the sample falls to 19 years).

46

1984 and 1996, this project developed and released twelve improved varieties of maize (Morris,
Tripp, and Dankyi, 1999). The project also promoted use of chemical fertilizers to complement
these improved varieties, and recommended new planting strategies.
While these research advances created the potential for improved maize productivity, the
real benefits came only with their widespread adoption. By 1997, a nation-wide survey found
that 54% of farmers planted modern varieties of maize, though adoption rates varied widely
across agro-ecological zones (the highest adoption rate, 69%, was in the coastal savanna, while
the lowest rate, 38%, was in the Forest zone). Adoption of recommended planting strategies
followed a similar pattern. Yet, only 21% of farmers adopted the recommended fertilizers
(ranging from 36% in the Guinea Savanna to 9% in the Forest zone), and only 26% of the
national maize crop (by area) received fertilizer. (Morris, Tripp, and Dankyi, 1999.) In 1997,
approximately half of Ghana’s maize area was planted to modern varieties (ranging from 75% in
the Coastal Savanna, to 33% in the Forest).27
Adoption of improved maize was thus reasonably widespread, if unevenly so, across the
country. On the supply side, one constraint to more widespread adoption of improved maize
varieties was an inability of the Ghana Seed Company (a government entity) to multiply the
improved seeds in sufficient quantity (Morris, et. al., 1999). On the demand side, Doss and
Morris (2001) found that the key constraints to adoption were lack of access to land, labor, and
credit. Jatoe, Al-Hassan, and Abatania (2005) found similar constraints to the adoption of
improved sorghum varieties in northern Ghana, where 40% of farmers had adopted improved
sorghum, but only 0.1% of total sorghum area was planted to modern varieties.
27

The survey also found that 9% of farmers who adopted modern varieties subsequently “disadopted” them, along
with nearly one-third of those who had tried fertilizer, and 13% of those who had adopted recommended
management techniques.

47

More recently, Kwadzo, Ansah, Kuwornu, and Amegashie (2010) surveyed farmers in
Ghana’s Eastern Region. They found that 83% of farmers had adopted improved maize, which
covered 78% of maize area planted in the region. Yet, they also found that the yield potential of
this adoption was not maximized because only 34% of farmers had also adopted nitrogen
fertilizer, and that only 30% of maize area received fertilizer. They also found that the likelihood
of adoption of improved maize was a positive function of both road access by farmers and the
number of visits by extension agents.
Policy Interventions
Policy interventions – both macroeconomic and sectoral – were also found to play
important roles in shaping agricultural productivity patterns in the African cross-section. In this
regard, too, Ghana is representative.
Ghana’s post-independence economic and policy experience is divided into two distinct
periods. Following its auspicious emergence into independence in 1957 as an essentially middleincome country, Ghana’s economy spiraled gradually downward into chaos, reaching its nadir in
the crisis of 1983. With the adoption of its well-known Economic Recovery Program in that
year, the country entered an extended (and continuing) period of stable growth. The
macroeconomic environment that ended in crisis was characterized by high inflation, large fiscal
deficits, declining exports, and a black market premium on its currency that grew from 35% in
the early 1970s to 367% in the late 1970s, to nearly 1300% in the early 1980s (World Bank data
cited in Brooks, Croppenstedt, and Aggrey-Fynn, 2009).
This history coincides cleanly with the sharp reversal of the partial productivity path
depicted in Figure 11, as well as with the transition to positive rates of TFP growth depicted in
48

Figure 15. The potential connections between macroeconomic distortions and agricultural
productivity are direct. The dramatically overvalued exchange rates that characterized the late
1970s and early 1980s in Ghana directly undermined incentives for domestic producers of
import-competing crops (such as maize and rice), as well as for export-crop producers (cocoa).
The 90% real depreciation of the cedi between 1983 and 1987 helped to relieve prior
macroeconomic discrimination against agriculture, improving incentive on the output side, yet
also increasing the cost of imported inputs. In addition, economic reform included the
elimination of numerous input subsidies that had contributed to the unsustainable fiscal deficits.
Thus, for example, the removal of fertilizer subsidies in 1990 led to a 36% increase in the real
price of fertilizer, while the prices of insecticides and fungicides tripled in real terms with the
removal of their subsidies (Seini, 2002).
Policy reforms at the sectoral level were less ambiguous in their benefits for Ghana’s
farmers. The period from independence to 1983 was characterized by high rates of agricultural
taxation – both indirect (arising largely from the overvalued exchange rate), and direct.
Subsequent to the liberalization of Ghana’s foreign exchange market and the devaluation of the
cedi in 1984, agricultural taxation was primarily direct taxation. The example of cocoa taxation
is notorious. The combination of an overvalued exchange rate and direct taxation in the form of
low producer prices paid by the monopsonistic Ghana Cocoa Board was such that by 1983,
farmers received about one-fifth of the FOB price of cocoa (Seini, 2002). With the subsequent
devaluation and the reform of agricultural policies that accompanied the Economic Reform
Program, cocoa farmers’ share of the FOB price had increased to 40% by 1995, and to 50% by
2001 (Brooks, Croppenstedt, and Aggrey-Fynn, 2009).

49

The nominal and relative rates of assistance (described above) provide a more general
indicator of agricultural policy in Ghana. Average rates of taxation (measured relative to
international prices) for agricultural tradables increased from approximately 17% in the early
1960s to 50% by the late 1970s. With the period of reform, these rates of taxation fell back to
17% by the late 1980s, and averaged just over 3% for 2000-04 (Brooks, Croppenstedt, and
Aggrey-Fynn, 2009). Comparing this indicator to similar measures for non-agriculture provides
an indicator of price discrimination of agriculture relative to non-agriculture (the “relative rate of
assistance”). From this broader perspective, as well, one finds substantial and increasing
discrimination against agriculture in the pre-reform period, with declining but persistent
discrimination against agriculture in the post-reform period. Relative discrimination against
agriculture averaged just over 6% in the early 1960s, increasing to approximately 25% in the late
1970s. While falling substantially during the period of economic reform, this indicator of
relative discrimination was still 8% for 2000-04.
Figure 16 highlights the close association between the TFP growth path for Ghana’s crop
agriculture with the (non-parametrically smoothed) path of the relative rate of assistance for
agriculture versus non-agriculture in Ghana. As in the broader cross-section, the RRA remains
negative throughout the period (indicating relative discrimination against agriculture); yet, it is
clear from Figure 16 that reductions in this rate of discrimination were associated with increases
in the rate of TFP growth. The potential for this association to be explained by reverse
causation, in which improved TFP growth led to reduced discrimination against agriculture, is
strongly limited by the fact that the severity of Ghana’s economic crisis (and its multiple sectoral
and macroeconomic adjustment agreements with the IMF and World Bank) left the government
no choice but to implement its broad program of economic reforms.
50

This brief review demonstrates that agricultural productivity growth in Ghana broadly
reflects the cross-country experience of sub-Saharan Africa. The general pattern of postindependence decline followed by renewed productivity growth since the 1980s is clear in
Ghana. The important roles of agricultural R&D expenditure and policy interventions seen in
the broader cross-section are also clear in Ghana.
Cautionary Note
Even a brief country case study can serve the purpose of providing a cautionary note for
the interpretation of cross-country findings. In particular, Ghana’s agro-ecological diversity is
common in sub-Saharan Africa. From a technological perspective, this diversity greatly
complicates current efforts to promote a new green revolution for Africa. As seen in Figure 14(a
– d), different crops are specific to different agro-ecological zones; and for ubiquitous crops such
as maize, an improved variety that thrives in humid Evergreen zones of south-western Ghana
may be inappropriate for planting in the arid zones of the northern savanna. An analysis that
explains aggregate agricultural productivity at the country level based on total expenditures on
agricultural R&D inevitably obscures the fact that both expenditures and productivity growth are
likely to be quite unevenly distributed across the country.28 This diversity is even more obscured
when that aggregate country-level analysis is merely part of a broader cross-country panel data
set.
Looking within a particular country also enables a closer examination of the sources and
quality of agricultural data. In the case of Ghana, Obirih-Opareh (2004) provides a critical
examination of the methods applied by the Ministry of Food and Agriculture in compiling its

28

Indeed, regional disparities between Ghana’s northern and southern zones are a source of considerable tension.

51

national area and production data. He notes, for example, that most Ghanaian farmers do not
keep their own records of area and production. In addition, Obirih-Opareh notes that most
farmers mix numerous crops in a single field, further complicating the calculation of area and
yield of individual crops, and that many farms are not accessible by road. As a result, production
and area surveys must rely on limited and potentially poorly-measured samples. For export
crops, such as cocoa, the situation is better. Similarly, consumption data for imported inputs
such as chemical fertilizer, are also more reliable. Yet, Obirih-Opareh in general finds that the
limited ability of the Government to undertake annual nation-wide surveys of complex and
remote production systems often leads to statistical anomalies in the published data. He also
notes that different international and national sources of published data on agricultural area and
production in Ghana provide conflicting information. In this respect, too, Ghana is undoubtedly
not unique in sub-Saharan Africa.

9. Conclusions
Agricultural productivity growth in sub-Saharan Africa has been a qualified success.
Total factor productivity growth has increased rapidly since the early 1980s. By the early 2000s,
average annual TFP growth was roughly four times faster than it had been 25 years earlier. This
period of accelerated growth, however, followed nearly 20 years of declining rates of TFP
growth subsequent to independence in the early 1960s. Average agricultural TFP growth for
sub-Saharan Africa was 0.14% per year during 1960 – 84, and increased to 1.24% per year from
1985 – 2002. The average over this period was approximately 0.6% per year, which accounts for
36% of the increase in total crop output over this period.
These highly aggregated results conceal substantial regional and country-level variation.
While regional TFP growth rates have tended to converge over time, and most rapid rate of TFP
52

agricultural growth over the entire period 1960 – 2002 was in Southern Africa (1.25% per year),
while the slowest rate was in the Sahel (-1.17%). With the exception of East Africa, every
region’s TFP growth rate was higher between the years1985 – 2002 than it had been during 1960
– 1984.
From among the long list of potential explanations for these trends, this paper considers
several leading contenders. Data constraints on individual explanations preclude a unified and
comprehensive decomposition of the productivity residual. It is clear, however, that
expenditures on agricultural R&D, along with the reform of macroeconomic and sectoral policies
shaping agricultural incentives have played a substantial role in explaining both the decline and
the rise in agricultural productivity found in this paper.
The case study of Ghana clearly reflects these broader findings, and permits a more
nuanced view of their effects. The case study also provides a brief window into the vast
complexity of agricultural development in any single country, and in doing so, provides a
cautionary note for the interpretation of aggregate cross-country results.

53

References
Alene, A. 2010. "Productivity Growth in the Effects of R&D in African Agriculture."
Agricultural Economics, forthcoming.
Anderson, K., and E. Valenzuela. 2008. Estimates of Distortions to Agricultural Incentives, 1955
to 2007, core database at www.worldbank.org/agdistortions.
Barro, R. and J-W Lee. 2010. “A New Data Set of Educational Attainment in the World, 1950–
2010.” NBER Working Paper No. 15902. April. Cambridge, MA.
Bates, R. 1981. Markets and States in Tropical Africa. Berkeley, University of California Press.
_____ and S. Block. 2010. “The Political Economy of Agricultural Trade Interventions in
Africa,” in K. Anderson, ed., The Political Economy of Agricultural Price Distortions.
Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Beintema, N., and G-J. Stads. 2006. “Agricultural Research and Development in sub-Saharan
Africa: An Era of Stagnation,” Background Paper, ASTI Initiative, International Food
Policy Research Institute, Washington, D.C.
Binswanger, H., and R. Townsend. 2000. "Technological Change and Commercialization in
Agriculture: The Effect on the Poor." World Bank Research Observer 6 (1): 57-80.
Block, S. 1994. "A New View of Agricultural Productivity in Sub-Saharan Africa," American
Journal of Agricultural Economics, Vol. 76, No. 3, August.

54

_____. 1995. "The Recovery of Agricultural Productivity in Sub-Saharan Africa," Food Policy,
Vol. 20, No. 5, October.
Breisinger, C., X. Diao, J. Thurlow, and R. Al-Hassan. 2008. Agriculture for Development in
Ghana: New Opportunities and Challenges. International Food Policy Research
Institute Discussion Paper 784. Washington, D.C.
Brooks, J., A. Croppenstedt, and E. Aggrey-Flynn. 2009. "Ghana." In K. Anderson and W.
Masters, eds., Distortions to Agricultural Incentives in Africa. Washington DC: World
Bank.
Byerlee, D., and D. Jewell. 1997. "The Technological Foundation of the Revolution." In D.
Byerlee and C. Eicher, eds., Africa's Emerging Maize Revolution. Boulder: Lynne
Rienner Publishers.
CAADP, 2006. Framework for African Agricultural Productivity, the Comprehensive African
Agriculture Development Program.
Chan-Kang, C., P.Pardey, S. Wood, J. Roseboom, and M. Cremers. 1999. "Reassessing
Productivity Growth in African Agriculture." Selected paper for the annual meeting of
the American Agricultural Economics Association, Nashville, Tennessee, August 8-11,
1999.
Coelli, T, D.S. Prasada Rao, C. O’Donnell, and G. Battese. 2005. An Introduction to Efficiency
and Productivity Analysis. New York: Springer Press.
Craig, B., P. Pardey, and J. Roseboom. 1991. "Patterns of agricultural growth and economic
development." In P. Pardey, J. Roseboom, and J. Anderson, eds., Agricultural Research
55

Policy: International Quantitative Perspectives. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
_____. 1997. "International Productivity Patterns: Accounting for Input Quality, Infrastructure,
and Research." American Journal of Agricultural Economics 79:1064-76.
Dorosh, P., H-G Wang, L. You, and E. Schmidt. 2010. “Crop Production and Road Connectivity
in Sub-Saharan Africa, A Spatial Analysis,” Policy Research Working Paper 5385, World
Bank, Washington, D.C.
Doss, C., and M. Morris. 2001. “How does gender affect the adoption of agricultural
innovations? The case of improved maize technology in Ghana." Agricultural
Economics. Vol. 25: 27-39.
Evenson, R. and D. Gollin. 2003. "Assessing the Impact of the Green Revolution, 1960 to
2000." Science, Vol. 300 (2 May):758-62.
Frisvold, G. and K. Ingram. 1995. "Sources of Agricultural Productivity Growth and Stagnation
in Sub-Saharan Africa." Agricultural Economics 4:169-80.
Fuglie, K. 2010. "Agricultural Productivity in Sub-Saharan Africa." Mimeo, Economic
Research Service, US Department of Agriculture, Washington D. C.
Fulginiti, L., R. Perrin, and B. Yu. 2004. "Institutions and Agricultural Productivity in SubSaharan Africa." Agricultural Economics 4:169-80.
Gabre-Madhin, E., and S. Haggblade. 2004. “Successes in African Agriculture: Results of an
Expert Survey." World Development, Vol. 32, No. 5:745-66.

56

Gollin, D. and R. Rogerson. 2010. “Agriculture, Roads, and Economic Development in
Uganda.” NBER Working Paper 15863. March. Cambridge, MA.
Griliches, Zvi. 1960. "Measuring Inputs in Agriculture: a Critical Survey." Journal of Farm
Economics XL22(5), December.
_____. 1963. "The Sources of Measured Productivity Growth: United States Agriculture, 19401960." Journal of Political Economy, Vol. LXXI, No. 4, August.
_____. 1964. "Research Expenditures, Education, and the Aggregate Agricultural Production
Function." American Economic Review, Vol. LIV, No. 6, December.
_____. 1987. “Productivity: Measurement Problems.” The New Palgrave: A dictionary of
Economics, Vol. 4, pp. 1010-1013.
Hayami, Y. and V. Ruttan. 1985. International Development: an International Perspective.
Baltimore MD.: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Headey, D., M. Alauddin,, and D.S. Prasada Rao. 2010. "Explaining Agricultural Productivity
Growth: an International Perspective." Agricultural Economics 41:1-14.
Jatoe, J.B., R. Al-Hassan, and L. Abatania. 2005. "Factors Affecting the Adoption of Improved
Sorghum Varieties among Farm Households in Northwest Ghana: A Probit Analysis."
Ghana Journal of Development Studies. Vol. 2, No. 1: 37-50.
Jefferson, Philip N. and Stephen A. O'Connell. 2004. “Rainfall shocks and economic
performance in four African countries.” In prep.

57

Jorgenson, D., and Z. Griliches, 1967. "The Explanation of Productivity Change." Review of
Economic Studies.
Krueger, A., M. Schiff, and A. Valdes. 1988. “Agricultural Incentives in Developing Countries:
Measuring the Effect of Sectoral and Economywide Policies." The World Bank
Economic Review. Vol. 2, No. 3: 255-271.
Kumwenda, J., S. Waddington, S. Snapp, R. Jones, and M. Blackie. 1997. "Soil Fertility
Management in Southern Africa." ." In D. Byerlee and C. Eicher, eds., Africa's Emerging
Maize Revolution. Boulder: Lynne Rienner Publishers.
Kwadzo, G. T-M., W. Ansah, J.M.K. Kuwornu, and D.P.K. Amegashie. 2010. "Technology
Package Adoption by Smallholder Maize Farmers: Acceptability Index and Logit Model
Analysis." Mimeo. Department of Agricultural Economics, University of Ghana.
Leidholm, C., M.McPherson, and E. Chuta. 1994. “Small Enterprise Employment Growth in
Rural Africa,” American Journal of Agricultural Economics, Vol. 76: 1177-1182.
Lokshin, M. 2006. “Difference-based semiparametric estimation of partial linear regression
models,” The Stata Journal, Vol. 6, Num. 3, pp. 377-383.
Lusigi, A., and C. Thirtle. 1997. "Total Factor Productivity and the Effects of R&D in African
Agriculture.” Journal of International Development 2:529-38.
Masters, W. and A. Garcia. 2010. “Agricultural Price Distortions and Stabilization,” in K.
Anderson, ed., The Political Economy of Agricultural Price Distortions. Cambridge,
Cambridge University Press.

58

Mendes, S., E. Teixeira, and M. Salvato. 2009. “Effect of Infrastructure Investments on Total
Factor Productivity (TFP) in Brazilian Agriculture.” Contributed Paper prepared for
presentation at the International Association of Agricultural Economists Conference,
Beijing, China, August 16-22, 2009.
Ministry of Food and Agriculture, Government of Ghana. 2007. District Level Agricultural
Production and Price Data. Accra.
Mitchell, T. D., et. al. 2003. “A comprehensive set of climate scenarios for Europe and the
globe.” In prep.
Morris, M., R. Tripp, and A.A. Dankyi. 1999. Adaptation and Impacts of Improved Maize
Production Technology: a Case Study of the Ghana Grains Development Project.
Economics Program Paper 99-01. Mexico, D. F.: CIMMYT.
Nin-Pratt, A. and B. Yu. 2008. "An Updated Look at the Recovery of Agricultural Productivity
in Sub-Saharan Africa." International Food Policy Research Institute Discussion Paper
00787, Washington, D.C.
Obirih-Opareh, N. 2004. “Quality Agricultural Statistical Analysis for Better Policy Planning
and Analysis in Ghana.” The Empirical Economic Letters, Vol. 3, No. 6:299-310.
Ramankutty, N. and J. A. Foley. 1998. “Characterizing patterns of global land use: An analysis
of global croplands data.” Global Biogeochemical Cycles, 12, 667-685.
Rao, D.S.P. 1993. Inter-country Comparisons of Agricultural Output and Productivity, Social
and Economic Development Paper, No. 112, Food and Agriculture Organisation, Rome.
59

Sahn, D., P. Dorosh, and S.Younger. 1997. Structural Adjustment Reconsidered – Economic
Policy and Poverty in Africa. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Sambanis, N., and M. Doyle. 2006. Making War and Building Peace: United Nations Peace
Operations. Princeton, NJ: PrincetonUniversity Press.
Sambanis, N. and I. Elbadawi. 2000. “Why Are There So Many Civil Wars in Africa?
Understanding and Preventing Violent Conflict.” Journal of African Economies, Vol. 9
(3):244-69.
Sebastian, K. 2007. "GIS/Spatial Analysis Contribution to 2008 WDR: Technical Notes on Data
& Methodologies." Background Paper for the World Development Report 2008, World
Bank, Washington, D.C.
Seini, A. W. 2002. Agricultural Growth and Competitiveness Under Policy Reforms in Ghana.
Technical Publication No. 61, Institute of Statistical, Social and Economic Research.
University of Ghana.
Solow, R. 1957. "Technological Change in the Aggregate Production Function." Review of
Economics and Statistics, Vol. 39, No. 3, pp. 312-20.
Suphannachart, W. and P. Warr. 2009. “Research and Productivity in Thai Agriculture,” mimeo,
Kasetsart University, Bangkok, Thailand.
Thirtle, C., Hadley, D. and Townsend, R. 1995. "Policy Induced Innovation in Sub-Saharan
African Agriculture: a Multilateral Malmquist Productivity Index Approach."
Development Policy Review 13 (4): 323-42.

60

Timmer, C.P. 1988. "The Agricultural Transformation." In H. Chenery and T.N. Srinivasan,
eds., Handbook of Development Economics, Vo. 1, Amsterdam: North Holland Press.
World Bank. 2010. African Development Indicators. Washington, DC: World Bank.
_____. 2000. Can Africa Claim the 21st Century? Washington, DC: World Bank.
Yatchew, A. 2003. Semiparametric Regression for the Applied Econometrician. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Zhang, X. and S. Fan. 2004. “How Productive is Infrastructure? A New Approach and Evidence
from Rural India.” American Journal of Agricultural Economics, Vol. 86 (2):492-501.

61

Figure 1. Partial Productivity Ratios for Africa and Global Comparisons

International Comparison of Partial Productivity Ratios in Agriculture
10000

1961/65 - 2001/05
0.1 ha/worker

= 1961/65
= 1981/85
= 2001/05

1 ha/worker

Japan

10 ha/worker

57
5 9

55

51
39
3 5

37

1000

3 3

100 ha/worker

31

Germany
4 9

India

4 7

45

World

4 3

7 9

7 7

7 5
89

41

2 9

USA

73
8 7

8 5

2 7
7 1

8 3

2 5

100

8 1

2 3

Brazil

1000 ha/worker

2 1

01/05
69

6 7

SSA

6 5

81/85

1 9

6 3

Australia

6 1

61/65

1 7

1 5

1 3

1 1

10

Agric. Output per Hectare

53

100

1000

10000

Agric. Output per Worker

100000

62

Figure 2. Regional Disaggregation of African Partial Productivity Ratios (Crop Output)

Agricultural Partial Productivity Ratios, 1961/65 - 2006/07
Regions of Sub-Saharan Africa
500

0.5 ha/worker

1 ha/worker

9

51
0

10

1 9

10

5 9

400

East

9

5 8

8

6

2 ha/worker

8

1 6

1 8

1 7

5

7

15

57

6

4
2 3

10

14

2 1
0

300

13

1

7

56

West (excl. Sahel)

5 4
9
3
2
1

12

10

2 9

1 1

55

54

53

31
0

5 2

8
7

200

6

7

9

46

8
4 5

4 8

10
41
0

3

2

36
38

6
5

1
2 3

25

8

2

7

2 2

21

9

37

3

4 ha/worker

2 4

4

41

1

6
35

51

2 8

4 2

4 9

43

47

5

Middle

3 9

5

2 7

26

34

4

Sahel

3 3

3

44

Southern

4
32

2

1

100

Agric. Output per Hectare

1 1
0

200

31

250

400

Agric. Output per Worker

600

800

Output Units: SSA Intl $
1=61/65; 2=66/70; 3=71/75; 4=76/80; 5=81/85; 6=86/90; 7=91/95; 8=96/00; 9=01/05; 10=06/07

63

Figure 3a – d. Country-Specific Partial Productivity Ratios (a. West, b. East, c. Middle, d.
Southern)

1000

Western Africa
1 ha/worker

0.5 ha/worker

13
1 0

GHA

18
1

35
1 0

CIV

1 9
10

GMB

NGA

24
1 0

3 7
10

21
0

SLN

LIB

2 0
10

37
1

1 9
1

GUN

BEN

20
1

1 3
1

Crop Output per HA
100

2 4
1

28
1 0

10 ha/worker

18
1 0

43
1 0

2 1

35
1

7 1
0

41
0

MLI

36
1

3 6
10

SEN

28
1

21

BKF

MRT

CPV

TGO

7 1

21 0

2 9
10

43
1

GBS

29
1

41

34
1 0

NIG
3 4
1

10

2.5 ha/worker

100

500
Crop Output per Worker

Eastern Africa
0.1 ha/worker

1000

2000

0.5 ha/worker

1 ha/worker
30
1

30
1 0

1000

MRS

5 ha/worker
MWI
BUR

2 7
10

26
1 0

Crop Output per HA
100

5 1
0

2 2
10

MAD

52
1 0

RWD

MOZ

KEN

5 1

4 2
10

2 6
1
3 2
10

44
1 0

ZWE

32
1

10
1 0

COM

5 2
1

46
1 0

4 6
1

UGD
44
1

1 0
1

2 7
1

TZA

1 6
10

5 3
10

2 2
1

4 2
1

ETH
4 5
10

3 8
10

3 8
1

15
1 0

SOM

16
1

SEY
ZMB

53
1

10

45
1

10

100
Crop Output per Worker

1000

2000

4000

64

Central Africa

800

0.5 ha/worker

1 ha/worker

1 1
0

11 0

Crop Output per HA
200
400

1 2
1 0

ANG

DRC

2.5 ha/worker
CGO

GAB

50
1

12
1

1 7
1

6 1
0

17
1 0

1 1

5 ha/worker

11

8 1
0

9 1
0

CAR
CAM
5 0
10

8 1

CHD
6 1

100

9 1

200

250

400
500
Crop Output per Worker

800

Southern Africa

1000

0.5 ha/worker

1000

1 ha/worker

4 10

Crop Output per HA
100

SWZ

41

3 9
1 0

LSO

3 9
1

SAF

2 3
1 0

23
1

3 1
0

33
1 0

BOT

10

31

2.5 ha/worker

10 ha/worker

3 3
1

10

100
Crop Output per Worker

1000

65

Figure 4. Baseline TFP Growth Estimates for 5-Year Periods (from SURE approach)

Agricultural TFP Growth Rates, SSA
SURE estimates, excluding country effects and input quality adjustments

2.30
1.87

0.66

-0.26

-0.10
-0.36

-1

Growth Rate of Agricultural TFP
0
1
2

3

2.79

-0.89

63-68

68-73

73-78

78-83

83-88

88-93

93-98

98-03

Note: each year represents the middle of a 5-yr average

66

Figure 5. Baseline TFP Growth Rates (from Semi-Parametric Regression)

Agricultural TFP Growth Rates, SSA Crops

-.5

Growth Rate of Agricultural TFP
0
.5
1
1.5
2

2.5

semi-parametric regression, excluding country effects and input quality adjustments

1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010
year

67

Figure 6. Regional Disaggregation of TFP Growth Rates

Agricultural TFP by Region, Unadjusted for Input Quality

West
Southern

SSA
mean

East
Sahel

Middle

-4

Growth Rate of Agricultural TFP
-2
0
2

4

semi-parametric regression

1960

1970

1980

year

1990

2000

2010

includes country fixed effects

68

Figure 7. Agricultural TFP Growth Rates Adjusted for Input Quality

Agricultural TFP Growth Rates, SSA Crops
Growth Rate of Agricultural TFP
.5
1
1.5
2

semi-parametric regressions adjusting for input quality

Baseline (no adjustment for input quality)

Controlling for adjustments
in land quality

0

Controlling for adjustments in land and labor quality

1960

1970

1980

year

1990

2000

2010

69

Figure 8. Effect of Civil War on Agricultural TFP

Agricultural TFP Growth, With & Without Civil War

Growth Rate of Agricultural TFP
-1
0
1

2

semi-parametric regression

without civil war
(mean = 0.65%/yr)

-2

with civil war
(mean = -0.08%/yr)

1960

1970

1980

year

1990

2000

2010

70

Figure 9. Effect of Black Market Premium on TFP Growth Rates

Agricultural TFP Growth, Controlling for Black Market Premium

Growth Rate of Agricultural TFP
.5
1

1.5

semi-parametric regression

Baseline

0

including black market premium

1960

1970

1980

year

1990

2000

2010

71

Figure 10. Effect of Agricultural Price Policy Distortions on Agricultural TFP

Agricultural TFP Growth & Relative Rate of Assistance
-.2

2.5

semi-parametric regression

Baseline TFP

-.35
-.3
-.25
Relative Rate of Assistance

Growth Rate of Agricultural TFP
1
1.5
2

Relative Rate of Assistance
for Agriculture vs Non-Agriculture
(right axis)

.5

-.4

TFP, controlling
for RRA

1960

1970

1980

year

1990

2000

2010

72

Figure 11. Partial Productivity Ratios for Ghana

Agricultural Partial Productivity Ratios, 1961/65 - 2006/07
-- GHANA --

1 ha/worker

700

0.5 ha/worker

1 9

(0.2, 2.1)

91/95

Crop Output per Hectare
400
500
600

06/07
01/05
1 9
1 0

(2.8, 3.1)

96/00
1 9
8

1 9
7

(9.5, 8.5)

71/75
1 9
3

66/70

(0.6,-.85)

19
2

(.5, -1.5)

86/90

61/65

2 ha/worker

1 9
1

1 9
6

(-4.3, -5.3)

(4.4, 2.9)
1 9
4

76/80

300

1 9
5

(-2.2, -3.3)

81/85

300

400

500
600
Crop Output per Worker

700

800

Annual growth rates for each period: (output/Ha, output/worker)

73

Figure 12. Agricultural TFP Growth and R&D Expenditures, Ghana

Agricultural TFP Growth and R&D Expenditures

Growth Rate of Agricultural TFP
-2
0
2
4

6

20
30
40
50
60
70
Expenditures on Agricultural R&D (PPP millions)

-- GHANA --

Estimated TFP Growth Rate
(left-hand scale)

-4

R&D Expenditures
(right-hand scale)

1960

1970

1980

year

1990

2000

2010

74

Figure 13. Agro-Ecological Zones of Ghana

75

Figure 14. Rainfall Patterns in Ghana

76

Figure 15 (a – d). Yield, by District, for Maize, Cassava, Sorghum, and Plantain (2008)

77

Figure 16. TFP & Relative Rate of Assistance to Agriculture vs Non-Agriculture in Ghana

TFP & Relative Rate of Assistance (Ag vs Non-Ag)
0
Crop TFP
(left-hand scale)

-4

-.4

RRA
(non-parametrically smoothed)

-.3
-.2
-.1
Relative Rate of Assistance

Growth Rate of Agriculutral TFP
-2
0
2
4

6

-- GHANA --

1960

1970

1980

year

1990

2000

2010

78

Figure A1. Comparison of TFP Estimates with Alternative Output Aggregates
Comparison of Baseline TFP Growth Estimates with Alternative Output Aggregates
Growth Rate of Agricultural TFP
0
.5
1
1.5
2

semi-parametric regression

crop output w/
SSA-specific PPP

total agri output
w/ global PPP
crop output w/
global PPP

1960

1970

unadjusted for input quality

1980

year

1990

2000

2010

1) total agri = crops + livestock
2) land input for total agri includes pasture

79

Table 1. Partial Productivity Ratio Growth Rates by Region
Region
East
Output/Worker
Output/Ha
Ha/Worker
Central
Output/Worker
Output/Ha
Ha/Worker
Southern
Output/Worker
Output/Ha
Ha/Worker
Western
Output/Worker
Output/Ha
Ha/Worker
Sahel
Output/Worker
Output/Ha
Ha/Worker
SSA
Output/Worker
Output/Ha
Ha/Worker

1961-70

1971-80

1981-90

1991-2000

2001-07

1961-2007

1.06
1.81
-0.75

-0.73
1.22
-1.95

1.3
2.56
-1.26

-0.03
1.38
-1.41

1.16
1.16
0

0.26
1.59
-1.33

0.97
0.55
0.42

-0.76
-1.43
0.67

-0.58
1.09
-1.67

1.2
2.3
-1.1

1.67
2.19
-0.52

-0.09
0.65
-0.74

3.14
3
0.14

1.98
1.87
0.11

3.72
3.32
0.4

2.68
3.39
-0.71

1.09
1.74
-0.65

1.24
1.14
0.1

0.4
1.14
-0.74

1.31
1.46
-0.15

3.16
3.61
-0.45

2.77
2.14
0.63

4.67
2.69
1.98

1.05
1.27
-0.22

-0.99
0.38
-1.37

-0.95
0.24
-1.19

1.92
0.23
1.69

0.96
0.42
0.54

2.34
1.71
0.63

-0.05
0.56
-0.61

0.81
1.38
-0.57

-0.02
0.78
-0.8

1.79
1.79
0

1.12
1.79
-0.67

2.18
1.65
0.53

0.41
1.24
-0.83

Source: FAO and author’s calculations

80

Table 2. Growth Rates of Partial Productivity Ratios by Country
1961 - 2007

Growth Rate of:
Output/Worker
Output/Ha

Output/Worker

Ranked by:
Output/Ha

Angola

-0.98

1.25

Nigeria

Nigeria

Benin

3.03

2.09

Benin

Seychelles

-.625

1.52

Gabon

Swaziland

1.74

1.65

Swaziland

Malawi

-0.47

0.79

South Africa

Zambia

Cameroon

1.09

1.81

Seychelles

Namibia

Cape Verde

1.91

1.51

Cape Verde

Ethiopia

-.107

0.684

Côte d'Ivoire

Kenya

0.35

1.43

Namibia

Benin

Comoros

-0.62

0.803

Burkina Faso

Niger

Congo

-0.29

1.19

Mali

Côte d'Ivoire

Congo, Dem. Rep.

-0.63

1.15

Malawi

Cameroon

Côte d'Ivoire

1.88

1.82

Mauritania

Tanzania

Djibouti

6.17

10.61

Cameroon

Burkina Faso

Equatorial Guinea

-2.75

-2.01

Mauritius

Botswana

Eritrea

-3.99

-3.78

Guinea

Cape Verde

Ethiopia

-0.18

2.25

Sierra Leone

Chad

Gabon

3.02

0.47

Ghana

Ghana

Gambia

-2.86

-2.09

Rwanda

Angola

Ghana

0.6

1.41

Zambia

Rwanda

Guinea

0.78

0.81

Chad

Congo

-0.65

-0.44

Tanzania

Congo, Dem. Rep.

0.15

2.17

Kenya

Lesotho

Lesotho

-0.54

1.12

Central African Rep

Togo

Liberia

-0.79

0.9

Mozambique

South Africa

Madagascar

-0.41

0.62

Ethiopia

Liberia

Malawi

1.46

2.62

Congo

Uganda

Mali

1.73

0.67

Togo

Guinea

Mauritania

1.12

0.17

Madagascar

Comoros

Mauritius

1.06

-0.09

Burundi

Burundi

-0.15

0.2

Uganda

Central African Republic

1.87

2.39

Niger

Mali

-0.52

1.87

Lesotho

Madagascar

Nigeria

3.43

3.16

Zimbabwe

Zimbabwe

Rwanda

0.56

1.19

Comoros

Gabon

Senegal

-1.93

0.33

Botswana

Sierra Leone

Seychelles

2.54

2.78

Congo, Dem. Rep.

Senegal

Sierra Leone

0.65

0.42

Guinea-Bissau

Mozambique

Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi

Cent Afr Rep
Chad

Guinea-Bissau
Kenya

Mozambique
Namibia
Niger

81

Somalia

-1.1

-0.02

Liberia

Mauritania

2.6

1.01

Angola

Somalia

Swaziland

2.91

2.63

Somalia

Mauritius

Tanzania

0.28

1.73

Senegal

Guinea-Bissau

Togo

-0.35

1.05

Equatorial Guinea

Equatorial Guinea

Uganda

-0.48

0.83

Gambia

Gambia

Zambia

0.36

2.46

Eritrea

Eritrea

Zimbabwe

-0.6

0.48

(excluding Djibouti, as too small and an outlier)

0.441

1.21

South Africa

AVERAGE
(excl. Djibouti)

Source: FAO and author’s calculations

82

Table 3. Annual Growth Rates of Crop Output and Conventional Inputs
1961-84
Crop Output
1.66
Labor
1.60
Land
0.84
Livestock
2.28
Tractors
7.14
Fertilizer
6.28
Source: FAO and author’s calculations

1985-2007
2.22
1.64
0.90
1.67
-0.5
-0.5

1961-2007
2.09
1.63
0.85
1.88
3.47
3.35

Table 4. Production Function Estimates (with Country Fixed Effects), 1961 – 2000. Dependent
variable: aggregate crop output

Log land per worker
Log tractors per worker
Log livestock per worker
Log fertilizer per worker

(1)

(2)

(3)

0.821***
(17.07)
0.025*
(1.81)
0.149***
(3.96)
0.033***
(4.05)

0.822***
(17.22)
0.028**
(2.08)
0.106***
(2.90)
0.034***
(4.30)
0.050***
(3.09)
0.365***
(8.67)

5.123***
(95.55)
X
1038
30
0.40

2.813***
(10.03)
X
1038
30
0.45

0.923***
(18.12)
0.031**
(2.34)
0.009
(0.22)
0.034***
(4.37)
0.067***
(4.10)
0.366***
(8.80)
0.058***
(5.21)
2.774***
(9.48)
X
1038
30
0.46

Log irrigated land share
Log rainfall
Avg years schooling
Constant
Includes Year dummies
Observations
Number of countries
R-squared

Absolute value of t statistics in parentheses.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

83

Table 5. Regional TFP Growth Rates (Unadjusted for Input Quality)
Region:
East
Southern
Middle
West
Sahel
SSA

1960 - 1984
0.23
0.84
-2.43
0.37
-2.41
0.14

1985 - 2002
0.19
1.80
0.61
1.61
0.48
1.24

1960 - 2002
0.21
1.25
-1.13
0.90
-1.17
0.61

Table 6. Accounting for Changes in Land and Labor Quality
(1)
Baseline TFP
Mean Growth Rate
% Change Relative to
Baseline
t-test (P-value)
a.

0.97

(2)
Adjusting for Land
Quality
0.87

(3)
Adjusting for Land
and Labor Quality
0.59

10%
vs (1):
0.103a*

39%
vs (2):
0.000***

one-sided test

84

Table 7. Trends in Agricultural Research Spending by Sub-Region, 1971-2000. Originally,
Table 1 in Beintema and Stads (2006).

Table 8. Pair-Wise Decompositions of Agricultural TFP
l

% Change
T-test vs
Sample size of No. of years
vs baseline
baseline
regressionc
included
a
TFP
R&D (t-10)
75
P = .044
219
11
R&D (t – 5)
45
P = .06b
274
16
Paved Road Share
3
P = .47
237
11
1037
37
Civil War
11
P = .13b
Black Mkt Prem.
29
P = 0.00
737
37
ΔRRA(t-1)
16
P = .016
387
38
a. Baseline net of input quality adjustments
b. One-sided t-test.

No. of countries
included
11
11
28
28
28
10

c. Refers to underlying estimation of production function from which TFP growth path is derived.

85

Appendix 1 – Commodities and International Prices Included in Aggregate
Crop Output
Commodity
wheat
rice_paddy
barley
maize
oats
millet
sorghum
potatoes
sweet_potatoes
cassava
yams
sugar_cane
cow_peas_dry
pulses_nes
nuts_nes
soybeans
groundnuts_with_shell
oil_palm_fruit
sunflower_seed
sesame_seed
seed_cotton
lettuce_chicory
tomatoes
beans_green
leguminous_vegetables_nes
carrots_turnips
bananas
citrus_fruit_nes
avocados
dates
coffee_green
cocoa_beans
tea
tobacco
natural_rubber

Price ($I)*
157.0241
274.6291
146.3894
98.85061
129.3321
227.9305
183.9405
183.828
147.4281
170.8198
348.0107
39.34161
253.0388
233.8105
2186.915
207.6962
509.03
57.23346
290.227
485.4894
315.2179
363.9961
816.665
557.1413
342.7727
393.2994
208.0983
337.675
1002.395
879.3388
1179.314
1421.738
1500.892
2541.928
1197.116

* Base year = 2006

86

Appendix 2 – Comparison of Baseline TFP Growth Rates with Alternative
Output Aggregates
The main results presented in the paper are based on an output aggregate that includes
only crops, and that uses international prices that were calculated specifically for this African
sample to aggregate those crops. This appendix compares the baseline TFP growth rate
estimates derived from that crop aggregate output with two alternative output aggregates – one
using only crop output but using the FAOs global international prices for aggregation, and
another using total agricultural output (from FAO) – the sum of crop and livestock output –
aggregated with global FAO international prices. In the latter case, I include permanent pasture
land in the measure of land input.
As Figure A1 illustrates, the resulting sets of TFP growth paths tell a broadly similar
story, though with different average TFP growth over the period.
Mean TFP Growth Rate Estimates:


crop output with African international prices = 0.61%/yr



crop output with FAO global international prices = 0.52%/yr



total agricultural output with FAO global international prices = 0.74%/yr

87

