                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        MODELING INFLATION AFTER THE CRISIS

                                         James H. Stock
                                         Mark W. Watson

                                       Working Paper 16488
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w16488


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2010




Prepared for the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Symposium, “Macroeconomic Policy: Post-Crisis
and Risks Ahead,” Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August 26-28. We thank Larry Ball, Ben Bernanke, Richard
Berner, Roberto Billi, Jeffrey Fuhrer, Bob Gordon, Bart Hobijn, Peter Hooper, Michael Kiley, Mickey
Levy, Emi Nakamura, Athanasios Orphanides, Glenn Rudebush, Frank Smets, Doug Staiger, and John
Williams for helpful comments and suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by James H. Stock and Mark W. Watson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Modeling Inflation After the Crisis
James H. Stock and Mark W. Watson
NBER Working Paper No. 16488
October 2010
JEL No. C22,E31

                                              ABSTRACT

In the United States, the rate of price inflation falls in recessions. Turning this observation into a useful
inflation forecasting equation is difficult because of multiple sources of time variation in the inflation
process, including changes in Fed policy and credibility. We propose a tightly parameterized model
in which the deviation of inflation from a stochastic trend (which we interpret as long-term expected
inflation) reacts stably to a new gap measure, which we call the unemployment recession gap. The
short-term response of inflation to an increase in this gap is stable, but the long-term response depends
on the resilience, or anchoring, of trend inflation. Dynamic simulations (given the path of unemployment)
match the paths of inflation during post-1960 downturns, including the current one.


James H. Stock
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center M4
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
James_Stock@harvard.edu

Mark W. Watson
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544-1013
and NBER
mwatson@princeton.edu
                                          I. Introduction



       The past five decades have seen tremendous changes in inflation dynamics in the

United States. Some of the changes arguably stem from transformations in the U.S.

economy. Energy is a smaller share of expenditures than it was during the oil price

shocks of the 70s, labor union membership has declined sharply over the past forty years,

and there has been a shift from production of goods to production of services. Monetary

policy too has undergone dramatic transformations: the stance against inflation has

become more aggressive, there have been discussions of formal or informal inflation

targets, and there has been a recognition of the importance of expectations – and of

expectations management – in determining the path of inflation.

       These changes have created major headaches for inflation forecasters. Research

over the past decade has documented considerable instability in inflation forecasting

models, see for example Cogley and Sargent (2002, 2005), Cogley, Primiceri, and

Sargent (2010), Levin and Piger (2004), and Stock and Watson (2007); the literature on

this instability is surveyed in Stock and Watson (2009). Given this instability, inflation

forecasters have a dearth of reliable multivariate models for forecasting inflation. In fact,

it is exceedingly difficult to improve systematically upon simple univariate forecasting

models, such as the Atkeson-Ohanian (2001) random walk model (although that model

seems to have broken down in the 2000s) or the time-varying unobserved components

model in Stock and Watson (2007).

       Yet this picture of the instability and unreliability of multivariate forecasting

models conflicts with the broad historical regularity that the major postwar U.S.




                                              1
disinflations have all occurred during or just following recessions. Figure 1 plots the

paths of the unemployment rate and the 4-quarter rate of inflation1 (  t4 ) in the core

personal consumption expenditure (PCE) price index over the 8 NBER-dated recessions

from 1960 to 2010. Because the 1980Q1 recession was only 6 quarters peak-to-peak,

Figure 1 combines the 1980Q1 and 1981Q3 recessions into a single episode, so the eight

recessions and their aftermath are presented as seven recessionary episodes. The plotted

series are deviated from their values at the date of the NBER peak. For example, in the

recession beginning in 1960Q2, the unemployment rate rose from 5.2% in 1960Q2 to

7.0% four quarters later (1961Q2), an increase of 1.8 percentage points. Over those four

quarters, the 4-quarter rate of core PCE inflation fell from 1.9% to 1.2%, a decline of 0.7

percentage points; these changes, relative to 1960Q2, are plotted in the first panel of

Figure 1. In five of the seven recessionary episodes since 1960, inflation fell through the

date at which the unemployment rate reached its peak, and then either plateaued or

continued to fall for at least several more quarters. The most notable exception is the

1973Q4 recession, which was accompanied by sharp oil price increases and, as discussed

below, much higher oil price pass-through to core than is currently observed.

        One way to see the commonality among these episodes is to superimpose the

panels of Figure 1. This is done in Figure 2, where the data for each episode have been

scaled so that the unemployment rate increases by one unit between the NBER peak (time




1
  Throughout this paper we compute the four-quarter rate of price inflation as  t4 =
100ln(Pt/Pt–4), where Pt is the quarterly value of the price index. The one-quarter rate of
inflation, at an annual rate, is computed as t = 400ln(Pt/Pt–1), so  t4 = (t + t–1 + t–2 +
t–3)/4. If the original price index is monthly, Pt is the average value of the price index
for the months in the quarter.


                                               2
0) and the unemployment peak (time 1). 2 Figure 2 also plots the mean of these scaled

unemployment and inflation rates, along with one-standard error bands. The 1973Q4

recession is omitted from Figure 2 – but not from our econometrics – because of the

atypical sequence of energy price increases through the first six months of the recession.

Averaged over the six episodes in Figure 2, by the time that the unemployment rate

peaks, the 4-quarter rate of core PCE inflation has fallen by 0.37 percentage points

(standard error = 0.13) for each percentage point rise in the unemployment rate. By the

time that the episode is 50% beyond the peak unemployment rate (that is, at time scale

1.5 in Figure 2), the 4-quarter rate of core PCE has fallen by 0.59 percentage points (SE =

0.23) for each percentage point peak increase in the rate of unemployment.

        Two of the episodes in Figure 2 are of particular interest. The first is 2001Q1.

Inflation fell through the first 10 quarters of this episode: by the second quarter of 2003,

four-quarter core PCE inflation had fallen to 1.5% and there was increasing concern

about deflation (e.g. Bernanke [2003]). In 2004, however, inflation deviated from the

historical pattern by increasing. The second episode of interest is the recession that

began in 2007Q4. Based on currently available data, the path of core PCE inflation in

this episode is only slightly above the post-1960 average. We return to both of these

episodes below.




2
 For example, in the 1960Q2 recession the quarterly unemployment rate rose by 1.8
percentage points from 1960Q2 to its peak in 1961Q2. Figure 2 thus plots [u(s) –
u1960Q2]/1.8, where the time scale s is set so that s = 0 is 1960Q2 and s = 1 is 1961Q2.
The 4-quarter rate of inflation is plotted in the same way, that is, as [4(s) – 1960
                                                                                  4
                                                                                       Q 2 ]/1.8,

on the same time scale as unemployment. When unemployment peaked in 1962Q2, four-
quarter core PCE inflation had fallen by 0.7 percentage points, so the value plotted for
inflation for this episode at s = 1 is -0.7/1.8 = -0.4.


                                                3
       Figure 2 captures the essential empirical content of the Phillips curve: inflation

declines during periods of economic weakness. On average over these recessionary

episodes, inflation at first falls slowly, then more rapidly as the unemployment rate

increases. At some point after the unemployment rate peaks, the inflation rate stabilizes

at a lower level. With only seven episodes, the standard errors are fairly large and

increase with the time after the NBER peak, so these dynamics are estimated imprecisely.

       The goal of this paper is to reconcile the apparent contradiction between the

instability of Phillips curve forecasting models (and multivariate inflation forecasting

models more generally) and the empirical regularity in Figure 2. We do so by drawing

upon four sets of evidence. First, we provide nonparametric and parametric evidence of a

stable linear relationship between inflation and a new gap measure, which we term a

recession gap. The unemployment recession gap is the difference between the current

unemployment rate and the minimum unemployment rate over the current and previous

eleven quarters. This new gap is designed to turn the empirical regularity in Figure 2 into

a variable that can be used in a regression. Second, we provide nonparametric evidence

of nonlinearities in the relation between 4-quarter inflation and traditional unemployment

and output gap measures; this evidence is consistent with the nonlinear parametric

specification found by Barnes and Olivei (2003). Third, we conduct a pseudo out-of-

sample forecasting exercise using the unemployment recession gap along with other

activity measures, including both parametric and nonparametric forecasts; we find that

simple linear models using the unemployment recession gap provide episodic

improvements over univariate forecasts of four-quarter inflation, where the forecasting

improvements occur during economic downturns. These episodic improvements are




                                             4
consistent with, but sharper than, those noted in Stock and Watson (2009). Fourth, we

conduct a dynamic simulation of inflation using the recession gap model and find a good

match between the actual and predicted inflation paths, given the unemployment path,

over the five downturns of Figure 2.

        The econometrics in this paper considers a multivariate forecasting model in

which a candidate variable, say xt, is used to predict the forecast errors from a univariate

forecast of inflation over the next four quarters,  t4 4 . The univariate model we adopt is

the unobserved components model of inflation proposed in Stock and Watson (2007), in

which the rate of inflation is represented as the sum of a stochastic trend, t, and a

transitory component, where the volatility of the two components varies over time. In

this model, the forecast of future inflation using date t information is the best estimate of

the trend at date t, t|t, so the forecast error for four-quarter ahead inflation is  t4 4 –t|t.

Cogley, Primiceri, and Sargent (2010) refer to the deviation of inflation from t as the

inflation gap, and, like them, we focus on the predictability of this gap. Specifically, the

multivariate forecasting models we consider have the form,



                       t4 4 = t|t + 4xt + et44 ,                                                 (1)




where 4 is an unknown coefficient and et44 is an error term, and where the

subscript/superscript “4” indicates that (1) applies to the 4-quarter inflation rate.

        Our primary focus is on the unemployment recession gap as the predictor variable

xt in (1). However, we also estimate (1) using other predictors xt, in particular other

measures of economic activity, survey expectations of inflation, and measures of the


                                                        5
money supply. The findings using other activity variables are consistent with those using

the unemployment recession gap: activity variables provide episodic improvements over

the univariate model, which are sharpest if the activity variable is a recession gap. In

contrast to the findings in Ang, Bekaert, and Wei (2007), we find that, on average over

our sample period, augmenting activity variable forecasts with survey measures of

inflation expectations tends to make little difference, relative to using only the activity

measure. Consistent with the literature, monetary variables produce forecasts of inflation

that are less accurate out of sample than univariate forecasts, both on average over the

full sample and episodically.

       Before turning to our analysis, we make several remarks about the interpretation

of our forecasting model and our results. First, the recession gap is not a standard gap

measure, in the sense that it measures only the severity and timing of economic

contractions. This paper focuses on only one part of the Phillips curve – what happens

during downturns – and is silent about the behavior of inflation in booms.

       Second, we think of the estimated trend in (1), t|t, as capturing long-term inflation

expectations. The extent to which these expectations, as captured by t|t, are “anchored”

or “resilient” is allowed to change over time. We show in Section 3 that our trend

measure closely tracks inflation expectations as reported by the Survey of Professional

Forecasters. In a sense, this should not be surprising: it is very difficult to beat

univariate inflation forecasting models and t|t is computed from a competitive univariate

forecasting model that allows for time variation in the resilience of trend inflation, so it

makes sense that the forecasts from this model would line up with professional forecasts.

Because our trend is derived as a univariate long-run forecast, conceptually t|t differs



                                              6
from private-sector inflation expectations, although as a practical matter this difference

seems to be slight. 3

         Third, our analysis focuses on backwards-looking models, in which expectations

are in effect estimated by a reduced-form time series model. To the extent that t|t

captures inflationary expectations, (1) can be thought of as a New Keynesian Phillips

Curve in which observed expectations are used for estimation. An alternative approach is

to use model-based expectations in conjunction with a New Keynesian Phillips curve.

Fuhrer and Olivei (2010) provide simulations using this latter approach in the context of

the current recession and those simulations complement the forecasting approach in this

paper.

         There are several other recent papers related to ours. Liu and Rudebusch (2010)

provide different evidence that the behavior of inflation in the current downturn is

consistent with the historical U.S. Phillips curve, and Meier (2010) provides international

evidence that recessions are associated with declines in inflation. Williams (2009)

provides Phillips-curve forecasts of the decline in inflation during this recession, in which

he emphasizes the importance of the substantial increase in expectations anchoring in

muting the disinflationary pressures of the currently large gaps. Giannone, Lenza,

Momferatou, and Onorante (2010), using quite different methods, also provide evidence

of a Euro-zone Phillips curve during the current episode.

         Section II of this paper shows that the pattern in Figure 2 also holds for core CPI,

the GDP price index, headline PCE, and headline CPI. Section III presents our


3
  Our interpretation of t|t as long-term expected inflation also accords with Cogley,
Primiceri, and Sargent (2010), who interpret t as the Fed’s inflation target and changes
in the volatility of t as reflecting changes in Fed credibility.


                                               7
econometric analysis of (1) using the unemployment recession gap and other

unemployment rate gaps. Section IV extends this analysis to other predictors. Section V

discusses implications for the current recession, and Section VI concludes.

        Data note. All the data used in this paper are quarterly from 1959Q1 – 2010Q2.

The values of monthly series are averaged over the quarter. The data are the most recent

revised data as of August 26, 2010. All predictors xt are constructed to be one-sided

using revised data; we do not consider issues raised by data revisions. Gaps and trend

inflation are computed using pre-1959 data for initial conditions when available. Except

for Section II, we focus on inflation as measured by the PCE price index less food and

energy (core PCE) because it is methodologically consistent and because it eliminates the

noise from energy price fluctuations, which have recently been very large (e.g. Hamilton

[2009]); results for other inflation measures can be computed using the replication files

that are available for this paper.



           II. Price Inflation During Recessions, 1960 – 2010: Other Price Indexes



        In addition to core PCE inflation, other measures of price inflation also fall during

periods of economic weakness. Figure 3 plots the recession behavior of four-quarter

inflation computed using four other price indexes: core Consumer Price Index (CPI), the

chain-weighted GDP price index, the headline PCE price index, and the headline CPI.

The construction of Figure 3 is the same as Figure 2, except for the price index used.

        The pattern of inflation for the four price indexes in Figure 3 is similar to that

seen using core PCE in Figure 2. The magnitudes of the decline in inflation depend on




                                              8
the price index. By the time that the episode is 50% beyond the peak unemployment rate

(a value of 1.5 on the time scale in Figure 3), four-quarter core CPI inflation has fallen by

0.83 percentage points (SE = 0.25), inflation measured by the GDP price index has fallen

by 0.45 percentage points (SE = 0.27), and headline PCE and headline CPI have

respectively declined by 0.74 (SE = 0.33) and 1.02 (SE = 0.33) percentage points. The

standard errors of the mean declines for headline inflation are larger than for core because

of movements in energy and food prices that differ from one recession to the next.

Nevertheless, the basic pattern remains the same.4

       Because the behavior of the four inflation measures in Figure 3 matches the

overall pattern observed for core PCE inflation in Figure 2, for the rest of this paper we

focus solely on core PCE inflation.



              III. Price Inflation During Recessions, 1960 – 2010: Econometrics



       The graphical evidence of the previous section is suggestive but informal, so we

now turn to an econometric investigation of price inflation during recessions. In this

section, we continue to focus on unemployment-based measures of activity. We begin

with additional details about our forecasting model (1), including our measure of trend



4
  This pattern of inflation declines over recessions is robust to treating the 1980Q1 and
1981Q3 recessions separately instead of treating them as a single episode; for example,
for the core PCE 4-quarter inflation decline at time scale 1.5, the mean decline and
standard error are unchanged to two decimal points if these two recessions are treated
separately. The mean declines are even robust to including the 1973Q4 recession, even
though its special circumstances make it less relevant. With 1973Q4 included, at time
1.5 the mean decline in 4-quarter core PCE is 0.43 (SE = 0.15), the mean decline in core
CPI is 0.62 (SE = 0.30), in GDP price index inflation is 0.39 (SE = 0.23), in headline
PCE is 0.66 (SE = 0.28), and in headline CPI is 0.93 (SE = 0.29).


                                              9
inflation, the implications of time variation in our trend estimate for the long-run slope of

the Phillips curve, and unemployment gaps including our new unemployment recession

gap. We then report the results of four complementary econometric investigations. First,

we examine nonlinearities in the Phillips curve as suggested by recent work by Barnes

and Olivei (2003), Stock and Watson (2009), and Fuhrer and Olivei (2010); we confirm

that there is evidence of Barnes-Olivei (2003) nonlinearities using a standard gap

measure, but not using the recession gap. Second, we estimate parametric (linear)

Phillips curve models and find that models with the recession gap exhibit less instability

than models with conventional gaps. Third, we conduct a pseudo out-of-sample

forecasting study that compares various unemployment-based forecasts; all the

unemployment gap measures exhibit the “episodic” improvements (during recessions)

discussed in Stock and Watson (2009), but those improvements are sharpest for the

recession gap measure. Finally, we conduct a dynamic simulation using a full-sample

one-quarter ahead forecasting model based on the recession gap and find that, given the

unemployment path, the predicted inflation path matches the actual path of inflation in

the episodes plotted in Figures 2. This model contains only two estimated coefficients, a

time-varying moving average parameter and a single (stable) Phillips curve slope

coefficient. Thus this model provides a parsimonious parametric summary of Figure 2.



III.A. Measures of Trend Inflation and Real-Time Gaps

       Trend inflation. Implementation of (1) as a forecasting equation requires a

measure of trend inflation computed using contemporaneous and past, but not future, data

– that is, a one-sided measure of trend inflation. The trend measure we use here is




                                             10
derived from the univariate time series model of inflation developed in Stock and Watson

(2007), in which the rate of inflation is represented as the sum of two unobserved

components, a trend t and a transitory disturbance t, where the variances of these two

disturbances can change over time:



                      t = t + t,     Et = 0, var(t) =  2,t                               (2)

                      t = t–1 + t,   Et = 0, var(t) =  2,t , cov(t,t) = 0.             (3)




The time-varying variances are modeled as evolving as independent random walks in

logarithms. This so-called unobserved components-stochastic volatility (UC-SV) model

is estimated using nonlinear filtering methods, for details see Stock and Watson (2007).

The estimate of trend inflation (t|t) which we use to estimate (1) is the one-sided (that is,

filtered) estimate of t obtained from the UC-SV model.

        The UC-SV model implies that inflation has a time-varying moving average

representation in first differences (a time-varying IMA(1,1) representation),



                      t = at – tat–1,      Eat = 0, var(at) =  a2,t ,                       (4)




where t and  a2,t are functions of  2,t and  2,t .

        From the perspective of inflation forecasting, the key feature of the UC-SV model

is that, conditional on  2,t and  2,t , it results in a linear forecast of inflation with

potentially long lags where the lag structure is time-varying but parsimoniously



                                                   11
parameterized by only two parameters. The variances  2,t and  2,t determine the

variability of the trend and transitory components. Allowing these innovation variances

to change over time produces time variation in the resilience of the trend. In particular, a

regime shift in monetary policy that induces a change in the extent to which expectations

are anchored will be captured by a decrease in the variance of the trend innovation and an

increase in the resilience of the estimated trend.

        Figure 4 presents the standard deviations   ,t and   ,t and the implied time-

varying moving average coefficient t for core PCE inflation. Over the past decade, the

volatility of the trend (,t) has been at historical lows, and the persistence of inflation

forecasts, as measured by t, has been at historical highs. During the 2000s, inflation

tended to revert to a stable trend, whereas in the 70s and 80s the trend moved to track

inflation.

        Figure 5 plots the estimated trend t|t from the UC-SV model along with the

median 5-year ahead forecast that has been reported in the Survey of Professional

Forecasters since 2007. The two series move together very closely. Although the time

span is very short, Figure 5 suggests that the trend t|t can be thought of as a substitute

measure of long-term inflation expectations.

        The equivalence of the unobserved components and IMA(1,1) representations

allows a useful link between the value of  and the resilience of the trend. Setting aside

time variation for the moment, the filtered trend can be expressed as a distributed lag of

past inflation, specifically,




                                              12
                                      
                     t|t = 1     i t i .                                           (5)
                                     i 0




The weights in this expression sum to one, and the smaller is , the more weight is placed

on recent observations and the more volatile is the trend. In the limit that  approaches

one, the estimated trend is simply the sample average of past inflation.

        From (1) to a backwards-looking Phillips curve with time-varying parameters.

In the UC-SV model, t|t is the optimal univariate time-t forecast of t+h for all h  1, so

that at+1 = t+1 – t|t, where at is the forecast error in (4), the MA(1) version of the

univariate model. We consider the possibility that this univariate forecast error is

predictable using some variable xt, so that at+1 = 1xt + et11 , where the

subscript/superscript “1” indicates that 1 and et11 apply to this 1-step ahead projection.

This yields the one-step ahead model,



                              t+1 = t|t + 1xt + et11 .                                  (6)




If we continue ignore time variation in , then substituting (5) into (6) and rearranging

yields the autoregressive-distributed lag model,



                                    
                     t+1 =   i  t i + 1xt + et11 ,                               (7)
                                   i 0




                                                    13
Equation (7) is just a tightly parameterized backwards-looking Phillips curve forecasting

model with potentially long lags in the tradition of Gordon (1982, 1990, 1998) and

Brayton, Roberts, and Williams (1999), without the dummy variables and supply shock

variables found in the Gordon (1990) “triangle” model.

        Equation (7) provides a useful framework for understanding two implications of

time variation in  (with time variation, (7) is an approximation which holds for slow

time variation). First, time variation in  implies time variation in the Phillips curve

coefficients on lagged inflation. Second, time variation in  implies time variation in the

long-run slope of the Phillips curve. Specifically, the long-run effect on inflation of a

unit exogenous change in xt is (1 – )1. Thus, even if 1 is constant (we provide

evidence below that this is so, when xt is the unemployment recession gap), the long-run

effect on inflation varies over time because  varies over time. In particular, when  is

large (close to one), then the long-run Phillips curve is flatter than when  is small. Said

differently, when the innovations to trend inflation are relatively small – that is, when

inflation expectations are well-anchored – then  is near one. Even if the one-quarter

ahead effect of a change in xt on inflation is constant over time, the anchoring of

expectations means that the long-run impact of a change in xt is less than if expectations

were less well anchored.

        Iterating (4) forward four quarters yields  t4 4 = t|t + bt+4 or, equivalently,  t4 4 – t

=   i 0  i  t i + bt+4 where bt+4 = [at+4 + (2–)at+3 + (3–2)at+2 + (4–3)at+1]/4. As in
        




the 1-step forecast, consider the possibility that future univariate forecast errors at+1, at+2,




                                                 14
at+3, and at+4 (and thus bt+4) are predictable using xt, so that bt+4 = 4xt + et44 . Thus we

have that  t4 4 = t|t + 4xt + et44 , which is (1), or equivalently,

                                          
                        t4 4 – t =   i  t i + 4xt + et44 .                           (8)
                                         i 0



When derived in this way the coefficient 4 in (8) is seen to depend on  because bt+4 is a

function of .5 Thus, time variation in  may lead to time variation in 4 even if 1 is time

invariant.

          Real-time gaps. A challenge in forecasting inflation using activity variables is

constructing reliable one-sided measures of activity gaps, which can differ substantially

from two-sided gaps estimated with the benefit of subsequent data. Here, we consider

two one-sided gaps, one standard in the literature and one new, plus a “differences”

transformation of activity.

          The new one-sided gap measure, which we refer to as a “recession gap,” focuses

attention on economic downturns by computing the gap as the deviation of

unemployment from its minimum over the current and previous 11 quarters. That is, the

unemployment recession gap is,



              unemployment recession gapt = ut – min(ut,…, ut–11),                               (9)



where ut denotes the unemployment rate at date t. In effect, the unemployment recession

gap takes on the value of the unemployment rate in Figure 2 during downturns, and is




5
    Let j = Eat+jxt. From expression for bt+4, 4 = [4 + (2–)3 + (3–2)2 + (4–3)1]/4.


                                                    15
zero otherwise. Thus, the unemployment recession gap translates Figure 2 into

something that can be analyzed using linear regression.6

         We also examine a conventional one-sided gap computed using a one-sided

bandpass filter. Following Stock and Watson (2007), one-sided band-pass gaps are

computed as the deviation of the series augmented with univariate forecasts of future

values from a symmetric two-sided MA(80) approximation to the optimal lowpass filter

with pass band corresponding to periodicities of at least 60 quarters.

         The third unemployment-based predictor we consider is a difference (or changes)

transformation, in which the predictor is the four-quarter change in the unemployment

rate, ut – ut–4.

         Figure 6 plots the unemployment rate and these three unemployment-based

measures. The three measures have broad similarities but important differences. Most

notably, the bandpass and differences measures vary during economic expansions,

whereas the recession gap essentially varies only during downturns.




6
  Our unemployment recession gap is related to two distinct literatures. The first
concerns hysteresis in the Phillips curve and in the labor market (for a recent contribution
and references, see Ball (2009)). If our recession gap is interpreted as a conventional
gap, then the NAIRU is modeled as the running three-year minimum of the
unemployment rate, which tends to drift down slowly in expansions and to adjust
upwards after long contractions. We take no stand on such an interpretation and prefer to
think of the unemployment recession gap as simply translating Figure 2 into a variable
that can be studied using regressions. The second related literature is on nonlinearities in
the univariate output process. Specifically, Beaudry and Koop (1993) propose a variable,
the “current depth of recession,” which is the difference between current real GNP and its
historical maximum value. Our implementation differs from theirs in several ways.
First, we consider the unemployment rate, not real GNP, and when we construct
recession gaps using output measures we use local detrending (see Section 4.1). Second,
our unemployment rate minimum is for a 3-year rolling window for instead all of history.
Third, Beaudry and Koop (1993) apply their measure to nonlinearities in the univariate
output process, whereas our focus is models of inflation.


                                            16
III.B Nonlinearities in the Phillips Curve

        Does the Phillips curve slope depend on the size of the gap? Figure 7 provides

scatterplots of  t4 4 – t|t against the 1-sided bandpass gap (upper panel) and the

unemployment recession gap (lower panel). Both panels also show a nonparametric

kernel regression line (with 95% confidence bands) and a parametric regression function.

Barnes and Olivei (2003) found evidence supporting a piecewise linear Phillips curve, so

for the one-sided bandpass regression the parametric regression is a piecewise linear

function, with the thresholds chosen so that 70% of the observations fall in the middle

section and 15% in each outer section. The parametric regression in the recession gap

scatterplot is linear.

        Figure 7 provides support for the Barnes-Olivei (2003) specification applied to

the one-sided bandpass gap: the Barnes-Olivei (2003) type piecewise linear function is

remarkably close to the nonparametric regression function. There is a large central

region – normal times of moderate and small gaps – in which the Phillips relation is

essentially flat, but in periods of large (bandpass) gaps, the curve steepens.7 In the

pseudo out-of-sample forecasting exercise reported below we therefore consider both

linear and nonlinear (nonparametric) specifications for the bandpass gap.

        In contrast, there is little evidence of nonlinearities in the Phillips curve using the

recession gap, so the work below adopts a linear specification as a function of the

recession gap.




7
  The evidence for a piecewise nonlinear Phillips curve is stronger using a non-
forecasting specification in which the unemployment gap dating overlaps with the dating
of the dependent variable.


                                              17
       Does the Phillips curve slope depend on the level of inflation? The possibility

that the Phillips curve flattens at low levels of inflation has long been an element of the

literature, see for example Ball, Mankiw, and Romer (1988), Akerlof, Dickens, and Perry

(1996) (on downward wage rigidity) and, for a recent empirical treatment, Aron and

Muellbauer (2010). We investigated this type of nonlinearity, in which the slope of the

Phillips curve, specifically 4 in (1), depends on the level of inflation; here, we focus on

the recession gap Phillips curve.

         Figure 8 presents a nonparametric estimate of the slope 4 (the coefficient on the

unemployment recession gap) as a function of the current estimate of trend inflation

(t|t).8 The estimated slope is clearly less in absolute value for small values of trend

inflation than for large values, however the 95% confidence bands are wide and the full-

sample linear regression estimate of -0.18 is contained within the confidence band for

almost all values of trend inflation. Parametric models incorporating this nonlinearity do

not seem to be particularly robust, with the statistical significance of the nonlinearity

depending on the details of the specification. One reason for this imprecision and

apparent lack of robustness is that there is limited historical experience at very low levels

of inflation, so the evidence we have essentially rests on two historical episodes, the early

1960s and the early 2000s. This imprecision and lack of robustness is underscored by

pseudo out-of-sample forecasting experiments (not reported) in which specifications in

which the slope depends on t|t were found to exhibit instability.




8
 The slope was estimated by local linear regression of (1) using a biweight kernel as a
function of t|t – , where  appears on the horizontal axis of Figure 8, with a bandwidth
of 1.3.


                                              18
       Because the time series evidence is limited, we also consider evidence from the

micro literature on price setting. One argument for a flattening of the Phillips curve at

low levels of inflation is that there is resistance to reducing nominal wages and prices.

The micro literature, however, presents little evidence of a price change floor at zero. For

example Nakamura and Steinsson (2008) find that one-third of price changes for the

same goods are negative, a finding consistent with Klenow and Kryvtsov (2008). Some

additional evidence on whether the distribution of price changes truncates or piles up at

zero is provided in Appendix A, which examines annual price changes for 233

disaggregated components of the PCE price index. Price changes at this level of

disaggregation accord with the micro finding of little price resistance at zero. While the

absence of resistance to price declines does not imply an absence of resistance to wage

declines, this micro and subaggregate evidence does not on its face suggest that a price

Phillips curve would flatten at low levels of inflation.

       Given the limited evidence in the time series data and the lack of evident price

resistance at zero in the micro and subaggregate data, for the rest of this paper we adopt

specifications in which the Phillips curve slope does not depend on the level of inflation.

This said, the hint of nonlinearity in Figure 8 remains an intriguing topic for further

research.



III.C Gap Models: Estimates and Stability

       Table 1 reports various regression statistics for estimates of 1 in (6) (one-quarter

ahead) and 4 in (1) (4-quarter ahead) using the three unemployment gaps. All R2s are

low, underscoring that inflation is difficult to forecast. The final two columns report



                                             19
statistics testing for stability of the slope coefficient, first by testing for a break in

1984Q1 (a common choice for the Great Moderation break) and second using the Quandt

Likelihood Ratio (QLR) statistic (also known as the sup-F statistic) testing for a single

break at an unknown time. For the one-step ahead regressions, these test statistics fail to

reject the null hypothesis of coefficient stability. The one-step ahead point estimates of 1

for the unemployment recession gap and the R2 also indicate stability of this predictive

regression. In contrast, the coefficients on the one-sided bandpass gap and the fourth

difference change by a large factor across the subsamples, as do the regression R2s,

suggesting less stability than the unemployment recession gap regression despite the

failure of the stability tests to reject for any of the one-step ahead specifications.

Consistent with the discussion in Section 3.1, the estimates of 4 in the four-step ahead

regression appear less stable than in the one-step ahead specification. Indeed, both

stability tests reject for the four-quarter ahead bandpass gap and fourth-differences

specifications, and the estimated coefficients and R2s change dramatically for these two

measures from the pre-84 to post-84 parts of the sample. In contrast, the hypothesis of

stability is not rejected for the recession gap coefficient in the four-quarter ahead

specification, the magnitude of its change is small relative to the other variables, and its

R2 is stable across the two samples.



III.D Pseudo Out-of-Sample Forecasting Results

        The pseudo out-of-sample forecasting method. This section examines the

forecasting performance of the three unemployment variables, relative to the univariate

UC-SV benchmark, in a pseudo out-of-sample forecast experiment. At a given date t,



                                                20
forecasts of  t4 4 using each model are made using data only available through date t. For

the exercise here, the first forecast date is the later of 1970Q1 or the date necessary for

the shortest regression to have 40 observations, and the final forecast date is four quarters

before the end of the sample.

          A useful statistic is the centered rolling root mean forecast error (RMSE). This is

the square root of a weighted moving average of the squared pseudo out-of-sample

forecast error, centered so that the moving average extends seven quarters on either side.9

          Figure 9 presents rolling RMSEs, the rolling RMSEs relative to the rolling RMSE

of the UC-SV model, and the pseudo out-of-sample forecasts for the three unemployment

gap models. Because of the possible nonlinearity in the Phillips curve using the bandpass

gap, for that gap forecasts were computed using both a linear model and a nonparametric

nonlinear forecast (the predicted value is read off the recursively estimated nonparametric

regression curve).

          Five findings are apparent in Figure 9. As is documented in the next section,

these results are robust to using other activity measures and including other variables, so

we spend some time discussing them here.

          1. Consistent with findings elsewhere in the literature, there is considerable

             variation over time in the predictability of inflation. In 2006, the rolling

             RMSEs were near historic lows, but they have recently crept up to levels of

             the early 1990s.


9
    Specifically, following Stock and Watson (2009), the rolling RMSE is computed as
                        t 7                                                t 7

                                 K ( s  t )  s4 4   s4 4|s          K ( s  t ) , where K is the biweight
                                                                       2
rolling RMSE(t) =
                       s t  7                                            s t  7

kernel, K(x) = (15/16)(1 – x2)21(|x|1).


                                                              21
2. The forecasting improvements made by Phillips curve forecasts are episodic,

   and the greatest improvements are evident in downturns. This finding is

   similar to that in Stock and Watson (2009).

3. The recession gap model improves upon the UC-SV model during the

   disinflations of the early 1980s, the early 1990s, and (by a smaller margin)

   during the current recession. The only two periods in which the recession gap

   model does relatively poorly is during 1976-7 and 2004. Both of these

   failures correspond to the unusual periods observed in Figure 1: the increase

   in inflation following the 1973Q4 recession, and the increase in inflation

   during 2004 which (as can be seen in Figure 2) was atypical for this stage of

   the business cycle.

4. The fourth-difference forecasts substantially improve upon the recession gap

   forecasts only during 2004-2005, when the slow decline of unemployment led

   to forecasts of increasing inflation, whereas the recession gap forecasts had

   inflation falling.

5. The nonparametric nonlinear forecasts made using the one-sided bandpass

   gap, which appeared promising based on the analysis of Section III.B, end up

   differing little from the UC-SV forecasts. The linear bandpass gap forecasts

   provide smaller improvements during downturns than the recession gap

   forecasts, and provide essentially no improvements over the UC-SV model

   during the current downturn. The reason for this is that the 1-sided gap

   estimate at the end of the sample heavily weights the current unemployment




                                    22
              rate, so by this measure the unemployment gap has been small (less than two

              percentage points) throughout this recession, see Figure 6(b).



III.E Parametric Dynamic Simulations

       We now turn to the question of whether the unemployment gap model is

quantitatively consistent with the paths of inflation in Figures 1 and 2, given the observed

path in unemployment. To address this question we conduct a dynamic simulation using

the one-quarter ahead regression (6) in which xt is the unemployment recession gap,

using the full-sample estimate of 1 reported in Table 1. The simulation allows  to vary

across episodes by using the estimated value of t at each episode’s NBER peak date.

We conduct the dynamic simulation by computing the value of t for the months over the

recessionary episode plotted in Figure 2, given the path of unemployment.10 Note that,

except for initialization at the NBER peak, no actual values of inflation enter the

simulation.

       The dynamic simulation paths differ by episode both because the unemployment

paths differ and because  varies over time. When  is large, there will be more inertia in

trend inflation so that while a given value of xt has a constant effect on one-quarter

inflation, four-quarter inflation will fall by less than it would were  smaller.

       The dynamic simulation results, along with one standard error confidence bands,

are presented in Figure 10. Two conclusions are evident. First, the predicted paths of

10
  This is equivalent to using a VAR to compute the response of inflation to a sequence of
unemployment shocks chosen to match the episode-specific path of unemployment in
Figure 1, under the restriction that lagged inflation does not enter the unemployment
equation, and using the nonlinear recession gap transformation to link the unemployment
path and the inflation path. The restriction that lagged inflation does not enter the
unemployment equation is not rejected at the 10% level.


                                              23
inflation are similar to actual inflation in the 1960Q2, 1969Q4, 1980Q1, and 1990Q3

episodes. Second, the inflation path also is fairly close to its predicted value during the

2001Q1 episode through the peak of unemployment, but thereafter drifts upwards and

away from the predicted continued disinflation. By 2004Q4, the dynamic simulation

predicts the 4-quarter inflation rate to have fallen since 2001Q1 by 0.6 percentage points,

when in fact it rose by 0.5 percentage points. The standard error band for this episode is

wide, but the increase in inflation falls outside that band.



                                       IV. Other Predictors



This section examines the pseudo out-of-sample forecasting performance of other activity

variables, activity variables augmented by survey expectations, and monetary variables.

In many cases we focus on performance of the median forecast within a category (e.g.

recession gap activity variables) both to streamline presentation and because of the well-

known virtues of forecast pooling.



IV.A Other Activity Variables

       Table 2 summarizes the pseudo out-of-sample forecasting performance of six

activity variables (the unemployment rate, the capacity utilization rate, real GDP, the

index of industrial production, employment, and the Chicago Fed National Activity Index

[CFNAI]), each subject to three gap or changes transformations (recession gaps, one-




                                              24
sided bandpass gaps, and fourth differences).11 Figure 11 plots the rolling RMSEs and

forecasts of the median combined forecast, by gap transformation.

       Table 2 and Figure 11 largely confirm the findings based on the analysis of the

unemployment rate discussed in Section 3.4. The forecasts based on the various activity

variables tend to move together (for a given gap transformation). On average, the

Phillips curve forecasts offer little improvement over the UC-SV benchmark, but they do

offer improvements in recessionary episodes. The exception, again, is 2004, in which all

the activity variable forecasts perform poorly relative to the UC-SV benchmark.



IV.B. Expectations

       The models analyzed so far are variants of backwards-looking Phillips curves.

Although we have interpreted t|t as reflecting expectations (t|t is the optimal long-term

forecast of inflation from the UC-SV model), the empirical models do not explicitly

incorporate forward-looking expectations. Expectations can be incorporated into Phillips

curve forecasts either as model-based expectations (forecasts obtained using a model that

includes a New Keynesian Phillips curve) or by using survey- or market-based

expectations. Here, we consider the effect on the activity-based forecasts of Section 4.1

of adding survey expectations as an additional predictor in (1). Although market-based




11
  GDP, industrial production, employment, and the CFNAI were initially transformed by
taking logarithms. The capacity utilization rate recession gap was computed as the
negative of the deviation of the capacity utilization rate from its maximum value over the
current and previous eleven quarters. The recession gaps for the remaining four series
were computed by first computing a recursive locally detrended series, then setting the
recession gap to be the negative of the deviation of the detrended series from its
maximum value over the current and previous eleven quarters.


                                             25
expectations are an appealing alternative approach, we do not use them here because of

complications introduced by liquidity effects in the TIPS market.

           We consider five real-time survey measures of inflation expectations: the Survey

of Professional Forecasters (SPF) forecasts of GDP inflation 1 year ahead; the SPF

forecast of CPI inflation 1 and 10 years ahead; and the University of Michigan survey

forecast of inflation expectations 1 year ahead and 5-10 years ahead. Because these

series are persistent, we analyze them as expectation gaps, that is, deviations from UC-

SV trend CPI inflation (the SFP GDP inflation forecast is deviated from the GDP

inflation trend).12

           The results, presented as median combination forecasts across the various

expectations measures, are summarized in Table 3. Figure 12 examines forecasts based

on the unemployment recession gap augmented by individual survey forecasts, as well as

the median survey-augmented unemployment recession gap forecast. The results in

Figure 12 are striking and typical. Throughout almost all of the sample, the survey

measures introduce negligible changes to the recession gap forecast.



IV.C. Monetary Aggregates




12
     Using the notation of (1), the regression estimated is  t4 4 – t|t = xt + (  te –  te|t ) +
ete4 , where  te|t is the trend used to detrend the inflation expectation  te . Were the two
trends the same so t|t =  te|t , this regression would simplify to  t4 4 =   te + (1–)t|t + xt
+ ete4 , which is a Mincer-Zarnowitz forecast comparison regression comparing the
survey forecast  te|t and the UC-SV model forecast t|t, augmented with xt. Because  t4 4
is core PCE inflation and the survey detrending uses either CPI or the GDP price index,
the two trends are not the same, but this algebra suggests that the regression can still be
given a Mincer-Zarnowitz forecast combination interpretation.


                                                     26
       Table 4 and Figure 13 summarize the results of pseudo out-of-sample forecasts

based on four monetary aggregates, with four transformations each. Unlike all previous

models, these specifications include lagged values of xt (here, money) as well as current

values; lag lengths were chosen recursively by the Akaike Information Criterion. The

recursive forecasts exhibit instability and have greater RMSEs by decade than the UC-SV

model or the activity-based models. There are no episodes in which the monetary

predictors outperform the UC-SV model. Because the coefficients are estimated to be

small, the median combination forecasts are essentially the UC-SV forecast, with noise

added. As the second part of Table 4 indicates, the qualitative findings are the same for

two-year ahead forecasts of inflation as for one-year ahead forecasts. This negative

assessment and indications of instability are consistent with the studies of monetary

models of inflation at longer horizon by Sargent and Surico (2008) and Benati (2010).

This is not to say that monetary expansions and inflation are unrelated, rather, the

evidence here is that the predictive relationship between money and inflation is weak and

unstable at short to medium horizons.



                                   V. The Current Recession



V.A. Energy and Housing

       Before turning to the implications of this analysis for the current recession, we

briefly consider the implications of energy and housing prices for core PCE inflation over

the past several years.




                                             27
       Oil price pass-through. As discussed in the introduction, the volatility of oil

prices since 2007 is an important reason that we have focused on core inflation in this

paper. The question remains, however, about the extent to which energy price increases

are passed through to core inflation. Hooker (2002) provides evidence that oil price

increases led to increases in core inflation during the 1970s, but that after 1981 the extent

of pass-through declined significantly. Hooker (2002) focused on the oil coefficients in

triangle-type Phillips curve specifications, with a full-sample estimate of the NAIRU.

       We reexamine the extent of energy price pass-through using a simpler

specification than Hooker (2003) which does not involve a NAIRU assumption. Table 5

reports the cumulative coefficients in a distributed lag regression of quarterly inflation in

headline PCE (panel A) and core PCE (panel B) on current and eight quarterly lagged

values of PCE energy inflation. During the 1970s, the pass-through of energy prices to

headline PCE was approximately twice energy’s share. Unlike Hooker, we find that the

effect of energy prices on headline inflation is twice energy’s share during the 1980s and

early 1990s, although the cumulative pass-through to core is not statistically significant.

During the past 15 years, however, the pass-through of energy to headline inflation has

occurred in the initial quarter and equals energy’s (declining) share, and the dynamic

pass-through to core is precisely estimated to be zero.13 Thus, although the methods and

samples are different, the results in Table 5 largely confirm Hooker’s (2002) conclusion,

although perhaps the reduction in pass-through occurred more gradually through the

1980s and early 1990s than Hooker (2002) estimates. Concerning the current recession,



13
  The dynamic multipliers in the final column of Table 5B imply that the cumulative
effect of energy price changes from 2007Q4 to 2010Q1 on core PCE inflation is a net
reduction of core PCE inflation by 0.02 percentage points (2 basis points).


                                             28
we therefore proceed to focus on core PCE inflation without special concern that the

results are being distorted by energy prices, despite their recent large fluctuations.

       Housing. Housing prices have fallen dramatically and, with a lag, so have the

rents and owner-equivalent rents which enter PCE inflation. This raises the possibility

that the collapse of housing prices, an important feature of this recession, might be

driving measured declines in inflation. Hobijn, Eusepi, and Tambalotti (2010) examined

the extent to which movements in the housing component of core PCE is exceptional

over the past several years. They find that while the housing component has dropped, so

have the other components of core PCE, and the differences between core PCE and core

PCE excluding housing are negligible over 2008 and 2009. We therefore continue to

focus on core PCE, with no special treatment of housing prices.



V.B. Forecasts and Dynamic Simulations

       The dynamic simulation for the current recession is presented in Figure 14. The

dynamic simulation uses the August 2010 SPF forecasted path of unemployment for

quarters 2010Q3-2011Q3. Currently the path of inflation is on the conditional mean of

the dynamic simulation, after initially dropping more sharply than the simulation path

then increasing slightly. Based on the SPF forecasted path of unemployment, by 2011Q3

the 4-quarter rate of core PCE inflation is expected to drop another 0.5 percentage points

from its 2010Q2 value of 1.5%.

       The four-quarter ahead forecasts using the estimated regression (1) and the

unemployment recession gap (or the activity recession gaps) have generally tracked the

downward movement of inflation over this recession, although the forecasts did not




                                             29
match the timing. The sharpest falls in inflation in this recession occurred from 2008Q3

to 2009Q3, and the pseudo out-of-sample forecasts of four-quarter inflation over this

period (made four quarters prior to this decline) missed the decline and forecasted the

decline to occur later because unemployment did not start to rise substantially until

2008Q3.

       The projections based on the dynamic simulation are consistent with direct four-

quarter ahead forecasts using the estimates of (1) reported in the previous sections. The

unemployment recession gap model, both alone and the median expectations-augmented

forecast, forecast a decline in the rate of 4-quarter core PCE inflation of 0.8 percentage

points from 2010Q2-2011Q2. The median forecast over all recession gap activity

variables indicates a somewhat smaller decline, by 0.6 percentage points over this period.

       We stress that there is considerable uncertainty surrounding these point estimates

of further declines in inflation. The standard error bands in Figure 14 are consistent with

declines that are considerably more modest or much more severe. One important source

of uncertainty is how variable trend inflation currently is. For example, according to the

dynamic simulation, if  were to take on a value one standard error below its estimated

value in 2007Q4, then the predicted decline in the rate of 4-quarter PCE inflation from

2010Q2 to 2011Q2 would be 0.9 percentage points instead of 0.5 percentage points. The

decline along the lower confidence band in Figure 14 (which reflects uncertainty in both

 and ) from 2010Q2 to 2011Q2 is steeper, 1.2 percentage points. The standard error

bands in Figure 14 understate the uncertainty because they only incorporate estimation

uncertainty and ignore future shock uncertainty.




                                             30
        The range of these declines in inflation is similar to that reported in Fuhrer and

Olivei (2010) based on the entirely different and complementary approach of solving for

model-based expectations with inflation determined by a New Keynesian Phillips Curve.



                                   VI. Discussion and Conclusion



        We have suggested that the empirical regularity of Figure 2 – that U.S. recessions

are associated with declines in inflation – can be captured by a simple model in which the

deviation of core inflation from a long-run (statistical) trend is predicted by a new

measure, the unemployment recession gap. Regressions using this gap measure appear to

be stable based on standard statistical tests, although we point this out with trepidation

because the history of the inflation forecasting literature is one of apparently stable

relationships falling apart upon publication. As the dynamic simulations in Figures 9 and

13 show, this model does a reasonable job of matching inflation dynamics given only the

path of unemployment over a recessionary episode.

        The results in this paper need to be understood in the context of three important

sources of uncertainty. The first pertains to uncertainty within our econometric model.

In that model, the long-term movement of inflation in response to a given short-term

decline in activity depends on the volatility of the trend component of inflation: if the

trend is resilient then inflation reverts to the trend, but if the trend is volatile then the

trend tracks inflation. Both regimes are present in the record over the past 50 years. The

volatility of trend inflation is currently at historically low levels, although at the very end




                                                31
of the sample it is inching up. An increase in that volatility, holding constant the

volatility of the transitory component, would make the inflation path in Figure 14 steeper.

       Second, making projections in the current recession requires extrapolating to rates

of inflation at the edge of or outside the range of the data. There are some hints that the

slope parameter 4 might be smaller in absolute value at low levels of inflation (Figure 8),

but these hints are not robustly confirmed by statistical tests. Moreover, inflation

dynamics could change in the region in which conventional monetary policy becomes

ineffective and the parametric model could be ill-equipped to handle this.

       Third, there is a key episode that does not match the historical regularity, the

increase in inflation in late 2003 through 2004. This increase occurred despite the

“jobless recovery” in which the unemployment rate lingered for quarters near its peak.

Because the unemployment rate remained high, the recession gap model predicted falling

inflation over 2004 when in fact the four-quarter rate of inflation increased by 0.7

percentage points from 1.5% in 2003Q4 to 2.2% in 2004Q4. As late as August 2003, the

FOMC minutes record concern about continuing declines in inflation.14 There are two

leading explanations for this increase. The first is that the increase stemmed from special


14
   “Committee members generally perceived the upside and downside risks to the
attainment of sustainable growth for the next few quarters as roughly equal; however,
they viewed the probability, though minor, of a substantial and unwelcome fall in
inflation as exceeding that of a pickup in inflation from its already low level. On balance,
the Committee believed that the concern about appreciable disinflation was likely to
predominate for the foreseeable future.” FOMC minutes, August 12, 2003. Billi (2009)
argues that, in hindsight, the inflation “scare” of 2003 was overstated: real-time estimates
of core PCE inflation indicated inflation falling through the end of 2003 to under 1% per
year, while the fully revised estimates now available show that core PCE inflation started
to increase in mid-2003 and reached 2% by early 2004. Our interest here is not the
confusion caused by these large data revisions, but the puzzling increase in core inflation
in late 2003 and early 2004 in the fully revised data. Also see Dokko et. al. (2009) for an
analysis of real-time monetary policy during this period.


                                             32
factors and price increases external to the U.S. economy, which in turn passed through to

core inflation. This explanation is the one put forward at contemporaneous FOMC

meetings. According to the minutes from the spring and summer of 2004, the increase in

core inflation during early 2004 was largely attributed to energy costs (which had risen

sharply) and to a depreciation of the dollar.15 The energy price part of this explanation,

however, does not square with the econometric evidence that the pass-through from oil

prices to core was zero on average from 1995 to 2006 (Table 5). Although housing

prices were increasing sharply during 2004, the housing component of PCE did not start

to increase substantially until the end of 2005, well after the unexplained rise in inflation

in 2004.

       The second leading explanation of 2004 is that this was an episode of successful

expectations management by the Fed, in which market participants expected core

inflation to increase (perhaps because of a perceived increase in the Fed’s inflation

target), and this expectation led to an actual increase in inflation. Interestingly, we can

find no allusion to this mechanism in the FOMC minutes from the period. Throughout

this episode ten-year inflationary expectations remained steady, and incorporating

inflationary expectations improves upon the unemployment recession gap forecasts for

these years; however, we are reluctant to read too much into this improvement because

including inflationary expectations produced worse forecasts on average for the decade

and on average over the full sample. At the moment, we are sympathetic to the “special

factors” explanation, in large part because that is the explanation offered by

15
  Dokko et. al. (2009) document that the FOMC projection for 2004 inflation (headline
PCE) in the Monetary Report to Congress at the start of 2004 was 2 percentage points
below realized 2004 inflation, and states that this “miss is partly explained by an
unexpected jump in the price of oil that year” (p. 14).


                                             33
contemporary observers including the FOMC, but ambiguity about this episode remains.

Absent an explanation for the rise in inflation in 2004, we cannot rule out a similar

fortuitous rise in the remaining quarters of the current episode, but neither can we be

confident it will happen again.




                                            34
                                      References



Aron, Janine and John Muellbauer (2010). “New Methods for Forecasting Inflation,

       Applied to the U.S.,” manuscript, Nuffield College Oxford.

Akerlof, George A., William T. Dickens, and George L. Perry (1996). “The

       Macroeconomics of Low Inflation,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity

       1996:1, 1-76.

Atkeson, A. and L.E. Ohanian (2001), “Are Phillips Curves Useful for Forecasting

       Inflation?” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review 25(1):2-11.

Ang, A., G. Bekaert, and M. Wei (2007), “Do Macro Variables, Asset Markets, or

       Surveys Forecast Inflation Better?” Journal of Monetary Economics 54, 1163-

       1212.Ball, Laurence, N. Gregory Mankiw, and David Romer (1988). “The New

       Keynesian Economics and the Output-Inflation Trade-off,” Brookings Papers on

       Economic Activity, 1988:1, pp. 1-65.

Ball, Laurence M. (2009), “Hysteresis in Unemployment: Old and New Evidence.” Ch. 7

       in Understanding Inflation and the Implications for Monetary Policy (2009),

       Jeffrey Fuhrer, Yolanda Kodrzycki, Jane Little, and Giovanni Olivei (eds).

       Cambridge: MIT Press: 361-382.

Barnes, Michelle L. and Giovanni P. Olivei (2003). “Inside and Outside the Bounds:

       Threshold Estimates of the Phillips Curve,” Federal Reserve Bank of Boston New

       England Economic Review, 3-18.

Beaudry, Paul and Gary Koop (1993). “Do Recessions Permanently Change Output?”

       Journal of Monetary Economics 31, 149-163.




                                          35
Benati, Luca (2010), “Long Run Evidence on Money growth and inflation,” ECB DP

       1027.

Bernanke, Ben S. (2003), “An Unwelcome Fall in Inflation?” speech, the Economics

       Roundtable, University of California – San Diego, July 23, 2003, at

       http://www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/speeches/2003/20030723/

Billi, Roberto M. (2009), “Was Monetary Policy Optimal During Past Deflation Scares?”

       Economic Review of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City 2009, 3rd Quarter,

       67-98.

Brayton, Flint, John. M. Roberts, and John C. Williams (1999). “What’s Happened to the

       Phillips Curve?” FEDS Discussion Paper 99-49.

Cogley, Timothy, Giorgio Primiceri, and Thomas J. Sargent (2010). “Inflation-Gap

       Persistence in the U.S.,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 2, 43-69.

Cogley, Timothy and Thomas J. Sargent (2002). “Evolving Post-World War II U.S.

       Inflation Dynamics,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2001, MIT Press,

       Cambridge.

Cogley, Timothy and Thomas J. Sargent (2005). “Drifts and Volatilities: Monetary

       Policies and Outcomes in the Post World War II U.S.” Review of Economic

       Dynamics 8, 262-302.

Cogley, Timothy and Argia Sbordone (2008). “Trend Inflation, Indexation, and Inflation

       Persistence in the New Keynesian Philips Curve.” American Economic Review

       98(5): 2101–2126.




                                          36
Dokko, Jane, Brian Doyle, Michael T. Kiley, Jinill Kim, Shane Sherlund, Jae Sim, and

       Skander van der Heuvel (2009), “Monetary Policy and the Housing Bubble,”

       FEDS 2009-49.

Fuhrer, Jeffrey C. and Giovanni P. Olivei (2010). “The Role of Expectations and Output

       in the Inflation Process: An Empirical Assessment,” Public Policy Brief no. 10-2,

       Federal Reserve Bank of Boston.

Giannone, Domenico, Michele Lenza, Daphne Momferatou, and Luca Onorante (2010),

       “Short-Term Inflation Projections: A Bayesian Vector Autoregressive Approach,”

       manuscript, European Central Bank.

Gordon, Robert J. (1982). “Inflation, Flexible Exchange Rates, and the Natural Rate of

       Unemployment.” in Workers, Jobs and Inflation, Martin N. Baily (ed).

       Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution, 89-158.

Gordon, Robert J. (1990). "U.S. Inflation, Labor's Share, and the Natural Rate of Un-

       employment." In Economics of Wage Determination (Heinz Konig, ed.). Berlin:

       Springer-Verlag.

Gordon, Robert J. (1998). Foundations of the Goldilocks Economy: Supply Shocks and

       the Time-Varying NAIRU,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1998:2, 297-

       333.

Hamilton, James D. (2009). “Causes and Consequences of the Oil Shock of 2007-08,”

       Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2009:1, 215-261.

Hobijn, Bart, Stefano Eusepi, and Andrea Tambalotti (2010). “The Housing Drag on

       Core Inflation.” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Economic Letter 2010-




                                           37
       11, April 5. http://www.frbsf.org/publications/economics/letter/2010/el2010-

       11.html

Hooker, Mark A. (2002). “Are Oil Shocks Inflationary? Asymmetric and Nonlinear

       Specifications versus Changes in Regime,” Journal of Money, Credit, and

       Banking 34(2), 540-561.

Klenow, Peter J. and Oleksiy Kryvtsov (2008). “State-Dependent or Time-Dependent

       Pricing: Does it Matter for Recent U.S. Inflation?” Quarterly Journal of

       Economics 123(3), 863-904.

Levin, Andrew and Jeremy Piger (2004). “Is Inflation Persistence Intrinsic in Industrial

       Economies” ECB Working Paper 334.

Liu, Zheng and Glenn D. Rudebusch (2010), “Inflation: Mind the Gap,” Federal Reserve

       Bank of San Francisco Economic Letter 2010-02.

Meier, André (2010), “Still Minding the Gap – Inflation Dynamics during Episodes of

       Persistent Large Output Gaps,” IMF Working Paper WP/10/189.

Nakamura, Emi and Jón Steinsson (2008). “Five Facts about Prices: A Reevaluation of

       Menu Cost Models,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 123(4), 1415-1464.

Roberts, John M. (2004), “Monetary Policy and Inflation Dynamics,” FEDS Discussion

       Paper 2004-62, Federal Reserve Board.

Sargent, Thomas J. and Paolo Surico (2008), Monetary Policies and Low-Frequency

       Manifestations of the Quantity Theory,” manuscript, NYU.

Staiger, Douglas O., James H. Stock, and Mark W. Watson (2001). “Prices, Wages and

       the U.S. NAIRU in the 1990s,” Ch. 1 in The Roaring Nineties, A. Krueger and R.




                                            38
       Solow (eds.), Russell Sage Foundation/The Century Fund: New York (2001), 3 –

       60.

Stock, J.H., and M.W. Watson (2007), “Why Has U.S. Inflation Become Harder to

       Forecast?” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 39, 3-34.

Stock, J.H., and M.W. Watson (2009), “Phillips Curve Inflation Forecasts,” Ch. 3 in

       Understanding Inflation and the Implications for Monetary Policy (2009), Jeffrey

       Fuhrer, Yolanda Kodrzycki, Jane Little, and Giovanni Olivei (eds). Cambridge:

       MIT Press. (with M.W. Watson): 101-186.

Williams, John (2009), “The Risk of Deflation,” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco

       Economic Letter 2009-12.




                                           39
Table 1. Estimated 1- and 4- quarter ahead forecasting regressions using
unemployment gaps

                                                                                t-test for
                                                                                              QLR stability
                        1959Q2 –           1959Q2 –             1984Q1 –        break in
                                                                                              test P-value
                         2009Q2             1983Q4               2009Q2          1984Q1
  1-quarter ahead            R2                R2                   R2
                        1                1                   1
    Recession gap     −0.10    0.035    −0.11         0.037   −0.07    0.033       0.55              0.96
                      (0.04)            (0.06)                (0.03)
 1-sided bandpass     −0.20    0.028    −0.30         0.045   −0.09    0.010       1.23              0.75
                gap   (0.09)            (0.15)                (0.08)
  Fourth difference   −0.13    0.033    −0.18         0.046   −0.08    0.018       1.12              0.63
                      (0.05)            (0.07)                (0.06)

  4-quarter ahead                R2                    R2               R2
                       4                4                  4
    Recession gap     -0.18    0.077    -0.21         0.084    -0.11   0.066       1.00              0.32
                      (0.06)            (0.07)                (0.07)
 1-sided bandpass     -0.41    0.079    -0.60         0.120    -0.11   0.017      2.76**          0.02
                gap   (0.10)            (0.12)                (0.13)                            (1983Q1)
  Fourth difference   -0.29    0.111    -0.42         0.166    -0.08   0.028      2.66**          0.08
                      (0.09)            (0.11)                (0.07)                            (1983Q1)

Notes: The one-quarter ahead regressions are t+1 – t|t = 1xt + et14 , and the 4-quarter
ahead regressions are  t4 4 – t|t = 4xt + et44 , where xt is a predictor known at date t. The
first six numeric columns present the estimates of 1 (or 4, as appropriate), its standard
error (in parentheses), and the regression R2 for the row predictor and column sample.
Standard errors are heteroskedasticity-robust for one-quarter ahead regressions and are
Newey-West standard errors (6 lags) for four-quarter ahead regressions. The QLR (sup-
Chow) statistic was computed using symmetric 15% trimming. If the QLR test rejects
stability, the estimated break date appears in parentheses. The t-statistic in the second to
last column is significant at the *5% **1% significance level.




                                                 40
      Table 2. Relative root mean squared error of activity-based pseudo out-of-sample
      forecasts of 4-quarter core PCE inflation, relative to UC-SV model.


Series                                1970Q1 –     1970Q1 –    1980Q1 –     1990Q1 –      2000Q1 –
                                       2010.Q1      1979.Q4     1989Q4       1999Q4        2010Q1
UC-SV (RMSE)                          0.97 (158)   1.61 (40)   0.86 (40)     0.45 (40)     0.39 (38)
A. Recession gaps
                   Unemployment       0.98 (158)   1.01 (40)   0.85 (40)     0.79 (40)     1.20 (38)
               Capacity utilization   0.94 (127)    1.03 (9)   0.85 (40)     0.87 (40)     1.22 (38)
                              GDP     0.98 (158)   1.03 (40)   0.82 (40)     0.78 (40)     1.18 (38)
             Industrial production    0.98 (158)   1.01 (40)   0.86 (40)     0.82 (40)     1.24 (38)
                      Employment      0.99 (158)   1.00 (40)   0.83 (40)     0.84 (40)     1.55 (38)
                            CFNAI      1.01 (94)       (0)     1.04 (16)     0.77 (40)     1.24 (38)
           Median recession gap       0.97 (158)   1.01 (40)   0.84 (40)     0.78 (40)     1.22 (38)
B. 1-sided bandpass gaps
                   Unemployment       0.98 (158)   0.98 (40)   0.97 (40)     0.96 (40)     1.08 (38)
               Capacity utilization   0.93 (127)   0.80 (9)    0.93 (40)     1.00 (40)     1.10 (38)
                              GDP     0.95 (158)   0.96 (40)   0.90 (40)     0.87 (40)     1.11 (38)
             Industrial production    0.97 (158)   0.97 (40)   0.91 (40)     0.97 (40)     1.19 (38)
                      Employment      0.99 (158)   0.99 (40)   0.98 (40)     0.95 (40)     1.13 (38)
                            CFNAI     0.90 (126)    0.81 (8)   0.88 (40)     0.92 (40)     1.14 (38)
                   Median BP gap      0.96 (158)   0.97 (40)   0.91 (40)     0.94 (40)     1.11 (38)
C. 4-quarter differences
                   Unemployment       0.96 (158)   0.94 (40)   0.99 (40)     0.99 (40)     1.06 (38)
               Capacity utilization   1.05 (123)   0.94 (5)    1.06 (40)     1.08 (40)     1.16 (38)
                              GDP     0.96 (158)   0.95 (40)   0.97 (40)     0.96 (40)     1.12 (38)
             Industrial production    0.97 (158)   0.96 (40)   0.93 (40)     1.03 (40)     1.19 (38)
                      Employment      0.94 (158)   0.91 (40)   0.90 (40)     0.89 (40)     1.52 (38)
                            CFNAI     1.05 (122)    0.87 (4)   1.02 (40)     1.02 (40)     1.48 (38)
           Median recession gap       0.96 (158)   0.94 (40)   0.97 (40)     0.96 (40)     1.18 (38)
Overall median – all activity         0.95 (158)   0.97 (40)   0.86 (40)     0.86 (40)     1.12 (38)

      Notes: The first line reports the standard deviation of the UC-SV forecast errors over the
      column sample period; the remaining lines report the ratio of the row forecast RMSE to
      the US-SV RMSE over the column sample. Numbers of observations used in the
      computation are given in parentheses. CFNAI denotes the Chicago Fed National Activity
      Index.




                                                   41
         Table 3. Relative root mean squared error of expectations-augmented activity
         pseudo out-of-sample forecasts of 4-quarter core PCE inflation, relative to activity
         variables alone.

Series                                     1970Q1 –      1970Q1 –   1980Q1 –     1990Q1 –     2000Q1 –
                                            2010.Q1       1979.Q4    1989Q4       1999Q4       2010Q1
A. Recession gaps
                       Unemployment        1.06 (113 )        (0)   1.10 (35 )   0.97 (40 )   1.04 (38 )
                    Capacity utilization   1.06 (113 )        (0)   1.10 (35 )   1.00 (40 )   1.02 (38 )
                                   GDP     1.06 (113 )        (0)   1.09 (35 )   0.98 (40 )   1.03 (38 )
                  Industrial production    1.05 (113 )        (0)   1.08 (35 )   0.96 (40 )   1.07 (38 )
                          Employment       1.00 (113 )        (0)   1.03 (35 )   1.01 (40 )   0.96 (38 )
                                 CFNAI      1.01 (94 )        (0)   0.97 (16 )   1.01 (40 )   1.04 (38 )
                 Median recession gap      1.05 (113 )        (0)   1.08 (35 )   0.99 (40 )   1.02 (38 )
B. 1-sided bandpass gaps
                       Unemployment        1.08 (113 )        (0)   1.12 (35 )   1.03 (40 )   0.99 (38 )
                    Capacity utilization   1.08 (113 )        (0)   1.14 (35 )   1.03 (40 )   0.97 (38 )
                                   GDP     1.01 (113 )        (0)   1.03 (35 )   1.02 (40 )   0.96 (38 )
                  Industrial production    1.03 (113 )        (0)   1.07 (35 )   1.05 (40 )   0.94 (38 )
                          Employment       1.06 (113 )        (0)   1.09 (35 )   1.01 (40 )   1.03 (38 )
                                 CFNAI     1.08 (113 )        (0)   1.14 (35 )   1.05 (40 )   0.96 (38 )
                       Median BP gap       1.06 (113 )        (0)   1.10 (35 )   1.04 (40 )   0.98 (38 )
C. 4-quarter differences
                       Unemployment        1.02 (113 )        (0)   1.08 (35 )   0.95 (40 )   0.87 (38 )
                    Capacity utilization   0.96 (113 )        (0)   1.00 (35 )   0.93 (40 )   0.82 (38 )
                                   GDP     1.04 (113 )        (0)   1.11 (35 )   0.97 (40 )   0.86 (38 )
                  Industrial production    1.03 (113 )        (0)   1.09 (35 )   0.97 (40 )   0.88 (38 )
                          Employment       1.02 (113 )        (0)   1.15 (35 )   1.02 (40 )   0.78 (38 )
                                 CFNAI     0.94 (113 )        (0)   1.04 (35 )   0.93 (40 )   0.69 (38 )
          Median 4-quarter difference      1.00 (113 )        (0)   1.06 (35 )   0.97 (40 )   0.85 (38 )
Overall median – all activity              1.04 (113 )        (0)   1.09 (35 )   1.01 (40 )   0.96 (38 )

         Notes: Numbers of observations used in the computation are given in parentheses. The
         inflation expectations are SPF 1 year CPI and GDP price index, SPF 10-year CPI, and
         University of Michigan 1- and 5-10 year inflation surveys.




                                                         42
           Table 4. Relative root mean squared error of money-based pseudo out-of-sample
           forecasts of 4-quarter core PCE inflation, relative to UC-SV model.

Series                                        1970Q1 –           1970Q1 –     1980Q1 –     1990Q1 –     2000Q1 –
                                               2010.Q1            1979.Q4      1989Q4       1999Q4       2010Q1

Forecasts of inflation over next 4 quarters
UCSV (RMSE)                                   0.97 (158 )        1.61 (40 )   0.86 (40 )   0.45 (40 )   0.39 (38 )
              Monetary base (growth rate)     1.10 (155 )        1.04 (37 )   1.16 (40 )   1.12 (40 )   1.61 (38 )
   Monetary base (change in growth rate)      1.12 (154 )        1.01 (36 )   1.10 (40 )   1.18 (40 )   2.33 (38 )
                           M2 (growth rate)   1.09 (155 )        1.07 (37 )   1.15 (40 )   1.08 (40 )   1.16 (38 )
                M2 (change in growth rate)    1.06 (154 )        1.02 (36 )   1.15 (40 )   1.17 (40 )   1.21 (38 )
                           M3 (growth rate)   1.08 (141 )        1.07 (37 )   1.16 (40 )   0.93 (40 )   1.16 (24 )
                M3 (change in growth rate)    1.04 (140 )        1.02 (36 )   1.11 (40 )   1.05 (40 )   1.05 (24 )
                         MZM (growth rate)    1.06 (155 )        1.05 (37 )   1.12 (40 )   1.04 (40 )   0.97 (38 )
              MZM (change in growth rate)     1.20 (154 )        0.99 (36 )   1.77 (40 )   1.08 (40 )   1.11 (38 )
                 Median – 4 quarter ahead     1.05 (155 )        1.03 (37 )   1.10 (40 )   1.05 (40 )   1.04 (38 )
Forecasts of inflation over next 8 quarters
UCSV (RMSE)                                   1.21 (154 )        1.98 (40 )   1.13 (40 )   0.55 (40 )   0.35 (34 )
              Monetary base (growth rate)     1.05 (147 )        0.96 (33 )   1.24 (40 )   1.17 (40 )   1.01 (34 )
   Monetary base (change in growth rate)      1.05 (146 )        0.98 (32 )   1.19 (40 )   1.17 (40 )   1.07 (34 )
                           M2 (growth rate)   1.08 (147 )        0.97 (33 )   1.33 (40 )   1.00 (40 )   1.31 (34 )
                M2 (change in growth rate)    1.05 (146 )        0.98 (32 )   1.21 (40 )   1.12 (40 )   1.02 (34 )
                           M3 (growth rate)   1.04 (137 )        0.95 (33 )   1.29 (40 )   0.83 (40 )   1.50 (24 )
                M3 (change in growth rate)    1.04 (136 )        0.97 (32 )   1.19 (40 )   1.09 (40 )   0.99 (24 )
                         MZM (growth rate)    1.27 (147 )        0.97 (33 )   1.92 (40 )   1.08 (40 )   0.91 (34 )
              MZM (change in growth rate)     1.21 (146 )        0.97 (32 )   1.77 (40 )   1.09 (40 )   0.99 (34 )
                 Median – 8 quarter ahead     1.03 (147 )        0.96 (33 )   1.23 (40 )   1.06 (40 )   1.00 (34 )

           Notes: The first line in each block reports the standard deviation of the UC-SV forecast
           errors over the column sample period; the remaining lines report the ratio of the row
           forecast RMSE to the US-SV RMSE over the column sample. Numbers of observations
           used in the computation are given in parentheses. MZM denotes St. Louis Fed zero-
           maturity money.




                                                            43
  Table 5. Predicted change in PCE inflation resulting from a 1 percentage point
              increase in PCE-Energy inflation, q quarters earlier.

Entries in the first block are cumulative dynamic multipliers estimated over the indicated
                       time period using the distributed lag regression,

                                       8
                              t =     
                                      i 0
                                             i
                                                  PCE  energy
                                                 t i            + errort


                             A. Pass-through to headline PCE

             Q                     Cumulative dynamic multiplier after q quarters
                             1962Q1 – 1982Q4    1983Q1 – 1994Q4       1995Q1 – 2006Q4
              0                 0.075 (.008)       0.058 (.009)          0.048 (.003)
              1                 0.081 (.020)       0.057 (.014)          0.052 (.007)
              2                 0.144 (.025)       0.053 (.020)          0.052 (.011)
              3                 0.169 (.035)       0.064 (.022)          0.053 (.014)
              4                 0.189 (.039)       0.074 (.025)          0.056 (.015)
              5                 0.179 (.041)       0.083 (.030)          0.063 (.017)
              6                 0.213 (.042)       0.096 (.034)          0.065 (.019)
              7                 0.234 (.041)       0.110 (.034)          0.065 (.020)
              8                 0.199 (.045)       0.116 (.036)          0.059 (.022)

   Oil share in PCE (final        8.7%                             5.2%     5.8%
   year of subsample)



                               B. Pass-through to core PCE

             q                     Cumulative dynamic multiplier after q quarters
                             1962Q1 – 1982Q4    1983Q1 – 1994Q4       1995Q1 – 2006Q4
              0                 0.020 (.006)      -0.009 (.010)          0.000 (.004)
              1                 0.034 (.017)      -0.007 (.018)          0.004 (.007)
              2                 0.100 (.030)      -0.014 (.025)          0.003 (.011)
              3                 0.132 (.035)      -0.007 (.028)          0.000 (.014)
              4                 0.153 (.042)       0.009 (.032)          0.002 (.016)
              5                 0.155 (.044)       0.015 (.036)          0.007 (.017)
              6                 0.176 (.043)       0.028 (.040)          0.010 (.020)
              7                 0.199 (.045)       0.040 (.041)          0.007 (.022)
              8                 0.185 (.042)       0.045 (.046)          0.000 (.025)

Notes: Newey-West standard errors are in parentheses.




                                                 44
Figure 1. Unemployment rate (solid line) and 4-quarter rate of core PCE inflation (solid with
circles) during the eight U.S. recessions since 1960 (the 1980 and 1981 recessions are merged). The
series are plotted as deviations from their values at the NBER peak.



                                           45
Figure 2. Unemployment rate (upper lines) and 4-quarter rate of core PCE inflation (lower lines) over six
U.S. recessions from 1960 to 2010, including the mean and  1 standard error bands. The series are plotted as
deviations from their values at the NBER peak, scaled so that the unemployment rate reaches a maximum of 1
at date 1. Color coding is the same as in Figure 2; 1973 is omitted, and the 1980 and 1981 recessions are
merged.




                                                    46
                    (a) core CPI                                         (b) GDP price index




                   (c) PCE-all                                               (d) CPI-all

Figure 3. Unemployment rate (upper lines) and 4-quarter rates of inflation (lower lines) over six U.S.
recessions from 1960 to 2010, including the mean and  1 standard error bands, for four price indexes.
Construction and color coding is the same as in Figure 2.




                                                    47
                              (a) standard deviation of the change in trend (,t)




                            (b) standard deviation of transitory component (,t)




                                     (c) Moving average coefficient (t)


Figure 4. UCSV model of core PCE inflation: estimated time-varying standard deviations of the trend and
transitory components (panels (a) and (b)) and the implied time-varying coefficient of the moving average
coefficient.



                                                     48
Figure 5. The estimated trend in core PCE (t|t) and the 5-year ahead median inflation forecast from the
Survey of Professional Forecasters.




                                                     49
                                       (a) Civilian unemployment rate




                               (b) Derived unemployment activity measures

Figure 6. The unemployment rate (panel (a)) and three activity measures based on the unemployment rate
(panel (b)): the one-sided bandpass gap, the 4-quarter difference, and the 12-quarter unemployment recession
gap.


                                                    50
                            (a) unemployment gap: 1-sided bandpass filtered gap




                      (b) unemployment gap: 12-quarter unemployment recession gap

Figure 7. Scatterplot of UCSV 4-quarter ahead forecast error (  t4 4 – t|t) vs. real-time (one-sided)
unemployment gaps, for two measures of the gap: (a) 1-sided bandpass filtered, and (b) 12-quarter recession
gap. Kernel nonparametric regression functions and one standard error bands (dashed) are shown in blue.
Parametric regression functions are in red: in panel (a), a Barnes-Olivei (2003)-type piecewise linear
regression function, in panel (b), a linear regression function.




                                                    51
Figure 8. Nonparametric regression (blue solid) and 95% confidence bands (blue dashed) of the slope
coefficient 4 as a function of the value of trend inflation at date t (t|t), using the unemployment recession gap.
Red solid line is the parametric estimate (-0.18, SE = 0.06). Parametric and nonparametric regressions are
full-sample.




                                                       52
Figure 9. Pseudo out-of-sample forecasts of 4-quarter core PCE inflation using various unemployment gaps:
rolling root mean squared errors (top panel), rolling RMSEs relative to the UCSV model (middle panel), and
forecasts (bottom panel). Forecasts are 1-sided bandpass gap, nonlinear 1-sided bandpass gap, 4-quarter
change in unemployment, and recession gap. In the first panel, actual values of  t4 4 - t|t are in black.




                                                    53
Figure 10. Dynamic simulations of 4-quarter core PCE inflation in five downturns, computed using the
unemployment recession gap model. All series are plotted as percentage point deviations from their values at
the NBER peak. Dashes are predicted values given the unemployment path, dots are 90% confidence bands.




                                                    54
Figure 11. Pseudo out-of-sample forecasts of 4-quarter core PCE inflation using six activity measures
(unemployment rate, capacity utilization, GDP, industrial production, employment, and the CFNAI). Panels
are rolling root mean squared errors (top), rolling RMSEs relative to the UCSV model (middle), and recursive
forecasts (bottom). Forecasts are median recession gap, median 1-sided bandpass gap, median 4-quarter
difference, and the unemployment recession gap, where the median forecasts are across the six activity
variables.




                                                    55
Figure 12. Pseudo out-of-sample forecasts of 4-quarter core PCE inflation using the unemployment recession
gap augmented with various survey measures of inflation expectations. Panels are rolling root mean squared
errors (top), rolling RMSEs relative to the UCSV model (middle), and recursive forecasts (bottom). Forecasts
are the unemployment recession gap, not augmented, and augmented with: the SPF 10-year core CPI
forecast, the SPF 1-your GDP price index forecast, and the median forecast using the five expectations
measures in Table 3.




                                                    56
Figure 13. Pseudo out-of-sample forecasting of 4-quarter core PCE inflation using monetary variables.
Forecasts are the unemployment recession gap (alone), and the forecast using the growth rate of M3 (alone),
and the median forecast based on the eight measures of money in Table 4. Panels are rolling root mean
squared errors (top), rolling RMSEs relative to the UCSV model (middle), and recursive forecasts (bottom).




                                                    57
Figure 14. Dynamic simulation of 4-quarter core PCE inflation from 2007Q4 to 2011Q3 computed using the
unemployment recession gap model. Unemployment values from 2010Q3 through 2011Q3 are SPF median
forecasts. All series are plotted as percentage point deviations from their values at the NBER peak. Dashes
are mean predicted values, dots are 90% confidence bands.




                                                    58
                                        Appendix A




              Annual percentage price change of disaggregate (% at annual rate)



Figure A-1. Empirical cumulative distributions of annual percentage price changes of 233
components of PCE inflation, at five years between 1990 and 2007. The vertical lines are
monthly PCE (all) inflation rates for that month, for the date corresponding to the
cumulative distributions. Discontinuities at zero indicate a “pile-up” of zero price
changes. The infrequency of pile-ups at zero and the smooth shifting of the cdf through
zero are consistent with the micro (individual-good) evidence in Nakamura and Steinsson
(2008) and Klenow and Kryvtsov (2008) that price declines are commonplace. Data
source: BEA Personal Income Web site.




                                            59
