NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DO PEOPLE SEEK TO MAXIMIZE HAPPINESS? EVIDENCE FROM NEW SURVEYS
Daniel J. Benjamin
Ori Heffetz
Miles S. Kimball
Alex Rees-Jones
Working Paper 16489
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16489

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2010
We are extremely grateful to Dr. Robert Rees-Jones and his office staff for generously allowing us
to survey their patients and to Cornell‘s Survey Research Institute for allowing us to put questions
in the 2009 Cornell National Social Survey. We thank Gregory Besharov, John Ham, Benjamin Ho,
Erzo F. P. Luttmer, Michael McBride, Ted O‘Donoghue, Matthew Rabin, Antonio Rangel, and Robert
J. Willis for especially valuable early comments and suggestions. We are grateful to participants at
the CSIP Workshop on Happiness and the Economy held at the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco,
participants at the Cornell Behavioral/Experimental Lab Meetings, and seminar audiences at Cornell
University, Deakin University, Syracuse University, NBER, the Stanford Institute for Theoretical Economics
(SITE), and Florida State University for helpful comments. We thank Eric Bastine, J.R. Cho, Kristen
Cooper, Isabel Fay, John Farragut, Geoffrey Fisher, Sean Garborg, Arjun Gokhale, Jesse Gould, Kailash
Gupta, Han Jiang, Justin Kang, June Kim, Nathan McMahon, Elliot Mandell, Cameron McConkey,
Greg Muenzen, Desmond Ong, Mihir Patel, John Schemitsch, Brian Scott, Abhishek Shah, James
Sherman, Dennis Shiraev, Elizabeth Traux, Charles Whittaker, Brehnen Wong, Meng Xue, and Muxin
Yu for their research assistance. We thank the National Institute on Aging (grant P01-AG026571/01)
for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Daniel J. Benjamin, Ori Heffetz, Miles S. Kimball, and Alex Rees-Jones. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Do People Seek to Maximize Happiness? Evidence from New Surveys
Daniel J. Benjamin, Ori Heffetz, Miles S. Kimball, and Alex Rees-Jones
NBER Working Paper No. 16489
October 2010, Revised April 2011
JEL No. D03,D60
ABSTRACT
Are subjective well-being (SWB) measures a good empirical proxy for utility? We evaluate one necessary
assumption: that people’s preferences coincide with what they predict will maximize their SWB. Our
method is to present survey respondents with hypothetical scenarios and elicit both choice and predicted
SWB rankings of two alternatives. While choice and predicted SWB rankings usually coincide, we
find systematic reversals. Furthermore, we identify factors—such as predicted sense of purpose, control
over one‘s life, family happiness, and social status—that help explain choice controlling for predicted
SWB. We explore how our findings vary with the SWB measure and the choice situation.
Daniel J. Benjamin
480 Uris Hall
Economics Department
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14853
and NBER
daniel.benjamin@gmail.com
Ori Heffetz
324 Sage Hall
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14853
oh33@cornell.edu

An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w16489

Miles S. Kimball
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
and NBER
mkimball@umich.edu
Alex Rees-Jones
Economics Department
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14853
arr34@cornell.edu

All things considered, how satisfied are you with your life as a whole these days?
Taken all together, how would you say things are these days—would you say that you are
very happy, pretty happy, or not too happy?
Much of the time during the past week, you felt you were happy. Would you say yes or no?

1

Economists increasingly use survey-based measures of subjective well-being (SWB) as
an empirical proxy for utility. In some applications, SWB data are used for conducting welfare
evaluations that are difficult to conduct with standard revealed preference methods. Examples
include measuring the negative externality from neighbors‘ higher earnings (Luttmer, 2005),
individuals‘ tradeoff between inflation and unemployment (DiTella, MacCulloch, and Oswald,
2003), and the effect of health status on the marginal utility of consumption (Finkelstein,
Luttmer, and Notowidigdo, 2008). In order for such SWB-based evaluations to assess welfare as
conceived in the standard economic approach, a necessary assumption is that an agent‘s
preferences over alternatives and her measured SWB under each alternative yield identical
rankings of the alternatives. This paper provides evidence for evaluating that assumption. Put
differently but equivalently, the goal of this paper is to assess whether individuals seek to
maximize SWB (as commonly measured).
In pursuing that goal, this paper also empirically addresses two opposing theoretical
views regarding the relationship between SWB and utility. The first, reflected at least implicitly
in a large number of papers (e.g., Gruber and Mullainathan, 2005; Frey, Luechinger, and Stutzer,
2008; Welsch, 2009), is that SWB data represent idealized revealed-preference utility in the
sense of what individuals would choose if they were well-informed about the consequences of
their choices for SWB. The second view, explicitly laid out in Kimball and Willis (2006) and
Becker and Rayo (2008), is that even well-informed agents will be willing to trade off SWB for
other things they care about, making SWB and utility distinct.2 This paper assesses these two
1

The first of these three questions is from the World Values Survey (WVS); similar questions appear in the EuroBarometer Survey, the European Social Survey, the German Socioeconomic Panel (G-SOEP), and the Japanese Life
in Nation survey. The second question is from the U.S. General Social Survey (GSS); similar questions appear in the
Euro-Barometer survey, the National Survey of Families and Households (NSFH), and the WVS. The third question
is from the University of Michigan’s Survey of Consumers; similar questions appear in the Center of Epidemiologic
Studies Depression Scale (CES-D), the Health and Retirement Study (HRS), and the Gallup-Healthways Well-Being
Index (GHWBI).
2
For other elaborations of this view, see also Kimball, Levy, Ohtake and Tsutsui (2006), Tsutsui, Kimball, and
Ohtake (2010), and Kimball, Nunn and Silverman (2010).

2

views empirically by measuring the concordance between choices and what individuals think
will maximize their SWB.3
We pose a variety of hypothetical decision scenarios to three respondent populations: a
convenience sample of 1,066 adults, a representative sample of 1,000 adult Americans, and 633
students. Each scenario has two alternatives. For example, one scenario describes a choice
between a job that pays less but allows more sleep versus a job with higher pay and less sleep.
We ask respondents which alternative they would choose. We also ask them under which
alternative they expect greater SWB; we assess this ―predicted SWB‖ using measures based on
each of the three commonly-used SWB questions posed in the epigraph above. Importantly,
since people often mispredict the happiness consequences of their choices (e.g., Gilbert, 2006),
we compare an individual’s choices with her ex ante beliefs regarding her choices’ effects on
SWB.4
We have two main results. First, we find that overall, respondents‘ SWB predictions are a
powerful predictor of their choices. On average, predicted SWB and choice coincide in our data
83 percent of the time. We find that the strength of this relationship varies across choice
situations, subject populations, survey methods, questionnaire structure variations, and measures
of SWB, with coincidence ranging from well below 50 percent to above 95 percent.
Our second main result is that discrepancies between choice and predicted SWB rankings
are systematic. Moreover, we can identify other, non-SWB factors that help explain respondents‘
choices. In some surveys, in addition to measuring participants‘ choices and predicted SWB, we
also ask participants to predict how each alternative would affect particular aspects of life other
than SWB. The aspects that systematically contribute most to explaining choice, controlling for
SWB, are sense of purpose, control over life, family happiness, and social status. At the same
time, and in line with our first main result above, when we examine how well SWB compares
with the other factors we measure, we find that across our scenarios, populations, and methods,
3

Some researchers adopt yet a third view, the philosophical position that happiness per se is the appropriate
maximand for a policymaker (e.g., Bentham, 1789; Layard, 2005; Bronsteen, Buccafusco, and Masur, forthcoming).
See Bernheim (2009) for a categorization and discussion of alternative philosophical approaches to welfare
economics. Throughout this paper, we adopt the standard economic perspective (common to the two views
mentioned in the text) that the appropriate maximand for welfare analysis is an individual’s preferences. However,
the value of our results does not hinge on this perspective. Even if one believes that happiness is the appropriate
maximand, one would like to know under what circumstances people choose to maximize it on their own, and under
what circumstances a policymaker would have to intervene in order to maximize it.
4
In the terminology of Kahneman, Wakker, and Sarin (1997), we compare ―decision utility‖ (what people choose)
with ―predicted utility‖ (what people predict will make them happier).

3

SWB is by far the single best predictor of choice.
These results provide a nuanced answer to our motivating question. People do not
exclusively seek to maximize SWB (as operationalized by common SWB measures), yet SWB
does seem to be a uniquely important argument in the utility function. Furthermore, as discussed
shortly, the choice-SWB relationship varies systematically with scenario and SWB measure.
We use a variety of survey versions and empirical approaches in order to test the
robustness of our main results to alternative interpretations. For example, while most of our data
are gathered by eliciting both choice and predicted SWB rankings from each respondent, in some
of our survey variations we elicit the two rankings far apart in the survey, or we elicit only
choice ranking from some participants and only SWB ranking from others. To take another
example, we assess the impact of measurement error by administering the same survey twice (at
two separate times) to some of our respondents. While these different approaches affect our point
estimates and hence the relative importance of our two main results, both results appear to be
robust.
As steps toward providing practical, measure-specific and situation-specific guidance to
empirical researchers as to when the assumption that people try to maximize predicted SWB is a
better or worse approximation, we analyze how our results differ across SWB measures and
across scenarios. Comparing SWB measures, we find that a ―life satisfaction‖ measure (modeled
after the first question in the epigraph) is a better predictor of choice than either of two
―happiness‖ measures (modeled after the second and third questions in the epigraph) which
perform similarly to each other. Comparing scenarios, we find that in scenarios constructed to
resemble what our student respondents judge as representative of important decisions in their
lives, predicted SWB coincides least often with choice, and other factors add relatively more
explanatory power. This suggests that caution is especially warranted in drawing welfare
conclusions from SWB data in such situations. Importantly, we also find that in scenarios where
one alternative offers more money, respondents are systematically more likely to choose the
money alternative than they are likely to predict it will yield higher SWB. This suggests that
survey-based SWB measures may understate the utility benefits of higher income.
Our work is related to a literature in philosophy that poses thought experiments in
hypothetical scenarios in order to demonstrate that people‘s preferences encompass more than
their own happiness. That literature focuses on extreme situations such as being hooked up to a

4

machine that guarantees happiness.5 In contrast, by focusing on realistic choice situations rather
than on extreme ones, and by focusing on commonly-used SWB measures rather than on the
concept of happiness, we seek to assess to what extent measured happiness is a good proxy for
preferences in empirically-relevant situations.6 As far as we are aware, the work whose
methodology is most similar to ours is one of the experiments in Tversky and Griffin (1991), but
their research question is different.7
The paper is organized as follows. Section I discusses the survey design and subject
populations. Section II asks whether participants choose the alternative in our decision scenarios
that they predict will generate greater SWB. Section III asks whether aspects of life other than
SWB help predict choice, controlling for SWB, and compares the relative predictive power of
the factors that matter for choice. Section IV presents robustness analyses. Section V discusses
additional results. Section VI concludes, and discusses other possible applications of our
methodology. Finally, the Appendix lists our decision scenarios, and the Web Appendix provides
a chronology of all pilots; details information on all survey instruments; describes all of our
robustness analyses and reports all the resulting tables; and reports an extensive set of additional
analyses and results.

5

In what is perhaps the most famous thought experiment, a reader is asked to introspect whether he or she would
choose to be hooked up to an ―experience machine‖ that would guarantee complete happiness for the rest of life,
without awareness that the experience is not real (Nozick, 1974, pp.42-45). It is argued that if a reader would refuse
the machine, he or she must not care exclusively about happiness. Less fancifully, extreme examples such as
sacrificing one’s life for a cause one believes in may also suggest that happiness is not the only maximand.
6
Like us, Becker and Rayo (2008) propose empirical tests of whether things other than happiness matter for
preferences in empirically-relevant choice situations. Relatedly, Truglia (2010) tests empirically whether the utility
function inferred from consumption choices is distinguishable from the estimated happiness function over
consumption. In contrast to our approach, where we measure individuals’ predictions about SWB, these alternative
tests rely on ex post measured happiness. Hence these tests assume that people correctly predict the happiness
consequences of their choices, while our tests do not. However, we still interpret individuals’ choices as revealing
their ―true preferences‖—i.e. their assessment of their welfare—given their (potentially mistaken) beliefs about the
consequences of their choices. This interpretation may be unjustified in situations where, e.g., due to social or moral
pressure, choices do not reveal ―true preferences‖ (see Koszegi and Rabin, 2008). To the extent that the decision
scenarios we study involve such situations, our finding that people sometimes make choices that do not maximize
predicted SWB may overstate the discrepancy between ―true preferences‖ (or welfare) and SWB. However, our
finding that people often choose an option that generates higher income despite predicting lower SWB for that
option leans against this view; social or moral pressure would probably dictate choosing the lower-income option.
7
In a between-subjects experiment with 66 undergraduates, Tversky and Griffin‘s participants were presented with a
hypothetical choice between a job with a higher salary where co-workers earn even more versus a job with a lower
salary where co-workers earn even less. Consistent with what we find in a similar choice problem, Tversky and
Griffin find that participants are more likely to choose the higher absolute salary but say they would be happier with
the higher relative salary. Tversky and Griffin interpret the result as supporting their theory that payoff levels are
weighted more heavily in choice, while contrasts between payoffs and a reference point are weighted more heavily
in SWB judgments.

5

I. Survey Design
While our main evidence is based on 29 different survey-versions, all versions share a
similar underlying structure. Respondents are presented with a sequence of hypothetical
scenarios, and in each they face a choice between two options. To illustrate, our ‗Scenario 1‘
highlights a tradeoff between sleep and income. Followed by its SWB and choice questions, it
appears on one of our questionnaires as follows:
Say you have to decide between two new jobs. The jobs are exactly the same in almost every way,
but have different work hours and pay different amounts.
Option 1: A job paying $80,000 per year. The hours for this job are reasonable, and you would be
able to get about 7.5 hours of sleep on the average work night.
Option 2: A job paying $140,000 per year. However, this job requires you to go to work at unusual
hours, and you would only be able to sleep around 6 hours on the average work night.
Between these two options, taking all things together, which do you think would give you a
happier life as a whole?
Option 1:
Option 2:
Sleep more but earn less
Sleep less but earn more
definitely
probably
possibly
possibly
probably
definitely
happier
happier
happier
happier
happier
happier
X
X
X
X
X
X
Please circle one X in the line above
If you were limited to these two options, which do you think you would choose?
Option 1:
Sleep more but earn less
definitely
choose
X

probably
choose
X

Option 2:
Sleep less but earn more
possibly
choose

possibly
choose

X
X
Please circle one X in the line above

probably
choose

definitely
choose

X

X

In within-subject questionnaires, respondents are asked both the SWB question and the
choice question above. In between-subjects questionnaires, respondents are initially or
exclusively asked only one of the two questions.
I.A. Populations and Studies

6

We conducted surveys among 2,699 respondents from three populations: 1,066 patients
at a doctor‘s waiting room in Denver who voluntarily filled out our questionnaires while waiting
for their appointment; 1,000 adults who participated by telephone in the 2009 Cornell National
Social Survey (CNSS) and form a nationally representative sample;8 and 633 Cornell students
who were recruited on campus and participated for pay or for course credit.9 The Denver and
Cornell studies include both within-subject and between-subjects survey variants, while the
CNSS study is exclusively within-subject.10
Table 1 summarizes the design details of these studies. It lists each study‘s respondent
population, sample size, scenarios used (see I.B below), types of questions asked (see I.C below),
and other details such as response scales, scenario order, and question order.11 The rest of this
section explains the details summarized in the table.
I.B. Scenarios
Our full set of 13 scenarios is given in the Appendix, starting with Scenario 1 (―sleep
versus income‖) from the example above. Referring to scenarios by their scenario number (1
through 13), table 1 reports which scenarios are used in which studies, and in what order they
appear on different questionnaires. As detailed in the Appendix, some scenarios are asked in
different variations (e.g. different wording, different quantities of money/sleep/commute time,
etc.) and some scenarios are tailored to different respondent populations (e.g., while we ask
students about school, we ask older respondents about work). In constructing the scenarios, we
were guided by four considerations.
First, we chose scenarios that highlight tradeoffs between options that the literature
suggests might be important determinants of SWB. Hence, respondents face choices between
jobs and housing options that are more attractive financially versus ones that allow for: in

8

The CNSS is an annual survey conducted by Cornell University’s Survey Research Institute. For details:
https://sri.cornell.edu/SRI/cnss.cfm.
9
We conducted additional, smaller, studies among another 924 participants. Briefly, they included a pilot of the
Cornell surveys with University of Chicago Students (102 respondents), a survey of Cornell students eliciting
important decisions they face (171 respondents), as well as two surveys among the Denver sample (429 respondents)
and a survey among Cornell students (222 respondents) that measured willingness-to-pay for greater SWB, among
other things not related to this paper. For additional details, see the Web Appendix.
10
In our Cornell between-subjects surveys, we use a design that allows us to also elicit within-subject data from our
respondents, as described in section III.
11
The median age in our Denver, CNSS, and Cornell samples is, respectively, 47, 49, and 21; the share of female
respondents is 76, 53, and 60 percent. For summary statistics, see Web Appendix table A3.

7

Scenario 1, more sleep (Kahneman et al., 2004; Kelly, 2004); in Scenario 12, a shorter commute
(Stutzer and Frey, 2008); in 13, being around friends (Kahneman et al., 2004); and in 3, making
more money relative to others (Luttmer, 2005; see Heffetz and Frank, forthcoming, for a survey).
Second, since some of us were initially unsure we would find any divergences between
predicted choice and SWB, in our earlier surveys we focused on choice situations where one‘s
SWB may not be the only consideration. Hence, in Scenario 4 respondents choose between a
career path that promises an ―easier‖ life with fewer sacrifices versus one that promises
posthumous impact and fame, and in Scenarios 2 and 11 they choose between a more convenient
or ―fun‖ option versus an option that might be considered ―the right thing to do.‖
Third, once we found divergences between predicted SWB and choice, in our later
surveys (the Cornell studies) we wanted to assess the magnitude of these divergences in
scenarios that are representative of important decisions faced by our respondent population. For
this purpose we asked a sample of students to list the three top decisions they made in the last
day, the last month, the last two years, and in their whole lives.12 Naturally, decisions that were
frequently mentioned by respondents revolved around studying, working, socializing and
sleeping. Hence, in the resulting Scenarios 7-10, individuals have to choose between socializing
and fun versus sleep and schoolwork; traveling home for Thanksgiving versus saving the airfare
money; attending a more fun and social college versus a highly selective one; and following
one‘s passion versus pursuing a more practical career path. To these scenarios we added
Scenario 6, where respondents choose between giving up two hours a week versus paying a
weekly sum of money. With this relatively pedestrian scenario we also hoped to get an insight
into our subjects‘ time-versus-money tradeoff.
Fourth, as an informal check on our methods, we wanted to have one falsification-test
scenario where we expected a respondent‘s choice and SWB ratings to coincide. For this
purpose, we added Scenario 5, in which respondents face a choice between two food items
(apple versus orange) that are offered for free and for immediate consumption. Since we
carefully attempted to avoid any non-SWB differences between the options, we hypothesized
that in this scenario, predicted SWB would most strongly predict choice. (Notice that this
scenario has the additional attraction of being similar to prevalent decisions in almost everyone‘s
12

The sample included 102 University of Chicago students; results were subsequently supported by surveying
another 171 Cornell students. See the Web Appendix for full details (including the classification of responses by
―decision type‖).

8

life, which is our third consideration above.)
I.C. Main Questions
(a) Choice question: In all studies, for each scenario, the choice question is presented as in our
example above. In our analysis, we convert the horizontal six-point response scale into an
intensity-of-choice variable, ranging from 1 to 6, or into a binary choice variable (―choose
Option 1‖ versus ―choose Option 2‖).13 We view answers to this question as measures of
preference, and the binary variable as a measure of (hypothetical) pairwise-choice.
(b) SWB question: While the language in the choice question is always kept the same, we vary
the SWB question across questionnaire versions in order to examine how choice relates to
several different, common SWB measures. In our Denver within-subject study we ask three
different versions of the SWB question, modeled after what we view as three ―families‖ of SWB
questions that are commonly-used in the literature (see examples in the epigraph):
(i) life satisfaction: ―Between these two options, which do you think would make you
more satisfied with life, all things considered?‖;
(ii) happiness with life as a whole: ―Between these two options, taking all things
together, which do you think would give you a happier life as a whole?‖; and
(iii) felt happiness: ―Between these two options, during a typical week, which do you
think would make you feel happier?‖14
Since our between-subject tests have less statistical power than our within-subject tests, we
ask only version (i) in our Denver between-subject surveys. In the CNSS study, where we were
limited to one version of the SWB question due to design constraints, we ask only version (ii).
As with the choice question, in the Denver study there are six possible answers (see the example
13

Responses in the CNSS study are elicited as a binary choice rather than as a six-point scale, because in telephone
interviews the binary format is both briefer for interviewers to convey and easier for respondents to understand.
14
A fourth family of SWB questions, notably seen in the Gallup World Poll and Pew Global Attitudes surveys, and
more recently on the HRS and its sister studies in Europe, asks respondents to rank their lives on an objective scale
without using happiness or satisfaction language. For example, the Gallup World Poll asks: ―Please imagine a
ladder/mountain with steps numbered from zero at the bottom to ten at the top. Suppose we say that the top of the
ladder/mountain represents the best possible life for you and the bottom of the ladder/mountain represents the worst
possible life for you. If the top step is 10 and the bottom step is 0, on which step of the ladder/mountain do you feel
you personally stand at the present time?‖ This family of SWB questions is used when difficulties in translation
make standard SWB questions unreliable. We did not include this type of measure in our experimental surveys, but
consider studying ladder/mountain measures with the tools developed here a promising topic for further research.

9

response-scales above) which we convert into either a six-point variable or a binary pairwiseSWB-ranking variable; in the CNSS study, response is binary.
Finally, as described shortly, in our Cornell studies we ask respondents about twelve
different aspects of life, of which (one‘s own) happiness is only one. In that study we use
versions of (ii) and (iii) that are modified to remain meaningful, with fixed wording, across
aspects. The modified (ii) and (iii) result in these two new versions:
(iv) own happiness with life as a whole: ―Between these two options, taking all things
together, which option do you think would make your life as a whole better in
terms of … [your own happiness]‖; and
(v) immediately-felt own happiness: ―Between these two options, in the few minutes
immediately after making the choice, which option do you think would make
you feel better in terms of … [your own happiness].‖
The modified response scale now includes a middle ―no difference‖ response, and has seven
possible answers (Option 1 definitely better; Option 1 probably better; Option 1 possibly better;
no difference; Option 2 possibly better, etc.). Respondents are allowed to indicate ―no
difference‖ for aspects of life that, in a given scenario, they judge irrelevant. We ask both (iv)
and (v) in the Cornell within-subject surveys, and only (iv) in the Cornell between-subjects
surveys.
(c) Questions about meta-choice and about other aspects of life: For completeness, we
briefly mention here that some of our surveys contain the following additional questions. First, in
all questionnaires of the Denver and Cornell within-subject studies, the choice question is
followed by what we refer to as a meta-choice question: ―If you were limited to these two
options, which would you want yourself to choose?‖ Second, as mentioned above, the SWB
question in all Cornell studies is modified to elicit ratings of the two scenario options in terms of
―own happiness‖ as well as eleven additional aspects of life. For example, in versions (iv) and (v)
of the SWB question (see language above), [your own happiness] may be followed by [your
family‘s happiness], [your health], [your romantic life], etc.15 We discuss these additional

15

In some questionnaire versions, we separate ―own happiness‖ from the other eleven aspects, and ask respondents
first only about own happiness in each scenario, and then, re-presenting the scenarios, we ask about the other
aspects. In these versions, we refer to the question on own happiness as an ―isolated‖ measure of SWB (see table 1).

10

questions in sections III and IV, where we analyze the data they yield.

II. Do People Respond to the Choice and SWB Questions in the Same Way?
In this section we look at respondents’ ranking of Option 1 versus Option 2 in terms of
hypothetical choice compared with their ranking of the options in terms of predicted SWB.
Viewing responses to the choice and the SWB questions as binary variables, we ask: Do
respondents answer the two questions as if they were answering the same question, or do they
answer them systematically differently? (We postpone analyzing responses as multi-point
variables to section III.) Our analysis provides a first test of the null hypothesis that individuals
seek to maximize SWB.
To answer our question, table 2 reports the distribution of binary responses to our surveys‘
choice and SWB questions by study and scenario, along with p-value statistics from equality-ofproportions tests. The table pools responses across SWB question variants (see I.C(b) and table 1
above); we discuss results by specific SWB measure below. The rest of this section interprets the
figures reported in the table.16
II.A. Within-Subject Analysis
We start with table 2‘s leftmost column, which reports Scenario 1 figures from the
Denver within-subject questionnaires (our ―sleep versus income‖ scenario from the example in
section I). The column‘s top four cells report a vertically-stacked 22 contingency matrix,
consisting of the joint binary distribution of subjects who favor Option 1 in the choice question,
and those who favor it in the SWB question. Looking at these four cells, we point out two facts
that illustrate the present section‘s two main findings. First, the top two cells reveal that SWB
response is highly predictive of choice response: between the two cells, 87 percent of
respondents rank Option 1 versus Option 2 in the choice question the same as they do in the
In other versions, where the twelve aspects appear together either in the order specified above or in reverse order, we
refer to the own happiness question as a ―first/last in a series‖ measure.
16
Non-response in our surveys was generally low. In the Cornell studies, virtually all questions had a non-response
rate below 2 percent (one Cornell respondent was excluded due to obvious confusion with instructions). In the
CNSS, less than 5 percent of respondents answered ―Do not know‖ or refused to answer in any of the questions. Due
to the less-structured recruiting method used in our Denver doctor‘s office studies, some questions from those
studies had non-response rates as high as 20 percent. However, the majority of this non-response is driven by
respondents being called in for their appointments, alleviating concerns of selection bias. Comparing the completed
responses of subjects who did not finish the complete survey to the responses of those who finished the entire
survey, we find no evidence of a difference in average responses.

11

SWB question. Second, the next two cells reveal systematic differences across the two questions
among the remaining 13 percent of respondents: while 12 percent rank Option 1 (sleep) above
Option 2 (income) in the SWB question and reverse this ranking in the choice question, only 1
percent do the opposite. This asymmetry suggests that on average, respondents react to the two
questions systematically differently. The fifth cell reports the p-value from a paired Liddell exact
test, a (nonparametric) equality-of-proportions test (Liddell, 1983).17 The null hypothesis—
namely, that the proportion of respondents who rank Option 2 above Option 1 does not depend
on whether they answer the choice or the SWB question—is easily rejected.
Examining the top five rows in table 2 for the rest of the Denver within-subject columns
verifies that the two main findings above are not unique to Scenario 1: in the remaining five
scenarios, 81 to 90 percent of respondents rank the two options identically across the choice and
SWB questions; yet in four out of five cases, choice-SWB reversals among the remaining 10 to
19 percent of respondents are asymmetric, and the equality-of-proportions null hypothesis across
the two questions is easily rejected. In these cases, respondents rank income above legacy,
concert above duty, low rent above short commute, and income above friends in higher
proportions in the choice question than in the SWB question. Interestingly, there appears to be a
systematic tendency among respondents to favor money in the choice question more than in the
SWB question.
Similarly, the CNSS column suggests that qualitatively, Scenario 1‘s findings carry over
from our Denver study—a pencil-and-paper survey with six-point response scales administered
to a convenience sample—to the CNSS study—a telephone survey with binary response scales
administered to a nationally representative sample. While the proportion of participants with no
choice-SWB reversals increases to 92 percent, almost all of the rest—7 out of the remaining 8
percent—favor Option 1 (sleep) in the SWB question and Option 2 (income) in the choice
question. The direction of this asymmetry is hence the same as in the Denver sample, and
equality of proportions is again easily rejected.
Last among our within-subject data, results from the Cornell surveys are reported on the
17

Conceptually, the Liddell exact test works as follows. For each respondent who answered both the SWB and the
choice questions, one of his or her two responses is randomly (and hence, possibly falsely) reassigned to be treated
as choice-response and the other as SWB-response. The difference between the proportions who favored Option 1
over Option 2 in the (reassigned) choice versus SWB questions is recorded. This procedure is then repeated for
every possible permutation of assignments. The Liddell p-value reports the fraction of repetitions that resulted in a
difference in proportions equal to or greater than the actual difference in proportions in our data. Computationally,
p-values are calculated using an exact formula.

12

second page of table 2. The structure of this part of the table is similar to the corresponding
Denver and CNSS parts, with the following three differences that result from the fact that the
Cornell questionnaires allow for an additional ―no difference‖ response in the SWB question: (a)
an additional row below the top four rows reports the proportion of respondents who choose the
―no difference‖ response; (b) the top four rows report vertically-stacked contingency matrices as
before, only here they exclude these ―no difference‖ responses (their sum is normalized to 100
percent after dropping these responses); and (c) the ―no difference‖ responses are excluded from
the Liddell tests.18
Starting again with Scenario 1 in the leftmost column, choice-SWB reversals (in the third
and fourth rows, 24 percent together) are still a minority, although they are almost twice to three
times more common in the Cornell sample than in the Denver and CNSS samples. Importantly,
consistent with the Denver and CNSS data, in virtually all of these reversals—23 of the 24
percent—Option 1 (sleep) is ranked above Option 2 (income) in the SWB question and below it
in the choice question. Equality of proportions is, again, strongly rejected for this scenario.19
Moving to the rest of the Cornell within-subject columns reveals a similar story. Equality
of proportions is strongly rejected for all the remaining nine scenarios (2-10) as well, with the
exception of Scenario 5. Recall that we constructed Scenario 5 (―apple versus orange‖) as a
falsification test, to alert us if our methods produced choice-SWB reversals they should not. We
predicted that, barring problems with our methods, choice and SWB should largely coincide for
this scenario. Reassuringly, the results support this prediction. Indeed, only 5 percent of
responses exhibit reversals in this scenario, by far the lowest fraction among the ten scenarios.20

18

Since respondents must choose between Option 1 and 2 in the choice question, we cannot observe whether
individuals indicating ―no difference‖ for SWB support or weaken the equality-of-proportions null hypothesis.
These individuals’ responses in the choice question mirror the distribution of choice-responses among the rest of the
respondents reasonably closely (Web Appendix table A5), and, reassuringly, the choice proportions in table 2 are
virtually unaffected by excluding these individuals. Moreover, under the null hypothesis that choice is determined
solely by predicted SWB, the distribution of choice-responses should be closer to 50-50 for individuals indicating
SWB ―no difference.‖ Hence, the responses of these respondents actually provide additional suggestive evidence
against the null hypothesis.
19
Comparing each of the top four cells in the scenario 1 column across the three within-subject samples reveals that
the reported proportions differ dramatically between the samples. Given the very different populations and, in the
CNSS study, the very different survey methods, this finding in itself is not surprising. (For example, we speculate
that since a telephone survey is harder to understand, more respondents answered the two questions in the same way,
taking the ―artificial consistency‖ mental shortcut discussed in II.B below.)
20
Furthermore, we find no evidence that these reversals are in one systematic direction. At the same time, a sizeable
37 percent of respondents indicate ―no difference‖ in the SWB question in scenario 5—by far the highest. This may
suggest that scenario 5 is ―cleaner‖ than we intended it to be: not only non-SWB aspects of life, but even own

13

As to the two other scenarios that are used in both the Denver and Cornell studies—Scenarios 3
and 4—choice-SWB reversals maintain their direction: in both studies, (absolute) income is
ranked above relative income (Scenario 3) and above legacy (Scenario 4) in the choice questions
more often than in the SWB questions. (While equality of proportions is rejected in the Cornell
data but not in the Denver data in Scenario 3, it is rejected in both studies in Scenario 4.)
Finally, in Scenarios 6 and 8, which are used only in the Cornell studies and include a
―money‖ option, we once again find that respondents favor money in the choice question more
than in the SWB question. That this tendency holds in all seven scenarios that trade off more
money/income for something else—be it more sleep, higher relative income, a legacy, a shorter
commute, being around friends, having more time, or visiting family—suggests that surveybased SWB measures understate the utility benefits of higher income.
Our two main findings—that the ranking of the two options is identical across the choice
and SWB questions for most respondents and in most scenarios, but that respondents react to the
two questions systematically differently—hold not only in the pooled data, but also for each
SWB question variant (i)-(v) separately. We show this in Web Appendix table A4, which reports
versions of table 2 by SWB measure. Interestingly, we find some differences across the measures
in the prevalence of choice-SWB reversals. In the Denver sample, the life satisfaction question
variation (i) comes closest to matching choice, with only 11 percent of reversals, averaged across
all scenarios. In comparison, happiness with life as a whole (ii) and felt happiness (iii) yield more
reversals—17 percent each. In the Cornell sample, own happiness with life as a whole (iv) and
immediately felt own happiness (v) both yield 22 percent reversals. We return to the comparison
between different SWB measures in section V.A below.
II.B. Between-Subjects Analysis
Our within-subject analysis above is based on both choice and SWB responses elicited
from each individual. However, empirical work that uses SWB data relies on surveys that
measure SWB alone, not together with choice. Thus, two potential biases could compromise the
relevance of our findings to existing SWB survey data and their applications. On the one hand,

happiness is deemed by many respondents irrelevant in what they may perceive as a context of de gustibus non est
disputandum.

14

asking a respondent both questions might generate an ―artificial consistency‖ between the two
responses. For example, respondents might think they ought to give consistent answers, or might
give consistent answers as an effort-saving mental shortcut. On the other hand, an ―artificial
inconsistency‖ bias is also possible if respondents infer from being asked more than one question
that they ought to give different answers, or if the presence of the other question focuses
participants‘ attention on the contrast between the wordings.
To address these concerns, we compare the above results from the Denver and Cornell
within-subject studies with their counterpart between-subjects studies, in which respondents are
asked either just the choice or just the SWB question. For ease of comparison, the betweensubjects results are reported below the within-subject results on the two pages of table 2.
We start with the Denver sample. While the Denver within-subject questionnaires use the
three SWB variants (i)-(iii), their between-subjects counterpart uses only variant (i), the life
satisfaction measure. Looking again at Scenario 1, of the between-subjects respondents who are
presented with this SWB question, 34 percent rank Option 2 (income) above Option 1 (sleep). Of
the respondents who are presented with the choice question, the proportion is 44 percent. The
direction of the discrepancy is the same as in the within-subject data and, as reported by the
Fisher exact test p-value, the difference is statistically distinguishable from zero.21 In contrast,
the other columns show that there is essentially no difference between the responses to the
choice and the SWB questions in the rest of the scenarios in the Denver between-subjects study.
Before comparing these proportion point estimates across the within- and betweensubjects data, we first compare statistical results. Since the unpaired Fisher test has less power
than the paired Liddell test, table 2 also reports Fisher test results for the within-subject data.
They are calculated by randomly assigning our subjects into two equal groups, and examining
only either their choice or their SWB response (hence ―unpairing‖ these data). The reported
average p-values (and average n) from 500 such repetitions show that a Fisher test rejects the noreversals null in (on average) one or two of our six within-subject scenarios (compared with one
of the five between-subjects scenarios). In other words, when using a comparable low-power
21

We use the Fisher exact test as a non-parametric unpaired equality-of-proportions test. Conceptually, it works as
follows. Remember that each respondent answers either the choice or the SWB question. These responses are pooled
and reassigned (possibly falsely) into the two groups, and the proportion of those who rank Option 1 above Option 2
in each group is recorded. This procedure is repeated for all possible permutations of assignments. The reported pvalue is the fraction of repetitions that resulted in difference in proportions at least as great as that between the two
actual groups. Computationally, p-values are calculated using an exact formula.

15

test, overall statistical results seem comparable.
In order to compare the magnitudes of the choice-SWB reversals in the between- and
within-subject data, we focus on only the three scenarios that are identical across the two
studies22 and on only those of the Denver within-subject respondents who answer the life
satisfaction question (i) (reported in Web Appendix table A4). In this comparison, we find that
while in Scenario 1 (income vs. sleep) discrepancies increase from 3 percentage points in the
within- to 10 in the between-subjects data, in Scenario 13 (friends vs. income) they decrease
from 7 to virtually nil, and in Scenario 3 (absolute income vs. relative income) they are
essentially nil in both studies. Our overall interpretation of our Denver data with the life
satisfaction measure—the measure with the fewest choice-SWB reversals—is that while there
are clear differences across the within- and between-subjects studies, the evidence in either
supports the same two main findings, albeit with differences in relative emphasis.
Finally, our Cornell between-subjects questionnaires ask the ―own happiness with life as
a whole‖ SWB question variant (iv). Starting again with the first scenario, results are strikingly
similar to those in the Cornell within-subject data. On magnitudes, 66 percent favor Option 2
(income) in the choice question while 46 percent favor Option 2 in the SWB question, similar to
the corresponding proportions—68 and 45 percent—among the Cornell within-subject
respondents who are asked SWB question variant (iv) (see Web Appendix table A4).23 On
statistical results, in spite of the reduced power of the unpaired Fisher test in the bottom row
compared with the paired Liddell test directly above it, equality of proportions between the
choice and SWB questions is still easily rejected in the between-subjects study.
Looking at the rest of the scenarios (in both tables) suggests that the finding in Scenario
1—that the choice-SWB difference in proportions in the between-subjects data is similar to but
slightly smaller than that in the within-subject data—is typical of only some scenarios. Of the ten
scenarios in the Cornell studies, the difference maintains its sign but increases in one scenario
(from 7 to 12 percent); decreases in four (from 23 to 20; 10 to 4; 11 to 9; and 11 to 8 percent);
disappears in two (10 to 0; and 12 to 0 percent); and changes sign in three, including two very
22

As reported in table 1 and the Appendix, only scenarios 1, 3, and 13 are comparable across the studies: scenario 2
is only included in the between-subjects study, and different versions of scenarios 4 and 12 are presented across the
within- and between-subjects studies. For further explanation see the Web Appendix.
23
Remember that in both studies, these figures exclude ―no difference‖ responses in the SWB question. We note
that such ―no difference‖ responses seem more prevalent in the within- than in the between-subjects data. See Web
Appendix table A4, where we report their prevalence by design variations.

16

large changes (1 to -5; 20 to -13; and 24 to -11 percent). The Fisher test at the bottom row rejects
the null hypothesis in three of the ten scenarios in the Cornell between-subjects data—strikingly
similar to the Fisher test reported in the ―Average p-value from 500 repetitions‖ row for the
within-subject data.
As with the Denver data, our overall interpretation is that while there are differences
across the between- and the within-subject studies—in particular, choice-SWB reversals are on
average less pronounced in the between-subjects study—either set of studies supports our two
main findings.
II.C. Measurement Error
Our analysis above suggests that in many scenarios, individuals do not respond to the
choice and SWB questions as if they were responding to the same question. However, in a given
scenario, such rejection of the null hypothesis could be explained by differences in measurement
error across the two questions—for example, because it is easier to introspect about choice than
about SWB, or vice versa. An individual whose ―true‖ ranking of the options is identical across
the questions is more likely to mistakenly rank the ―wrong‖ option higher in a question with
greater measurement error, leading to ranking proportions closer to 50-50 for that question.
Looking across table 2‘s columns reveals that cross-question differences in the
measurement error variances for choice and SWB in the same direction in all scenarios in a study
cannot explain our data. For example, in the Denver within-subject data, choice proportions are
closer to 50-50 in Scenarios 1, 11, and 13, but SWB proportions are closer in Scenarios 4 and 12.
We postpone further discussion of measurement error to the end of section III.
To summarize, the two main findings in this section are (a) that most respondents in most
scenarios do not exhibit choice- versus SWB-ranking reversals, and (b) that when they do, their
pattern of reversals is systematic. Overall, the two findings hold up well—although with
differences in relative strength—across scenarios, populations, and designs. Furthermore, these
findings cannot be explained by a measurement error structure that is stable across scenarios.

III. Do Non-SWB Factors Help Predict Choice?
In this section we take a second approach to assessing whether individuals seek to

17

maximize SWB. We ask: Can we identify non-SWB factors that help explain choices, controlling
for predicted SWB? We also analyze by how much respondents’ choices can be explained by
their predicted SWB and non-SWB aspects of life together, compared with their predicted SWB
alone.
We address these questions using data from the Cornell sample, where we ask respondents
to rank the options on a set of eleven non-SWB aspects of life, in addition to ranking them on
choice and SWB (see section I.C). Specifically, in addition to being asked about ―your own
happiness,‖ respondents are also asked about: your family‘s happiness, your health, your
romantic life, your social life, your control over your life, your life‘s level of spirituality, your
life‘s level of fun, your social status, your life‘s non-boringness, your physical comfort, and your
sense of purpose. While still a limited list, we chose these aspects of life in an attempt to capture
what else, besides one‘s own happiness, might enter one‘s preferences and hence matter for
choice. Our list is guided by economists‘ and philosophers‘ enumeration of ―capabilities‖ (Sen,
1985; Nussbaum, 2000), non-hedonic components of SWB proposed by psychologists (White
and Dolan, 2009), and our own introspection (for example, we tried to include all aspects that
money can buy, such as physical comfort).
As mentioned above, in our Cornell between-subjects surveys we use a design that allows
us also to elicit within-subject data from our 201 participants. This is done by presenting subjects
with the between-subjects part of the survey, followed by an additional, within-subject part.24 In
the between-subjects analysis in section II we used only data from the first, between-subjects
part. In contrast, in this section we pool data from both parts, treating them as within-subject
data. Further pooling these data with the original Cornell within-subject data (432 respondents)
yields an augmented sample of 633 Cornell within-subject respondents. In this section we
analyze this pooled data set. In section IV.E and in the Web Appendix we show that our main
results hold in the constituent subsamples.

24

Specifically, we present the entire sequence of ten scenarios three times. First, each scenario is presented and is
followed by only a choice question (for half the respondents) or only a SWB question (for the other half). Second,
after respondents finish answering their question for each of the ten scenarios, the ten scenarios are presented again,
each followed by only the question (SWB or choice) respondents have not seen yet. Finally, the ten scenarios are
presented for a third time, with each scenario followed by the non-SWB aspect questions. Respondents are
specifically instructed to answer the surveys in exactly the order questions are presented, and the experimenters
verify that they do (in the rare cases where a respondent was observed to flip through the pages, she/he was
promptly reminded of this instruction). With this design, excluding data collected after the first round of scenariopresentation results in between-subjects data.

18

III.A. Response distributions
Figure 1 displays, by scenario, the histograms of raw, multi-point responses to the choice,
SWB, and eleven non-SWB-aspect questions. Note first that the choice responses—and also the
SWB responses, although to a lesser extent—tend to be bimodal with most of the mass on
―definitely‖ or ―probably,‖ suggesting that the choice-SWB reversals discussed in section II are
not the result of widespread near-indifferences. Second, notice that we were rather successful in
constructing Scenario 5 (apple versus orange): almost everyone indicates ―no difference‖ on nonSWB aspects of the options. While 37 percent also indicate ―no difference‖ on SWB, the low
count of reversals in Scenario 5 suggests that for the other respondents, variation in choice is
strongly related to variation in SWB. Finally, note that in many other scenarios, there is
substantial variation in the non-SWB aspect rankings, and that the histogram of choice responses
sometimes looks rather different from the histogram of SWB responses.
III.B. Predicting choice
Table 3 presents a variety of specifications in which we regress choice on SWB and nonSWB aspects of life, aggregating data across the ten scenarios (we discuss regressions by
scenario in section V.B below). We want to estimate the relationship from the within-scenario—
rather than the between-scenario—variation in responses. For this purpose, in the probit and
ordered probit specifications, we include scenario fixed effects.25 In the OLS specifications, we
demean all variables at the scenario level. Doing so yields identical coefficients to a fixed-effects
OLS specification but has the advantage that the R2‘s reflect only the within-scenario
explanatory power of the regressors. Interpreting the first three columns in table 3 as an attempt
to predict choice responses in our data, we first focus only on R2‘s. We return to interpreting
coefficients in the next subsection.
The first column of table 3 reports an OLS regression of six-point choice on seven-point
SWB. As reported by the R2, 0.38 of the variation in choice is explained by SWB (own
happiness) alone. In comparison, a regression of the same choice measure on our eleven nonSWB aspects (each as a seven-point variable) yields an R2 of 0.21 (second column of table 3).
25

Including fixed effects in non-linear models is problematic in cases where the number of fixed effects is
asymptotically infinite. Since our asymptotics rely on an infinite number of respondents, not of scenarios, the
inclusion of scenario fixed effects does not harm the consistency of our estimates.

19

Hence, we find that SWB predicts choice substantially better than all of the other aspects
combined. In the third column we regress choice on both SWB and the eleven non-SWB aspects.
The R2 of 0.41 is again substantially higher than that in the second column but is only slightly
higher than that in the first column.26 The pattern in these three columns is similar when we relax
the linear functional form, replacing each regressor with a set of six dummy variables (not
reported): the respective R2‘s are 0.46, 0.33, and 0.50. In summary, when we pool data across
scenarios we find that adding the non-SWB aspects to the regression of choice on SWB increases
explanatory power, but the increase is quite modest. (However, the increase is substantial in
some of the individual scenarios, as we report in section V.B.)
III.C. Comparing the coefficients
In order to interpret—and compare—the regression coefficients in table 3, we need to
provide more structure. We hence assume that choices result from maximizing a utility function,
(1)

U(H(X), X),

where H is SWB and X is a vector of non-SWB factors that might affect utility both directly, and
indirectly through H. If people seek to maximize SWB alone (as opposed to trading off SWB for
other, non-SWB factors), then the (vector) partial derivative ∂U/∂X will be identically zero. To a
first-order approximation, the difference in utility between two options in a decision problem is
(2)

∆U ≈ (∂U/∂H) ∆H + (∂U/∂X) ∆X,

where ∆H and ∆X are the differences between the options in predicted SWB and predicted nonSWB aspects, respectively. Naturally, the smaller are these differences, the more justified is the
approximation—a point we return to shortly.
We can now interpret the OLS regression from the third column of table 3 as estimating
the implied regression equation,

Bootstrapped standard errors yield the following 95-percent confidence intervals around the three respective R2‘s:
[0.36, 0.40], [0.19, 0.23], and [0.39, 0.43].

26

20

(3)

∆Uis = βH ∆His + βX ∆Xis + εis,

where ∆Uis, ∆His, and ∆Xis are, respectively, respondent i's choice, SWB, and non-SWB
responses in Scenario s (raw responses demeaned at the scenario level); and εis is an error term,
which captures the direct effects of unmeasured differences between the options as well as
choice mistakes. Under this interpretation, the twelve regression coefficients estimate marginal
utilities.
Under this approximation, the null hypothesis ∂U/∂X ≡ 0 can be rewritten as the
hypothesis that the vector βX = 0, or that all eleven non-SWB coefficients in the third column are
zero—a hypothesis we can easily reject (F-test p = 0.000). This result is robust to treating the
choice measure as ordinal rather than cardinal, or as binary (the ordered probit and probit
specifications in the fifth and sixth columns); to relaxing the linearity of our SWB measure by
replacing it with a set of six dummy variables; and to combinations of these specifications (see
tables A7-A9 in the Web Appendix for these and other specifications). Furthermore, with the
exception of Scenario 8 (where F-test p = 0.086), the result holds in each individual scenario.27
This and the robustness to relaxing the linearity of ∆H suggest that not all the marginal utilities
∂U/∂X are zero, regardless of how good an approximation we use in equation (2).
To move from testing the null hypothesis to interpreting the magnitudes of coefficients
requires additional assumptions. Econometrically, the coefficients in regression equation (3) are
consistently estimated if E(εis | ∆His, ∆Xis) = 0. We measure a long list of non-SWB aspects as an
attempt to make this assumption more plausible; an unmeasured factor will bias the coefficient
on the regressors it is correlated with. Psychologically, the coefficients are comparable if
respondents respond to the seven-point scales similarly across the twelve aspects.
Comparing the coefficients in the third column of table 3, the coefficient on SWB is by
far the largest. A one-point increase in our seven-point measure of predicted SWB is associated
with a highly significant 0.46-point increase in our six-point choice measure. The largest nonSWB coefficients are on sense of purpose (0.12), control over one‘s life (0.08), family happiness
(0.08), and social status (0.06). The relative sizes of the coefficients are similar in alternative
27

We show in table A10 in the Web Appendix that this result holds even when the regressions include only aspects
for which more than a trivial fraction of respondents (e.g. 15 percent) indicate answers other than ―no difference.‖ In
other words, it holds even when we include only the most reliably-estimated coefficients. Interestingly, table A10
shows that the only large and robust non-SWB coefficient in the ―apple versus orange‖ scenario is that on ―physical
comfort‖; this seems consistent with the de gustibus (or taste-related) interpretation of this scenario.

21

specifications (e.g., the ordered probit column), but we remind the reader that the data are pooled
across surveys that use two opposite orders in which aspects are presented, and order matters for
the coefficient estimates (see section IV.E). While the rejection of βX = 0 suggests that SWB is
not the only argument in the utility function, a comparison of the coefficients suggests that the
marginal utility of SWB is several times larger than the marginal utilities of even the most
significant non-SWB aspects we measure.28
Finally, related to the question to what extent people seek to maximize SWB, we can ask
to what extent people prefer a higher level of some non-SWB aspect because it increases SWB.
Rewriting equation (2) as ∆U ≈ [(∂U/∂H) (∂H/∂X) + (∂U/∂X)] ∆X decomposes the net effect on
utility of a change in X into an indirect effect that operates through ∆H and a direct effect. The
coefficients in the second column of table 3 estimate the sum of the indirect and direct marginal
effects, (∂U/∂H) (∂H/∂X) + (∂U/∂X). In the third column, the coefficient on SWB estimates
∂U/∂H, while the coefficients on the non-SWB aspects estimate the direct marginal effects,
∂U/∂X. Under this causal interpretation of the coefficients, comparing the second and third
columns suggests that, for example, while the effects of health and life’s non-boringness on
utility operate only through their effects on SWB, the entire effect of social status operates
directly (without affecting SWB). In between these extremes, aspects such as family happiness,
control over one’s life, life’s level of fun, physical comfort, and sense of purpose seem to have
roughly equal direct and indirect effects on utility.
III.D. Measurement error
Measurement error in ∆His or ∆Xis will cause the assumption E(εis | ∆His, ∆Xis) = 0 to fail,
therefore biasing the coefficient estimates. Moreover, measurement error in ∆His could also
invalidate our tests of the null hypothesis that βX ≡ 0; even if predicted non-SWB aspects do not
enter utility directly, if they affect predicted SWB, and if predicted SWB is measured with error,
we could find—as we do—that the predicted non-SWB aspects are statistically significant
predictors of choice. In order to address these concerns, we collected repeated observations on a
sub-sample (of 230) of our Cornell respondents. This enables us to estimate a measurementerror-corrected equation (3). Specifically, we use Simulation-Extrapolation (SIMEX) (Cook and
28

However, we believe that the most plausible bias from unmeasured factors exaggerates the coefficient on SWB.
Specifically, an unmeasured factor whose effect on ∆H has the same sign as its direct effect (i.e., not through ∆H) on
∆U will bias upward the coefficient on ∆H.

22

Stefanski, 1994), a semi-parametric method that assumes homoskedastic additive measurement
error but does not make assumptions about the distribution of the regressors.29 Intuitively, the
SIMEX method proceeds in two steps. First, it simulates datasets with additional measurement
error and uses them to estimate the function describing how the regression coefficients change
with the amount of measurement error. Then the algorithm extrapolates in order to estimate what
the coefficients would be if there were no measurement error in the original data. Table 3
displays the results of applying this method to our regressions. As expected, relative to the OLS
results, the coefficient on own happiness increases, and remains by far the most predictive
regressor. However, the non-SWB aspects with largest coefficients and statistical significance in
the OLS regressions remain statistically significant and also increase.
These results suggest that SWB is not the only argument in the utility function and that
non-SWB aspects of life enter preferences as well. At the same time, among the aspects we
measure, SWB has by far the highest marginal utility.
IV. Robustness
To examine the robustness of our results from sections II and III, we conduct a long list
of additional analyses. Full details, including all tables, charts, and statistics, are available in the
Web Appendix. In this section we briefly summarize our findings. Unless stated otherwise, they
are based on our within-subject data from either the Denver or the (augmented) Cornell samples.
IV.A. Are results driven by only a few individuals?
A natural interpretation of our evidence from sections II and III is that most people‘s
preferences assign high but not exclusive weight to SWB, and therefore people usually but not
always choose the option they predict would maximize SWB. However, an alternative
interpretation is that most people exclusively seek to maximize SWB, and our results are driven
by a small minority of participants who do not. In contrast with this latter interpretation, we find
29

We choose to use the SIMEX method over several more common measurement error correction methods (such as
IV or regression disattenuation) for several reasons. Primarily, the other methods are highly inefficient. Moreover,
the SIMEX method is flexible in its treatment of the measurement error structure, it accommodates misclassified
categorical data, and it easily accommodates non-linear models such as probit or ordered probit regressions. For
additional discussion of SIMEX see the Web appendix, and for IV results see table A12 there. For example, in our
IV estimates, standard errors are so large that we cannot reject that any of the OLS or SIMEX coefficients reported
in table 3 are equal to the IV coefficients, with one exception: the 0.46 coefficient on own happiness in the OLS
regression (third column) is significantly lower than the corresponding IV coefficient, which is 0.75.

23

that most respondents (both Denver and Cornell) exhibit at least one reversal and that very few
exhibit reversals in half or more of the scenarios.
Moreover, we explore whether some of the respondents who do not exhibit a choiceSWB reversal in a given scenario would have done so if that scenario‘s tradeoff between SWB
and non-SWB factors had assigned a different ―price‖ to SWB. We do this by presenting some of
our Denver respondents with four different versions of Scenario 4, a choice between a career as
an artist who earns $40,000 annually and will have a lasting legacy versus a higher-paying career
as a commercial artist who will leave no legacy. The versions differ from each other in the
commercial artist‘s annual income: it is $42,000, $60,000, $80,000, or $100,000. We find that
the fraction of participants who exhibit a choice-SWB reversal varies from as low as 3 percent in
the $42k version to as high as 17 percent in the $80k version. Overall, 24 percent exhibit a
reversal in at least one income-version, suggesting that the fraction of individuals for whom we
observe a reversal in a given scenario is a lower bound on the total number who would exhibit a
reversal in the same scenario with some ―price of SWB.‖
IV.B. Scenario-order effects and participant fatigue
We investigate the effects of scenario order on responses with our Denver sample, where
respondents face the six scenarios in one of two opposite orders (see table 1). Scenario-order
effects could arise, for example, due to increasing fatigue or boredom among respondents. They
could either increase or decrease the number of choice-SWB reversals through increasing
response variance, decreasing respondents‘ effort, and in general changing artificial consistency
or inconsistency patterns. While we indeed find evidence of scenario-order effects on responses
in individual scenarios, they do not seem to influence our main findings. Averaged across the six
scenarios, 15 percent of respondents exhibit a choice-SWB reversal in a scenario, regardless of
whether it appears in the first or second half of the survey (Fisher exact test p = 0.87).
IV.C. Self-reported artificial consistency/inconsistency and mistakes
In section II we address artificial consistency and inconsistency concerns, as well as
measurement error that in all scenarios is either larger for choice than for SWB, or vice versa. In
section III, our measurement-error-corrected regressions address the possibility of response
mistakes that are uncorrelated across repetitions of the survey. As an additional check on these

24

and other concerns, after our Cornell respondents finish responding to all the decision scenarios,
we directly ask them whether their choice-SWB reversals were a mistake; whether they think
they would regret them; and whether they were trying to make their choice and SWB responses
consistent. Interestingly, only 7 percent report their reversals as a mistake, 23 percent report that
they would regret them, and 20 percent report consciously trying to make their choice and SWB
consistent. We repeat section III‘s analysis excluding groups of respondents based on their
responses. We find, in line with our findings from our earlier approaches, that while mistakes
and artificial consistency/inconsistency are likely present in our data, they alone cannot explain
our results.
IV.D. Self-control
A related concern is that choice-SWB reversals may reflect a self-control problem (as in
Laibson, 1997 and O‘Donoghue and Rabin, 1999), rather than a preference for non-SWB aspects
of life.30 To address this concern, in some versions of the survey, in addition to asking
participants what they would choose, we also ask them what they would want themselves to
choose (the meta-choice question mentioned in Section I.C(c)). We reasoned that if, for
example, a participant preferred Option 1 but would choose Option 2 due to a self-control
problem, the participant would indicate favoring Option 2 in the choice question but Option 1 in
the meta-choice question. Aggregating across all surveys that include the meta-choice question
(see table 1), we find reversals between choice and meta-choice in 28 percent of the cases.
However, while self-control problems may be relevant in these cases, our main conclusions from
section III appear to be robust to excluding these observations. For example, in our benchmark
specification from the third column of table 3, while excluding observations with a choice/metachoice inconsistency increases the coefficient on own happiness, it also increases the coefficient
on sense of purpose.

30

In most of our decision scenarios, it is not obvious how a self-control problem would be implicated, but there are a
few where it could be. For example, in scenario 7, one of the alternatives is staying out later with friends, while the
other is going to bed earlier to feel better and be more productive the next day. A respondent who correctly
anticipates having a self-control problem might respond that she would choose to stay out late, even though her
welfare would be maximized by going to bed earlier.

25

IV.E. Context of choice, SWB, and non-SWB aspect questions
Closely related to concerns of artificial consistency and inconsistency, it is possible that
our results are affected by the organization of our choice, SWB, and non-SWB aspect questions.
Specifically, respondents‘ interpretations of the questions or their understanding of the meaning
of the related concepts may be context-dependent.31 For example, when the choice and SWB
questions appear close together (as in our example scenario in section I), respondents may
interpret each of the questions differently from how they interpret each when presented
separately. Additionally, interpretations of the questions may depend on whether the choice
question appears before or after the SWB question in each scenario.
It is similarly possible that respondents‘ interpretation of ―own happiness‖ depends on
whether it appears as a stand-alone question or as merely one aspect of life in a list of twelve. For
example, when ―own happiness‖ appears as an aspect in a list, respondents may interpret it to
refer to only the part of own happiness that is not correlated with—or affected by—the other
aspects on the list (―happiness controlled for other aspects of life‖). Finally, the order in which
the twelve aspects are presented may affect responses, for example because order affects the
aspects‘ interpretation, or because respondents pay less attention to aspects at the bottom of the
list.
As mentioned in sections I (see table 1) and III, different versions of our surveys vary in
whether the choice and SWB questions are asked close together or far apart, and in the order the
questions are asked; they also vary in the distance between the SWB and non-SWB aspects, and
in the order of aspects. Repeating our analysis in section III by questionnaire organization
verifies that such order and context effects do indeed matter. We briefly summarize the main
findings. First, aspects listed earlier have larger coefficients. Second, own happiness as part of a
twelve-aspects list has a smaller coefficient than as a stand-alone question. Third, a design where
we present each scenario to solicit only choice for that scenario, then present each scenario again
to solicit only happiness, and then present each scenario yet a third time to solicit only non-SWB
aspect ratings yields the lowest coefficient on own happiness (0.31). That design also yields, in
one of the aspect orderings, the highest coefficient on sense of purpose (0.27), making it the
highest coefficient on any of our non-SWB aspects in any of the designs. Yet, in all designs, non31

Notice the important difference between this possibility and the possibility of cross-respondent differences in the
interpretations or understanding of the scenarios. The latter possibility is a lesser concern as long as a respondent’s
interpretation or understanding of a scenario remains the same across the choice and SWB questions.

26

SWB aspects are statistically significant, and the coefficient on own happiness has a higher point
estimate than any of the non-SWB aspects. While the context in which we ask our key survey
questions definitely matters, our basic results appear to be robust.
IV.F. An alternative approach: willingness-to-pay questions
Our empirical methodology in section III was to assess the marginal utility of SWB and
other factors by confronting participants with a series of scenarios, and estimating the
coefficients from a regression of choice on predicted SWB and non-SWB aspect ratings of the
choice options. As another source of evidence on marginal utilities, which we can use to crossvalidate our regression-based findings, we also ask questions aimed to directly elicit participants‘
willingness-to-pay (WTP) for improving SWB and other aspects of their lives.
Near the end of the Cornell surveys, after participants had faced all of the scenarios, we
ask them, for the list of twelve aspects, the maximum amount of minutes per week they would be
willing to invest in improving their rating of their life on that aspect by one point on a ten-point
scale. Consistent with our regression-based findings, own happiness has the largest WTP.32
Moreover, the correlation between mean WTP and the coefficient from a univariate OLS
regression of choice on each aspect individually is 0.67 (p < 0.02).33 SWB has a large impact on
this correlation coefficient because it has both a high WTP and a high regression coefficient. To
assess the robustness of the correlation, we omit SWB from the set of aspects; in that case, the
correlation is 0.49, economically sizeable but not statistically significant (p = 0.12).34
We interpret these WTP-based findings as broadly supportive of our scenario-based findings.

32

We measure WTP in units of time because we expect time to be more comparable across respondents than money
for our student sample. Response categories are 0, 5, 10, 15, 20, 30, 45, 60, 75, and 120 minutes. Both mean WTP
for own happiness (69 minutes) and its median (60 minutes) are well below the highest response option of 120
minutes (34 percent chose the latter). Across all of our survey populations, we similarly find that WTP for SWB is
typically below the highest response option in a variety of questions including, for example, asking respondents
what fraction of their income or what amount of meditation time they would be willing to devote to raise happiness.
Although there are well-known reasons to be skeptical about contingent valuation questions, especially those far
removed from everyday experience, this response pattern may be interpreted as suggesting that respondents think
about a tradeoff between SWB and other aspects of their life when answering these questions.
33
The univariate coefficient, as opposed to the coefficient from the multivariate regression reported in table 3, is the
appropriate one to use for comparability with the WTP question because the WTP question does not partial out
spillover effects on the other characteristics when eliciting WTP to improve one characteristic.
34
These correlations might be inflated if aspects listed earlier have both larger coefficients (see section IV.E) and
higher WTP; however, we find high correlations even between coefficients measured in one aspect order and WTPs
measured in the opposite order.

27

V. Additional Results
To provide additional results that may be useful for happiness researchers and policy
makers, we conduct the analysis from section III separately across SWB measures, scenarios,
and respondent characteristics. This section is a brief summary of a more thorough treatment in
the Web Appendix.
V.A. Comparing SWB measures
Across our surveys, we ask five different SWB question variants, based on three families
of SWB questions asked in large-scale surveys used for empirical work: life satisfaction,
happiness with life as a whole, and felt happiness (see section I.C(b) and table 1). In section II.A
we compare the frequency of choice-SWB reversals across our different SWB measures. We
now compare how well the measures predict choice using R2‘s from univariate OLS regressions
of our multiple-point choice variable on our multiple-point SWB measures.
As in section III, we demean our variables at the scenario level. In the Denver sample, the
life satisfaction question variant (i) is the best predictor of the choice question, with R2 = 0.65.
Happiness with life as a whole (ii) and felt happiness (iii) come second and third, respectively,
with R2 = 0.59 and 0.55. The felt happiness R2 is statistically significantly lower than the life
satisfaction R2 (p = 0.02 calculated using bootstrapped standard errors), and the R2 for happiness
with life as a whole is not statistically distinguishable from the other two. In the Cornell sample,
own happiness with life as a whole (iv) and immediately felt own happiness (v) have R2 = 0.39
and 0.37, not statistically distinguishable from each other.
These R2‘s and our findings in II.A paint a consistent picture. While in the Denver data
the life-satisfaction-type SWB question is more predictive of choice than the happiness-type
SWB questions, in both Denver and Cornell the felt happiness and the happiness with life as a
whole questions predict choice similarly. One possible hypothesis as to why some SWB
measures predict choice better is that they encourage participants to report the present value of
SWB flows over time. However, our finding that variant (v)—about happiness ―in the few
minutes immediately after making the choice‖—is as predictive of choice as variant (iv)— about
happiness in ―life as a whole‖—is inconsistent with this view.
V.B. Heterogeneity across decision scenarios

28

For applied work, it is useful to know in which situations the assumption that people try
to maximize only SWB is a better or worse approximation. Table 4 shows the benchmark OLS
specification from table 3, conducted separately for each of the ten scenarios in the Cornell data.
The ―Incremental R2‖ row reports the difference between the reported R2’s (from the reported
multivariate regressions) and R2’s from univariate regressions of choice on only SWB (which are
not reported).
Mechanically, if utility is increasing in SWB, then a ranking of decision alternatives
resulting from utility-maximization and a ranking resulting from SWB-maximization will
coincide in choice settings where predicted SWB happens to be the only aspect that varies across
the choice alternatives. As discussed above, Scenario 5 (apple versus orange)—which was
designed to be as close as possible to such a case—has very little variance in non-SWB aspects
and the fewest choice-SWB reversals (see figure 1 and table 2). As expected, the R2 in a
univariate regression of choice on predicted SWB is the highest (at 0.56) in Scenario 5, and the
incremental R2 from adding all other aspects is the lowest (at 0.02). If this type of minor
decision—which possibly comprises most decisions in life—generally features low variance in
non-SWB aspects, then the assumption that people try to maximize predicted SWB is a good
approximation in such settings. The next highest univariate R2 is for Scenario 3 (absolute income
vs. relative income, at 0.49). This result is a surprise to us. We did not expect predicted SWB to
capture the issues involved in the choice between absolute and relative income as well as it does.
Interestingly, at the other extreme, the four scenarios we designed to be representative of
typical important decisions facing our college-age Cornell sample—Scenarios 7-10 (socialize
versus sleep, family versus money, education versus social life, and interest versus career)—are
among the scenarios with the lowest univariate R2 and, correspondingly, the highest incremental
R2 from adding non-SWB aspects as regressors. Indeed, in Scenarios 7 and 10, where univariate
R2 is the lowest—at 0.25 and 0.24, respectively—incremental R2 is 0.07 and 0.13. Here, nonSWB aspects increase predictive power (as measured by R2) substantially, by 28 and 54 percent
respectively. This in turn suggests that one should be especially cautious in interpreting
measured SWB as utility in empirical applications that focus on important life decisions.
The rest of the scenarios fall somewhere in between. They include the scenarios that were
designed to explore common themes from the happiness literature and, surprisingly, those
designed as situations where we most expected to find tensions between SWB and non-SWB

29

factors (see section I.B).
Finally, table 4 reveals a heterogeneity in coefficients across scenarios (Chow test p =
0.000). Moreover, this heterogeneity appears to be systematic, with an increased coefficient on
SWB and decreased coefficients on non-SWB factors in scenarios where there is less variance
across the choice alternatives in non-SWB factors. In contrast, our simple theoretical framework
from section III predicts constant marginal utilities and hence constant coefficients across
scenarios. We speculate that this empirical heterogeneity results from the fact that in scenarios
where some aspect varies less, that aspect becomes less salient as an input into utility, and
respondents tend to take it into account less when making a choice.35 Regardless of the
explanation for the heterogeneity, it reinforces the assessment that predicted SWB may be a
better approximation of utility in minor than in important decisions.
V.C. Preference heterogeneity across respondents
For a policymaker deciding whether to use SWB data as a proxy for utility for a
particular demographic group, it may be useful to know how the propensity to maximize
predicted SWB varies with demographic characteristics, such as gender, age, race, education,
and income. In the Web Appendix, we report regressions that predict choice-SWB reversals as a
function of respondent characteristics. In the Cornell sample, black respondents are 24
percentage points more likely than white ones to exhibit a choice-SWB reversal (with a standard
error of 10 percentage points). However, on the whole across the Denver, CNSS, and Cornell
samples, there is relatively little evidence for heterogeneity across demographic groups.
To see how heterogeneity in maximizing predicted SWB relates to well-understood
dimensions of individual heterogeneity, we also predict the probability of a choice-SWB reversal
35

In the Web Appendix we examine and rule out several alternative explanations. First, since our regression
equation (3) relies on a first-order approximation of the utility function (1), one possible explanation of the above
empirical heterogeneity is that the approximation breaks down in scenarios where the choice alternatives differ
greatly in some aspects. Second, coefficients may be different in scenarios where both choice alternatives are far
from the respondent’s current situation, either because the relevant marginal utilities are not the same or because the
respondent has difficulty predicting choice in fanciful hypothetical settings. We test these two explanations by
running separate regressions for scenarios where we expect the local approximation to hold well or not; we find little
evidence for differences in coefficients across these categories. Third, the coefficients may be identified off of
different respondents in different scenarios. However, Cook’s influence statistic (calculated at the respondent level)
is highly correlated across most scenarios, and influence-robust iteratively reweighted least squares regressions still
yield coefficients that vary across scenarios. This suggests that identification off of different respondents is not
driving the variation in our coefficients across scenarios. We cannot rule out other explanations, such as respondents
scaling their responses differently in different scenarios.

30

as a function of scores on the ―Big 5‖ personality traits, which we measure in the Cornell withinsubject sample using John and Srivastava‘s (1999) BFI scale. We find that a one standard
deviation increase in conscientiousness is associated with an 2 percent lower likelihood of a
choice-SWB reversal, while a one standard deviation increase in neuroticism (i.e., moody, tense)
is associated with a 2 percent higher likelihood.
VI. Discussion
When aggregating our results across scenarios, we find that choices maximize predicted
SWB (especially ―life satisfaction‖) for most people most of the time. This may partially allay
one source of concern about using SWB data as a welfare measure. However, care must be taken
in interpreting our findings. The amount of choice-SWB concordance we find represents an
upper bound on the degree to which the use of SWB measures is justified as a welfare measure in
empirical applications. Applications always require additional assumptions that we do not test.
For example, a typical assumption is that SWB measures are comparable and can be aggregated
across individuals.36
When comparing scenarios, our results suggest that, first, researchers should be
especially cautious about using SWB data as a proxy for utility in settings that are perceived to
involve personally-important decisions. Second, in settings where one alternative involves higher
income or more money, predicted SWB systematically understates the utility benefits of the
money alternative. This in turn suggests that the increasingly-common practice of estimating
willingness to pay for more sex, less pollution, etc., by comparing the coefficient on income with
that on another variable in multivariate SWB regressions biases these estimates upwards.
Our scenario-based methodology could be usefully applied in several new directions.
First, the method of assessing the correspondence between choice and predicted SWB could be
used to assess new SWB measures. In the Web Appendix, we describe pilot data we collected on
two such measures, neither of which appears to predict choice any better than existing measures.
Measures that explicitly encourage integration of SWB over time, as well as ladder/mountain-

36

Our results may also overstate the extent to which standard SWB questions provide a good measure of preferences
because standard questions are asked absolutely (―How satisfied are with your life?‖), while our SWB questions are
asked relatively (―Between these two options, which do you think would make you more satisfied with life?‖).
Different individuals may apply different scales to a greater extent for an absolute measure, making it more difficult
to translate an absolute SWB measure into a meaningful utility number than might be suggested by our results.

31

type measures, seem especially promising areas for further research.37
Second, our method could be used to provide more tailored guidance for applied work by
asking about scenarios that are intended to address specific issues of interest. For illustrative
purposes, we pilot four such scenarios at the end of our Cornell repeat-survey. For example, to
reconcile the intuition that Americans today are better off than in the past with the finding that
average SWB has remained flat in the U.S. over the past decades (Easterlin, 1974, 1995; see
Stevenson and Wolfers, 2008, for a recent assessment), we ask respondents to rank being born in
1950 versus being born in 1990 in both choice and SWB questions. Although our 209
respondents overwhelmingly favor being born in 1990 in both questions (87 and 79 percent,
respectively), the 9 percent who choose 1990 despite believing that they would be happier in
1950 is statistically significantly larger than the 1 percent exhibiting the reverse response pattern
(Liddell test p-value < 0.001). This result indeed suggests that some people prefer being born
later even if it does not make them happier. For another example, to reconcile the intuition that
expanding political and economic freedoms for women have made women better off with the
finding that average SWB among women has declined in the U.S. since the 1970s, both
absolutely and relative to men (Stevenson and Wolfers, 2009), we ask respondents to rank living
in a world with or without these expanded freedoms for women. Again, significantly more
respondents choose a world with these expanded freedoms for women in spite of believing that a
world without them would make them happier than the reverse (Liddell p = 0.007). For further
examples and full details, see the Web Appendix.
Finally, some researchers have attempted to identify the key non-SWB aspects of life that
are associated with greater welfare (e.g., Sen, 1985). Others have called for an SWB-based
―national well-being index‖ to provide a measure of welfare that captures factors not represented
in economic indicators such as GDP (e.g., Diener et al., 2009). To the best of our knowledge, our
paper is the first attempt to empirically estimate the appropriate weights on SWB and other
factors for combining them into an overall index of welfare. Our method could be applied more
systematically for this purpose.

37

Since different SWB questions seem to capture distinct dimensions of well-being that correlate differently with
income and other variables (e.g. Kahneman and Deaton, 2010), future research could also explore whether a
combination of SWB questions predicts choice better than any individual SWB question alone.

32

References
Becker, Gary S., and Luis Rayo. 2008. ―Comment on ‗Economic growth and subjective wellbeing: Reassessing the Easterlin Paradox‘ by Betsey Stevenson and Justin Wolfers.‖
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring, 88-95.
Bentham, Jeremy. 1789. An Introduction to the Principle of Morals and Legislations.
Bernheim, Douglas B. 2009. ―Behavioral Welfare Economics.‖ Journal of the European
Economics Association, 7(2-3), 267-319.
Blanchflower, David G. and Andrew J. Oswald. 2004. ―Money, Sex and Happiness: An
Empirical Study.‖ Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 106(3), 393-415.
Bronsteen, John, Christopher J. Buccafusco, and Jonathan S. Masur. Forthcoming. ―Well-being
analysis.‖ Georgetown Law Journal.
Cook, J. R. and Leonard A. Stefanski. 1994. ―A simulation extrapolation method for parametric
measurement error models.‖ Journal of the American Statistical Association, 89, 13141328.
Diener, Ed, Richard Lucas, Ulrich Schimmack, and John Helliwell. 2009. Well-Being for Public
Policy. New York: Oxford University Press.
DiTella, Rafael, Robert J. MacCulloch, and Andrew Oswald. 2003. ―The Macroeconomics of
Happiness.‖ Review of Economics and Statistics, 85(4), 809-827.
Ellison, Christopher G. 1991. ―Religious involvement and subjective well-being.‖ Journal of
Health and Social Behavior, 32, 80–99.
Easterlin, Richard A. 1974. ―Does economic growth improve the human lot? Some empirical
evidence.‖ In Paul A. David and Melvin W. Reder (eds.), Nations and Households in
Economic Growth: Essays in Honor of Moses Abramovitz. New York: Academic Press,
Inc.
Easterlin, Richard A. 1995. ―Will raising the incomes of all increase the happiness of all?‖
Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 27, 35-47.
Finkelstein, Amy, Erzo F.P. Luttmer, and Matthew J. Notowigdo. 2008. ―What good is wealth
without health? The effect of health on the marginal utility of consumption.‖ NBER W.P.
14089, June.
Frey, Bruno S., Simon Luechinger, and Alois Stutzer. 2008. ―The life satisfaction approach to
valuing public goods: The case of terrorism.‖ Public Choice, 138, 317-345.
Gilbert, Daniel T. 2006. Stumbling on happiness. New York: Knopf.

33

Gruber, Jonathan, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2005. ―Do cigarette taxes make smokers happier?‖
Advances in Economic Analysis & Policy, 5(1) Article 4.
Heffetz, Ori, and Robert H. Frank. Forthcoming. ―Preferences for Status: Evidence and
Economic Implications.‖ Handbook of Social Economics, Jess Benhabib, Alberto Bisin,
Matthew Jackson, eds., Elsevier.
John, Oliver P., and Sanjay Srivastava. 1999. ―The Big Five trait taxonomy: History,
measurement, and theoretical perspectives.‖ In Lawrence A. Pervin and Oliver P. John
(Eds.), Handbook of personality: Theory and research (2nd ed., pp. 102-138). New York:
Guilford.
Laibson, David I. 1997. ―Golden eggs and hyperbolic discounting.‖ Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 112(2), 443-477.
Layard, Richard. 2005. Happiness. Penguin Press.
Liddell, F. D. K. 1983. ―Simplified exact analysis of case-referent studies: matched pairs;
dichotomous exposure.‖ Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health, 37(1), 82-84.
Luttmer, Erzo F.P. 2005. ―Neighbors as Negatives: Relative Earnings and Well-Being.‖
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(3), 963-1002.
Kahneman, Daniel, and Angus Deaton. 2010. ―High income improves evaluation of life but not
emotional well-being.‖ Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 107(38)
16489-16493.
Kahneman, Daniel, Alan B. Krueger, David A. Schkade, Nobert Schwarz, and Arthur A. Stone.
2004. ―A survey method for characterizing daily life experience: The Day Reconstruction
Method.‖ Science, 306, 1776-1780.
Kahneman, Daniel, Peter P. Wakker, and Rakesh Sarin. 1997. ―Back to Bentham? Explorations
of experienced utility.‖ Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(2), 375-405.
Kelly, William. 2004. ―Sleep-Length and Life Satisfaction in a College Student Sample.‖
College Student Journal, 38(3).
Kimball, Miles S., Helen Levy, Fumio Ohtake, and Yoshiro Tsutsui, 2006. ―Unhappiness After
Hurricane Katrina.‖ University of Michigan mimeo.
Kimball, Miles S., Ryan Nunn, and Daniel Silverman, 2010. "Accounting for Adaptation in the
Economics of Happiness." Univeristy of Michigan mimeo.
Kimball, Miles S., and Robert J. Willis. 2006. ―Happiness and Utility.‖ University of Michigan
mimeo.
Koszegi, Botond, and Matthew Rabin. 2008. ―Choices, Situations, and Happiness.‖ Journal of
Public Economics, 92, 1821-1832.

34

Nozick, Robert. 1974. Anarchy, State, and Utopia. New York: Basic Books.
Nussbaum, Martha. 2000. Women and Human Development: The Capabilities Approach.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
O‘Donoghue, Ted, and Matthew Rabin. 1999. ―Doing it now or later.‖ American Economic
Review, 89(1), 103-124.
Oreopoulos, Philip. 2007. ―Do dropouts drop out too soon? Wealth, health and happiness from
compulsory schooling.‖ Journal of Public Economics, 91, 2213–2229.
Sen, Amartya. 1985. Commodities and Capabilities. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Stevenson, Betsey and Justin Wolfers. 2008. ―Economic Growth and Subjective Well-Being:
Reassessing the Easterlin Paradox.‖ Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring, 187.
Stevenson, Betsey and Justin Wolfers. 2009. ―The Paradox of Declining Female Happiness.‖
American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 1(2), 190-225.
Stutzer, Alois and Bruno S. Frey, 2008. ―Stress that Doesn't Pay: The Commuting Paradox,‖
Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 110(2), 339-366.
Stutzer, Alois. 2007. ―Limited Self-Control, Obesity and the Loss of Happiness,‖ IZA
Discussion Papers 2925, Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA).
Truglia, Ricardo Nicolás Pérez. 2010. ―A Samuelsonian Validation Test for Happiness Data,‖
Harvard University mimeo, August 17.
Tsutsui, Yuichi, Miles Kimball, and Fumio Ohtake. 2010. ―Koizumi Carried the Day: Did the
Japanese Election Results Make People Happy and Unhappy?‖ European Journal of
Political Economy, 26, 12-24.
Tversky, Amos, and Dale Griffin. 1991. ―Endowments and Contrast in Judgments of WellBeing.‖ In Richard J. Zeckhauser (ed.), Strategy and Choice, Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press. Reprinted in Kahneman, Daniel, and Amos Tversky (eds.), Choices, Values, and
Frames, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Welsch, Heinz. 2009. ―Implications of happiness research for environmental economics.‖
Ecological Economics, 68, 2735-2742.
White, Mathew P., and Paul Dolan. 2009. ―Accounting for the richness of daily activities.‖
Psychological Science, 20(8), 1000-1008.

35

Table 1: Study-specific Information
Study Location

Denver

Choice vs. SWB: Withinor Between- Subjects
Sample
Design Population
Observations
Scenarios used

Within

CNSS
Between

Volunteers at a doctor‘s waiting room

Within

497

569

Nationally
representative
1000

1, 3, 4, 11, 12, 13

1, 2, 3, 4, 12, 13

1

Cornell
Within

Between

Cornell Students
432†

201
1-10

Observations for each SWB question variant in parenthesis

SWB Question Format
(i) Life Satisfaction
(Isolated)

(164)

(ii) Happiness with Life as
a Whole
(Isolated)

(162)

(569)

(1000)

(iii) Felt Happiness
(Isolated)

(171)

(iv) Own Happiness with
Life as a Whole
Isolated

(107)

First/Last In Series

(107)

(v) Immediately Felt Own
Happiness
Isolated

(110)

First/Last In Series

(108)

(201)

SWB Response Scale

6-point

Binary

7-point

Choice Response Scale

6-point

Binary

6-point

Meta-Choice Question?

Yes

No

No

4-1-11-12-13-3

1-2-12-13-3-4

1

3-13-12-11-1-4

3-13-12-2-1-4‡

Yes

No

Order variations
Scenario order

Question order
Aspects of life order
Summary: number of
questionnaire versions

Choice-Meta-SWB
SWB-Choice-Meta

12

SWB-Choice

1-2- … -9-10

Choice-SWB
Two opposite orderings of 11
non-SWB aspects

4

1

8

4

Notes: See section I for details and for the framing of the choice, SWB, and meta-choice questions; see the Appendix for the list of scenarios (1-13).
† Of these, 230 were surveyed twice, allowing us to conduct measurement-error-corrected estimation.
‡ Scenario 4 is always presented last because it is followed by both a choice and a SWB question. In order to have a clean between-subjects design,
we did not want subjects to know we were interested in both choice and SWB until after subjects were done with the rest of the scenarios. We also
note that this scenario is presented in four different order-versions, so strictly speaking the Denver between-subjects study includes the four
questionnaire versions reported in the table’s bottom row, times four (sixteen versions in total). We report the number four because in terms of the
between-subjects part of this study, there are four versions.

36

Table 2: Choice and SWB Responses Across Studies and Scenarios (continued on next page)

Denver Study
Choice Scenario

Within

For exact phrasing
see Appendix

2

3

4

11

12

13

1

Sleep

Concert

Abs. Inc.

Legacy

Concert

Low Rent

Friends

Sleep

vs

vs

vs

vs

vs

vs

vs

vs

Income

Birthday

Rel. Inc.

Income

Duty

Short
Commute

Income

Income

Higher SWB: Option 1
Chosen: Option 1

58%

48%

24%

16%

52%

50%

74%

Higher SWB: Option 2
Chosen: Option 2

29%

42%

60%

65%

32%

34%

18%

Higher SWB: Option 2
Chosen: Option 1

1%

6%

2%

12%

11%

2%

1%

Higher SWB: Option 1
Chosen: Option 2

12%

4%

14%

7%

5%

14%

7%

p-value from Liddell Exact Test

0.000

0.350

0.000

0.024

0.002

0.000

0.000

n = 425

n = 420

n = 422

n = 422

n = 425

n = 422

n = 972

0.111

0.527

0.044

0.359

0.315

0.071

n = 427

n = 423

n = 427

n = 423

n =427

n = 424

Average p-value from 500 repetitions of
Fisher Exact Test treating within-subject
data as if they were between-subjects

Between

CNSS

1

Version 2

Version 2

Higher SWB: Option 2

34%

86%

51%

***

54%

54%

Chosen: Option 2

44%

84%

48%

***

55%

53%

p-value of Fisher Test

0.020

0.716

0.433

0.930

0.793

n = 526

n = 525

***
n = 525

n = 524

n = 525

Notes: Response distribution by study and scenario. For the complete text of each scenario, see the Appendix. If a scenario‘s phrasing changed meaningfully between surveys, the version of the scenario is indicated in the first
row of the study block. For between-subjects data, we report the Fisher Exact Test p-value testing the null hypothesis that mean response to choice question = mean response to SWB question (an unpaired equality-ofproportions test). For within-subject data, we report the analogous Liddell Exact Test p-value (a paired equality-of-proportions test). In cases where respondents could indicate SWB indifference, responses indicating
indifference were dropped from these tests. To conduct hypothesis tests with equal power for the within- and between-subjects data, we treat the within-subject data as if they were between-subjects by randomly assigning
half of the observations to choice and half to SWB, and only looking at each respondent‘s assigned response. The reported p-value and n are the average across 500 repetitions of this algorithm. See details in section II. Since
Scenario 4 ( ―legacy vs income‖) was not presented in a between-subjects design in spite of being included in the between-subjects part of the Denver study, its results from that part are not reported. For a description of this
scenario‘s results, see section IV.A.

Table 2: Choice and SWB Responses Across Studies and Scenarios (continued from previous page)

Cornell Study
Choice Scenario
For exact phrasing,
see Appendix

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Sleep

Concert

Abs. Inc.

Legacy

Apple

Money

Socialize

Family

Education

Interest

vs

vs

vs

vs

vs

vs

vs

vs

vs

vs

Income

Birthday

Rel. Inc.

Income

Orange

Time

Sleep

Money

Social life

Career

Within

Version 2
Higher SWB: Option 1
Chosen: Option 1
Higher SWB: Option 2
Chosen: Option 2
Higher SWB: Option 2
Chosen: Option 1
Higher SWB: Option 1
Chosen: Option 2

29%

29%

41%

44%

45%

44%

62%

68%

53%

27%

46%

49%

43%

31%

50%

37%

15%

15%

22%

35%

1%

7%

14%

8%

2%

14%

17%

5%

22%

3%

23%

15%

2%

17%

3%

5%

6%

12%

3%

35%

Indifference for SWB

8%

14%

13%

10%

37%

22%

10%

5%

6%

6%

0.000

0.002

0.000

0.001

0.424

0.000

0.000

0.001

0.000

0.000

n = 397

n = 368

n = 375

n = 387

n = 270

n = 333

n = 385

n = 409

n = 402

n = 402

0.025

0.387

0.234

0.348

0.531

0.333

0.184

0.377

0.035

0.002

n = 197

n = 196

n = 193

n = 196

n = 168

n = 194

n = 198

n = 198

n = 198

n = 198

p-value of Liddell Exact Test

Average p-value from 500
repetitions of Fisher Exact
Test.

Between

Version 2
Higher SWB: Option 2

46%

67%

49%

38%

56%

34%

26%

14%

16%

61%

Chosen: Option 2

66%

71%

40%

38%

51%

34%

18%

26%

29%

50%

p-value of Fisher Test

0.006

0.643

0.195

1.000

0.537

1.000

0.234

0.048

0.027

0.117

n = 197

n = 196

n = 193

n = 196

n = 168

n = 194

n = 198

n = 198

n = 198

n = 198

Notes: Response distribution by study and scenario. For the complete text of each scenario, see the Appendix. If a questions phrasing changed meaningfully between surveys, the version of the
question is indicated in the first row of the study block. For between-subjects data, we report the Fisher Exact Test p-value testing the null-hypothesis that mean response to choice question = mean
response to SWB question (an unpaired equality-of-proportions test). For within-subject data, we report the analogous Liddell Exact Test p-value (a paired equality-of-proportions test). In cases where
respondents could indicate SWB indifference, responses indicating indifference were dropped from these tests. To conduct hypothesis tests with equal power for the within- and between-subjects data,
we treat the within-subject data as if they were between-subject by randomly assigning observations to choice or to SWB in numbers that match the between-subjects test, and only looking at each
respondent‘s assigned response. The reported p-value and n are the average across 500 repetitions of this algorithm. See details in section II.

38

Table 3: Regressions of Choice on Aspects of Life
OLS

Ordered
Probit

Probit

None

None
0.46***
(0.010)

SIMEX
Corrected
Additive
0.59***
(0.014)

Family happiness

0.15***
(0.017)

0.08***
(0.015)

0.11***
(0.026)

0.06***
(0.012)

0.09***
(0.017)

0.13***
(0.032)

Health

0.07**
(0.021)

0.00
(0.019)

0.00
(0.031)

0.01
(0.016)

0.01
(0.022)

0.02
(0.042)

Life's level of romance

-0.00
(0.024)

-0.01
(0.021)

0.01
(0.033)

-0.00
(0.018)

-0.00
(0.025)

0.04
(0.045)

Social life

-0.01
(0.020)

-0.03
(0.018)

-0.05
(0.028)

-0.02
(0.015)

-0.02
(0.021)

-0.04
(0.036)

Control over your life

0.17***
(0.017)

0.08***
(0.015)

0.11***
(0.025)

0.06***
(0.012)

0.09***
(0.017)

0.13***
(0.028)

Life's level of spirituality

-0.08**
(0.024)

-0.02
(0.021)

-0.04
(0.036)

-0.02
(0.018)

-0.04
(0.025)

-0.05
(0.047)

Life's level of fun

0.13***
(0.021)

0.05*
(0.018)

0.03
(0.031)

0.04*
(0.015)

0.04*
(0.021)

0.03
(0.036)

Social status

0.07***
(0.016)

0.06***
(0.014)

0.07**
(0.023)

0.05***
(0.012)

0.07***
(0.016)

0.10***
(0.027)

Life's non-boringness

0.07***
(0.020)

-0.01
(0.017)

-0.01
(0.030)

0.00
(0.014)

0.00
(0.020)

0.01
(0.037)

Physical comfort

0.09***
(0.017)

0.04**
(0.014)

0.03
(0.023)

0.04**
(0.012)

0.05**
(0.017)

0.04
(0.030)

Measurement error correction
Own happiness

None
0.54***
(0.009)

None
0.37***
(0.009)

None
0.37***
(0.012)

SIMEX
Corrected
Additive
0.48***
(0.019)

0.21***
0.12***
0.13***
0.10***
0.12***
0.14***
(0.015)
(0.013)
(0.022)
(0.011)
(0.015)
(0.025)
Observations
6285
6220
6217
6217
6217
6217
6217
(pseudo) R2
0.38
0.21
0.41
0.19
0.35
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. In the OLS and ordered probit regressions, the dependent variable is 6-point choice. In the probit regressions the dependent variable is binary choice. All
regressions use 7-point ratings of aspects. Based on 633 Cornell respondents. Each observation is a respondent's ratings for one scenario; there are 10 observations per respondent corresponding to the
10 scenarios in the questionnaires. Probit and ordered probit regressions include (unreported) scenario fixed effects. OLS regressions’ variables are demeaned at the scenario level, generating
coefficients equivalent to including scenario fixed effects. Measurement error corrections are done using the simulation extrapolation method described in section III, under the assumption of additive
measurement error. * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001
Sense of purpose

39

Table 4: OLS Regressions of Choice on All Aspects of Life, by Scenario
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

All
questions

Sleep
vs
Income

Concert
vs
Birthday

Abs. Inc.
vs
Rel. Inc.

Legacy
vs
Income

Apple
vs
Orange

Money
vs
Time

Socialize
vs
Sleep

Family
vs
Money

Education
vs
Social life

Interest
vs
Career

Own happiness

0.46***
(0.010)

0.38***
(0.031)

0.44***
(0.031)

0.52***
(0.032)

0.44***
(0.031)

0.73***
(0.036)

0.53***
(0.036)

0.31***
(0.032)

0.53***
(0.033)

0.35***
(0.029)

0.27***
(0.030)

Family happiness

0.08***
(0.015)

0.07*
(0.032)

0.01
(0.071)

0.16***
(0.046)

0.05
(0.041)

0.16
(0.159)

0.15*
(0.059)

-0.09
(0.053)

0.05
(0.050)

0.14***
(0.037)

0.21***
(0.041)

Health

0.00
(0.019)

-0.05
(0.055)

-0.07
(0.076)

-0.11
(0.077)

-0.04
(0.058)

0.05
(0.065)

0.06
(0.075)

0.18***
(0.054)

0.05
(0.057)

-0.03
(0.044)

-0.06
(0.063)

Life's level of romance

-0.01
(0.021)

0.08
(0.059)

-0.02
(0.064)

0.07
(0.078)

-0.00
(0.066)

-0.67**
(0.228)

-0.10
(0.086)

0.02
(0.054)

-0.03
(0.068)

0.01
(0.053)

0.01
(0.072)

Social life

-0.03
(0.018)

-0.02
(0.055)

0.02
(0.043)

-0.01
(0.056)

0.00
(0.058)

0.02
(0.225)

0.04
(0.071)

-0.00
(0.065)

-0.05
(0.053)

-0.04
(0.053)

0.01
(0.054)

Control over your life

0.08***
(0.015)

0.02
(0.042)

0.05
(0.053)

0.04
(0.056)

0.08*
(0.039)

-0.00
(0.093)

0.07
(0.052)

0.15***
(0.043)

0.05
(0.049)

0.06
(0.038)

0.07*
(0.035)

Life's level of spirituality

-0.02
(0.021)

-0.04
(0.049)

-0.00
(0.061)

-0.16
(0.090)

0.13*
(0.055)

0.31
(0.221)

-0.15
(0.091)

-0.01
(0.076)

-0.15*
(0.062)

-0.00
(0.054)

-0.01
(0.068)

Life's level of fun

0.05*
(0.018)

0.06
(0.042)

0.15**
(0.051)

0.04
(0.066)

0.05
(0.047)

-0.08
(0.127)

0.13
(0.068)

-0.03
(0.073)

0.03
(0.059)

0.06
(0.057)

-0.00
(0.057)

Social status

0.06***
(0.014)

-0.00
(0.036)

0.04
(0.045)

0.05
(0.040)

0.04
(0.036)

-0.27
(0.227)

-0.01
(0.061)

0.06
(0.059)

0.11
(0.060)

0.06*
(0.029)

0.16***
(0.043)

Life's non-boringness

-0.01
(0.017)

0.05
(0.037)

-0.03
(0.054)

0.22**
(0.078)

-0.01
(0.047)

0.09
(0.121)

-0.03
(0.060)

0.18**
(0.062)

-0.05
(0.061)

-0.02
(0.055)

0.05
(0.055)

Physical comfort

0.04**
(0.014)

0.09*
(0.036)

0.00
(0.060)

-0.05
(0.054)

0.00
(0.042)

0.21**
(0.066)

-0.00
(0.049)

0.05
(0.048)

-0.10*
(0.041)

0.06
(0.040)

-0.02
(0.049)

Choice Scenario
For exact phrasing,
see Appendix

0.12***
0.17***
0.12**
0.12**
0.12**
0.29*
0.05
0.04
0.09*
0.17***
0.17***
(0.013)
(0.038)
(0.047)
(0.044)
(0.041)
(0.119)
(0.050)
(0.044)
(0.046)
(0.037)
(0.029)
Observations
6217
615
621
620
624
624
619
622
625
626
621
R2
0.41
0.46
0.43
0.53
0.41
0.58
0.42
0.32
0.38
0.43
0.37
Incremental R2
0.03
0.06
0.03
0.04
0.04
0.02
0.02
0.07
0.02
0.08
0.13
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. OLS regressions of 6-point choice on 7-point aspects of life. Based on 633 Cornell respondents. The leftmost column aggregates data across choice scenarios;
each of the other columns corresponds to a specific scenario. Each observation is a respondent’s ratings for one scenario; there are 10 observations per respondent corresponding to the 10 scenarios in
the questionnaires. All variables are demeaned at the scenario level, generating coefficients equivalent to including scenario fixed effects. ―Incremental R2‖ is the difference in R2 between the reported
multivariate regression and a univariate regression of choice on happiness; it represents the increased percentage of variation in choice that can be explained by including the additional aspects. * p <
0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001
Sense of purpose

40

Figure 1: Raw Response Distributions (Choice and Aspects of Life)

All
Scenarios

Choice

Own Happiness

Family Happiness

1

1
Sleep
vs
Income

6

1

2
Concert
vs
Birthday

6

1

3
Abs. Inc.
vs
Rel. Inc.

6

1

4
Legacy
vs
Income

6

1

5
Apple
vs
Orange

6

1

6
Money
vs
Time

6

1

7
Socialize
vs
Sleep

6

1

8
Family
vs
Money

6

1

9
Education
vs
Social Life

6

1

10
Interest
vs
Career

6

1

6

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

1

4

7

Health

Romance

Social Life

Control

Spirituality

Fun

Social Status

Non-boringness

Comfort

Purpose

Notes: Based on 633 Cornell respondents. See details in text. The histograms show the distribution of 6-point responses to the choice question (top row) and 7-point responses to the aspect questions
(bottom twelve rows). The leftmost column aggregates data across choice scenarios; each of the other columns corresponds to a specific scenario.

41

Appendix: Scenarios Presented in Surveys

Scenario 1: Sleep vs. Income
Say you have to decide between two new jobs. The jobs are exactly the same in almost every
way, but have different work hours and pay different amounts.

Option 1: A job paying $80,000 per year. The hours for this job are reasonable, and you would
be able to get about 7.5 hours of sleep on the average work night.

Option 2: A job paying $140,000 per year. However, this job requires you to go to work at
unusual hours, and you would only be able to sleep around 6 hours on the average work night.

Scenario 2: Concert vs. Birthday
Suppose you promised a close friend that you would attend his or her 50th [―21st‖ in student
samples] birthday dinner. However, at the last minute you find out that you have won front row
seats to see your favorite musician, and the concert is at the same time as the dinner. This is the
musician’s last night in town. You face two options:
Option 1: Skip your friend’s birthday dinner to attend the concert.
Option 2: Attend your friend’s birthday dinner and miss the concert.

Scenario 3: Absolute Income vs. Relative Income
Suppose you are considering a new job, and have offers from two companies. Even though all
aspects of the two jobs are identical, employees’ salaries are different across the two companies
due to arbitrary timing of when salary benchmarks happened to be set. Everyone in each
company knows the other employees’ salaries. You must choose one of the two companies,
which means you must decide between the following two options:

Option 1: Your yearly income is $105,000, while on average others at your level earn $120,000.

42

Option 2: Your yearly income is $100,000, while on average others at your level earn $85,000.

Scenario 4: Legacy vs. Income
(Phrasing in Denver within-subject study): Suppose you are a skilled artist, and you have to
decide between two career paths for your life.

Option 1: You devote yourself to your own style of painting. This would require a number of
sacrifices, such as having less time for friends and family, and making less money. For example,
you expect that selling your paintings will give you an income of $40,000 a year. If you choose
this path, you don’t expect that your work will be appreciated in your lifetime, but posthumously
you will make an impact on the history of art, achieve fame, and be remembered in your work.

Option 2: You become a graphic designer at an advertising company. This would give you more
money and more time with friends and family than Option 1. The company is offering you a
salary of $60,000 a year, which will afford you a much more comfortable lifestyle, but you will
have no impact and leave no legacy to be remembered.

(Phrasing in Denver between-subject study and Cornell study) : Suppose you are a skilled artist,
and you have to decide between two career paths for your life. There are two styles of painting
that you consider to be your own style, and you enjoy both equally. Style 1 happens to be much
less popular than Style 2 today, but you know it will be an important style in the future.

Option 1: You devote yourself to Style 1. You expect that selling your paintings will give you
an income of $40,000 a year. If you choose this path, you don’t expect that your work will be
appreciated in your lifetime, but posthumously you will make an impact on the history of art,
achieve fame, and be remembered in your work.

Option 2: You devote yourself to Style 2. You expect that selling your paintings will give you
an income of $60,000 a year, but you will have no memorable impact. [In the Denver betweensubject study, each subject saw this question three times, with different salaries in option 2. This

43

number took a value of either $42,000, $60,000, $80,000, or $100,000.]

Scenario 5: Apple vs. Orange
Suppose you are checking out a new supermarket that just opened near where you live. As you
walk by the fresh fruit display, you are offered your choice of a free snack:

Option 1: A freshly sliced apple.

Option 2: A freshly sliced orange.

Scenario 6: Money vs. Time
Suppose that due to budget cuts, the school implements a ―student activities fee‖ of $15 dollars a
week to help pay for maintenance of facilities used for extracurricular student activities.
However, the school allows you to not pay the fee if instead you put in 2 hours of service a week
shelving books at the library. You face two options:

Option 1: Spend 2 hours a week shelving books.

Option 2: Pay $15 a week.
Scenario 7: Socialize vs. Sleep
Say you are hanging out with a group of friends at your friend’s room. You are having a really
good time, but it is getting to be late at night. You have to decide between two options.
Option 1: Stay up another hour. It is likely you will feel tired all day tomorrow, but this
particular evening you are having an especially fun time.
Option 2: Excuse yourself from the group, and go to bed. You will be disappointed to miss the
fun, but you know you will feel better the next day and be more productive at paying attention in
class and doing your homework.
Scenario 8: Family vs. Money

44

Imagine that for the first time in three years, your parents (or if your parents are gone, your
closest relatives who are older than you) have arranged for a special family gathering that will
happen the day after Thanksgiving, with everyone also invited to Thanksgiving dinner. You face
two options. Would you choose to go to the family gathering the day after Thanksgiving (and
maybe to Thanksgiving dinner) if getting there required a $500 roundtrip plane ticket for plane
flights that were 5 hours each way?
Option 1: Go to the thanksgiving gathering, which requires a $500 round trip plane ticket.
Option 2: Miss the thanksgiving gathering, but save the money.
Scenario 9: Education vs. Social Life
Suppose you have decided to leave Cornell, and are transferring to a new school. You have been
accepted to two schools, and are deciding where to go. The first school is extremely selective and
high quality, but is in a small town out in the country with a less active social scene. The second
school is in a major city with a great social scene, but is slightly less renowned. Which would
you choose?
Option 1: Highly selective school, isolated socially and geographically.
Option 2: Less selective school, socially active and in a major city.
Scenario 10: Interest vs. Career
Suppose you are considering two summer internships. One is extremely interesting and involves
work you are passionate about, but does not advance your career. The other will likely be boring,
but will help you get a job in the future. Which would you choose?
Option 1: Interesting internship which does not advance career.
Option 2: Boring internship which will help you get a job.
Scenario 11: Concert vs. Duty
Say you are driving by yourself to see your favorite musician in concert on their last day in town.
45

You are five minutes away, and the concert starts in ten minutes. On the drive, you witness a
truck hit a parked car, causing roughly $500 in damages, and then drive away without leaving
their information. You notice the truck’s license plate, and you are the only witness. You face
two options:

Option 1: Keep driving and get to the concert on time.

Option 2: Call the police, in which case you will have to wait around the parked car to give a
testimony. This would take about half an hour. You would have trouble finding a seat and might
miss the whole concert.

Scenario 12: Low Rent vs. Short Commute
(Phrasing in Denver within-subject study): Say you are moving to a new town. You are trying to
decide between two similar apartments which you could rent. The two apartments are identical in
almost everything – including floor plan, amenities, neighborhood character, schools, safety, etc.
However, they have different rents and are located at different distances from your work.

Option 1: An apartment which requires a 45-minute drive to work. The rent is about 20% of
your monthly income.

Option 2: A similar apartment, with only a 10-minute drive. The rent is about 40% of your
monthly income.

(Phrasing in Denver between-subject study): Say you are moving to a new town. The new town
is known for its terrible traffic jams, and driving there is widely considered to be unpleasant. You
are trying to decide between two similar apartments which you could rent. The two apartments
are identical in almost everything – including floor plan, amenities, neighborhood character,
schools, safety, etc. However, they have different rents and are located at different distances
from your work.

Option 1: An apartment which requires a 45-minute drive each way to work. The commute has

46

heavy traffic almost the whole way. The rent is about 20% of your monthly income.

Option 2: A similar apartment which requires a 10-minute drive each way to work. The
commute has heavy traffic almost the whole way. The rent is about 40% of your monthly
income.

Scenario 13: Friends vs Income
Say you have been reassigned at your job, and will be moved to a new location. There are two
offices where you could request to work. One office is in a city where many of your friends
happen to live, and pays 20% less than your current salary. The other office is in a city where
you don’t know anyone, and pays 10% more than your current salary. Your job will be exactly
the same at either office. You must decide between the following two options:

Option 1: Make 20% less than your current salary and move to the city with your friends.

Option 2: Make 10% more than your current salary and move to a city where you do not know
anyone.

47

