                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                     SNOW AND LEVERAGE

                                          Xavier Giroud
                                         Holger M. Mueller
                                           Alex Stomper
                                         Arne Westerkamp

                                        Working Paper 16497
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16497


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2010




We are especially grateful to our discussants, Michael Roberts and Tim Adam, as well as to Mike
Lemmon, Josh Rauh, Jacob Sagi, David Scharfstein, Philipp Schnabl, Antoinette Schoar, Jeremy Stein,
Ilya Strebulaev, Amir Sufi, Eluvon Thadden, Ivo Welch, and seminar participants at the NBER Corporate
Finance Summer Institute, the European Winter Finance Summit, New York University, Vanderbilt
University, Humboldt University,and University of Mannheim for helpful comments. We thank the
Austrian Hotel - and Tourism Bank, especially Bernhard Fuchs,and the Austrian Central Institute for
Meteorology and Geodynamics for providing us with data.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Xavier Giroud, Holger M. Mueller, Alex Stomper, and Arne Westerkamp. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Snow and Leverage
Xavier Giroud, Holger M. Mueller, Alex Stomper, and Arne Westerkamp
NBER Working Paper No. 16497
October 2010, Revised June 2011
JEL No. G32,G34

                                             ABSTRACT

Using a sample of highly (over-)leveraged Austrian ski hotels undergoing debt restructurings, we show that
reducing a debt overhang leads to a significant improvement in operating performance (return on assets,
net profit margin). In particular, a reduction in leverage leads to a decrease in overhead costs, wages,
and input costs, and to an increase in sales. Changes in leverage in the debt restructurings are
instrumented with Unexpected Snow, which captures the extent to which a ski hotel experienced
unusually good or bad snow conditions prior to the debt restructuring. Effectively, Unexpected Snow
provides lending banks with the counterfactual of what would have been the skihotel’s operating
performance in the absence of strategic default, thus allowing to distinguish between ski hotels
that are in distress due to negative demand shocks (“liquidity defaulters”) and ski hotels that are
in distress due to debt overhang (“strategic defaulters”).


Xavier Giroud                                       Alex Stomper
Stern School of Business                            MIT Sloan School of Management
New York University                                 50 Memorial Drive
44 West Fourth Street                               Cambridge, MA 02142
Suite 9-190                                         astomper@mit.edu
New York, NY 10012-1126
xgiroud@stern.nyu.edu                               Arne Westerkamp
                                                    WU Wien
Holger M. Mueller                                   Heiligenstaedter Str. 46
Stern School of Business                            Vienna, Austria
New York University                                 arne.westerkamp@wu.ac.at
44 West Fourth Street
Suite 9-190
New York, NY 10012-1126
and NBER
hmueller@stern.nyu.edu
1       Introduction
In his seminal article, Myers (1977) shows that owners of debt-ridden firms may forgo
profitable investment opportunities and exert too little eﬀort to maintain the firm’s value
as a going concern, because the returns from such investments would partly accrue to
the firm’s debtholders.1 For the same reason, firm owners may strategically pay out cash
to themselves (as wages or dividends) or sell vital firm assets on the secondary market
and pocket the proceeds.2 As Myers (1977, p. 162) notes, whether firm owners forgo
profitable investments or disinvest is immaterial; the two cases are exactly symmetric.
In the extreme case, debt overhang may not only lead to underinvestment, but it may
eﬀectively lead to the firm’s “strategic default.”3
    In the recent financial crisis, debt overhang plays a key role not only at the level of
banks and financial institutions (e.g., Diamond and Rajan, 2010; Veronesi and Zingales,
2010; Philippon and Schnabl, 2011) but also at the individual household level. Many
households with negative home equity strategically defaulted on their mortgages even
though they could have aﬀorded to make their mortgage payments (Melzer, 2010; Guiso,
Sapienza, and Zingales, 2011). In addition, Melzer (2010) finds that households with
negative home equity significantly cut back on home improvements and home maintenance
spending–investments whose returns would have accrued to the mortgage lender in case
of a default. At the same time, they did not reduce spending on automobiles, furniture,

    1
     Myers (1977) gives several examples: “The discretionary investment may be maintenance of plant
and equipment. It may be advertising or other marketing expenses, or expenditures on raw materials,
labor, research and development, etc.” (p. 155). Another important discretionary investment is eﬀort:
“The value of a going concern can be maintained only by positive action, in a competitive industry the
firm should have to work hard to simply keep up. This is not simply a matter of maintaining plant and
equipment. There is continual eﬀort devoted to advertising, sales, improving eﬃciency, incorporating
new technology, and recruiting and training employees” (p. 156).
    2
     “[S]uppose the firm has plenty of cash on hand. It can either invest the cash or pay it out to the
stockholders. In that case the investment is financed not by a stock issue, but by forgoing a dividend”
(Myers, 1977, pp. 159-160). Likewise, “[c]onsider a firm which is holding a real asset for which there is
a secondary market. [...] The shareholders should attempt to liquidate and run, leaving the creditors
holding the empty bag” (p. 162).
    3
     In multi-period strategic default models (e.g., Bolton and Scharfstein, 1990), incentive compatibility
is achieved by setting the repayment to creditors such that the firm finds it (weakly) optimal to continue
rather than to “steal the money and run.” Thus, the solution is precisely to make the debt repayment
suﬃciently low so as to avoid strategic default induced by debt overhang.

                                                    2
and home appliances, suggesting that the problem is indeed one of debt overhang and not
simply a liquidity shortage.
    Given its importance both for policy and practice, the debt overhang problem has
spurred a large empirical literature. An important concern with many studies is that
they rely on variation in leverage that is unlikely to be exogenous, making it diﬃcult to
establish causality.4 This paper provides evidence on the debt overhang problem using
a sample of highly (over-)leveraged Austrian ski hotels undergoing debt restructurings.
Debt restructurings are ideal for the study of debt overhang: by definition, any (ex-post)
solution must involve renegotiations with creditors.5 More importantly, the specific nature
of our data allows us to identify plausibly exogenous variation in leverage changes and
thus to address whether–for highly (over-)leveraged firms–a reduction in leverage leads
to an improvement in operating performance.
    In our sample, the average (book) leverage ratio prior to the debt restructuring is
2.40. As a result of the debt restructurings, leverage decreases by 23% on average. This
decrease is entirely due to debt reductions (i.e., forgiveness), not due to increases in asset
values. In fact, asset values decrease slightly (by 1% on average) due to forced asset
sales. However, while there is a significant reduction in leverage on average, there is
substantial cross-sectional variation. Indeed, not all ski hotels may be in distress due to
debt overhang. Some hotels may be in distress due to negative demand shocks, resulting
in weak operating performance and poor liquidity. For such hotels, there is no reason
for creditors to forgive debt–it would merely constitute a windfall gain for the hotels.
Rather, creditors should extend debt maturity and defer interest payments. By contrast,
for hotels that are in distress due to debt overhang, it can be optimal for creditors to
forgive debt (see Myers, 1977, p. 158).6

   4
       We discuss related empirical literature at the end of this section.
   5
     See Myers (1977, p. 158) or Tirole (2006, pp. 125-126). Accordingly, what gives the debt overhang
problem its bite is the absence of renegotiation, not excessive leverage per se. While renegotiation can
solve the debt overhang problem ex post, there are, of course, ex-ante solutions, notably to take on less
debt. In fact, this the main point of Myers’ article, namely, to argue why the possibility of a (future)
debt overhang may prevent firms from taking on too much debt despite the obvious tax advantages.
   6
    From the creditors’ viewpoint, debt forgiveness is only optimal if it increases the expected debt
repayment by the firm (via an improvement in operating performance). In this case, debt forgiveness is

                                                       3
    An obvious diﬃculty for creditors is to distinguish between these two types of distress.
As Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2011, p. 2) write: “The main problem in studying
strategic defaults is that this is de facto an unobservable event. While we do observe
defaults, we cannot observe whether a default is strategic.” Looking at operating perfor-
mance or cash balances might not help: “strategic defaulters” might also exhibit poor
operating performance and low cash balances, albeit for diﬀerent reasons (see footnotes
1 and 2). To identify “strategic defaulters,” creditors would eﬀectively need to know the
counterfactual of what would have been the firm’s operating performance in the absence of
strategic default.
    While this counterfactual is, by definition, unobservable, creditors can–in the spe-
cific context studied here–observe a variable that is highly correlated with it: snow.
Out-of-sample evidence from over 2,000 Austrian ski hotels that did not undergo debt
restructurings shows a strong positive relation between snow and operating performance
(ROA). This is not surprising. After all, snow aﬀects the demand for ski vacations, which
in turn aﬀects the profits of ski hotels. Accordingly, if a ski hotel experienced poor
snow conditions prior to the debt restructuring, it is relatively likely that this hotel is a
(genuine) “liquidity defaulter.” In contrast, if a ski hotel got into distress despite having
experienced highly favorable snow conditions, it is less likely that this hotel is a “liquidity
defaulter” and more likely that it is a “strategic defaulter.”
    We measure “poor” and “favorable” snow conditions prior to the debt restructuring
relative to the hotels’ own average snow conditions in the previous ten years. We call
this measure Unexpected Snow. Accordingly, Unexpected Snow captures the extent to
which a ski hotel experienced unusually good or bad snow conditions prior to the debt
restructuring. Indeed, and consistent with the above hypothesis, ski hotels with negative
Unexpected Snow did not receive significant reductions in leverage. In contrast, ski hotels
with positive Unexpected Snow received substantial reductions in leverage. Moreover, ski

a Pareto-improvement that benefits both the firm and its creditors. Krugman (1989) explicitly models
the choice of creditors between “Financing vs. Forgiving a Debt Overhang.” In his model, “financing”
a debt overhang means to roll over maturing debt, which is optimal if there is a temporary (exogenous)
liquidity shock. In contrast, “forgiving” a debt overhang is optimal if the borrower’s incentives to invest
and to provide eﬀort are distorted. Though Krugman applies these arguments to sovereign lending, they
already follow directly from Myers’ (1977) seminal analysis.

                                                    4
hotels with negative and positive Unexpected Snow had similar (weak) operating perfor-
mance and cash balances prior to the debt restructuring, suggesting that creditors cannot
easily use this information to identify “strategic defaulters.”
   While comparisons between ski hotels with negative and positive Unexpected Snow
are insightful, they are based on “raw data.” However, we obtain similar results when
using a regression framework. When we regress changes in leverage (after versus before
the debt restructuring) on Unexpected Snow prior to the debt restructuring (our first-
stage regression), we find that ski hotels with higher (i.e., more positive) Unexpected
Snow receive significantly larger reductions in leverage. The eﬀect is also economically
significant: a one-standard deviation increase in Unexpected Snow is associated with a
reduction in leverage of 23% on average.
   The main objective of our study is to examine whether–for highly (over-)leveraged
firms–reductions in leverage lead to improvements in operating performance. When
estimating OLS regressions, we find that smaller reductions in leverage are associated
with larger increases in ROA. However, it is not diﬃcult to think of a reverse causality
explanation. For instance, ski hotels with larger anticipated increases in ROA might
receive less debt forgiveness, resulting in smaller reductions in leverage.
   In stark contrast, when we regress changes in ROA on changes in leverage using
only exogenous variation in leverage–i.e., we instrument changes in leverage using Un-
expected Snow prior to the debt restructuring–we find the opposite result: ski hotels
with larger reductions in leverage now experience significantly larger increases in ROA.
The eﬀect is also economically significant: a reduction in leverage of 23%–the average in
our sample–is associated with an increase in ROA of 28% Thus, consistent with Myers’
(1977) argument that debt overhang impairs firm performance, we find that–for highly
(over-)leveraged firms–a reduction in leverage leads to a statistically and economically
significant increase in ROA. We obtain similar results if we measure operating perfor-
mance using net profit margin (where EBITDA is scaled by sales), and if we estimate
median regressions to account for the possibility of outliers.
   To gain a better understanding of why a reduction in leverage leads to an increase in
ROA, we run separate regressions using individual components of ROA as the dependent

                                             5
variable. We find that a reduction in leverage leads to a decrease in overhead costs,
wages, and input costs, and to an increase in sales, albeit the input cost result is not
statistically significant. The wage result is particularly interesting. As the hotels in our
sample are small, family-run hotels, wages are partly transfers to the hotels’ owners and
their family members. Thus, while a decrease in wages (per employee) may be interpreted
as an improvement in operational eﬃciency, it might also be interpreted–and perhaps
especially so–as evidence of the owners’ willingness to keep cash in the firm rather than
to pay it out strategically to themselves.7
    When we regress changes in ROA on changes in leverage–instrumented with Un-
expected Snow prior to the debt restructuring–we always control for changes in snow.
Thus, if ROA improves after the debt restructuring, it is not because snow conditions
have improved. With respect to the validity of our instrument, this implies any potential
direct eﬀect of Unexpected Snow–i.e., other than through changes in leverage–due to se-
rial correlation of snow conditions is already accounted for. To further assess the validity
of our instrument, we provide out-of-sample evidence from over 2,000 Austrian ski hotels
that did not undergo debt restructurings. As we show, Unexpected Snow is uncorrelated
with both changes in ROA and future ROA, suggesting it has no direct eﬀect on the
dependent variable in our second-stage regression.8
    A second test we perform also uses the (control) sample of ski hotels that did not
undergo debt restructurings. The idea is straightforward. If the increase in ROA was due
to a direct eﬀect of Unexpected Snow, then other ski hotels in the same region should also
experience an increase in ROA, given that they are exposed to the same snow conditions.
Based on this logic, we construct a new performance measure, Locally Adjusted ROA,

   7
     See footnote 2. From an ex-ante viewpoint, creditors might want to commit to “punish” (e.g.,
liquidate) “strategic defaulters” knowing that renegotiation is (Pareto-)optimal ex post. Our result that
ski hotels with positive Unexpected Snow receive significant reductions in leverage is consistent with ex-
post optimal behavior on the part of creditors, suggesting it is diﬃcult for creditors to credibly commit not
to renegotiate. However, our result is also consistent with creditors pursuing an ex-ante optimal strategy
whereby “strategic defaulters” are only liquidated with probability  while with probability 1 −  the
ex-post optimal outcome is implemented. This is possible as we do not observe liquidations. Thus, it
might well be that the restructuring cases in our sample are those that are renegotiated with probability
1 −  under an ex-ante optimal strategy.
   8
     Although we always control for changes in snow, it should be noted that Unexpected Snow is uncor-
related with future snow, future Unexpected Snow, changes in snow, and changes in Unexpected Snow.

                                                     6
which is ROA minus the median ROA of all control hotels in the same region and year.
Our results remain virtually unchanged, suggesting they are not driven by a direct eﬀect
of Unexpected Snow on changes in ROA.
   In the final part of our analysis, we account for possible selection bias. A necessary
condition for a ski hotel to be restructured is that it must be “structurally important,”
meaning it must be a large hotel relative to other hotels in the same municipality. Based
on this criterion, we construct a new variable, Local Capacity Share, which we use as an
instrument in the selection equation. Importantly, Local Capacity Share does not capture
aspects of the hotel’s performance and is therefore likely exogenous in the second-stage
regression. Our results remain virtually unchanged, and the Inverse Mills Ratio is not
significant, suggesting they are not driven by selection bias.
   As remarked previously, debt renegotiations are ideal for the study of debt overhang.
Other studies also examine debt renegotiations, albeit they do not consider subsequent
changes in operating performance.9 Gilson, John, and Lang (1990) consider 169 publicly
traded U.S. companies that are in financial distress. The authors examine which of
the companies successfully restructure their debt outside of bankruptcy and which of
them file for Chapter 11. Similarly, Asquith, Gertner, and Scharfstein (1994) consider 76
companies that issue high-yield “junk” bonds and subsequently become distressed. The
authors examine how these firms attempt to resolve their financial distress and which
of them eventually file for Chapter 11. Roberts and Sufi (2009a) consider 1,000 private
credit agreements between financial institutions and publicly traded U.S. companies. The
authors conclude that key triggers of renegotiation are fluctuations in borrowers’ assets,
financial leverage, the cost of equity capital, macroeconomic conditions, and the financial
health of lenders.
   Andrade and Kaplan (1998) examine 31 highly leveraged transactions that later be-
come financially distressed. In the majority of cases, the distress is resolved through
Chapter 11. The authors conclude that the “pure” costs of financial distress are modest
at best. Other studies focus on investment. Lang, Ofek, and Stulz (1996) show that


   9
       Roberts and Sufi (2009b) survey the theoretical and empirical literature on debt renegotiations.

                                                     7
leverage is negatively related to investment, employment growth, and capital expenditure
growth. Using a structural approach, Hennessy (2004) derives an empirical proxy for
levered equity’s marginal Q, generating a direct test for debt overhang. In the empirical
test of his model, he finds that debt overhang significantly impairs investment. In related
work, Whited (1992) shows that augmenting an investment Euler equation with a credit
constraint that includes both leverage and interest coverage ratios greatly improves the
Euler equation’s fit.
     Perhaps most closely related to our study is an unpublished paper by Kroszner (1999)
on the Supreme Court’s decision to uphold the abolition of gold indexation clauses in
public and private debt contracts passed by Congress in 1933. As Kroszner argues, “the
Supreme Court decision is eﬀectively a debt forgiveness equivalent to 69% of the value of
a firm’s debt” (p. 20). He finds that both equity prices and corporate bond prices rise
upon the announcement of the Supreme Court’s decision.
     The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses institutional details.
Section 3 provides an example based on an actual case from our sample. Section 4 discusses
sample selection, empirical methodology, and summary statistics. Section 5 contains our
main results. Section 6 discusses the strength and validity of our instrument. Section 7
addresses selection bias. Section 8 concludes. The Appendix provides a discussion of the
timing conventions used in the construction of our variables.



2         Institutional Background
As is common in many countries, Austrian firms may try to restructure their debt prior to
filing for bankruptcy. Typically, debt restructurings are the outcome of direct negotiations
between the firm and its lender(s). In the Austrian tourism industry, however, debt
restructurings often involve the participation of the Austrian Hotel- and Tourism Bank
(AHTB).10 Founded in 1947, the AHTB–which is also our main data provider–is a
development bank that administers funds provided by the European Recovery Program
(ERP or “Marshall Plan”). While the AHTB also provides limited financial support,
    10
         The German name is Österreichische Hotel- und Tourismus Bank Ges.m.b.H.

                                                   8
its role in the debt restructurings is primarily that of a mediator, given that it does
not take on any credit risk.11 Mediation by the AHTB is desirable as it ensures that
the negotiations take place in a coordinated and multilateral fashion. This is especially
important in the context of debt renegotiations, where the presence of multiple lending
banks can create free-rider problems that may lead to a breakdown of the negotiations.
In our sample of 115 debt restructurings, 70 cases involve at least two lending banks, and
33 cases involve at least four lending banks.
    Given its role as a mediator, the AHTB collects data on the distressed hotels, in-
cluding “soft” information gathered from on-site visits by the AHTB’s loan oﬃcers. The
first main data collection takes place prior to the debt restructuring. These data, which
include both “hard” and “soft” information, constitute our “before” data. The AHTB
also collects post-restructuring data, with varying frequency, to monitor the success of
the debt restructuring. These data, which typically only include “hard” information,
constitute our “after” data.
    For the AHTB to be involved in the negotiations, certain eligibility criteria must be
met. For instance, the AHTB’s mandate is restricted to “structurally important hotels.”
While this criterion is rather “soft,” it is usually satisfied if a hotel is the largest hotel
among all hotels in the same municipality and sales exceed Euro 360,000. In addition, a
number of necessary conditions must be met. For instance, the book value of the hotel’s
debt must be at least 15 times its total sales, the book value of equity must be smaller
than eight percent of total assets, and the restructuring must not involve investments into
the hotel’s assets that are not essential for regaining profitability. Among other things,
this precludes investments in land or capacity expansions and investments to complete
projects already under way. There are also restrictions imposed by the European Union.
For instance, the hotel must be a small- or medium-sized enterprise, and it must have
been founded more than three years ago.
    If the eligibility criteria are met, the mediation starts with an on-site inspection by


  11
     The AHTB provides limited financial support in the form of interest rate subsidies and small loans,
though the loans must be fully guaranteed by another lending bank. That the AHTB does not take on
any credit risk follows from a requirement by the ERP.

                                                   9
the AHTB’s loan oﬃcers. The AHTB then produces a report that is sent to all parties
involved–i.e., the hotel’s owner(s) and its lending bank(s)–along with an invitation to
a meeting to discuss restructuring options. The report includes, besides “hard” financial
information, also other information about the hotel, e.g., the date of the last renovation,
number of employees, banking relationships, number of beds, price per night, whether it
is a “leading” hotel (Leitbetrieb), and legal form, as well as information about the hotel’s
owner(s) and their use of hotel assets, e.g., whether the property is used for private
purposes, whether spouses or children work in the hotel, and when the hotel received its
operating license under the current owner. The report may also include an assessment
by the AHTB’s loan oﬃcers as to the likely causes of the hotel’s distress. Unfortunately,
the level of detail varies considerably across reports. While “hard” financial information
is available for most hotels in our sample, other information is sometimes only available
for a smaller subset.
    The purpose of the negotiations is to devise a restructuring plan, which stipulates–
next to the obligations of the hotel’s owner(s)–the obligations of the lending bank(s)
in the debt restructuring. Typically, the negotiations fail if at least one lending bank is
unwilling to agree to the restructuring plan, and this lending bank cannot be removed
from the bargaining table, e.g., because no other lender can be found who is willing to
buy out the (dissenting) lending bank’s claims. If the negotiations fail, the hotel has
essentially three options: it can enter formal bankruptcy, it can remain in distress, or it
can negotiate with its lending bank(s) on a bilateral basis.



3     Case Study
This example is based on an actual case from our sample. For confidentiality reasons, it
does not contain the name(s) of the hotel, its owner(s), and its lending bank(s).
    The hotel is located in a small village with famous ski areas nearby. Being over 300
years old, it was taken over by the current owner 12 years before the debt restructuring.
Like virtually all hotels in our sample, the hotel is managed by the owner and his family.
The hotel has an average of nine employees (not counting family members), 34 rooms,

                                            10
and 71 beds, making it a rather typical hotel in our sample. The hotel is structured as a
“Gesellschaft nach bürgerlichem Recht,” which means each of the owners is individually
and personally liable for all of the hotel’s liabilities. This legal form is typical of most
hotels in our sample.
   As the report by the AHTB’s loan oﬃcers suggests, the hotel experienced a sharp
decline in demand in the years prior to the debt restructuring. Compared to four years
before the debt restructuring, the number of nights stayed dropped by 31.8%.12 This
decline in demand is unlikely to come from unfavorable snow conditions. Indeed, the
average snow in the two years before the debt restructuring was 36.1% higher than the
average snow experienced by the same hotel in the preceding ten years. Instead, as the
loan oﬃcers suggested, the decline is due to insuﬃcient eﬀort to boost sales. Going
forward, the loan oﬃcers conjectured that sales could be improved by cooperating with
travel agencies. The loan oﬃcers also criticized the hotel’s cost management, especially its
failure to adjust input costs and wages to the declining demand. As a result, the hotel’s
net profit margin (EBITDA/sales) dropped sharply in the two years prior to the debt
restructuring, to 13.2% and 13.9%, respectively, from 28.3% and 20.4% four and three
years prior, respectively. The hotel’s ROA in the year prior to the debt restructuring was
only 6.3%, which is well below the median in our sample.
   In the debt restructuring, the hotel received substantial debt forgiveness. The hotel
had only one lending bank, which agreed to forgive about ATS 11.5m (approximately
Euro 833,333). As a result, the hotel’s (book) leverage ratio was reduced from 1.84 to
1.41. This reduction is above the median in our sample–the median (book) leverage
ratio before and after the debt restructuring is 1.77 and 1.56, respectively. In response
to the debt forgiveness, the owner family agreed to contribute funds of their own. First,
the owner’s father contributed ATS 2.3m from his personal wealth. Second, the owner’s
wife agreed to sell an unrelated private property that was registered under her name, the
proceeds of which were expected to be ATS 2m.
   In the years after the debt restructuring, the hotel’s performance improved substan-

  12
    This example is a rare exception in that we have several years of “before” data. In most cases, we
have only one year of “before” data.

                                                 11
tially.13 ROA increased from 6.3% prior to the debt restructuring to 10.9% in the three
years after the debt restructuring. This improvement is above the median in our sample.
In fact, only 25% of the hotels had a larger increase in ROA.



4         Data

4.1         Sample Selection

Our primary data source is the Austrian Hotel- and Tourism Bank (AHTB). We have
information on 145 ski hotels that underwent debt restructurings. For 30 of these hotels,
EBITDA is missing either “before” or “after” the debt restructuring, leaving us with 115
hotels. (Whenever EBITDA is non-missing, other key financial variables are also non-
missing.) In 91 cases, we have data for at least three “after” years. In 24 cases, we have
data for one or two “after” years. To allow a consistent comparison across hotels, we
collapse the “after” data into a single observation per hotel by taking the average of the
first three “after” years (or whatever is available). Accordingly, our final sample consists
of a cross-section of 115 ski hotels with one “before” and one “after” observation per
hotel. All of the debt restructurings took place between 1998 and 2005. To account for
the diﬀerent years in which the debt restructurings took place, we include year dummies
in all our regressions.
     The AHTB also provided us with a “control sample” of 2,095 ski hotels that did not
undergo debt restructurings. All of these hotels applied for or received funds under other
(non-restructuring) ERP funding programs at some point, which is why they are in the
AHTB database. For most of these hotels, we have several years of consecutive data,
though for some hotels we only have one or two years worth of data.
     We have monthly weather data for all Austrian weather stations provided by the
Austrian Central Institute for Meteorology and Geodynamics.14 We match each hotel to
its closest weather station by locating the weather station with the minimal Euclidean
    13
    There has been no change in ownership or management after the debt restructuring. In fact, only
two hotels in our sample experienced such changes, and removing them does not aﬀect our results.
    14
         The German name is Zentralanstalt für Meteorologie und Geodynamik.

                                                   12
distance from the co-ordinates of the postal oﬃce in the hotel’s ZIP code. To ensure that
the weather conditions reflect those in the hotel’s vicinity, we require that the altitudinal
distance between the weather station and the hotel must not exceed 500 meters. This
constraint is only binding in a few cases, and our results are unchanged if we drop it.
Arguably, the weather conditions measured by the closest weather station are a noisy
proxy of the weather conditions that are relevant for the hotel (e.g., snow conditions at
nearby ski slopes). While it is unlikely that this introduces any bias, it introduces noise
into the regressions, making it only harder for us to find any significant results.


4.2    Empirical Methodology

To examine whether changes in leverage in the debt restructurings lead to changes in
operating performance, we estimate the following cross-sectional regression:


                       ∆ ROA =  +  × ∆ leverage + γ 0 X +                        (1)


where  indexes hotels, ∆ is the diﬀerence operator (“after” minus “before” the debt
restructuring), and X is a vector of control variables, which includes size, age, altitude,
∆ snow, and year dummies. In robustness checks, we replace ∆ ROA with ∆ NPM
(“net profit margin“). Flow variables, such as EBITDA, are lagged one year behind stock
variables, such as leverage, based on the rationale that flow variables are generated by
stock variables. Appendix A explains in detail what the diﬀerence operator ∆ measures
based on whether a given variable is a stock or flow variable.
   Including altitude in our regressions captures certain persistent diﬀerences across ho-
tels, which is useful as our sample is a cross-section and hotel-fixed eﬀects cannot be
included. For instance, the correlation between altitude and 10-, 15-, and 20-year average
snow levels is between 676% and 693%. Including ∆ snow in our regressions controls
for any contemporaneous eﬀect of snow on ROA. Hence, if ROA improves after the debt
restructuring, it is not because snow conditions have improved. (Section 4.3 describes
how snow is matched to EBITDA based on the hotels’ fiscal years.) The year dummies
capture any eﬀect that is common to all hotels that are restructured in the same year.

                                             13
There are two restructurings events in 1998, 20 events in 1999, 31 events in 2000, 27
events in 2001, 13 events in 2002, 12 events in 2003, four events in 2004, and six events
in 2005. In all our regressions, we cluster standard errors at the district level.15
    Our identification strategy has already been laid out in the Introduction. For this
reason, we shall be brief. To obtain consistent and unbiased estimates, we instrument
∆ leverage in equation (1) with Unexpected Snow. Unexpected Snow is the average snow
experienced by a given hotel in the two years prior to the debt restructuring minus the
average snow experienced by the same hotel in the preceding ten years. Accordingly,
Unexpected Snow captures the extent to which a ski hotel experienced unusually good
or bad snow conditions in the two years before the debt restructuring, which is the pe-
riod when it likely got into distress. Note that Unexpected Snow is serially uncorrelated
(0005  = 0916), which also makes it uncorrelated with any (persistent) unobserved
hotel characteristic that might explain cross-sectional variation in ∆ ROA. In addition,
Unexpected Snow is uncorrelated with snow in future years, though it should be noted
that we already control for ∆ snow in all our regressions.
    As explained in the Introduction, Unexpected Snow provides lending banks with the
counterfactual of what would have been the hotel’s operating performance in the absence
of strategic default, thus allowing to distinguish between ski hotels that are in distress
due to adverse demand shocks (“liquidity defaulters”) and ski hotels that are in distress
due to debt overhang (“strategic defaulters”).16 Accordingly, if a ski hotel experienced
unusually bad snow conditions prior to the debt restructuring, it is relatively likely that
this hotel is a (genuine) “liquidity defaulter.” In contrast, if a ski hotel got into distress
despite having experienced unusually favorable snow conditions, it is less likely that this


   15
     Districts (“Bezirke” in German), also referred to as “political districts” by Austria’s statistical oﬃce,
are roughly similar to counties in the US. Excluding Vienna–there are no Viennese hotels in our sample–
the average population per political district is 67.5 thousand. The 115 hotels in our sample are located
in 42 diﬀerent districts.
   16
     To validate this conjecture, we regress ROA on (contemporanous) Unexpected Snow in the same (fis-
cal) year–controlling for size, altitude, and year dummies–using our “control sample” of 2,095 ski hotels
that did not undergo debt restructurings (5,910 firm-year observations). As conjectured, the coeﬃcient on
Unexpected Snow is positive and highly significant ( = 325). The eﬀect is also economically significant:
a one-standard deviation increase in Unexpected Snow leads to an increase in (contemporaneous) ROA
of 0.8 percentage points, or about 6.2%.

                                                     14
hotel is a “liquidity defaulter” and more likely that it is a “strategic defaulter.”17 Note also
that lending banks cannot easily use other information–such as operating performance
and cash balances–to identify “strategic defaulters.” As we argued in the Introduction,
“strategic defaulters” might also exhibit poor operating performance and low cash bal-
ances, albeit for diﬀerent reasons. Indeed, ski hotels with negative Unexpected Snow (64
of the 115 hotels) had a median ROA of 94% before the debt restructuring, while ski
hotels with positive Unexpected Snow (51 of the 115 hotels) had a median ROA of 90%
The diﬀerence is not statistically significant.18 Likewise, ski hotels with negative Unex-
pected Snow had a median cash-to-asset ratio of 13% before the debt restructuring, while
ski hotels with positive Unexpected Snow had a median cash-to-asset ratio of 10% The
diﬀerence is again not significant.
    While the median ∆ leverage for ski hotels with negative Unexpected Snow is only
−007 the median ∆ leverage for ski hotels with positive Unexpected Snow is −033 which
is almost five times larger.19 Thus, ski hotels with positive Unexpected Snow–but not
those with negative Unexpected Snow–received substantial reductions in leverage, which
is consistent with lending banks perceiving these hotels as being in distress due to debt
overhang.20 While comparisons between ski hotels with negative and positive Unexpected
Snow are insightful, they are based on “raw data.” In Section 6, we formally explore the
relationship between ∆ leverage and Unexpected Snow in a regression framework. In that
section, we also provide tests to examine both the strength and validity of our instrument.
  17
     Debt overhang can lead to strategic default through various channels (see footnotes 1 and 2). For
example, hotel owners may intentionally cut down on crucial investments such as maintenance, advertis-
ing, and marketing expenditures. Likewise, they may provide too little eﬀort to boost sales, keep wages
and input cost low, and improve operational eﬃciency. Finally, they may pay out cash to themselves (as
wages or dividends) or sell vital firm assets and pocket the proceeds.
  18
     As there is no correlation between Unexpected Snow and ROA before the debt restructuring (0001
 = 0994) we can include the latter in our regressions and obtain virtually identical results.
  19
     Ski hotels with negative and positive Unexpected Snow have virtually identical median leverage ratios
before the debt restructuring: 176 and 177 respectively. Hence, the percentage reduction in leverage is
also (almost) five times larger for ski hotels with positive Unexpected Snow.
  20
     An alternative hypothesis is that ski hotels that got into distress despite positive Unexpected Snow
are simply “bad types.” In other words, the problem might be incompetent management and not debt
overhang. However, only two (out of 115) hotels in our sample experienced a change in ownership or
management after the debt restructuring. (And one of the two hotels had negative Unexpected Snow.)
Also, if the problem was incompetent management, it is not clear why the lending banks would try to
solve the problem by forgiving large amounts of debt.

                                                   15
4.3     Definition of Variables and Summary Statistics

Our main measure of operating performance is the return on assets (ROA), which is
EBITDA divided by the book value of assets. In robustness checks, we also use net
profit margin (NPM), which is EBITDA divided by sales. To avoid that outliers drive
our results, we winsorize both variables at the 5th and 95th percentiles of their empirical
distribution. We obtain similar results if we winsorize at the 1st and 99th percentiles or
at the 10th and 90th percentiles, or if we use median regressions instead. (See Tables II,
III, and VII for results based on median regressions.)
    Given that all hotels in our sample are privately held, market values are not available.21
Accordingly, “leverage” is the book value of debt divided by the book value of assets.
“Size” is the book value of assets in the year prior to the debt restructuring. “Age” is
the number of years since the hotel was granted its operating license as of the year before
the debt restructuring. This information is missing for 28 hotels. For these hotels, we use
instead the number of years with available accounting data.22 In all our regressions, we
use the logarithms of size and age. “Altitude” is the surface-weighted average altitude of
the area spanned by the hotel’s ZIP code (in meters).
    “Snow” in any given year is the number of days during the main winter season (De-
cember, January, February, and March) with more than 15 cm of snow on the ground
as measured by the closest weather station. Winter months are matched to firm-year
observations based on the hotels’ fiscal years. For example, if the fiscal year ends on
December 31, “snow in 1999” is the number of days with more than 15 cm of snow on
the ground in the months of January 1999, February 1999, March 1999, and December
1999. This matching ensures that–when controlling for ∆ snow in our regressions–we
indeed capture accurately any contemporaneous eﬀect of snow on EBITDA. As already
mentioned above, Unexpected Snow is the average snow experienced by a given hotel in

  21
    See Myers (1977, pp. 149-150), however, who argues that leverage ratios based on book values may
be more informative, because they refer to assets already in place.
  22
     The year in which the hotel was granted its operating license is also missing for all control hotels.
For this reason, age is not part of the descriptive statistics in Table I, the out-of-sample regressions in
Table VI, and the selection equation in Table VIII. Rather than omitting age altogether, we could use the
number of years with available accounting data as a proxy for age. All our results would remain similar.

                                                    16
the two years prior to the debt restructuring minus the average snow experienced by the
same hotel in the preceding ten years.
   It should be noted that our results are not sensitive to the choice of snow variable. For
instance, we obtain virtually identical results if we use a 10 or 20 cm threshold in place
of a 15 cm threshold. This is not surprising, given that the correlation with our snow
variable is 928% and 979%, respectively. Our results are also similar if we use entirely
diﬀerent snow variables, such as the number of days with fresh snowfall.
   Firm-year observations are mapped into either “before” or “after” observations as
follows (see Appendix A for further details). In the case of stock variables (e.g., assets,
debt), the first “after” observation is measured at the end of the fiscal year in which
the restructuring took place. In the case of flow variables (e.g., EBITDA, sales), the
first “after” observation is measured one year later, as is common practice, based on
the rationale that flow variables are generated by stock variables. The second and third
“after” observations as well as the “before” observation are defined accordingly. One
implication of this timing convention is that ROA in fiscal year  combines accounting
data from years  and  − 1, i.e., ROA() := EBITDA()Assets( − 1)
   Table I provides summary statistics. “Restructuring sample” refers to the 115 ski
hotels that underwent debt restructurings. “Control sample” refers to the 2,095 ski hotels
in the control group that did not undergo debt restructurings. In the restructuring sample,
“mean” and “median” refer to the year before the debt restructuring. In the control
sample, “mean” and “median” are averages across all firm-years.
   As is shown, restructured hotels are smaller than control hotels (smaller book value
of assets, fewer beds, fewer employees), consistent with the notion that smaller hotels are
more likely to get into distress. Importantly, restructured hotels are highly leveraged.
The average leverage ratio in the year before the debt restructuring is 2.40 (median 1.77),
which is roughly twice as large as the corresponding number for control hotels (mean
1.26, median 0.99). When comparing these numbers to other samples (e.g., Compustat),
it is useful to bear in mind that practically all hotels (including control hotels) are small
privately held hotels, which tend to rely heavily on debt financing. Moreover, it is useful
to remember that leverage is based on book values, not market values.

                                             17
5        Results

5.1      Return on Assets

Table II shows our main results. The dependent variable is the change in ROA “after”
versus “before” the debt restructuring (∆ ROA). The main independent variable of inter-
est is the change in leverage in the debt restructuring (∆ leverage). The control variables
are size, age, altitude, and ∆ snow, where snow is matched to EBITDA to account for
any contemporaneous eﬀect of snow on ROA (see Section 4.3 for details). The results of
the first-stage regression are discussed separately in Section 6.1.
     In columns [1] and [2] of Panel (A), equation (1) is estimated by OLS. Regardless
of whether control variables are included, the coeﬃcient on ∆ leverage is positive and
significant. Thus, OLS regressions suggest that ski hotels with smaller reductions in
leverage experience larger increases in ROA.23 However, it is not diﬃcult to think of a
reverse causality explanation. For instance, ski hotels with larger anticipated increases in
ROA might receive less debt forgiveness, resulting in smaller reductions in leverage. More
generally, as ∆ leverage is potentially endogenous in equation (1), it is not clear how to
interpret the OLS results.
     In columns [1] and [2] of Panel (B), equation (1) is estimated by IV using Unex-
pected Snow before the debt restructuring as an instrument for ∆ leverage. Regardless of
whether control variables are included, the coeﬃcient on ∆ leverage is now negative and
significant. Thus, ski hotels with larger reductions in leverage experience larger increases
in ROA. The eﬀect is also economically significant. When control variables are included,
the coeﬃcient on ∆ leverage is −0052 ( = 248). Given that ∆ leverage is −055 on
average, this corresponds to an average increase in ROA of −0052 × −055 = 003 or
three percentage points. Given that the average ROA before the debt restructuring is
109%, this corresponds to an increase in ROA of about 28%. Thus, consistent with
Myers’ (1977) argument that debt overhang impairs firm performance, our results show
that–for highly (over-)leveraged firms–a reduction in leverage leads to a statistically

    23
    Both the average and median ∆ leverage in our sample are negative. Accordingly, we refer to larger
(smaller) values of ∆ leverage as “smaller (larger) reductions in leverage.”

                                                 18
and economically significant increase in ROA. As for the control variables, the coeﬃcients
on size and ∆ snow are both positive and significant, while those on age and altitude are
both insignificant.
   Following Hausman (1978), we can compare the OLS and IV estimates to test for
endogeneity. Regardless of whether control variables are included, we can always reject
the null of no endogeneity at high significance levels ( = 0015 without control variables;
 = 0001 with control variables). Thus, provided our instrument is valid, Hausman tests
confirm that the OLS estimates are biased.
   To mitigate the eﬀect of outliers, we winsorize ROA at the 5th and 95th percentiles
of its empirical distribution. An alternative approach is to use median (least absolute
deviation) regressions. A main complication introduced by using median regressions is
the computation of the standard errors. In the presence of cross-sectional dependence, the
asymptotic covariance matrix of Koenker and Bassett (1978), which assumes independent
observations, cannot be used. The standard bootstrap approach cannot be used either
as it only corrects for heteroscedasticity. To circumvent this problem, we use a modified
bootstrap approach: block bootstrapping. The diﬀerence to standard bootstrapping is
that instead of drawing single observations, we draw entire blocks of observations. The
underlying idea–which is similar to clustering–is to preserve the existing correlation
structure within each block and to use the independence across blocks to consistently
estimate the standard errors. In analogy to the clustering method used in our main
analysis, we construct blocks at the district level, leaving us with 42 blocks. Specifically,
we construct 500 bootstrap samples by drawing with replacement 42 districts from our
sample. For each bootstrap sample, we estimate our main specification using median
regressions and store the coeﬃcients. The standard errors are then calculated based on
the empirical distribution of these 500 sets of coeﬃcients.
   Column [3] of Panels (A) and (B) reports the results. As is shown, they are very similar
to our previous results. In the IV regression (Panel (B)), the coeﬃcient on ∆ leverage
has become slightly smaller, but it remains statistically significant (−0037;  = 218)
Importantly, the results based on median regressions suggest that our previous results are
not driven by outliers.

                                             19
5.2       Net Profit Margin

In Table III, the dependent variable is the change in net profit margin (∆ NPM). Oth-
erwise, the regression specification is identical to that in Table II.24
   Similar to our previous ROA results, OLS regressions yield again a positive coeﬃcient
on ∆ leverage, though it is only significant in the median regression. When ∆ leverage is
instrumented with Unexpected Snow prior to the debt restructuring, we again find that
the coeﬃcient on ∆ leverage is negative and significant (−0042;  = 225), suggesting
that ski hotels with larger reductions in leverage experience larger increases in net profit
margin. Interestingly, the coeﬃcient on ∆ leverage is now slightly larger in the median
regression (−0050;  = 251). As for the control variables, the coeﬃcients on size and
∆ snow are again both positive, though the coeﬃcient on ∆ snow is only significant in
the median regression. The coeﬃcients on age and altitude are again both insignificant.
Importantly, that the results are similar to our previous ROA results suggests that the
choice of scaling variable (assets versus sales) plays little role.
   Hausman (1978) tests also yield similar results. Regardless of whether control variables
are included, we can always reject the null of no endogeneity at high significance levels
( = 0033 without control variables;  = 0002 with control variables).


5.3       Costs and Revenues

To gain a better understanding of why a reduction in leverage leads to an increase in
ROA, we consider separately the eﬀect on individual components of ROA. Unfortunately,
we have data on individual components of ROA only for a subset of our sample. Thus,
to the extent that our results are based on a small sample, they should be taken with
caution. For brevity, we only report the results of the IV regressions.
   The results are shown in Table IV. In columns [1] to [3], the dependent variable is
the change in overhead costs (SG&A), the change in wages, and the change in input costs,
respectively. Since all these variables are cost components, all coeﬃcients should have the
opposite sign as those in our previous ROA regressions. In column [4], the dependent

  24
       The number of observations drops to 114 due to sales being missing for one hotel.

                                                    20
variable is the change in sales. Here, we would expect all coeﬃcients to have the same
sign as those in our previous ROA regressions.
    In columns [1] to [3], the coeﬃcient on ∆ leverage is positive and–except for the input
cost regression in column [3]–significant. In column [4], the coeﬃcient on ∆ leverage is
negative and significant. Hence, a reduction in leverage leads to a significant decrease
in overhead costs and wages and to a significant increase in sales. It also leads to a
decrease in input costs, though the eﬀect is not significant ( = 153) That the eﬀect
is not a pure “sales eﬀect” is not entirely surprising: we already know from Table III
that a reduction in leverage leads to a significant increase in net profit margin, which
is EBITDA divided by sales. The wage result is particularly interesting. As the ski
hotels in our sample are small, family-run hotels, wages are partly transfers to the hotels’
owners and their family members. Thus, while a decrease in wages may be interpreted
as an improvement in operational eﬃciency, it might also be interpreted–and perhaps
especially so–as evidence of the owners’ willingness to keep cash in the firm rather than
to pay it out to themselves (see footnote 2).
    All control variables have the expected signs. As in our previous ROA regressions,
the coeﬃcient on size is always significant, while the coeﬃcients on age and altitude are
insignificant. Interestingly, the coeﬃcient on ∆ snow is only significant in column [4].
Accordingly, the significant coeﬃcient on ∆ snow in our previous ROA regressions is
likely to come from a positive eﬀect of snow on (contemporaneous) sales.



6     Identification

6.1    First-Stage Regression

In the first-stage regression, we regress ∆ leverage on Unexpected Snow plus all control
variables from equation (1). We estimate:


                  ∆ leverage =  +  × unexpected snow + γ 0 X +                  (2)




                                            21
where  indexes hotels, ∆ is the diﬀerence operator (“after” minus “before” the debt
restructuring), and Unexpected Snow is the average snow experienced by a given hotel in
the two years prior to the debt restructuring minus the average snow experienced by the
same hotel in the preceding ten years. All other variables are the same as in equation (1).
Standard errors are clustered at the district level.
    Table V presents the results. As is shown, the coeﬃcient on Unexpected Snow is
negative and significant at the 1% level (−0014;  = 321). The eﬀect is also economically
significant. A one-standard deviation (3920) increase in Unexpected Snow is associated
with a reduction in leverage of −0014 × 3920 = −055. Given that the average leverage
ratio before the debt restructuring is 2.40, this corresponds to a decrease in leverage
of about 23%. Accordingly, our results show that ski hotels with unusually good snow
conditions before the debt restructuring receive significantly larger reductions in leverage,
which is consistent with lending banks perceiving these hotels as being in distress due to
debt overhang (see Section 4.2).25
    Consistency of IV estimation in a finite sample requires that the instrument must be
suﬃciently “strong,” meaning it must correlate strongly with the troublesome endogenous
variable. In equation (2), the  -statistics for the null that  = 0 is 1030 which exceeds
the “rule of thumb” for strong instruments ( ≥ 10) proposed by Staiger and Stock
(1997) as well as 15% critical threshold value in Table 5.2 of Stock and Yogo (2005, p.
101). Hence, weak identification is unlikely to be a concern.


6.2     Validity of the Instrument

In the specific context of our study, the exclusion restriction requires that Unexpected Snow
prior to the debt restructuring has no direct eﬀect on changes in ROA–i.e., other than
through its eﬀect on changes in leverage. While the exclusion restriction cannot be tested
directly (within sample), its validity can be supported using out-of-sample evidence. Using


  25
     When we estimate equation (2) using ∆ assets as the dependent variable, we find that the coeﬃcient
on Unexpected Snow is literally zero (0000) and highly insignificant ( = 023) Thus Unexpected Snow
has no eﬀect on changes in assets, implying that the variation in leverage in our IV regressions is due to
variation in debt reductions.

                                                   22
our control sample of 2,095 ski hotels that did not undergo debt restructurings, we examine
whether Unexpected Snow has a direct eﬀect on changes in ROA by regressing ∆ ROA on
Unexpected Snow while controlling for size, altitude, ∆ snow, and year dummies.26 Age is
not included as a control variable because it is missing for all control hotels.27 Panel (A)
of Table VI shows the results.28 Regardless of whether control variables are included,
the coeﬃcient on Unexpected Snow is never significant ( = 009 without control variables;
 = 004 with control variables). Thus, out-of-sample evidence suggests that Unexpected
Snow has no direct eﬀect on changes in ROA.
    Instead of estimating the eﬀect of Unexpected Snow on changes in ROA, we can
(somewhat similarly) estimate its eﬀect on future ROA. In Panel (B), we regress ROA
on Unexpected Snow lagged by one year while controlling for (lagged) size, altitude, (con-
temporaneous) snow, and year dummies. In columns [3] and [4], we additionally include
hotel-fixed eﬀects. Regardless of whether control variables or hotel-fixed eﬀects are in-
cluded, the coeﬃcient on Unexpected Snow is never significant (-statistic between 015
and 068) Accordingly, out-of-sample evidence suggests that Unexpected Snow has no
direct eﬀect on future ROA.
    A second test we perform to assess the validity of our instrument also makes use of
our control sample of 2,095 ski hotels that did not undergo debt restructurings. The idea
is straightforward. If the increase in ROA documented in Panel (B) of Table II was due
to a direct eﬀect of Unexpected Snow, then other ski hotels in the same region should also
experience an increase in ROA, given that they are exposed to the same snow conditions.
Based on this logic, we construct a new performance measure, Locally Adjusted ROA,
which is defined as ROA minus the median ROA of all control hotels in the same district

  26
     In the spirit of equation (1), ∆ ROA in year  is the diﬀerence between ROA in year  and  + 1
Unexpected Snow and size are both measured in year  and ∆ snow in year  is the diﬀerence between
snow in year  and  + 1 to account for any contemporaneous eﬀect of snow on EBITDA. Moreover,
Unexpected Snow in year  is the diﬀerence between snow in year  and the average snow experienced by
the same hotel in the preceding ten years (i.e., years  − 1 to  − 10).
  27
       See Section 4.3. Note that age was never significant in any of our previous regressions.
  28
     The number of observations in Panel (A) is less than in Panel (B), because we always lose the “last”
observation of a given hotel when computing ∆ ROA. For instance, suppose a hotel is in our sample in
1999, 2000, and 2001. In Panel (B), this implies we have three firm-year observations. In Panel (A),
however, we only have two firm-year observations as ∆ ROA in 2001 cannot be computed.

                                                     23
and year.29 Using Locally Adjusted ROA thus eﬀectively “controls” for any direct eﬀect
of Unexpected Snow on changes in ROA–at least to the extent that the eﬀect is common
to all ski hotels in the same district.
     Table VII shows the results. Except for the fact that ROA is locally adjusted, the
regression specification is identical to that in Table II. For brevity, we only report the
results of the IV regressions. Regardless of whether control variables are included, the
coeﬃcients on ∆ leverage are remarkably similar to the corresponding coeﬃcients in Panel
(B) of Table II.30 Hence, once again, the evidence suggests that our previous results are
not driven by a direct eﬀect of Unexpected Snow. Also reassuring is that the coeﬃcient on
∆ snow is insignificant, while it was previously always significant. If ski hotels located in
the same district are indeed exposed to the same snow conditions, then this is precisely
what one would expect.



7        Selection Bias
Ski hotels undergoing debt restructurings are a selected sample. To account for possi-
ble selection bias, we use Heckman’s (1979) two-step correction method. The first step
involves estimating a selection equation. For this purpose, we augment our sample by in-
cluding the 2,095 control hotels that did not undergo debt restructurings. As mentioned
in Section 2, a formal criterion for the Austrian Hotel- and Tourism Bank (AHTB) to
be involved in the debt restructuring is that the hotel must be “structurally important,”
meaning it must be a large hotel relative to other hotels in the same municipality. Based
on this criterion, we construct a new variable, Local Capacity Share, which serves as an
instrument in our selection equation. Local Capacity Share is the number of beds of a
hotel in a given year divided by the number of beds of all hotels in the same district and
year. Importantly, Local Capacity Share is based on the number of available beds, not the

    29
     For each firm-year observation in our sample, there are on average 10.8 firm-year observations in the
control sample in the same district and year (see also footnote 15).
    30
     Likewise, OLS results–which we do not report here for brevity–are very similar to those in Panel
(A) of Table II. Hausman (1978) tests confirm that the OLS estimates are biased ( = 0018 without
control variables;  = 0001 with control variables).

                                                   24
number of nights stayed. Hence, it does not capture aspects of the hotel’s performance
and is therefore likely exogenous in the second-stage regression.
    We estimate the following Probit selection equation:


selection dummy =  +  × local capacity share +  × unexpected snow + γ 0 X +  
                                                                                                     (3)
where  indexes hotels,  indexes years,  are year dummies, Selection Dummy is a dummy
that equals one if a hotel is restructured in the following year and zero otherwise, Local
Capacity Share is the number of beds of hotel  in year  divided by the number of beds
of all hotels in the same district and year, Unexpected Snow is the average snow in years
 and  − 1 minus the average snow in the preceding ten years ( − 2 to  − 11), and X
is a vector of control variables, which includes size in year  − 1, altitude, and ∆ snow,
where the latter is computed as the diﬀerence between snow in years  and  − 1 If a
given hotel is restructured, its subsequent firm-year observations are dropped. Since age
is missing for all control hotels, the selection equation does not include age (see Section
4.3). Unfortunately, the number of beds is only available for 74 of the 115 hotels in our
restructuring sample. Standard errors are clustered at the district level.
    Panel (A) of Table VIII reports the results. The coeﬃcient on Local Capacity
Share is positive and significant ( = 272), implying that ski hotels with larger local
capacity shares are more likely to be restructured. (Recall that we always control for
size in our regressions.) What seems puzzling, however, is that while hotels with larger
local capacity shares are more likely to be restructured, Table I shows that restructured
hotels are on average smaller than control hotels. There is a simple explanation: debt
restructurings are concentrated in districts with smaller hotels. Within these districts,
restructured hotels are relatively larger, which explains the positive coeﬃcient on Local
Capacity Share in equation (3). Relative to (control) hotels in non-restructuring districts,
however, restructured hotels are relatively smaller.31

  31
     The average number of beds of all (restructured and control) hotels in districts in which a restruc-
turing took place–measured in the year before the restructuring–is 70. In contrast, the average number
of beds of only the restructured hotels in the same year is 76 (see Table I). Thus, restructured hotels
are larger than control hotels in the same district. On the other hand, the average number of beds of

                                                   25
    Using the estimates from equation (3), we can compute the Inverse Mills Ratio and
include it as an explanatory variable in our second-stage regression. Before doing so,
however, we wish to verify that the 74 hotels with non-missing bed data are representative
of our original sample of 115 hotels. For this purpose, we have re-estimated equation (1)
using only the 74 hotels with non-missing bed data. The results (not reported) are very
similar to those in Table II (column [2] of Panel (B)). Importantly, the coeﬃcient on ∆
leverage is −0055 ( = 239), while the corresponding coeﬃcient in Table II is −0052
( = 248).
    In Panel (B), we include the Inverse Mills Ratio as an explanatory variable in our
second-stage regression. Column [1] shows the results with ∆ ROA as the dependent
variable, and column [2] shows the results with locally adjusted ∆ ROA as the depen-
dent variable. In both cases, the coeﬃcient on ∆ leverage is remarkably close to the
corresponding coeﬃcients in Table II (column [2] of Panel (B)) and Table VII (column
[2]), respectively. Moreover, the Inverse Mills Ratio, though positive, is never signifi-
cant. Overall, this evidence suggests that our previous results are unlikely to be driven
by selection bias.



8     Conclusion
Using a sample of highly (over-)leveraged Austrian ski hotels undergoing debt restructur-
ings, this paper provides evidence in support of Myers’ (1977) argument that debt over-
hang impairs firm performance. The main contribution is to identify plausibly exogenous
variation in leverage and thus to address whether observed changes in firm performance
are indeed caused by changes in leverage. Our instrument, Unexpected Snow, captures the
extent to which a ski hotel experienced unusually good or bad snow conditions prior to the
debt restructuring. Eﬀectively, Unexpected Snow provides lending banks with the coun-
terfactual of what would have been the ski hotel’s operating performance in the absence

(control) hotels in non-restructuring districts is 118. Thus, control hotels in non-restructuring districts
are much larger than restructured hotels, which in turn are larger than control hotels in restructuring
districts. As a result, the average control hotel (including those in restructuring districts) is larger than
the average restructured hotel. Using size or the number of employees yields similar results.

                                                     26
of strategic default, allowing to distinguish between ski hotels that are in distress due
to adverse demand shocks (“liquidity defaulters”) and ski hotels that are in distress due
to debt overhang (“strategic defaulters”). Indeed, we find that ski hotels with unusually
good snow conditions before the debt restructuring receive significantly larger reductions
in leverage, which is consistent with lending banks perceiving these hotels as being in
distress due to debt overhang (e.g., Myers, 1977, p. 158). When instrumenting changes in
leverage with Unexpected Snow prior to the debt restructuring, we find that a reduction
in leverage leads to a significant increase in ROA, which is the opposite of what we find
in OLS regressions.
    To understand better why a reduction in leverage leads to an increase in ROA, we
examine separately the eﬀect on individual components of ROA. We find that a reduction
in leverage leads to a decrease in overhead costs, wages, and input costs, and to an increase
in sales, albeit the input cost result is not significant. The wage result is particularly
interesting. As the hotels in our sample are small, family-run hotels, wages are partly
transfers to the hotels’ owners and their family members. Thus, while a decrease in
wages may be interpreted as an improvement in operational eﬃciency, it might also be
interpreted as evidence of the owners’ willingness to keep cash in the firm rather than to
pay it out to themselves.



9     Appendix: Timing Conventions
In our regressions, the diﬀerence operator ∆ measures the diﬀerence between “after”
and “before” the debt restructuring. In the case of stock variables (e.g., assets, debt),
the first “after” observation is measured at the end of the fiscal year in which the debt
restructuring took place. In the case of flow variables (e.g., EBITDA, sales), the first
“after” observation is measured one year later based on the rationale that flow variables
are generated by stock variables. The second and third “after” observations, as well as
the “before” observation, are defined accordingly.
    One implication of this timing convention is that ROA in fiscal year  combines ac-
counting data from years  and  − 1 Specifically, denote by  the (end of the) fiscal year

                                             27
in which the debt restructuring of hotel  takes place. We then have that:
                               Ã      +2
                                                             !
                                   1X      EBITDA+1               EBITDA
                   ∆ ROA :=                                     −                    (4)
                                   3 =     assets               assets −1
                                         



   In contrast, since EBITDA and sales are both flow variables, NPM in fiscal year  uses
only accounting data from the same year. Hence, we have that:
                               Ã      +2
                                                             !
                                   1X      EBITDA+1                EBITDA
                  ∆ NPM :=                                      −                    (5)
                                   3 =    sales+1                 sales
                                         



   By the same token, since debt and assets are both stock variables, the leverage ratio
in fiscal year  uses only accounting data from the same year. Accordingly, we have that:
                                     Ã      +2
                                                           !
                                         1X      debt              debt −1
                    ∆ leverage :=                             −                      (6)
                                         3 = assets             assets −1
                                              



   Finally, to control for any contemporaneous eﬀect of snow on operating performance,
we match snow to EBITDA based on the hotels’ fiscal years. This implies that:
                                     Ã      +2
                                                             !
                                         1X
                       ∆ snow :=                snow+1       − snow           (7)
                                         3 =
                                              



where “snow ” is the total number of days during the months of January, February,
March, and December in fiscal (!) year  with more than 15 cm of snow on the ground as
measured by the weather station that is closest to hotel  based on the matching procedure
outlined in Section 4.1. Thus, snow is treated as a flow variable, like EBITDA, and it is
matched exactly to the fiscal year in which EBITDA is generated, implying that “after”
and “before” have exactly the same meaning for snow and EBITDA.



10     References
 Andrade, Gregor, and Steven N. Kaplan, 1998, How Costly is Financial (Not Economic)
     Distress? Evidence from Highly Leveraged Transactions That Became Distressed,

                                                  28
    Journal of Finance 53, 1443—1493.

Asquith, Paul, Robert H. Gertner, and David S. Scharfstein, 1994, Anatomy of Financial
    Distress: An Examination of Junk-Bond Issuers, Quarterly Journal of Economics
    109, 625—658.

Diamond, Douglas W., and Raghuram G. Rajan, 2010, Fear of Fire Sales and the Credit
    Freeze, mimeo, University of Chicago.

Gilson, Stuart C., Kose John, and Larry H.P. Lang, 1990, Troubled Debt Restructurings,
    Journal of Financial Economics 27, 315—353.

Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales, 2011, The Determinants of Attitudes
    towards Strategic Default on Mortgages, mimeo, Northwestern University.

Hausman, Jerry A., 1978, Specification Tests in Econometrics, Econometrica 46, 1251—
    1271.

Heckman, James J., 1979, Sample Selection Bias as a Specification Error, Econometrica
    47, 153—161.

Hennessy, Christopher A., 2004, Tobin’s Q, Debt Overhang, and Investment, Journal of
    Finance 59, 1717—1742.

Koenker, Roger, and Gilbert Bassett, Jr., 1978, Regression Quantiles, Econometrica 46,
    33—50.

Kroszner, Randall S., 1999, Is It Better to Forgive than to Receive? Repudiation of the
    Gold Indexation Clause in Long-Term Debt during the Great Depression, mimeo,
    University of Chicago.

Krugman, Paul, 1988, Financing vs. Forgiving A Debt Overhang, Journal of Develop-
    ment Economics 29, 253—268.

Lang, Larry H.P., Eli Ofek, and René M. Stulz, 1996, Leverage, Investment, and Firm
    Growth, Journal of Financial Economics 40, 3—29.

                                         29
Melzer, Brian, 2010, Mortgage Debt Overhang: Reduced Investment by Homeowners
    with Negative Equity, mimeo, Northwestern University.

Myers, Stewart, 1977, Determinants of Corporate Borrowing, Journal of Financial Eco-
    nomics 5, 147—175.

Philippon, Thomas, and Philipp Schnabl, 2011, Informational Rents, Macroeconomic
    Rents, and Eﬃcient Bailouts, mimeo, New York University.

Roberts, Michael R., and Amir Sufi, 2009a, Renegotiation of Financial Contracts: Evi-
    dence from Private Credit Agreements, Journal of Financial Economics 93, 159—184.

Roberts, Michael R., and Amir Sufi, 2009b, Financial Contracting: A Survey of Empirical
    Research and Future Directions, Annual Review of Financial Economics 1, 207—226.

Staiger, Douglas O., and James H. Stock, 1997, Instrumental Variables Regression with
    Weak Instruments, Econometrica 65, 557—586.

Stock, James H., and Motohiro Yogo, 2005, Testing for Weak Instruments in Linear IV
    Regression, in: D.W.K. Andrews and J.H. Stock (eds.), Identification and Infer-
    ence for Econometric Models: Essays in Honor of Thomas Rothenberg, Cambridge:
    Cambridge University Press, 80—108.

Tirole, Jean, 2006, The Theory of Corporate Finance. Princeton: Princeton University
    Press.

Veronesi, Pietro, and Luigi Zingales, 2010, Paulson’s Gift, Journal of Financial Eco-
    nomics 97, 339—368.

Whited, Toni M., 1992, Debt, Liquidity Constraints, and Corporate Investment: Evi-
    dence from Panel Data, Journal of Finance 47, 1425—1460.




                                          30
                                                       Table I
                                                   Summary Statistics

“Restructuring sample” refers to the 115 hotels that underwent debt restructurings. “Control sample” refers to the 2,095
hotels in the control group that did not undergo debt restructurings. In the restructuring sample, “mean” and “median” refer to
the value in the year before the debt restructuring. In the control sample, “mean” and “median” refer to firm averages across
all firm-years. Size is the book value of assets (in Euros). Altitude is the surface-weighted average altitude of the area
spanned by the hotel’s ZIP code (in meters). Leverage is the book value of debt divided by the book value of assets.



                                           Restructuring Sample                          Control Sample

              Variable              # Hotels        Mean       Median         # Hotels        Mean         Median


              Size                       115    1,603,494      997,071           2,095     4,532,693      1,570,291

              Beds                        74          76.0          65           1,901          96.4            75

              Employees                   74          16.9          13           1,893          26.4            16

              Altitude (meters)          115        1,180         1,152          2,095        1,275          1,368

              Leverage                   115          2.40         1.77          2,095          1.26           0.99
                                                                                 Table II
                                                                Return on Assets: OLS and IV Regressions

Return on assets (ROA) is EBITDA divided by the book value of assets. Δ ROA is the average ROA in the three years after the debt restructuring minus the ROA in the
year before the debt restructuring. Δ Leverage and Δ snow are defined accordingly. Leverage is defined in Table I. Snow is the number of days during the months of
January, February, March, and December in a given fiscal year with more than 15 cm of snow on the ground as measured by the closest weather station. Size is the
logarithm of the book value of assets (in Euros) in the year before the debt restructuring. Age is the logarithm of one plus the number of years since the hotel was granted
its operating license as of the year before the debt restructuring. In Panel (B), Δ leverage is instrumented with Unexpected Snow, which is the average snow in the two
years prior to the debt restructuring minus the average snow in the preceding ten years. In columns [1] and [2] of both panels, standard errors are clustered at the district
level. In column [3] of both panels, median regressions are used, where the standard errors are computed using block bootstrapping with 500 bootstraps and 42 blocks
based on the 42 districts in which the hotels are located. The coefficients and standard errors on altitude and Δ snow are multiplied by 1,000. All debt restructurings took
place between 1998 and 2005. t-statistics are in parentheses. *, **, and *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.


          Panel (A): OLS Regressions                                                       Panel (B): IV Regressions



          Dependent Variable:         ROA            ROA              ROA               Dependent Variable:          ROA           ROA             ROA
                                       [1]              [2]              [3]                                            [1]              [2]             [3]


           Leverage                0.005**           0.005*           0.004**              Leverage                -0.034**         -0.052**         -0.037**
                                     (2.16)            (1.98)           (2.10)                                         (2.45)           (2.48)           (2.18)
          Size                                        -0.000            -0.001             Size                                       0.066**           0.046*
                                                       (0.04)           (0.37)                                                          (2.41)           (1.79)
          Age                                          0.006             0.007             Age                                          -0.006           -0.003
                                                       (1.09)           (1.12)                                                          (0.86)           (0.38)
          Altitude                                     0.002            -0.003             Altitude                                     -0.013           -0.020
                                                       (0.17)           (0.35)                                                          (1.28)           (1.40)
           Snow                                       0.373           0.520**              Snow                                      0.538*           0.535**
                                                       (1.41)           (2.04)                                                          (1.98)           (2.14)

          Year Dummies                 Yes             Yes              Yes                Year Dummies                 Yes             Yes              Yes

          Regression Type             OLS              OLS             Median              Regression Type              IV               IV          Median/IV

          Observations                 115             115              115                Observations                 115             115              115
          R-squared                    0.10            0.11             0.10               R-squared                    0.11            0.17             0.11
                                                                               Table III
                                                              Net Profit Margin: OLS and IV Regressions

Net profit margin (NPM) is EBITDA divided by sales. Δ NPM is defined analogously to Δ ROA in Table II. All other variables are defined in Table II. In Panel (B), Δ
leverage is instrumented with Unexpected Snow as defined in Table II. In columns [1] and [2] of both panels, standard errors are clustered at the district level. In column
[3] of both panels, median regressions are used, where the standard errors are computed using block bootstrapping with 500 bootstraps and 42 blocks based on the 42
districts in which the hotels are located. The coefficients and standard errors on altitude and Δ snow are multiplied by 1,000. All debt restructurings took place between
1998 and 2005. t-statistics are in parentheses. *, **, and *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.


          Panel (A): OLS Regressions                                                      Panel (B): IV Regressions



          Dependent Variable:        NPM             NPM            NPM                Dependent Variable:          NPM           NPM            NPM
                                       [1]             [2]              [3]                                             [1]            [2]              [3]


           Leverage                 0.003            0.005          0.008**               Leverage                  -0.029*       -0.042**         -0.050**
                                     (0.89)           (1.27)          (2.35)                                           (1.94)         (2.25)           (2.51)
          Size                                        -0.011          -0.011              Size                                       0.044*           0.053*
                                                      (1.16)          (1.13)                                                          (1.74)           (1.86)
          Age                                          0.011           0.004              Age                                          0.001          -0.005
                                                      (1.22)          (0.43)                                                          (0.15)           (0.54)
          Altitude                                     0.003           0.007              Altitude                                    -0.009          -0.011
                                                      (0.26)          (0.39)                                                          (0.68)           (0.90)
           Snow                                      0.375          0.612*                Snow                                      0.510           0.733*
                                                      (0.90)          (1.67)                                                          (1.26)           (1.98)

          Year Dummies                 Yes             Yes             Yes                Year Dummies                 Yes            Yes              Yes

          Regression Type             OLS             OLS            Median               Regression Type               IV             IV           Median/IV

          Observations                 114             114             114                Observations                 114            114              114
          R-squared                    0.05            0.08            0.07               R-squared                    0.07           0.10             0.09
                                                     Table IV
                                         Costs and Revenues: IV Regressions

Δ Overhead is the average overhead cost in the three years after the debt restructuring minus the overhead cost in the year
before the debt restructuring. Δ Wages, Δ input costs, and Δ sales are defined accordingly. All variables are scaled by sales,
except for wages, which is scaled by the number of employees. All other variables are defined in Table II. Standard errors are
clustered at the district level. The coefficients and standard errors on altitude and Δ snow are multiplied by 1,000. All debt
restructurings took place between 1998 and 2005. t-statistics are in parentheses. *, **, and *** denotes significance at the
10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.




                Dependent Variable:       Overhead          Wages          Input Costs         Sales
                                              [1]               [2]               [3]              [4]


                 Leverage                 0.042**           0.427**             0.032           -0.039*
                                            (2.10)            (2.07)            (1.53)            (1.85)
                Size                       -0.011*           -0.431*           -0.046*             0.092
                                            (1.77)            (1.69)            (1.72)            (1.41)
                Age                         0.006              0.092             0.006            -0.034
                                            (1.06)            (0.57)            (0.82)            (0.89)
                Altitude                    0.006              0.180             0.001            -0.016
                                            (1.02)            (1.02)            (0.08)            (0.40)
                 Snow                      -0.094            -0.273            -0.182           0.563**
                                            (0.47)            (0.48)            (0.52)            (2.04)

                Year Dummies                 Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes

                Regression Type               IV                IV                IV                IV

                Observations                  35                74                35               114
                R-squared                    0.42              0.22              0.43              0.16
                                                             Table V
                                                      First-Stage Regression

All variables are defined in Table II. Standard errors are clustered at the district level. The coefficients and standard errors on
altitude and Δ snow are multiplied by 1,000. All debt restructurings took place between 1998 and 2005. t-statistics are in
parentheses. *, **, and *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.



                                           Dependent Variable:             Leverage


                                           Unexpected Snow                 -0.014***
                                                                              (3.21)
                                           Size                             1.130**
                                                                              (2.20)
                                           Age                               -0.205
                                                                              (1.18)
                                           Altitude                           0.354
                                                                              (1.23)
                                            Snow                             2.694
                                                                              (0.57)

                                           Year Dummies                       Yes

                                           Observations                       115
                                           R-squared                          0.34
                                                                               Table VI
                                                                        Out-of-Sample Evidence

In Panel (A), Δ ROA (Δ snow) is the difference between ROA (snow) in year t and ROA (snow) in year t + 1, while Unexpected Snow and size are both measured in year t.
In Panel (B), ROA and snow are both measured in year t, while Unexpected Snow and size are both measured in year t - 1, where Unexpected Snow in year t - 1 is the
difference between snow in year t - 1 and snow in the preceding ten years (i.e., t - 2 to t - 11). ROA, size, altitude, and snow are defined in Table II. The coefficients and
standard errors on altitude and Δ snow are multiplied by 1,000. All debt restructurings took place between 1998 and 2005. t-statistics are in parentheses. *, **, and ***
denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.


       Panel (A): ROA (First Differences)                                   Panel (B): ROA (Levels)



       Dependent Variable:               ROA            ROA               Dependent Variable:              ROA             ROA            ROA             ROA
                                            [1]           [2]                                                  [1]            [2]             [3]            [4]


       Unexpected Snow                   -0.003          -0.002             Unexpected Snow (t - 1)          0.045            0.033         -0.010           0.021
                                         (0.09)          (0.04)                                              (0.68)           (0.40)        (0.15)           (0.28)
        Snow                                          0.165***             Snow                                           0.159***                        0.166**
                                                         (3.38)                                                               (3.19)                         (2.28)
       Size                                            0.004***             Size (t - 1)                                   -0.022***                      -0.052***
                                                         (4.95)                                                              (12.19)                        (10.12)
       Altitude                                          -0.001             Altitude                                          0.002
                                                         (0.95)                                                               (0.53)

       Year Fixed Effects                 Yes             Yes               Year Fixed Effects                Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes
                                                                            Hotel Fixed Effects               No              No             Yes             Yes

       Observations                       4,253          4,253              Observations                     5,910           5,910          5,910           5,910
       R-squared                          0.01            0.01              R-squared                         0.13           0.13            0.72            0.72
                                                       Table VII
                                         Locally Adjusted ROA: IV Regressions

This table presents variants of the regressions in Panel (B) of Table II in which Locally Adjusted ROA is used instead of
ROA. Locally Adjusted ROA is computed by subtracting from each firm-year observation of ROA the median value of ROA
of all control hotels in the same district and year. In columns [1] and [2], standard errors are clustered at the district level. In
column [3], a median regression is used, where the standard errors are computed using block bootstrapping with 500
bootstraps and 42 blocks based on the 42 districts in which the (restructured) hotels are located. The coefficients and standard
errors on altitude and Δ snow are multiplied by 1,000. All debt restructurings took place between 1998 and 2005. t-statistics
are in parentheses. *, **, and *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.



                            Dependent Variable:          ROA              ROA             ROA
                                                      (Loc. Adj.)       (Loc. Adj.)      (Loc. Adj.)
                                                          [1]               [2]              [3]


                             Leverage                 -0.038**          -0.058**         -0.038**
                                                         (2.12)            (2.60)           (2.10)
                            Size                                         0.064**           0.032*
                                                                           (2.44)           (1.68)
                            Age                                           -0.007            -0.004
                                                                           (0.80)           (0.60)
                            Altitude                                      -0.016            0.001
                                                                           (1.23)           (0.11)
                             Snow                                         0.183             0.012
                                                                           (0.47)           (0.14)

                            Year Dummies                  Yes              Yes               Yes

                            Regression Type                IV               IV           Median/IV

                            Observations                  115              115               115
                            R-squared                     0.16             0.19              0.10
                                                        Table VIII
                                                  Heckman (1979) Correction

Panel (A) presents the results from a Probit regression in which the dependent variable is a dummy that equals one if a hotel
is restructured in the following year and zero otherwise (Selection Dummy). The sample includes all restructured and control
hotels with non-missing bed data. If a hotel is restructured, its subsequent firm-year observations are dropped. Local Capacity
Share is the number of beds of a hotel in a given year divided by the total number of beds of all hotels in the same district and
year. All other variables are defined in Table II. In Panel (B), the regression specification is the same as in Table II (column
[2] of Panel (B)) and Table VII (column [2]), respectively, except that the Inverse Mills Ratio computed from the selection
equation in Panel (A) is included as an explanatory variable. The sample in Panel (B) is restricted to the 74 restructured
hotels with non-missing bed data. Standard errors are clustered at the district level. The coefficients and standard errors on
altitude and Δ snow are multiplied by 1,000. All debt restructurings took place between 1998 and 2005. t-statistics are in
parentheses. *, **, and *** denotes significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.


        Panel (A): Selection Equation                      Panel (B): IV Regressions with Heckman Correction



        Dependent Variable:           Selection            Dependent Variable:             ROA               ROA
                                       Dummy                                                                (adjusted)
                                                                                            [1]                 [2]
        Local Capacity Share         0.376***
                                        (2.72)              Leverage                    -0.054**            -0.059**
        Unexpected Snow                -0.000                                              (2.45)              (2.62)
                                        (0.14)             Size                           0.069**            0.060**
        Size                         -0.172***                                             (2.53)              (2.02)
                                        (4.31)             Age                              0.009              0.003
        Altitude                       -0.043                                              (1.00)              (0.22)
                                        (0.40)             Altitude                        -0.022             -0.019
         Snow                         -2.680                                              (1.32)              (1.02)
                                        (0.74)              Snow                         0.706**              0.079
                                                                                           (2.42)              (0.15)
        Year Dummies                    Yes                Inverse Mills Ratio             0.021               0.069
                                                                                           (0.34)              (0.86)
        Observations                    6,736
        R-squared                        0.12              Year Dummies                     Yes                 Yes

                                                           Regression Type                   IV                 IV

                                                           Observations                      74                 74
                                                           R-squared                        0.28               0.24
