                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  AGENCY PROBLEMS AND THE FATE OF CAPITALISM

                                           Randall Morck
                                           Bernard Yeung

                                        Working Paper 16490
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16490


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2010




Partial financial support from the SSHRC is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Randall Morck and Bernard Yeung. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Agency Problems and the Fate of Capitalism
Randall Morck and Bernard Yeung
NBER Working Paper No. 16490
October 2010
JEL No. B53,G28,G34,N20,P1,P12

                                               ABSTRACT

Economics has firms maximizing value and people maximizing utility, but firms are run by people.
Agency theory concerns the mitigation of this internal contradiction in capitalism. Firms need charters,
regulations and laws to restrain those entrusted with their governance, just as economies need constitutions
and independent judiciaries to restrain those entrusted with government. Agency problems distort
capital allocation if corporate insiders are inefficiently selected or incentivized, and this hampers economic
growth absent a legal system with appropriate constraints. However, political economy problems and
agency problems in corporations may reinforce each other, compromising the quality of both corporate
governance and government.


Randall Morck
Faculty of Business
University of Alberta
Edmonton, CANADA T6G 2R6
and NBER
randall.morck@ualberta.ca

Bernard Yeung
National University of Singapore
Mochtar Riady Building
15 Kent Ridge Drive
BIZ 1, Level 6, #6-19
Singapore 119245
bizdean@nus.edu.sg
1.      Introduction
Neoclassical economics presents “capitalism” as a system where multitudes of firms compete to offer
customers the best prices. To many, especially outside America and Britain, “capitalism” is a system
where a handful of old‐monies families run the economy – often badly. The economists marvel at the
others’ credulity for conspiracy theories, while the others marvel at economists’ naivety about the “real
world”. Close inspection of corporate governance in different countries suggests that each side well take
the other seriously. Capitalism has genuinely different forms in different countries, and these reflect
fundamental differences in the distributions of corporate and political control.
        Neoclassical economics readily allows that who controls a country’s government matters, but
traditionally takes firms as profit maximizing black boxes and capital as a return‐generating substance
that Samuelson dubbed shmoo. Yet who controls firms, and their capital, matters (Berle and Means
1932). How microeconomics can incorporate this insight is the core issue of agency theory (Jensen and
Meckling 1976).
        Running a business requires scarce talent, and competition among potential leaders ideally
assigns corporate control to the most able. Adam Smith (1762) posits that business success requires an
empathic ability to predict potential customers’ desires. Hayek (1941, c. 25, p. 335) stresses the
importance of exceptional foresight; Knight (1921 c. 9 §3.9.7) stresses the rarity of rational decision‐
making ability; and Schumpeter (1912) sees uniquely creative innovators building new corporations that
destroy old ones, and thereby earning the wrath of all who preferred the status quo.
        Somewhat more cynically, and more in line with the recent corporate governance literature,
Adam Smith (1776, bk. 5, c. 1, pt. 3, art. 1) holds that corporate directors “seldom pretend to
understand anything of the business of the company.” Keynes (1936, c. 12, §5) concurs with Smith,
Hayek, Knight, and Schumpeter that “the social purpose of skilled investment is to defeat the dark forces
of time and ignorance which envelop our future”, he despairs that this is beyond the ability of corporate
executives, whose decisions the attributes to behavioral “animal spirits” (c. 12, §7). Mueller (1992) thus
advocates a broadly behavioral approach to modeling managerial decision‐making. Brandeis (1914)
blasts the ethics of corporate tycoons running firms built with “other people’s money”, and Berle and
Means (1932) describe a fundamental misalignment of their incentives.
        Corporate governance, broadly defined, continues this discussion. Capital is not schmoo, for
who controls businesses matters, as do the institutions that determine this, the interest groups that
affect these institutions, and thus the interface between financial economics and political economy.




                                                    1
        While economic theory addresses all these issues, incentive misalignment attracts the most
attention – perhaps because it highlights an internal contradiction within that theory. Neoclassical
economics posits that individuals maximize utility and that firms maximize economic profits or, more
precisely, the expected present values (NPVs) of their capital investments – which, in turn, precisely
equal the expected present values of economic profits. This presents problems because, as Gabrowski
and Mueller (1972) rightly note, firms are run by people. Which then is paramount: a CEO’s utility or
her firm’s NPV?
        Jensen and Meckling (1976), expanding earlier theories (Ross 1973) and reflecting previous
empirical work rejecting pure value maximization (Baumol 1959; Grabowski & Mueller 1972 and others),
provide the now standard resolution to this inconsistency. They assume utility maximization more
fundamental, and their firms therefore do not maximize NPVs. The implicit sacrificed value they dub an
agency cost. Specifically, they model outside investors – the firm’s owners or principals, as in
Corporations Law – buying shares in firms run by utility maximizing insiders, whom Corporations Law
declares to be their agents. Elaborating what is now standard terminology, they christen this divergence
of interests a principal‐agent problem, now often abbreviated to agency problem. Corporate governance
is the study of agency problems and the monitoring and control mechanisms that limit agency costs.
        Neoclassical economics posits that price competition culls firms that do not maximize NPVs, and
thus holds that agency problems ought to be brief and economically negligible (Demsetz & Villalonga
2001). However, the empirical literature increasingly confirms non‐value‐maximizing decisions to be
commonplace in corporate boardrooms, and far too economically important to be abstracted away (e.g.
Shleifer & Vishny 1997; Gompers et al. 2003; Bebchuk & Fried 2004; Bebchuk et al. 2009).
        If firms do not maximize value, managerial utility maximization might cause firms to effectively
maximize something else. Baumol (1959) posits sales maximization; and Baumol (1967) argues that
growth maximization best fits the facts – at least in the United States. Recent work in behavioral finance
suggests alternative objective functions for individuals (Shleifer 2000), and Mueller (1992) argues that
such considerations be incorporated into models of managerial behavior. Early work along these lines
includes Stein (1989) and Scharfstein and Stein (1990), and Baker et al. (2004) review the area. Morck
(2008) argues that a “loyalty reflex” demonstrated in Milgram’s (1974) experiments might compromiser
directors’ judgment, and draws from variants of those experiments and the broader social psychology
literature to evaluate governance reforms.      Nonetheless, most work in the area presumes utility
maximization by managers. This is perhaps justifiable, in that the critical issue is that neoclassical
economics assigns people, including managers, and firms different objective functions.


                                                    2
        Thus, Grabowski and Mueller (1972), Jensen (1986), and others argue that top executives attain
higher utility from running larger firms, and thus invest in negative PV projects merely to grow their
firms. Jensen calls this sort of capital misallocation a free cash flow agency problem, defining free cash
flow as the firm’s cash flow (revenues minus operating costs) less the setup costs of all its positive NPV
investments. A value maximizing firm should pay its free cash flow out to its shareholders, rather than
invest it in negative NPV projects, but Jensen presents evidence that free cash flow agency problems are
a first order determinant of overall agency costs. If this thesis is right, and the data suggest it is,
microeconomic theory missed something very fundamental before the advent of agency theory.
        Fortunately, this gap can be spanned with deeper economics (Jensen and Meckling 1976). Moral
outrage about corporate misgovernance, in contrast, may be largely misdirected. Agency costs are often
described as shareholder wealth expropriation. This is incorrect in an efficient market, where
shareholders buy low because they rationally foresee extensive agency problems, costly monitoring and
control mechanisms to limit agency problems, or a mixture of the two. Firms’ founders thus absorb all
agency costs by selling their shares at depressed initial public offering (IPO) prices; and the shares trade
at fair value thereafter. Only outside shareholders who underestimate agency problems overpay and
lose money on average, and this is expropriation unless caveat emptor applies.
        The real social costs of agency problems lie deeper in inner workings of the economy. Inefficient
resource allocation by firms costs money, as do the monitoring and control mechanisms that might limit
those problems. Some level of agency costs is thus unavoidable. But both firms and economies can seek
ways to reduce unavoidable agency costs.
        All else equal, if corporate insiders more credibly pre‐commit to maximize NPVs, investors pay
more for shares. Higher share prices make outside capital readily available to firms that need it,
permitting growth in firms with genuine business opportunities (Mueller 2006a). But less trusting
outside investors and low share prices make outside capital scarce, growth is restricted to firms with
abundant earnings from existing operations (La Porta & et al. 1997) – and these need not be the firms
with the most farsighted, rational, or innovative leadership. Governments can curtail agency costs with
institutions that better facilitate or require such commitments by corporate insiders. All else equal,
success at this cuts costs of capital to entrants and incumbents alike; promoting competition,
innovation, and efficient resource allocation. Corporate governance is therefore most fundamentally
about how honest and able corporate insiders can most efficiently and credibly commit to limit agency
costs, and about how governments can lower their costs of doing so (Shleifer and Vishny 1997; Bebchuk
and Weisbach 2010).


                                                     3
        Finally, a Handbook of Capitalism survey of corporate governance must pay due honor to Marx.
The internal contradiction at the heart of corporate governance is not unrelated to Marx’s more famous
contention that competition drives surplus value to zero, and that this dooms capitalism. Schumpeter
(1942, p. 31) interprets surplus value as the present value of abnormal returns to capital, essentially the
NPVs of finance textbooks; and argues correctly that competition indeed drives these to zero. This still
disturbs the equanimity of an occasional MBA student, who learns in microeconomics how economic
profits fall to zero under perfect competition, and then learns in Corporate Finance of the need for
“positive NPV” projects – that is, investments with positive economic profits. A well‐placed between‐
term or summer break obscures this discrepancy from all but the most insightful students; but its true
resolution, due to Schumpeter (1912), is that investment in innovation can have positive economic
profits for a time (Cable & Mueller 2008); and that successful innovators are exceptionally foresighted
and coldly rational rarities. Corporate governance is thus most fundamentally about how to entrust the
governance of businesses to people who are both able and willing to find the positive NPV projects that
Schumpeter evokes to save capitalism from Marxist doom. Good corporate governance is therefore
fundame3ntally about piloting firms through disequilibrium situations, where economic profits can be
very large, and positive or negative.
        Ultimately, a free market economy creates social welfare by organizing the efficient division of
labor (Smith 1776). Increased efficiency in corporate governance thus places corporations more reliably
under the control of top executives with specialized skills, talents, or information necessary for leading
their firm, organizing is core activities, developing its future capabilities, and mobilizing capital to
financing its growth opportunism. But designing institutions that better align CEOs’ personal utility
maximization with value maximization also promises improved microeconomic efficiency.                  The
normative goal of economic analysis in this context is trustworthy and well‐qualified top corporate
managers running firms that raise capital from rationally trusting investors. The positive goal of
economic analysis in this area is enlightenment as to how top corporate insiders, firms, and investors
actually behave, and the economic consequences of this.


2.      AGENCY PROBLEMS AND THE WEALTH OF NATIONS
The social purpose of the financial system is to entrust people’s savings to firms governed by
trustworthy people. Schumpeter’s famous circular flow fails if savers do not trust financial institutions
or financial markets, and instead bury coins in their gardens. But if savers can invest in bank accounts,
bonds, and stocks knowing their money will be entrusted to genuine entrepreneurs who can capture

                                                    4
genuine economic profits, the economy can mobilize its capital to finance huge firm capturing vast
economies of scale, daring technological innovators, and perceptive entrepreneurs who perceive
previously unexploited profit opportunities (Mueller 2006a).


2.1        BIG BUSINESS, TRUST, AND RICHES
Rosenberg and Birdzel (1986) argue that the joint stock company and other similar business
organizational forms that let anonymous investors assemble huge pools of capital, and the institutional
arrangements necessary to them, are fundamental to “how the West grew rich” and surpassed
previously more advanced civilizations such as the Arab World, China, and India. The West developed
institutions that let entrepreneurs assemble vast pools of capital from diverse investors, while the rest
did not.
           For large publicly traded companies to be viable, savers must trust corporate insiders to govern
efficiently. Insiders can make commitments to do so at the firm level by granting shareholders voting
rights, nominating trustworthy directors, mandating independent board committees, voluntarily
disclosing important information, adopting managerial incentive pay schemes, and the like. However,
Rosenberg and Birdzel stress how country‐level institutional developments are more important to the
credibility of such commitments. Promises to honor shareholders appear incredible without predictable
laws and regulations governing financial markets, efficient and dispassionate courts, honest civil
servants, mandatory disclosure rules, responsible government, and the like.
           With the discovery of sea routes to around Africa to Asia and of the New World, the spice, fur,
tobacco, and slave trades promised high returns but required vast capital outlays beyond the capabilities
of even the wealthiest merchants and aristocrats. The solution to this quandary, the joint stock
company, was 17th century Dutch invention.1
           Before the invention of the joint stock company, maritime trade was organized one ship at a
time. At the end of each voyage, the ship and cargo were sold and the proceeds divided between the
captain and crew, the provisioners, and the financiers with each party’s dividend (in the arithmetic
sense) pre‐specified in the contract. Financiers diversified the risk of loss at sea by buying shares in
multiple voyages, rather than backing a single ship. Over time, these arrangements expanded to include
several ships or all voyages for a fixed number of years.




1
    Subsequent paragraphs draw from Frentrop (2002).

                                                       5
        The modern world’s first joint stock company, the Dutch East India Company or Vereenigde
Oost‐Indische Compagnie (VOC) was formed in 1602.2 It was, according to the prominent investor Isaac
le Maire (1558‐1624), governed in a way “entirely absurd and impertinent” to the “displeasure and
complaint of both the people in the street and the investors”.3 This displeasure arose because, to le
Maire’s fury, the VOC directors refused to dissolve the venture, and instead used each voyages’ profits
to finance the next, paying dividends from the residual only. Moreover, they appeared intent on
continuing this “absurd” practice indefinitely! Le Maire wanted his money out of the VOC because he
felt its directors were running the company too laxly.              They were building fine houses along
Amsterdam’s best canals, but letting others grab promising business opportunities in Asia.
        On January 24 1609, in what (to our knowledge) is the first recorded corporate governance
dispute, le Maire formally charged that the directors sought to “retain another’s money for longer or
use it ways other than the latter wishes” and petitioned for the liquidation of the VOC in accordance
with standard business practice. The petition was denied, and investors who wanted out were forced to
find another exit strategy. The only option left to them was selling the shares of the VOC they owned to
other investors, for some merchants who had not participated in the initial voyage were indeed
interested in earning dividends from a second round of voyages.
        Because le Maire lost, a new business model arose – the publicly traded, indefinitely long‐lived,
joint stock corporation with publicly traded shares. This innovation financed the successive waves of
industrial revolution that created the modern world. But le Maire was also quite likely correct in arguing
that the directors of the VOC were growing fat and indolent, living off the shareholders’ hard‐earned
money. Today’s top managers have moved on, graduating from fine canal houses to Lear Jets, and
shareholders object just as vociferously. And today’s top corporate managers, just as confidently,
assure shareholders it’s all actually in their best interests.
         Ultimately, Dutch shareholders accepted the new model, and British organizers copied it,
especially after the Glorious Revolution of 1688 brought Dutch courtiers and ideas to London. Vast pools
of capital soon funded huge joint stock companies, like the British East India Company and the Hudson’s
Bay Company which, at their apogees, owned sizable fractions of India and Canada, respectively. Others
organized settler colonies, slaving expeditions, and slave plantations. The model soon spread to France
and across Europe.

2
  Lit. United East Indian Company. The VOC had antecedents in Flanders, and probably elsewhere; and businesses
similar to joint stock companies likely existed in Roman times (Malmendier 2005).
3
  (Frentrop 2002, c. 2) superbly documents the early corporate governance disputes of the VOC, and is our source
for the following historical case studies.

                                                        6
        Questionable business models, especially slaving and slave plantations, and later the opium
trade in China, attracted opprobrium to joint stock companies. But so did a popular perception of
rampant mismanagement. Writing more than half a century after Smith (1776, bk. 5, c1, pt. 3, art. 1)
despairs that “The directors of such companies ... being the managers rather of other people's money
than of their own, it cannot well be expected that they should watch over it with the same anxious
vigilance with which the partners in a private copartnery frequently watch over their own. Like the
stewards of a rich man, they are apt to consider attention to small matters as not for their master's
honour, and very easily give themselves a dispensation from having it. Negligence and profusion,
therefore, must always prevail, more or less, in the management of the affairs of such a company.”
        Courts, legislatures, and regulators ever since have sought to achieve the vast pools of capital
joint stock companies permit without the “negligence and profusion” Smith denounces. As noted
above, Rosenberg and Birdzell (1986) argue that western countries first developed institutions, legal and
informal, that brought this goal closer than ever before, and that this is “how the West grew rich” and
escaped the Malthusian trap that once bound every part of the world equally.
        Subsequent research in corporate governance elaborates on this theme.             Over the four
centuries since the VOC first defied its shareholders, much has changed to better protect public
shareholders in joint stock companies and similar structures – listed trusts, listed limited partnerships,
widely held cooperatives, and the like – from errant or inept insiders. In some countries, more efficient
hierarchies that better let honest and competent insiders credibly commit to good governance
encouraged broader, deeper, and more efficient capital markets in a virtuous circle or expanding
prosperity; while in other countries, this feedback loop either fails to form or quickly collapses after
occasionally materializing (La Porta et al. 1997; Rajan & Zingales 2003), preserving de facto feudal
institutions (Haber 2000; Acemoglu et al. 2001a, b)
        Differences in national institutions therefore merit the interest of corporate governance
researchers – either as factors directly responsible for these differences or as instruments behind other
factors that are responsible. However, before exploring these issues, we pause to consider how
governance quality can be measured and modelled.


2.2     WHO GOVERNS FIRMS MATTERS
The literature on agency problems uses a range of models and notation that remains inconsistent.
However, common themes are evident. Corporate insiders create wealth worth V from capital K, and
the wealth created, ΔV = V – K, is the NPV of the profits of their ventures. Agency problems arise


                                                      7
because the insiders must provide the investors – the people who provided the capital – with a return r
that is higher the greater the risk the investors perceive in the venture. Business ventures have intrinsic
risk, but agency problems add to this risk if insiders might keep part of r, or run the firm to enhance their
utility and leave insufficient funds to pay the return the investors expect. Perceiving these elevated
risks, rational investors withhold capital unless the promised return is very high or measures are in place
to make the actual payment of the return credible. Agency problems thus increase firms’ costs of
outside capital, and sufficiently serious agency problems preclude access to outside capital altogether
(La Porta et al. 1997).
        The scope for agency problems depends on the benefits b corporate insiders pay themselves.
Entrepreneurs contributing foresight, rationality, creativity, or other scare talents the firm needs merit
compensation bE. Since this compensates them for their skill in creating value, it is theoretically paid
entirely out of ΔV and leaves sufficient earnings to pay investors r. However, utility maximizing insiders
determine their own compensation, within the limits the country’s regulations and the firm’s
contractual obligations permit.
        The benefits insiders glean thus contain other terms. These private benefits of control come in
two flavors. Some private benefits – social status and the sheer utility of power, for example – need not
compromise the firm’s ability to allocate resources optimally, though they can if their consumption
induces unqualified insiders to retain control. Other private benefits – self‐dealing, excess
compensation, pet projects, pursuit of the good life at corporate expense, and the like – can allocate
resources suboptimally ‐ from the perspectives of as well as society. The former we call intangible
private benefits of control, denoted bI, and the latter we call tangible private benefits of control bT.
    Agency problems arise because, in general, bE and bT are indistinguishable until after the fact, and bI
may be largely unobservable. Monitoring and control mechanisms, whose cost we denote m, can curtail
bT, but generally curtail bE and bI too. Thus, outside investors’ return is reduced by insiders’ tangible
private benefits bT; and may be further reduced if incumbent insiders’ enjoyment of intangible private
benefits bI induces them to hold onto corporate power when more qualified people might take charge.
The economic importance of such entrenchment is evident in the positive stock price reaction that occur
upon announcements of the sudden deaths of many top corporate insiders (Johnson et al 1985; Erbani
et al 1987; Faccio and Parsley 2009).
      The efficacy with which insiders have added to a firm’s value can be assessed by estimating
Tobin’s average q ratio, q = V/K (Tobin & Brainard 1976). If corporate insiders have, on average, added
to a firm’s value, q > 1. If they have, on average, destroyed value, q < 1. Since events beyond insiders’


                                                      8
control can also create or destroy value, q is usually adjusted with industry benchmarks and for other
factors like firm size or age. However, we can proceed without loss of generality by declaring that q = 1
+ NPV/K, where K is the firm’s total stock of capital and NPV is the total aggregated net present value of
all the firm’s operations.
      Figure 1 shows mean firm‐level estimates of q, by country, from the mid 1990s from La Porta et
al. (2002), who go on to show higher average q ratios in countries whose governments offer outside
investors stronger legal rights against corporate insiders. Buttressing this finding, Gompers et al.
(Gompers et al. 2003) show that US firms with stronger commitments to shareholder democracy in their
corporate charters exhibit higher average q ratios; and Bebchuk and Cohen (2005a), Faleye (2007), and
others show markedly depressed average q ratios in firms with staggered boards, that is, whose
corporate charters grant directors three‐year terms with a third facing reelection each year.


Figure 1 Mean Tobin’s Average Q Ratios around the World
The means of the Tobin’s average q ratios of the twenty largest listed firms in each country are
proposed as gauges of the overall quality of corporate governance in each country. Values above
100% indicate a preponderance of value creating investments by the country’s corporations in the
eyes of their public investors. Data are for the mid 1990s, and the estimates are constructed by La
Porta et al. (2002).
       Argentina
        Australia
          Austria
         Belgium
         Canada
        Denmark
          Finland
          France
        Germany
          Greece
      Hong Kong
          Ireland
            Israel
              Italy
           Japan
           Korea
          Mexico
     Netherlands
   New Zealand
          Norway
         Portugal
       Singapore
            Spain
         Sweden
     Switzerland
 United Kingdom
   United States
                      0.0     0.5         1.0           1.5       2.0         2.5         3.0         3.5




                                                    9
       The limitations on shareholders’ legal and democratic rights also clearly cause depressed average
q ratios, rather than the converse. When US states pass legislation constricting shareholders’ legal
rights, the average share price of all firms incorporated in those states drops significantly (Ryngaert &
Netter 1990; Jahera & Pugh 1991), as do the prices of firms that modify their corporate charters to limit
shareholder democracy (DeAngelo & Rice 1983; Jarrell & Poulsen 1987, 1988; Bhagat & Jefferis 1991;
Datta & Iskandar‐Datta 1996; Bebchuk et al. 2002); though see also Comment & Schwert (1995), who
highlight how less democracy can create more value under the right management, and McWilliams &
Sen    (1997) and others, who highlight tradeoffs between different dimensions of shareholder
democracy.
       An alternative approach Tobin’s marginal q (Tobin 1969), designated here q’, assesses the
efficiency of corporate investment on the margin. This must be distinguished from Tobin’s average q
(Tobin & Brainard 1976), discussed above. Tobin’s marginal q’ = dV/dK, the marginal value the firm’s
management creates from a marginal unit of capital.4 The (tax adjusted) optimal value of q’ is one, for if
q’ > 1 the firm ought to expand and if q’ < 1 it has over‐expanded. Higher average q = V/K, in contrast,
always signifies net value creation. Empirical work reveals directly estimated marginal q ratios to be
closer to one (or its tax‐adjusted optimum) in firms about which investors have more information
(Durnev et al. 2004) and in countries with Common Law legal systems that accord public shareholders
stronger rights against insiders (Mueller, 2005, Gugler et al. 2004a; Gugler et al. 2007). Empirical studies
using alternative measures of investment efficiency find similar cross country results (Rajan & Zingales
1998; Wurgler 2000).
       Yet another approach compares the price of a firm’s stock price after it announces a large
investment relative to the price before to back out investors’ estimate of the marginal q ratio of that
investment (Morck et al. 1990). Increases in firms’ research and development (R&D) spending sharply
elevate share prices (Chan et al. 1990; Chan et al. 2001), as do foreign acquisitions by R&D intensive U.S.
firms (Morck & Yeung 1992), consistent with innovation as a source of genuine economic profits

4
  Marginal q ratios are also called profitability indexes in capital budgeting textbooks, and average q ratios can be
conceived of as profitability indexes for entire firms, rather than marginal projects. Much confusion arises in the
literature because of the confounding of Tobin’s marginal and average q ratios (Durnev et al. 2004; Gugler et al.
2004b, a), for Hayashi (1982) shows extremely strong linearity assumptions are needed for q’ to equal q and
Durnev et al. (2004) find them empirically uncorrelated in US data. The validity of both measures depends on the
efficiency of financial markets – that is, on investors accurately assessing the value implications of all the firm’s
investment opportunities and its top managers’ decisions. If irrational investors bias asset prices, V must be
reinterpreted as an unobservable fundamental value that would prevail under full rationality and full information.
Also, a marginal q of one indicates only efficiency of capital allocation on the margin; and does not indicate the
complete exploitation of all value maximizing inframarginal investment opportunities.


                                                         10
(Schumpeter 1912; Grabowski & Mueller 1978). In contrast, corporate takeovers, among the largest
capital investments firms undertake, more markedly depress the share prices of acquiring firms with
more evident agency problems (Morck et al. 1990) or in countries whose legal systems offer public
shareholders weaker legal recourse against insiders (Mueller & Yurtoglu 2007). The change in value of
the target and bidder combined suggest net value creation in many cases, but the mere fact that num
value‐destroying takeovers happen suggests that corporate insiders gain personal utility from ruling
over larger business empires, regardless of their profitability (Morck et al. 1990; Mueller & Sirower
2003).
      Determining the optimal protection of shareholders’ rights is complicated by several interrelated
considerations. First, shareholders entrust corporate governance to top insiders because those insiders
possess exceptional foresight, rationality, or creativity. This means shareholders recognize that insiders
are better qualified to govern the firm, and that excessive shareholder power might interfere with this.
Indeed, limits on shareholder democracy correlate with both unusually good and unusually poor
corporate performance (Adams et al. 2005; Adams & Ferreira 2007), suggesting that democracy limits
both extremes.
      Governments can impose conditions on corporate charters, force firms to spend money making
themselves transparent, and assign shareholders stronger rights in court. All such measures can limit
corporate insiders’ freedom to extract private benefits of control, but always at a cost. Just as more
democratic charters can limit truly creative CEOs’ freedom of action, transparency requirements entail
auditing and compliance costs and legal rights enable opportunistic and even extortionary lawsuits
(Jensen & Meckling 1976).


2.3      SHAREHOLDER VALUE AS AN IMPERFECT GOVERNANCE METER
The agency literature tends to identify superior corporate governance with higher share prices.
Normative chapters in economics and finance textbooks charge firms with maximizing net present
values, the expected discounted values of future profits. This makes sense, for outside investors almost
always invest solely to grow their savings. Obviously, a sole proprietorship maximizing its owner’s utility
and financed solely with her savings entails no agency conflict, for owner and manger are one; though
the textbooks describe this situation poorly. But capitalism prospers off specialized firms exploiting
economies of scale, and this typically requires mobilizing very large pools of outside investors’ capital.
This justifies shareholder value as a corporate governance metric; however, conditions under which the
metric can go askew merit note.


                                                    11
         First, shareholders are not the only people with investments in a firm. However, the prices of
firms’ other securities – bonds, debentures, bank loans, etc. – fluctuate relatively little compared to
stock prices. A firm’s obligations to its other investors almost always have legal priority over those to its
shareholders. Firms with cash flow shortfalls must cut or skip dividends first. Only if the shortfall is very
large does a firm lay off employees or miss an interest payment, for the former triggers often costly
labor laws and the latter triggers bankruptcy. Thus, any cash flow shortfalls initially hurt dividends, and
hence shareholder wealth, before affecting any other securities. Likewise, any unexpected positive
revisions in a firm’s future cash flow estimates normally augment expected future payouts available to
common shareholders, and thus raise the share price. Bondholders do not get higher interest payments
whenever the firm has an unusually good year. Consequently, most of the variation in a firm’s market
value, and therefore in its average q ratio, is due to variation in shareholder value.
         This is the fundamental reason why corporate governance must focus on shareholder value.
Shareholders are not more important than the firm’s other claimants; but their squawking amid
plummeting share prices turns out to be a highly sensitive corporate misgovernance alarm system. If
shareholders anger can prevent or reverse misbegotten corporate policies, creditors and workers are
protected.5 Nonetheless, many countries charge top insiders with balancing shareholders’ interests
against those of all stakeholders – creditors, employees, retired employees, consumers, suppliers, the
environment, the state, the community, and so on – seemingly to the detriment of overall wealth
creation (Klaus Gugler & Yurtoglu 2003) and quite probably to overall employment levels as well (Jensen
& Meckling 1979; Faleye et al. 2006).
         Second, stock prices can misrepresent the quality of corporate management. If the firm is
perfectly transparent, public investors can estimate the cash flows each of its projects will generate in all
future periods. But the public relies on public information, so shareholders might think brilliant
entrepreneurs mad and depose them, or laud truly mad corporate insiders as brilliant. The former
misperception retards growth, and the latter destroys existing wealth.
         This seemingly obvious point nonetheless causes much confusion. The Dutch court that upheld
the VOC’s right to life encapsulated this confusion in a mantra for disgruntled shareholders: “if you

5
  Of course, this early warning system can fail, and a corporate decision can be so awful as to adversely affect
creditors, workers, or other stakeholders before shareholders can sound an alarm. The laws of most countries
recognize that, in such cases, top insiders’ duty is expanded to encompass all affected stakeholders. Moreover, if
shareholder value is already near zero, shareholders may favor high risk gambles that might save the firm but are
likely to leave creditors or other stakeholders worse off in a looming bankruptcy. In such cases, the legal systems
of most countries shift insiders’ duties towards creditors – now the likely residual claimant.


                                                         12
don’t like the way the firm is run, sell your shares.” If the firm was badly run when the shareholders
bought their shares, and is no worse run now, this is reasonable advice. But selling out is no solution to
unexpected misgovernance. In an efficient market, the shares of an unexpectedly mismanaged firm
drop instantly, and fetch too little too late to assuage disgruntled shareholders.
        However, outside investors sometimes do misgauge the true value of a firm’s ongoing
investments. Firms are not perfectly transparent; their inner workings can be occluded by unavoidable
information gathering and processing costs, or by deliberate obfuscations designed to conceal dubious
management decisions. Taxes and other transactions costs further complicate the picture. The validity
of the efficient markets hypothesis – the speed and accuracy with which all relevant new information
accurately revises stock prices to reflect fundamental values – is therefore critical to the validity of
shareholder value being a defensible metric of corporate governance. Tobin (1984) thus stresses the
functional form of the efficient markets hypothesis as holding if financial markets are “efficient enough”
to guide capital to its highest‐value uses with a tolerably low error rate. The extent to which financial
market inefficiency biases corporate governance is one of the most understudied topics in current
finance research (though see Wurgler 2000; Durnev et al. 2004).
        Third, bubbles and financial panics are especially troublesome deviations from market
efficiency, and recent work in behavioral finance suggests that investors’ perceptions can be distorted in
more normal market conditions as well. All the stocks in an industry, or even in a country, can rise or fall
because of altered terms of trade, consumer tastes, or government policies. Thus, the high Tobin’s
average q ratios of US firms in Figure 1 might reflect more sensible regulations, a low dollar, or an
expanding stock market bubble in the mid 1990s. Some evidence suggests that firms’ share prices
relative to each other retain a relationship to their relative underlying fundamentals even as prices
overall rise and fall with bubbles and panics (Samuelson 1998; Jung & Shiller 2005). These possible
problems motivate measuring the quality of governance by firms’ average q ratios relative to industry or
country benchmarks (Morck et al. 1988).
        Fourth, companies can go from seemingly robust financial health to probable bankruptcy
quickly, depressing both their equity and debt valuations, and even putting employment and factor
market contracts at risk. Once bankruptcy is in the cards, the values of debt and other contractual
obligations fluctuate too, changes in shareholder valuation are no longer the whole picture. If only debt
is affected, switching the focus from shareholder value to the firm’s total market value is viable. If
supplier and employment contracts are put at risk, these valuation decreases must be weighed in too.




                                                     13
        Fifth, political rent seeking can disconnect firms’ NPVs, and therefore shareholder value, from
genuine economic profits. In many countries, one of the highest NPV investment firm can undertaking is
bribing public officials – either directly or, more commonly, indirectly via favors (Baumol 1990; Murphy
et al. 1991) – to gain state‐protected market power, subsidies, tax breaks, or regulatory favors . The
importance of such favors become visible when corrupt governments change, as when the stocks of
Indonesian firms favored by President Suharto collapsed upon his overthrow (Fisman & Miguel 2008). Is
a firm whose share price soars because of the hugely profitable bribing of a politician a “well‐governed”
firm? Is a firm ill‐governed if it refuses to bribe officials, and therefore suffers regulatory disfavor that
depresses its profits and share value? The answer to both is affirmative if shareholder value is the
metric used. But, this is misleading because corporate governance is fundamentally about allocating the
economy’s savings efficiently. Corruption can twist shareholder value badly out of alignment with
efficient capital allocation.
        Despite all of these caveats, shareholder value is the best corporate governance gauge available.
Shareholders, like canaries in a mine, are especially sensitive to danger. Their squawking is a sometimes
overly sensitive alarm system, and they occasionally doze through an approaching crisis. We therefore
keep our eye on share prices, but bear in mind the conditions under which this gauge can stick.


3.      CONSTITUTIONAL FINANCE
Good corporate governance is difficult because of an underlying time inconsistency problem: before
corporate insiders sell shares to outsiders, they promise value maximization so the shares fetch the
highest possible price. After the shares are issued, the same insiders rationally appreciate the utility of
policies other than shareholder value maximization. Good corporate governance thus entails a credible
commitment against insiders maximizing their utility ex post. The problem thus resembles that of a
government that must tie its own hands (Kydland & Prescott 1977), and thus the problem of designing
an optimal constitution (Buchanan & Tullock 1962; Mueller 1996). The best tether is often unclear
because the non‐value‐maximizing actions corporate insiders might take are often hard to anticipate –
even for the insiders themselves.
        This is most evident in the different attitudes towards good governance measures held by
insiders of younger versus older firms. Younger firms’ insiders, contemplating issuing new shares to
public investors, logically want each share to fetch as high a price as possible, and so favor strong
monitoring and control mechanisms, which are indeed more commonplace in the charters of firms with
more bountiful growth opportunities (Durnev and Kim, 2005). But a mature or declining firm’s share

                                                     14
issuance days are in its distant past, and its insiders quite plausibly come to appreciate larger private
benefits of control to a higher share price (Grabowski & Mueller 1975). Thus, a time inconsistency
problem inevitably arises as a firm ages, despite the most earnest protestations of the young firm’s
insiders.
        How countries deal with this time inconsistency matters, for this affects the pace of
Schumpeter’s creative destruction and thus the country’s long‐term economic growth (Shleifer &
Wolfenzon 2002; Rajan & Zingales 2004; Morck et al. 2005; Mueller 2006a). This is readily illustrated by
the venture capital cycle documented by Gompers and Lerner (Gompers & Lerner 1999), whereby
innovative entrepreneurs build new firms, entrust them to professional managers, sell out, and use the
proceeds to start another innovative venture.       This cycle, or something analogous to it, appears
important in the United States and other high‐income economies, but is altogether lacking in low‐
income economies (Morck et al. 2005). If professional managers cannot be trusted, the entrepreneur
must stay in charge. She cannot cash out, nor can her children, nor her children’s’ children. Rather, they
must take their pay in the form of private benefits. Such an economy is bereft of entrepreneurship and
its capital assets are governed by heirs, who are rarely the beneficiaries of talent as well as wealth. To
avoid this fate, capitalist economies need institutions that render professional corporate managers
credibly trustworthy by constraining their scope for private benefits.
        The corporate finance literature often follows Jensen and Meckling (1976) in referring to
corporate insiders’ generic non‐value‐maximizing behavior as “shirking” – relaxing to enjoy a
philosopher’s good life instead of striving to defeat Keynes’ “dark forces” to unveil the future. This is
historically valid, for in his complaint to the Dutch court, le Maire accused the VOC directors of
neglecting the company to enjoy quiet lives of luxury in expensive Amsterdam canal houses. It is also
empirically supported, for John et al. (2008) present evidence of personally risk‐averse US CEOs
safeguarding their perks and pay by shunning risky projects that nonetheless likely had positive NPVs.
        Yet other utility maximizing CEOs might spend their investors’ money to build ego‐satisfying, but
ultimately financially unstable, corporate empires (Jensen 1986), to pay themselves handsomely for
running the firm poorly (Jensen & Murphy 1990), or on “perks” like executive jets (Yermack 2006).
Utility maximizing CEOs might restrict hiring to a favored gender or an ethnicity, or to ego‐pleasing “yes‐
men”, even though this fills the firm with suboptimally qualified employees (Becker 1957). Politically or
socially aware CEOs might even spend their investors’ money lobbying for favored political agendas
(Högfeldt 2005) or funding pet charities (Atkinson & Galaskiewicz 1988) – all with the best of utility
maximizing intentions.


                                                    15
        The list of tangible and intangible private benefits of control insiders might extract, and the cost
to share prices of these actions, is impossible to complete for it grows naturally with financial
innovations like stock options, technological innovations like commuter helicopters, new tax loopholes,
and so on. Credibly pre‐committing to avoid each and every conceivable item on this list is beyond the
ability of even the finest contract lawyers. Credible commitments to good governance must thus be of a
more general character: they must be open‐ended promises to inform and empower shareholders
          Genuinely credible commitments may therefore require that public policy enforce governance
standards. Empirical evidence suggests that public policy is typically more effective than measures taken
by individual firms in reducing agency costs (Doidge et al. 2007). But arguments that regulations, such as
the Sarbanes Oxley Act in the United States, impose inefficiently large compliance costs on listed firms
cannot be dismissed summarily (Romano 2005).
        Obviously, the more credible the good governance measures with which the entrepreneur can
bind the professional CEO who succeeds her, the higher the return to entrepreneurship. Public policies
that enforce higher standards of corporate governance are thus defensible to encourage
entrepreneurship. Since new firms often bring important productivity‐enhancing technologies into play,
this has dynamic efficiency consequences (Schumpeter 1912). Even absent new technology, higher
returns to the founders of new firms encourage entry and enhance competition.
        This concern for long term dynamic efficiency, rather than ethical arguments about
expropriation, is the more defensible economic logic underlying corporate governance laws, regulations,
and standards. These let corporate insiders tie themselves and their successors to the mast, so that
public shareholders can rationally expect agency problems to be mitigated, and thus can be persuaded
to pay more for corporate shares. Since Schumpeter (1912) argues that much economic growth arises
through innovative entrepreneurs founding new firms, unnecessarily large agency costs could reduce
social welfare quite substantially over the long run.
        Different countries use different mixes of alternative mechanisms to encourage shareholder
value maximization and discourage insiders from shirking or otherwise extracting private benefits. And
given these, different firms can constrain their insiders in different ways by relying on some available
mechanisms more than others.          These mechanisms range along a spectrum from open access
governance, where shareholder democracy (with all its flaws) is paramount, to restricted access
governance, where big business is entrusted to (hopefully enlightened) corporate despots.


3.1     SHAREHOLDER DEMOCRACY

                                                        16
The most basic such mechanism is shareholder democracy, as specified in law and by the firm’s charter.
A corporate charter is essentially a firm’s constitution, specifying voting rights, constituencies, voting
procedures, allocation rules for board seats, and the like. This reflects historical accident: Joint stock
companies arose before governments were ready for them and, in England and elsewhere formed under
laws cribbed from those pertaining to municipal governments (Dunlavy 2007).
        This made a certain sense, in that both towns and joint stock companies are the joint property
of large numbers of strangers, whether landowners or shareholders. Thus, both are legal persons
capable of owning corporate property and run by elected boards and chief executive officers within the
constraints of bylaws and corporate charters that specify rules for electing boards and enacting bylaws.
Some early corporate charters even imitated municipal elections in granting one vote per shareholder,
rather than the modern standard of one vote per share (Dunlavy 2007).
        Corporate charters and bylaws, like those of towns and cities, specifying voting rights, election
rules, administrative organization, financial accountability, audit procedures, and the general freedom of
action entrusted to the board and management. Some corporations can thus be substantially more
democratic than others. Gompers et al. (2003) rank the strength of shareholder democracy in each of a
large sample of US firms in the 1990s, and find that more democratic governance correlates significantly
with higher shareholder valuations and superior financial performance.
         Shareholders’ ultimate trump card is the annual general shareholders meeting, at which all
shareholders can vote out the board of directors if they don’t like the way the company was run. A new
board can then fire the old managers, hire new ones, and set the company on a new course more to the
shareholders’ liking. To stay in charge, the VOC’s directors had to convince a majority of its shareholders
that the strategy of staying in business perpetually made sense. They succeeded – in part because
shareholders who disagreed sold out and others who agreed bought in.
        How shareholder democracy works thus depends critically on the corporation’s voting rules at
that meeting (Bebchuk & Cohen 2005a). Corporations experimented with remarkably variegated
shareholder voting rules through the 19th century (Dunlavy 2007). One especially democratic model was
one‐vote‐per‐shareholder, based on a direct analogy to municipal corporations (Maier 1993). Other
early English trading companies, for example the Hudson’s Bay Company’s 1670 charter, pioneered one‐
vote‐per‐share instead, and the latter model won out by the 20th century.
        The logic behind restricting large shareholders’ relative power is that a firm’s top managers can
better act in all the shareholders’ true interests if they are not controlled too heavily by any given
shareholder – precisely the message in the VOC example cited above. But an a priori equally plausible


                                                    17
chain of reasoning holds powerful large shareholders improve the quality of corporate decision‐making
because they have the sophistication, resources, and financial incentives to monitor the firm and to
intervene to correct wrong strategies (Shleifer & Vishny 1986). The latter logic might not justify super‐
voting shares for insiders, but it can justify one‐vote‐per‐share under appropriate convexity assumptions
(Grossman & Hart 1988).
        Other companies in the 19th century had sliding scales, where shareholders with larger stakes
had fewer votes per share – so as not to marginalize smaller shareholders utterly, while still giving larger
shareholders more say (Dunlavy 2007).6 Related structures survive to the present in many countries in
the form of voting caps, which restrict any shareholder from voting more than a certain fraction of a
company’s shares. For example, voting caps currently limit the power of large shareholders in all the
major Canadian banks.
        But these relics are oddities. In 1811, New York State mandated one‐vote‐per‐share (for
manufacturing corporations), and other states followed suit. One‐vote‐per‐share became the standard
for shareholder democracy by the early 20th century. One‐vote‐per‐shareholder is now barely a
historical footnote, and further reforms to let insiders’ shares have superior voting pushed some firms
and countries to antidemocratic extremes, which we explore below.
        Even under one‐vote‐per shareholder, consulting all the shareholders for every business
decision was impracticable – even more so in earlier centuries when transportation by horse or clipper
made quick meetings impossible. This forced dispersed shareholders to entrust important decisions to
the board and top management.
        Electing highly trustworthy directors was not always easy. For example, Charles II granted
Rupert Palatyne, his cousin and a royalist Civil War hero, a monopoly on the fur trade out of most of
what is now Canada. Palatyne organized an IPO in 1670, and the Hudson’s Bay Company’s shareholders
elected a board of elite courtiers. From 1685 to 1690, the Bay’s share price soared as it paid large and
increasing dividends, and then the whole board resigned. The new directors discovered the meteoric
dividends were financed with asset sales, and the share price plummeted accordingly – well after the old
directors safely sold all their shares at the peak. The law courts had no sympathy for the impoverished




6
 Alexander Hamilton supported such a graduated voting scale in his proposal for the Bank of the United States,
arguing that “A vote for each share renders a combination of a few principal stockholders, to monopolize the
power and benefits of the bank, too easy. An equal vote to each stockholder, however great or small his interest in
the institution, allows not that degree of weight to large stockholders which it is reasonable they should have, and
which, perhaps, their security and that of the bank require”

                                                        18
shareholders, for one of the old board’s last decisions was to pay a “special dividend” in gold for the
King.
        Over the subsequent decades and centuries, directors’ duties gelled around preventing such
abuses. At Common Law, directors’ fiduciary duty is to put aside their private interests, act for the
shareholders, and treat all shareholders (even Kings) equally. In most Common Law countries, these
duties are fundamental legal principles.
        However, the Common Law courts may trust shareholder democracy excessively. First, most
small shareholders do not vote in firms’ shareholder meetings. This because a typical small shareholder,
perhaps owning only a few hundred or a few thousand dollars worth of stock, must spend considerable
time and money to become informed about the issues; and these costs typically exceed the dollar gain
governance improvements would create for her (Grossman and Hart 1980). Second, most shareholder
votes resemble elections to the North Korea People’s Congress more than to the New York City Council.
The typical election has one candidate standing for each board position, and shareholders are offered
the choice of voting for the candidate or withholding their votes. The CEO traditionally selected the
candidates, though existing directors are now sometimes entrusted with selecting candidates instead.
        Contested elections do occur, but rarely. A proxy challenge – a campaign to replace incumbent
directors with a so‐called dissident slate of candidates – is time consuming and expensive (Dodd &
Warner 1983; Brickley 1986; Pound 1988; DeAngelo & DeAngelo 1989; Bhagat & Jefferis 1991; Van Nuys
1993; Mulherin & Poulsen 1998; Romano 2003; Davis & Kim 2007). Dissidents must campaign with their
own money, while insiders can use corporate funds; dissidents’ access to shareholders’ names and
addresses can be constrained; and small shareholders may still not be motivated to investigate the
issues and vote. Proxy contests are therefore rare, and occur only where the costs of mismanagement
are perceived to be great (Bebchuk & Hart 2001). This means only extremely large‐scale shareholder
value devastation is likely to result in insiders being turfed out.


3.2     REPRESENTATIVE SHAREHOLDER DEMOCRACY
These and other limitations on direct shareholder democracy lead recent rounds of expert reports in
Australia, Britain, Canada, and other Common Law countries to advocate more responsible
representative democracy: more independent directors, independent “lead directors” or board chairs,
and key committees composed of independent directors. The Sarbanes Oxley reforms in the US also
mandate greater numbers and responsibilities for outsider directors.



                                                      19
        The social psychology literature (Milgram 1974) shows that people tend to reflexively obey
legitimate authority figures unless dissenting peers or alternate authority figures voice dissent, so these
reforms are defensible as ways of limiting excessive director loyalty to CEOs and promoting critical
thought (Morck 2010). Of course, endless debate over every decision is unhelpful, and an optimal
amount of dissent ought to exist (Landier et al. 2009).
        Consistent with such a role for independent directors, Weisbach (1988) finds subpar
performance more likely to trigger CEO turnover in US firms whose boards contain more independent
directors. However, whether or not independent directors increase shareholder value is unclear.
Although early work finds no correlation, more recent studies indicate a growing traction (Kaplan and
Weisbach 2010). This may reflect increasingly rigorous definitions of independence preventing CEOs
selecting directors by combing through lists of their friends for people who meet the literal criteria for
independence.
        Defining “independence” for directors can be tricky. People drawn from the ranks of top
management are clearly not outsiders; defying the CEO puts their jobs at risk. People with financial ties
to the firm – its lawyers, accountants, marketing agencies, or suppliers – are also unlikely to defy the
CEO, for they risk losing business. CEOs often invite other CEOs to serve as independent directors,
raising the possibility of tit‐for‐tat (Axelrod 1984) mutual support networks insulating each other from
genuine shareholder democracy.
        Especially tight such networks of interlocking directorships are found in France, where the
alumni of a few elite colleges fill most top government and business jobs (Kramarz & Thesmar 2006),
often migrating from civil service to top business positions over their careers (Bertrand et al. 2006).
Pistor (2010) details similarly tight networks interweaving the top echelons of the Communist Party into
the boards of Chinese financial firms. Reputational concerns might keep even imperfectly independent
directors focussed on shareholder value and firm performance (Fama 1980; Fama & Jensen 1983), and
Kaplan and Reishus (1990) find senior US executives whose firms cut their dividends only half as likely as
their peers to be offered additional outside directorships. But loyalty to fellow network insiders might
just as easily induce a defensive huddle (Hallock 1997; Haunschild & Beckman 1998).
        The effectiveness of shareholder democracy depends critically on both corporations’ charters
and bylaws, and on national standards. For example, American companies can adopt “poison pills”,
rights offerings that massively dilute the stake of any unfriendly shareholder bent on acquiring enough
stock to oust the board (Ryngaert 1988; Brickley et al. 1993; Brickley et al. 1994), or amend their
corporate charters to establish staggered boards (Bebchuk & Cohen 2005b), which recast annual


                                                    20
shareholder votes as electing only one third of the board every year for a three year term. Bebchuk and
Cohen find that these innovations, especially staggered boards, substantially depress shareholder value
in US firms. In contrast, British and Canadian courts found these innovations to violate directors’
traditional Common Law duties to treat all shareholders equally and to act for shareholders. Staggered
boards are disallowed in both countries, and poison pills are banned in Britain and vulnerable to legal
challenge after a brief stay in Canada.


3.3     MULTIPLE CONSTITUENCIES
Shareholder democracy plays a role in corporate governance in every country, but some restrict it even
more severely than others.      A major recent trend is the shifting of directors’ duties away from
shareholders and towards more vaguely defined “stakeholders”.             These reforms are inspired by
Germany and other central and northern European countries that long explicitly set directors a fiduciary
duty not only to shareholders, but also to ‘stakeholders” – employees, customers, suppliers, the
environment, the people, the State, etc. Different countries operationalize this differently.
        A large listed German firm typically has a management board, or Vorstand, charged with weak‐
to‐week operational decisions, and a supervisory board, or Aufsichtsrat, charged with higher level
strategic decisions. Half of the supervisory board members in large firms are elected by shareholders
and the other half by employees, though the chair, an additional shareholder representative, can break
ties. In addition, German companies have works councils (Betriebsrat), elected by employees and
empowered to veto human resources decisions. Supervisory board members owe a general fiduciary
duty to all stakeholders, though their constituencies presumably affect their priorities.
        This system, established by Adolf Hitler to inspire boards with a duty to stakeholders – such as
their Volk, Reich and Führer (Fohlin 2005) – still inspires progressive reformers today. Several US states,
beginning with Massachusetts and Pennsylvania, now mandate a German‐style fiduciary duty of
directors towards all stakeholders, not just shareholders (Karpoff & Malatesta 1989). A recent Supreme
Court decision (Peoples v Wise) in Canada also shifts directors’ duty, but to act in the interests of “the
corporation”, rather than those of “the shareholders, creditors, employees, or any other stakeholders”.
This engenders considerable confusion, for the “interests” of a fictitious legal person are not readily
discernable, and the court provides no further guidance. Recent reforms in Britain also move that
country’s directors’ duty towards a broader responsibility to stakeholders, and a less exclusive duty to
shareholders.



                                                    21
        With stakeholder rights ascendant, shareholder democracy is necessarily weakened. CEOs and
directors, citing their duties to other stakeholders, can instruct their firms’ lawyers to fight shareholders
seeking to oust them. Since almost any corporate policy can be defended as in the interests of some
stakeholder, top insiders need only pick the stakeholders whose interests align with their own on an
issue‐by‐issue basis to defend sequences of entirely self‐interested decisions. Since Arrow (1964) shows
that no simple rule aggregates the preferences of heterogeneous constituents, such cynically self‐
interested governance cannot be judged socially worse than alternative decision rules.


3.4     OPEN ACCESS CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
In politics, the electorate’s ultimate power is to “throw the bums out” (Haber et al. 2008). Shareholders
have a similar last line of defence: the corporate takeover. If insiders let the share price fall too far
below its replacement cost7 per share, they put their firm ”on sale”. Even if the dismayed shareholders
cannot replace top management, they can sell their shares to a raider who, upon acquiring undisputable
control, can fire the board and bring in new management.
        In the US in the 1980s, serial raiders amassed huge fortunes buying up misgoverned firms whose
share prices were severely depressed (Easterbrook & Fischel 1982; Jensen & Ruback 1983; Jarrell et al.
1988; Morck et al. 1989). After gaining control, the raider replaced management, imposed credible
commitments to good governance, and sometimes broke bloated firms up into more manageable pieces
(Berger & Ofek 1996). This done, the raiders sold the firms back into the open stock market, where they
fetched far more than acquiring the mismanaged firm cost. This “market for corporate control” saw
raiders specializing in fixing broken firms, much like specialists in gentrification buying broken down
houses, fixing them up, and selling them. Criticisms that raiders create no value because they build no
new factories or office buildings miss this fundamental point.
        A more considered criticism is that some raiders are worse managers than the ones they oust.
Jensen (1986) argues that ego‐driven CEOs sometimes use takeovers to build shaky corporate empires
that they cannot manage, and a wealth of empirical evidence now supports this (Lang & Litzenberger
1989; Morck et al. 1990; Lang et al. 1991; Opler & Titman 1993; Christie & Nanda 1994). This is
plausible, for much evidence suggests top corporate insiders gain more utility from running larger firms
(Baumol 1959; Grabowski & Mueller 1972).



7
 Chapter 16 in this volume, “Mergers and the Market for Corporate Control” by D Mueller, provides a more in
depth discussion of the issues discussed in this sub‐section.

                                                      22
          Another plausible criticism is that stock market bubbles can trigger nonsensical takeovers
(Shleifer & Vishny 2003; Rhodes‐Kropf & Viswanathan 2004; Rhodes‐Kropf et al. 2005). Acquirers,
whose own shares are boosted by a bubble in, say high tech stocks, can use their overvalued shares as a
currency with which to buy other firms, and can again amass huge corporate empires. Once the bubble
bursts, former target shareholders left holding the acquirers’ now greatly deflated stock may well feel
short‐changed (Moeller et al. 2005; Mueller & Yurtoglu 2007).
          These problems call for better corporate governance of acquirer firms, not prohibitions of
takeovers. Indeed, bad acquirers in the 1980s often became targets of more adept raiders (Mitchell &
Lehn 1990). Mueller (2010) points out that while hostile takeovers can be an effective constraint on
managerial excess, “the market for corporate control is not sufficiently effective to eliminate all wealth
destroying mergers.” In particular, many countries and U.S. states curtail their markets for corporate
control in response to various mixtures of legitimate and illegitimate concerns.
          Some countries resist this trend more than others. In Britain, the courts nullified a succession of
devices CEOs tried to use to stop raiders, and a robust market for corporate control persists, preventing
insiders from becoming too neglectful of shareholder value or they risk ouster by a raider (Cheffins
2009). Takeovers also continue to rein in any excessively utility maximizing top managers of firms that
lack defensive armaments in the United States, Canada, Australia, and elsewhere.
          However, hostile takeovers, where a raider aggressively buys control with the avowed purpose
of ousting underperforming top management, grew rare in the U.S. after the 1980s because potential
target firms’ top managers erected arrays of takeover defences (Mikkelson & Partch 1997).                 As
mentioned in 3.3, the most important are poison pills, rights offerings that dilute raiders’ stakes before
they become large; staggered boards, which lock directors into three year terms with a third standing
for election each year and thus make a raider wait two years before replacing a majority of directors;
and state takeover laws, which empower CEOs to litigate against takeover bids (DeAngelo & Rice 1983;
Linn & McConnell 1983; Jarrell & Poulsen 1987; Mitchell & Netter 1989; McWilliams 1990; Bhagat &
Jefferis 1991; Comment & Schwert 1995; Borokhovich et al. 1997; Bebchuk et al. 2002; Cheng et al.
2005) .
          Takeovers still happen in the US, but now require the consent of the incumbent management,
who have the power to waive poison pills, fire staggered boards, and undo other takeover defences.
Underperforming managers now expect large golden parachutes, side payments for dismantling
takeover defences and stepping aside (Hartzell et al. 2004). Since the potential gains from fixing up
broken corporations can be very large, even very large golden parachutes can still leave the control


                                                      23
transaction viable. Only if the CEO gleans so much utility from remaining in control that no feasible
golden parachute side payment can induce him to step aside does the market for corporate control fail.
Since these negotiations are conducted behind the scenes, we have no reliable estimate of the full
shadow cost of takeover defences to the US economy in terms of takeovers of underperforming
corporations that did not happen.
        Underperforming firms in other countries use different takeover defences.               In Japan, the
keiretsu defence was long favoured (Sheard 1991; Morck & Nakamura 2005). This entails a group of
CEOs, who all fear ouster by raiders, greatly increasing their firms’ treasury shares – shares that exist,
but have not been sold to any investor. The firms swap these shares with each other so that each ends
up with of a majority of its shares held by other firms in the new keiretsu group. Each of thirty firms
might end up with a 1% or 2% stake in every other firm in the group, and every firm in the group then
ends up more than 50% owned by other firms in the group. At no cost, these firms are now all insulated
from raiders, for the groups’ CEOs pledge never to sell their shares in each others’ firms. The keiretsu
defence remains important in Japan, but shareholder pressure to sell interlocking shares has induced
many firms to adopt poison pills in recent years.8
        Dutch firms use a variety of oligarchic mechanisms that let insiders control seemingly widely
held firms with no fear of shareholder rebellion (de Jong et al. 2001; de Jong & Roell 2005). As noted
above, large seemingly widely held German firms are controlled by the country’s big banks, which are
empowered to vote small shareholders shares (Fohlin 2005).
        But most countries in Continental Europe, Asia, and Latin America have no effective market for
corporate control. This is because most listed companies have a controlling shareholder, usually a
wealthy business family, who controls an effective majority of the votes in the shareholder meeting, and
thus essentially appoints the board (La Porta et al. 1999; Fogel 2006). As long as the CEO and other top
managers please that shareholder, their positions are secure. In these countries, corporate governance
is the realm of despots (Gugler et al. 2007).


4       CORPORATE DESPOTS
Like the government of nations, corporate governance can provide very open access or restrict decision‐
making to tiny elites of insiders (North et al. 2009). Entrusting governance to a controlling shareholder
brings to the corporation the efficiency of the dictator (Blau 1957). As in politics, a brilliant and highly

8
 See e.g. Andrew Morse & Sebastian Moffett, 2008. Japan's Companies Gird for Attack ‐ Fearing Takeovers, They
Rebuild Walls ‐ The Rise of Poison Pills. Wall Street Journal

                                                      24
ethical despot can provide very good government (Johnson 1910). But several strands of empirical work
converge to show that, again as in politics, despots of this ilk are exceedingly rare.


4.1     ENLIGHTENED CORPORATE DESPOTS
If a firm’s controlling large shareholder demands economic efficiency, top management has little choice
but to forego maximizing their utility functions and maximize value (Shleifer and Vishny 1986). The
individuals or institutions that can afford to hold large equity blocks in large corporations are typically
either enormously wealthy families or institutional investors like pension funds, insurance companies,
banks, government organs, and large charitable foundations. All of these employ sophisticated financial
analysts, accountants, and lawyers who can and do take action to make sure the firms their employer
controls are run as their employer wants. Because large shareholders have large multimillion dollar
investments in their firms, the benefits of better management quite often outweigh their costs of
becoming informed and taking action. Large shareholders thus overcome the free rider problem of
Grossman and Hart (1980).
        Institutional investors’ effect on corporate governance appears to vary markedly across
countries.   British pension funds and insurance companies were empowered by postwar Labour
governments to finance workers’ retirements, and are largely run by independent professional fund
managers. Black and Coffee (1994) describe how the institutional investor whose portfolio is most
heavily weighted in a problem firm is expected to take the lead in forcing changes, and how other
institutional investors organize to back the lead institution.        Cheffins (2009) also highlights the
effectiveness of institutional investors lobbying against takeover defenses. Canadian and Australian
institutional investors may be on the path towards similar roles.
        American institutional investors are less independent, for most private sector workers’ pension
funds are managed by their employers (Bodie & Davis 2000; Woidtke 2002). Thus, General Motors, IBM,
and Northwest Airlines each run pension funds for their employees. Corporate pension funds seem
reluctant to vote against the incumbent top management of firms they own – perhaps hoping their
pension funds will reciprocate should the need arise (Wahal 1996; Del Guercio & Hawkins 1999; Faccio
& Lasfer 2000; Woidtke 2002). This leaves only government employees pension funds and a few
pension funds organized by occupation, rather than by employer, to act as genuine guardians of good
governance. CalPERS, the California Public Employees Retirement System, and various pension funds for
teachers and university professors denounce problematic governance, and often vote against
incumbents in proxy contests (Pound 1988). However, civil servants’ pension funds can be stymied by


                                                     25
other problems, such as political pressure to favor firms with strong government connections (Romano
1993c; Romano 1993a; Romano 1995), and can suffer governance problems of their own (Lakonishok et
al. 1991).
        But most controlling shareholders in most countries are tycoons or wealthy families (La Porta et
al. 1999), for independent institutional investors up to the job of challenging corporate insiders are rare
outside a handful of English speaking countries (Turner et al. 1991). Top insiders who are also large
shareholders ought to be less prone to agency problems than the top managers running the widely held
firms featured in section 2.2. This is because any drop in shareholder value due to the insider sacrificing
value for utility costs him money too – because he is also a shareholder. However, top insiders who are
also large shareholders might also be more prone to agency problems than the managers of widely held
firms because the former cannot be ejected by shareholder votes or corporate raiders, while the latter
can. Modest levels of managerial share ownership seem to mitigate agency problems, but higher levels
that precipitate entrenchment appear to magnify agency problems (Morck et al. 1988; McConnell &
Servaes 1990; Holderness et al. 1999, Mueller 2005).
        The founders of great family business dynasties are necessarily highly talented business leaders,
and that talent may more than make up for any problems associated with entrenchment. Indeed,
powerful tycoons may do their countries great service by coordinating so‐called “big push”
industrialization (Murphy et al. 1989), a process that requires the coordinated capitalization of
interdependent firms across many sectors of the economy. Rosenstein‐Rodan (1943) argues that a
modern economy is a complex web of interdependencies, with each firm implicitly relying on hosts of
suppliers, customers, and complementary good producers in numerous other industries, and on their
suppliers, customers, and complementary goods providers, and so on. This, he argues, means rapid
industrialization must be run under central planning, for otherwise early movers are subject to hold up
problems, economy of scale mismatches, and problems due to missing industries or insufficient
competition in early stage industries.
        Morck and Nakamura (2007) argue that the large business groups tycoons assemble in rapidly
industrializing countries may reflect “big push” growth in progress. The firms in such a group are usually
arranged in a control pyramid, with the tycoon controlling an apex firm that controls other listed firms,
each of which controls yet other listed firms, and so on – as illustrated in Figure 2. Actual control
pyramids also involve an apex firm, directly controlled by the family, controlling several listed firms,
each of which controls several more listed firms, and so on; but are often complicated by crossholdings,
control blocks split between multiple parent firms, control by parent firms in more distant tiers, dual


                                                    26
class stock, and numerous other factors. Thus, Figure 3 illustrates an actual business group, that of
Italy’s Agnelli family.


Figure 2. An Archetypical Pyramidal Business Group
Each box represents a listed firm. Lines connect controlled firms to the firm that controls them or, at
the apex of the structure, to the controlling family. Such structures let business families or tycoons
magnify control over one firm into control over business groups containing vastly greater assets that,
in some cases, amount to sizable fractions of national economies.

                                                                                                                   Family Firm
                                                        >50%                                                                                                                               >50%

                                                          A1                                                                                                                                 A2

                      >50%                                                                >50%                                                           >50%                                                                >50%

                        B1                                                                  B2                                                             B3                                                                  B4

     >50%                              >50%                              >50%                              >50%                         >50%                              >50%                              >50%                              >50%

        C1                               C2                                C3                                C4                           C5                                C6                                C7                                C8

             >50%             >50%             >50%             >50%             >50%             >50%             >50%          >50%           >50%             >50%             >50%             >50%             >50%             >50%             >50%

   D1           D2               D3               D4               D5               D6               D7               D8           D9             D10              D11              D12              D13              D14              D15              D16

            <50% in          <50% in          <50% in          <50% in          <50% in          <50% in          <50% in    <50% in           <50% in          <50% in          <50% in          <50% in          <50% in          <50% in          <50% in
            each             each             each             each             each             each             each       each              each             each             each             each             each             each             each


                                                                                                       Public Shareholders

Source: Wolfenzon et al. (2005)




                                                                                                                            27
Figure 3. The Agnelli Pyramidal Business Group
Each box is a separate firm, with lines indicating controlling equity blocks. Figures designated “O” are the
family’s actual ownership stake and those designated “C” are the fraction of votes the family controls in the
annual general shareholder’s meeting. The group is depicted as it was in the mid 1990s.




Source: Againin and Volpin (2005).



         These structures can contain dozens, and even hundreds of distinct firms, each drawing
energetically on public equity capital but controlled through a dominant voting block held by the firm
above it (Bebchuk et al. 2000). This structure lets the business group mobilize vast amounts of capital,
yet preserves for the controlling shareholder of the apex firm an undisputable rule over every firm in the
group. One person in command means the group member firms do not hold each other up, that
ventures in new industries can be established as firms in other sectors need them, and that firms forced
to operate at inefficient scales can be subsidized via inter‐corporate income shifting, or tunneling
(Johnson & et al. 2000).
         Consistent with a “big push” coordination role, pyramidal groups in emerging economies tend to
be extraordinarily widely diversified, with one firm in virtually every major sector (Khanna & Yafeh
2007). Business group member firms also tend to be more profitable, on average, than independent


                                                     28
firms in emerging markets (Khanna & Palepu 2000b, a; Khanna & Rivkin 2001; Khanna & Yafeh 2005),
perhaps reflecting their central role in “big push” industrialization. Finally, some Indian business groups
appear to take a leading role in setting up new firms in new industries (Khanna & Palepu 2005), and
similar patterns are evident elsewhere (Almeida & Wolfenzon 2006).
        However, the contribution of pyramidal business groups to rapid industrialization is evident only
in Meiji Japan (Morck & Nakamura 2007). Further evidence from other countries is needed to assess the
generality of this theory validating despotic corporate governance. Meanwhile, other potential benefits
of a controlling shareholder in emerging market economies include reputational capital (Khanna &
Palepu 2000b) and an ability to sidestep weak institutions and commonplace market failures by
controlling firms on both sides of an otherwise risky transaction (Khanna & Yafeh 2005).


4.2     SIMPLE DESPOTS
This benign view of despotic corporate governance may well be valid in some countries, or even in all
countries at a certain stage of development where “big push” industrialization is needed. But there is
ample empirical evidence that despotic corporate governance is often malign, and can seriously retard
living standards and institutional development.
        First, intelligence need not run reliably in families and brilliant tycoons, whose sweeping
governance power is entirely appropriate, may leave their empires to sons and grandsons of decidedly
less ability. Consistent with this, studies using data from developed economies find family control blocks
in the hands of heirs correlating with depressed firm performance (Morck et al. 1988; Villalonga & Amit
2006). Event study evidence from successions in family firms confirms that control passing to an heir
causes poor performance (Smith & Amoako‐Adu 2005; Perez‐Gonzalez 2006), as does careful
instrumentals variables estimation (Bennedsen et al. 2007). This appears to be a lesser problem in many
developing economies (Khanna & Yafeh 2007) – perhaps because arranged marriages let business
families breed for talent (Mehrotra et al. 2010), or perhaps because wealthy heirs can readily substitute
connections for talent in more corrupt economies (Krueger 2002; Morck & Yeung 2004; Fogel 2006), or
have unique (in their countries) access to good education and management training.
        Second, business tycoons and families often control firms without actually owning many of their
shares. They usually accomplish this by using dual class shares, pyramiding, or both. Regardless, this
greatly expands the scope for agency problems and non‐value‐maximizing corporate governance.
        Dual class shares are the rotten boroughs of corporate finance. A dual class equity structure
means a firm has two kinds of shares: superior voting shares, owned by the insiders, their friends, and


                                                    29
their relatives, give their owners 10, 100, or more votes per share; and inferior‐voting shares, owned by
outside investors, give their owners one, or often even no votes per share. Examining U.S. dual class
firms, Gompers et al. (2010) report that average q ratios fall sharply with the extent to which their
insiders voting rights exceed their actual ownership stake. Other evidence, including event studies
around the establishment of dual class structure and changes in the relative importance of different
share classes, suggests that dual class equity causes depressed shareholder value (DeAngelo & DeAngelo
1985; Jarrell & Poulsen 1988; Smith & Amoako‐Adu 1995; Amoako‐Adu & Smith 2001; Nenova 2003).
        Dual class shares barred firms from graduating from the NASDAQ or MAMEX to the NYSE, so up‐
and‐coming US firms tended to avoid them. However, dual class equity is more common in other
countries such as Canada (Smith & Amoako‐Adu 1995; Amoako‐Adu & Smith 2001) and Sweden
(Högfeldt 2005). A general trend towards unification of such equity structures is evidenced by the Israeli
policy of 1989 that dual class firms unify their equity prior to issue additional shares, (Hauser, and Beni
Lauterbach 2004).
        In many countries, super‐voting shares and inferior‐voting shares in the same company trade
side by side on the same stock exchange. Zingales (1994) explains an 80% premium for super‐voting
shares on the Milan stock exchange as reflecting the extensive private benefits Italy’s legal system
permits controlling shareholders to extract. Nenova (2006) shows that superior voting rights command
higher premiums in more corrupt economies, suggesting that more efficient and public shareholder‐
friendly legal and regulatory systems curtail private benefits of control.
        Pyramiding lets a controlling shareholder leverage a modest fortune into control over firms
worth vastly more. For example, a family might own fifty percent plus one share of Firm A, with small
shareholders owning the remainder of its stock. Firm A might then own fifty percent plus one share of
Firm B, again with small shareholders owning the remainder. The family can thus appoint Firm A’s
board, control of which lets the family also appoint Firm B’s board. But the family has only 50% of a 50%
stake in Firm B, and thus really only owns 25% of firm B. To see this, consider what happens if Firm B’s
value drops $1M. This causes Firm A’s stock in firm be to drop in value by $500K, and this causes the
family’s wealth to drop by $250K. This precisely replicates what would happen if the family owned a
25% stake in B directly.
        Actual pyramids can involve much longer chains of firms controlling firms, and those reinforced
with super‐voting shares, golden shares, and the like can include links with far less than 50% control.
For example, in the 1990s a branch of the Canadian Bronfman family directly controlled Broncorp Inc.,
which controlled HIL Corp. with a 19.6 percent stake. HIL owned 97 percent of Edper Resources, which


                                                     30
owned 60 percent of Brascan Holdings, which owned 5.1 percent of Brascan, which owned 49.9 percent
of Braspower Holdings, which owned 49.3 percent of Great Lakes Power Inc, which owned 100 percent
of First Toronto Investments, which owned 25 percent of Trilon Holdings, which owned 64.5 percent of
Trilon Financial, which owned 41.4 percent of Gentra, which owned 31.9 percent of Imperial Windsor
Group (Morck et al. 2000).
         This gives rise to two sorts of potentially severe agency problems. First, if the brothers were to
sacrifice $1M of Imperial Windsor’s assets to obtain a private benefit, this would reduce the value of
Gentra by 31.9% × $1M = $399K, which would reduce the value of Trilon Financial by 41.4% × $399K = $
165K. Multiplying ownership stakes all the way back shows the personal financial cost to the family
would be $300, or 0.03 percent of the $1M total cost of private benefit. If the family had no concern for
public shareholders, a private benefit worth $301 would outweigh the $1M loss for Imperial Windsor.9
Since the family fully controls this firm by dint of controlling its parent, and its parent’s parents all the
way up through the control chain, they could do this if they so chose.
         Second, pyramiding can tempt a controlling shareholder to favour one firm in the pyramid over
another. For example, a business deal between Imperial Windsor and HIL that caused the former to lose
$1M, costing the family $300, and the latter to gain that amount, increasing the family’s wealth by
19.6% of $1M or $196,000. Since the family controls the boards of both, it could easily instruct both
boards to approve the one‐sided deal. Such transactions are variously called transfer pricing, income
shifting, related party transactions, or tunnelling; and can involve the sale of goods, services, insurance,
or financial assets at artificial prices that shift wealth from one firm to the other.
         Tunnelling is entirely legal in many countries, and is considered a routine business practice. In
many Western Europe, Latin America, and much of Asia the practice is either explicitly legal or
essentially unregulated (Johnson & et al. 2000). Other countries regulate related party transactions
(Djankov et al. 2008). For example, Israel requires approval by one third of disinterested shareholders
before group firms can proceed with substantial related party transactions. In Canada, large related
party transactions must be disclosed and can require approval by the majority of disinterested
shareholders in a vote. Empirical studies reject pervasive tunnelling in Canada (Tian 2006) and Western
Europe (Faccio & Lang 2002); but not in India (Bertrand et al. 2002), Korea (Bae et al. 2002), or other
East Asian economies (Claessens et al. 2002; Claessens et al. 2006).



9
 This example is illustrative only of the potential for agency problems. Stangeland et al. (1995) find no evidence of
governance problems in this business group during this period.

                                                         31
         Shares not part of the control blocks holding the structure together are sold to outside
investors, and are discounted appropriately for the agency problems expected in each firm. This differs
across firms in the group, for it depends on the controlling family’s likely propensity to use the firm to
generate private benefits of control, and on whether the firm is more likely to give or receive in
tunneling.


4.3     EFFICIENT DESPOTISM
Top corporate insiders whom shareholders cannot fire are said to be entrenched (Stulz 1988). The
tycoons and business families who control pyramidal business groups command control blocks in every
firm in the pyramid, and so are entrenched. But so are the CEOs of widely held US firms who rig their
corporate charters with staggered boards or who reincorporate their firms into states that curtail hostile
takeovers.
        A degree of entrenchment might not be inefficient. First, Almazan and Suarez (2003) argue that
an efficient compensation contract for top managers might provide a degree of entrenchment because
job security is a component of compensation along with salary, bonus, and options. Indeed, job security
might be a desirable way of compensating CEOs when taking risks with very long‐term payoffs
maximizes share value Second, if interpersonal utility comparisons are permitted, an entrenched insider
might gain so much utility from controlling a great corporation that it outweighs the disutility her
blunders inflict upon others. Stulz (1988) models how she selects what fraction of her firm to sell to
outside shareholders and what level of monitoring and control mechanisms to install so as to balance
her marginal utility of wealth against the marginal utility she gains from control. In such a situation,
altering the rules to let shareholders remove her would not be a Pareto improvement, and could only be
justified on distributional grounds. Finally, an exceptionally able and socially minded insider might
deliver more efficient capital allocation, all else equal, if freed from constraints imposed by less
insightful public shareholders.


5.      CORPORATE GOVERNANCE AND CAPITALISM
The division of labor underlies capitalism’s success: just as people specialize in specific trades, firms
specialize in core business activities. Capitalism achieves economies of scale, despite specialization, by
mobilizing vast pools of public savings to capitalize efficiently large efficiently specialized firms run by
people with the specialized abilities.



                                                    32
        Capitalism thus entrusts top executives with huge amounts of “other people’s money” and
commands they be trustworthy agents that maximize the value of the pool of capital under their
stewardship. That is, without regard for their own utility, they must identify and undertake ventures
that earn genuinely positive economic profits exploiting new markets, technologies, business models, or
other opportunities. Clearly, such expertise deserves compensation, but its appropriate magnitude and
form are ill understood at present. If the top managers are inefficiently selected or incentivized, and
attend too much to their own utility rather than their investors’ wealth, we have an agency problem.
        Firm performance aggregates to economy performance, so how top corporate executives are
selected and incentivized matters for productivity, jobs, and tax‐financed public goods and services.
One such public service is the evenhanded enforcement of cost effective regulations to efficiently select
and incentivize top executives so firms are credibly trustworthy, and their stock are viable investments.
The voters of virtually all major democracies have elected governments that mandate standardized
accounting information and criminal penalties for releasing false information. This imposes compliance
costs on firms, reducing investors’ returns; but helps reassure investors that the firm is run in a
trustworthy way. Governments that get this tradeoff right mobilize their savers wealth efficiently and
optimize their citizenries’ potential well‐being.
        Most major democracies reward unfaithful corporate insiders with fines or jail for a range of
excessively self‐interested behavior. However, the range varies across countries, as does the definition
of good faith. A CEO loading corporate assets into a truck to be sold for personal gain violates the law
almost everywhere. Insider trading is illegal in an increasing number of countries, though enforcement
varies. In the United States, and a few other countries to a lesser extent, investors sue top corporate
insiders for failing to run their firms well. Good faith in the United States and United Kingdom
traditionally meant making reasonable decisions aimed at maximizing long‐term shareholder value
(Romano 1993b), but other countries define it otherwise. In Canada, top corporate officers and
directors have a duty only to the legal person of the corporation, not to its shareholders or any other
stakeholders (Lee 2005). In Germany, their duty is to balance the interests of shareholders against those
of all others with a stake in the firm – creditors, workers, managers, communities, the environment, and
so on (Fohlin 2005).
        Over the past decades, US corporate governance laws and regulations have grown progressively
less interested in shareholder value (Bebchuk 2007). Courts in many American states now require top
managers to balance the interests of all stakeholders, let top managers protect themselves from
shareholder democracy with poison pills, staggered boards, and other entrenchment devices. Some


                                                    33
students of corporate governance see this arising from a yet deeper agency problem (Bebchuk & Cohen
2003; Bar‐Gill et al. 2006).
         In a democracy, the people entrust politicians and top civil servants with command over the
capital assets of the government, rulemaking authority, and police powers of enforcement to advance
the public interest. In the framework of agency theory, these public sector managers are agents of the
people, much as top corporate managers are agents of shareholders. Politicians and top civil servants
also have utility functions, and are as prone to maximize them as anyone else (Krueger 1974). If public
officials put personal utility ahead of the public interest, the public sector too has an agency problem
(Stulz 2005).
         Just as shareholders can sell to a raider, the voters can turn out errant leaders in elections and
force civil service rationalizations in referendums. But just as corporate governance can, in reality, drift
far from efficient value maximization; government can lose sight of the public interest. Indeed, the two
sorts of agency problem may well reinforce each other: CEOs might use shareholders’ money to support
politicians who grant them greater leeway in using shareholders’ money as they will; while politicians
might use taxpayers’ money to support inefficiently governed firms that open competition would
otherwise destroy. Market failure begets government failure, which begets more market failure in an
accelerating race to the bottom to drain away investor wealth and the public good (Morck, Wolfenzon
and Yeung 2005).
         As with corporate governance, different countries at different times use difference institutions
to check public officials’ all too human self‐interest. Again, as with corporate governance, different
systems have different strengths and weaknesses, and the optimal system has yet to identify itself
(Mueller 2006b). The genuine marvel is perhaps that capitalism and democracy work as well as they do,
given this shared internal contradiction. Their vitality suggests that economists may underestimate the
strength and resilience of less appreciated checks on self interest – perhaps moral sentiments long
constrained most agents’ self‐interest as effectively as Smith (1762) claims; though religion and culture
can also constrain economic and financial development (Stulz 2005). Even more remarkably, such forces
may well continue to gather force even now, amid the cynical sophistication of the 21st century (Mueller
2009).
         The development of institutions surrounding corporate governance is nonetheless clearly
incomplete, for most countries employ regulations that are both costly and largely ineffective (La Porta
et al. 2006). This may well reflect lobbying by corporate insiders in mature firms, who benefit directly




                                                    34
from the freedom to use their investors’ money as they please; or by financial advisors, lawyers,
accountants, and others who benefit indirectly from regulatory complexity and opacity.
        In this sense, corporate governance is where political science was a century or two ago.
Hereditary power entrusted to business family dynasties remains the default form of governance in
most countries, and the limited shareholder democracy on offer often works poorly.             Intelligent
observers can, with straight faces, argue that despots serve some economies better than democrats.
Competition between governments for capital and skilled labor to tax may well induce continually
stronger and more efficiently provided shareholder rights (Tiebout 1956; Buchanan 1965). But lobbying
by powerful top corporate insiders might equally well induce a “race to the bottom” in corporate
governance (Bebchuk & Ferrell 2000) among governments.
        Here we see grounds for optimism. Institutions arose in other areas to promote social welfare
at the expense of previously seemingly immovable elites. Democracy is a more prevalent now than a
century ago; courts in the industrial democracies are also arguably less tolerant of corruption in high
places and academia is more open to new ideas. In these is discernable a well‐beaten path towards
reform that corporate governance might also follow (Morck 2008). Thus, calls for boards to designate a
lead independent director evoke political parallels in the “leader of the loyal opposition”, whose duty of
loyalty to democracy requires a continual criticism of government policies. Calls for more and stronger
independent directors likewise seem bent on injecting more argument and dissent into boardrooms,
rather like the constructive argument the adversary system evokes in Common Law courtrooms which,
somewhat inexplicably, appear to deliver better decisions in cases involving business disputes than do
the inquisitorial proceedings in legal systems descended from the Napoleonic code (Gennaioli & Shleifer
2007). These efforts to induce dissent in corporate boardrooms are likely to be unpopular with some
CEOs, just as discussants and referees were initially controversial in academia.          But opposition
politicians, counterarguments in court, and referees do seem to deliver better decisions, and so might
corporate boardrooms subjected to more shareholder democracy and accountability.




                                                   35
References
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson & James Robinson. 2001. The Colonial Origins of Comparative Development: An
         Empirical Investigation. American Economic Review 91 5, 1369‐1401
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson & James Robinson. 2002. Reversal of Fortune: Geography and Institutions in the
         Making of the Modern World Income Distribution. Quarterly Journal of Economics 107(4) 1231‐1294.
Adams, Renee & Daniel Ferreira. 2007. A Theory of Friendly Boards. Journal of Finance 62 1, 217‐50
Adams, Renee,Heitor Almeida & Daniel Ferreira. 2005. Powerful CEOs and their impact on corporate performance.
         Review of Financial Studies 18, 1403‐1432
Aganin, Alexander & Paulo Volpin. 2005. The History of Corporate Ownership in Italy. In: Morck RK (ed.) A History
         of Corporate Governance around the World: Family Business Groups to Professional Managers. University
         of Chicago Press. Chicago, 325‐61.
Almeida, Heitor & Daniel Wolfenzon. 2006. A Theory of Pyramidal Ownership and Family Business Groups. Journal
         of Finance 61 6, 2637‐80
Arrow, Kenneth. 1964. Social choice and individual values. Wiley, New York,.
Axelrod, Robert. 1984. The Evolution of Cooperation, Basic Books, New York.
Bae, K. H., J.K. Kang& J.M. Kim. 2002. Tunneling or value added? Evidence from mergers by Korean business
          groups. Journal of Finance 57, 2695‐2740
Baker, Malcolm, Joshua Coval & Jeremy Stein. 2007. Corporate Financing Decisions When Investors Take the Path
          of Least Resistance. Journal of Financial Economics 84 2, 266‐98.
Baker, Malcolm, Richard Ruback & Jeffrey Wurgler. 2004. Behavioral Corporate Finance: A Survey. 10863, National
          Bureau of Economic Research, Inc, NBER Working Papers
Bar‐Gill, Oren, Michal Barzuza & Lucien Bebchuk. 2006. The Market for Corporate Law. Journal of Institutional and
          Theoretical Economics 162 1, 134‐60
Baumol, William. 1959. Business behavior, value and growth. Macmillan, New York.
Bebchuk, Lucian & Allen Ferrell. 2000. Federalism and Takeover Law: The Race to Protect Managers from
          Takeovers. 7232, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc, NBER Working Papers
Bebchuk, Lucian & Alma Cohen. 2003. Firms' Decisions Where to Incorporate. Journal of Law and Economics 46 2,
          383‐425
Bebchuk, Lucian & Alma Cohen. 2005. The Costs of Entrenched Boards. Journal of Financial Economics 78 2, 409‐33
Bebchuk, Lucian & HJesse Fried. 2004. Pay without performance: The unfulfilled promise of executive
          compensation. Harvard University Press, Cambridge and London.
Bebchuk, Lucian & Oliver Hart. 2001. Takeover bids vs. Proxy Fights in Contests for Corporate Control. 8633,
          National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc, NBER Working Papers
Bebchuk, Lucian, 2007. The Myth of the Shareholder Franchise. Virginia Law Review 93, 675
Bebchuk, Lucian, Reinier Kraakman & George Triantis. 2000. Stock Pyramids, Cross‐Ownership, and Dual Class
          Equity: The Mechanisms and Agency Costs of Separating Control from Cash‐Flow Rights. In: Concentrated
          corporate ownership. University of Chicago Press, NBER Conference Report series. Chicago and London,
          pp. 295‐315.
Bebchuk, Lucien & Alma Cohen. 2005b. The costs of entrenched boards. Journal of Financial Economics 78, 409
Bebchuk, Lucien, Alma Cohen, & Allen Ferrell. 2009. What Matters in Corporate Governance? Review of Financial
          Studies 22, 783
Bebchuk, Lucien, J.C. Coates & G. Subramanian. 2002. The powerful antitakeover force of staggered boards:
          Further findings and a reply to symposium participants. Stanford Law Review 55, 885‐917
Bennedsen, Morten, Kaspar Nielsen, Francisco Pérez‐González & Daniel Wolfenzon. 2007. Inside the Family Firm:
          the Role of Families in Succession Decisions and Performance*. Quarterly Journal of Economics 122, 647
Berger, Philip & Eli Ofek. 1996. Bustup Takeovers of Value‐Destroying Diversified Firms. Journal of Finance 51 4,
          1175‐1200
Bertrand, Marianne, Francis Kramarz, Antoinette Schoar & Daviud Thesmar. 2006. Politicians, Firms and the
          Political Business Cycle: Evidence from France. In: MIT working paper.
Bertrand, Marianne,Paras Mehto & Sendhil Mullainathan. 2002. Ferreting Out Tunneling: An Application to Indian
          Business Groups. Quarterly Journal of Economics 117 1, 121‐48



                                                       36
Bhagat, Sanjai & Richard Jefferis. 1991. Voting Power in the Proxy Process: The Case of Antitakeover Charter
          Amendments. Journal of Financial Economics 30 1, 193‐225
Black, Bernard & John Coffee. 1994. Hail Britannia?: Institutional investor behavior under limited regulation.
          Michigan Law Review 92, 1997
Blau, Julian.1957. THE EXISTENCE OF SOCIAL WELFARE FUNCTIONS. Econometrica (pre‐1986) 25, 302
Bodie, Zvi & E.P. Davis. 2000. The foundations of pension finance. Edward Elgar, Cheltenham, UK ; Northampton,
          MA, USA.
Borokhovich, Kenneth, Kelly Brunarski & Robert Parrino. 1997. CEO Contracting and Antitakeover Amendments.
          Journal of Finance 52 4, 1495‐1517
Brickley, James , Jeffrey Coles, Jeffrey & Rory Terry. 1993. The board of directors and the enactment of poison
          pills. The Journal of Finance 48, 1071
Brickley, James, Jeffrey Coles & Rory Terry. 1994. Outside Directors and the Adoption of Poison Pills. Journal of
          Financial Economics 35 3, 371‐90
Brickley, James. 1986. Interpreting Common Stock Returns around Proxy Statement Disclosures and Annual
          Shareholder Meetings. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 21 3, 343‐49
Buchanan, James & Gordon Tullock. 1962. The calculus of consent, logical foundations of constitutional
          democracy. University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor,.
Buchanan, James. 1965. An Economic Theory of Clubs. Economica 32, 1‐14
Cable, J. & Dennis Mueller. 2008. Testing for Persistence of Profits' Differences Across Firms. International Journal
          of the Economics of Business 15, 201
Chan, Louis, Josef Lakonishok, & Theodore Sougiannis. 2001. The Stock Market Valuation of Research and
          Development Expenditures. Journal of Finance 56 6, 2431‐56
Chan, Su Han, John Martin & John Kensinger. 1990. Corporate Research and Development Expenditures and Share
          Value. Journal of Financial Economics 26 2, 255‐76
Cheffins, Brian. 2009. Corporate Ownership and Control: British Business Transformed. Oxford University Press,
          Oxford.
Cheng, S. J., V. Nagar & M.V. Rajan. 2005. Identifying control motives in managerial ownership: Evidence from
          antitakeover legislation. Review of Financial Studies 18, 637‐672
Christie, William & Vikram Nanda. 1994. Free Cash Flow, Shareholder Value, and the Undistributed Profits Tax of
          1936 and 1937. Journal of Finance 49 5, 1727‐54
Claessens, Stijn, Joseph Fan & Lary Lang. 2006. The Benefits and Costs of Group Affiliation: Evidence from East Asia.
          Emerging Markets Review 7 1, 1‐26
Claessens, Stijn,Simeon Djankov, Joseph Fan & Lary Lang. 2002. Disentangling the incentive and entrenchment
          effects of large shareholdings. Journal of Finance 57, 2741‐2771
Comment, Robert & G. William Schwert. 1995. Poison or Placebo? Evidence on the Deterrence and Wealth Effects
          of Modern Antitakeover Measures. Journal of Financial Economics 39 1, 3‐43
Datta, Sudip, Mai Iskandar‐Datta. 1996. Takeover defenses and wealth effects on securityholders: The case of
          poison pill adoptions. Journal of Banking & Finance 20, 1231
Davis, Gerald & E. Han Kim. 2007. Business Ties and Proxy Voting by Mutual Funds. Journal of Financial Economics
          85 2, 552‐70
De Jong, Abe & Ailsa Röell. 2005. Financing and Control in the Netherlands: A Historical Perspective. In: Morck R
          (ed.) A History of Corporate Governance around the World: Family Business Groups to Professional
          Managers. University of Chicago Press, pp. 467‐506.
De Jong, Abe, Rezaul Kabir, Teye Marra & Ailsa Röell. 2001. Ownership and Control in The Netherlands In: Barca F
          & Becht M (eds.) The Control of Corporate Europe. Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp. 188‐206.
DeAngelo, Harry & Edward, Rice. 1983. Antitakeover Charter Amendments and Stockholder Wealth. Journal of
          Financial Economics 11 1‐4, 329‐59
DeAngelo, Harry & Linda DeAngelo. 1989. Proxy Contests and the Governance of Publicly Held Corporations.
          Journal of Financial Economics 23 1, 29‐59
Del Guercio, Diane & Jennifer Hawkins. 1999. The Motivation and Impact of Pension Fund Activism. Journal of
          Financial Economics 52 3, 293‐340
Demsetz, Harold & Belen Villalonga. 2001. Ownership Structure and Corporate Performance. Journal of Corporate
          Finance 7 3, 209‐33

                                                         37
Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez‐de‐Silanes & Andrei Shleifer. 2008. The law and economics of
         self‐dealing. Journal of Financial Economics 88, 430
Dodd, Peter & Jerold Warner. 1983. On Corporate Governance: A Study of Proxy Contests. Journal of Financial
         Economics 11 1‐4, 401‐38
Doidge, Craig, Andrew Karolyi & Rene Stulz. 2007. Why Do Countries Matter So Much for Corporate Governance?
         Journal of Financial Economics 86 1, 1‐39
Dunlavy, Colleen. 2007. From Citizens to Plutocrats: Nineteenth‐century Shareholder Voting Rights and Theories of
         the Corporation. In K. Lipartito & Sicilia D., eds. Constructing Corporate America ‐ History, Politics, Culture.
         Oxford University Press, 66‐93.
Durnev, Art, Kan Li, Randall Morck & Bernard Yeung. 2004. Capital Markets and Capital Allocation: Implications for
         Economies in Transition. Economics of Transition 12 4, 593‐634.
Durnev, Art, Randall Morck & Bernard Yeung. 2004. Value‐Enhancing Capital Budgeting and Firm‐Specific Stock
         Return Variation. Journal of Finance 59 1, 65‐105.
Easterbrook, Frank & Daniel Fischel. 1982. Corporate Control Transactions. The Yale Law Journal 91, 698.
Etebari, Ahmad, James Horrigan & Jan Landwehr. 1987. To Be or Not to Be ‐‐ Reaction of Stock Returns to Sudden
         Deaths of Corporate Chief Executive Officers. Journal of Business Finance & Accounting 14, 255
Faccio, Mara & Ameziane Lasfer. 2000. Do Occupational Pension Funds Monitor Companies in Which They Hold
         Large Stakes? Journal of Corporate Finance 6 1, 71‐110
Faccio, Mara & D.C. Parsley. 2009. Sudden Deaths: Taking Stock of Geographic Ties. Journal of Financial and
         Quantitative Analysis 44, 683‐718.
Faccio, Mara & Larry Lang. 2002. The Ultimate Ownership of Western European Corporations. Journal of Financial
         Economics 65 3, 365‐95
Faleye, Olubunmi, Vikas Mehrotra & Randall Morck. 2006. When Labor Has a Voice in Corporate Governance.
         Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 41, 489
Faleye, Olubunmi. 2007. Classified Boards, Firm Value, and Managerial Entrenchment. Journal of Financial
         Economics 83 2, 501‐29
Fama, Eugene & Michael Jensen. 1983. Separation of Ownership and Control. Journal of Law and Economics 26 2,
         301‐25
Fama, Eugene. 1980. Agency Problems and the Theory of the Firm. Journal of Political Economy 88 2, 288‐307
Fogel, Kathy. 2006. Oligarchic family control, social economic outcomes, and the quality of government. Journal of
         International Business Studies 37, 603
Fohlin, Caroline. 2005. The History of Corporate Ownership and Control in Germany. In: Morck RK (ed.) A History of
         Corporate Governance around the World: Family Business Groups to Professional Managers. University of
         Chicago Press, pp. 223‐277.
Frentrop, Paul Marie Louis. 2002. Corporate governance 1602‐2002. Thesis (doctoral). Prometheus, Universiteit
         van Tilburg, 2002.
Gennaioli, Nicola & Andrei Shleifer. 2007. The Evolution of Common Law. Journal of Political Economy 115 1, 43‐68
Gompers, Paul & Josh Lerner. 1999. The venture capital cycle. MIT Press, Cambridge and London.
Gompers, Paul, Joy Ishii & Andrew Metrick. 2003. Corporate Governance and Equity Prices. Quarterly Journal of
         Economics 118 1, 107‐55
Grabowski, Henry & Dennis C. Mueller. 1972. Managerial and Stockholder Welfare Models of Firm Expenditure.
         Review of Economics and Statistics 54, 9
Grabowski, Henry & Dennis C. Mueller. 1975. Life‐Cycle Effects on Corporate Returns on Retentions. Review of
         Economics and Statistics 57, 400
Grabowski, Henry & Dennis C. Mueller. 1978. Industrial Research and Development, Intangible, Capital Stocks, and
         Firm Profit Rates. Bell Journal of Economics 9, 328
Grossman, Sanford & Oliver Hart. 1988. One Share‐One Vote and the Market for Corporate Control. Journal of
         Financial Economics 20 1/2, 175‐202
Gugler, Klaus, Dennis Mueller & B. Burcin Yurtoglu. 2003. The Impact of Corporate Governance on Investment
         Returns n Developed and Developing Countries. Economic Journal 113, 511
Gugler, Klaus, Dennis Mueller & B. Burcin Yurtoglu. 2004a. Corporate Governance and the Returns on Investment.
         Journal of Law and Economics 47, 589


                                                           38
Gugler, Klaus, Dennis Mueller & B. Burcin Yurtoglu. 2004b. Marginal q, Tobin's q, Cash Flow, and Investment.
          Southern Economic Journal 70, 512
Gugler, Klaus, Dennis Mueller & B. Burcin Yurtoglu. 2007. Corporate Governance and the Determinants of
          Investment. Journal of Institutional and Theoretical Economics 163, 598
Haber, Stephen, Douglass & Barry Weingast. 2008. Political institutions and financial development. Stanford
          University Press, Stanford, Calif.
Haber, Stephen. 2000. Political institutions and economic growth in Latin America : essays in policy, history, and
          political economy. Hoover Institution Press, Stanford University, Stanford, Calif.
Hallock, K. F. 1997. Reciprocally interlocking boards of directors and executive compensation. Journal of Financial
          and Quantitative Analysis 32, 331‐344
Hartzell, J. C., Ofek, E., Yermack, D., 2004. What's in it for me? CEOs whose firms are acquired. Review of Financial
          Studies 17, 37‐61
Haunschild, P. R., Beckman, C. M. 1998. When do interlocks matter? Alternate sources of information and interlock
          influence. Administrative Science Quarterly 43, 815‐844
Hauser, Shmuel, and Beni Lauterbach, 2004, The value of voting rights to majority shareholders:Evidence from
          dual‐class stock unifications, Review of Financial Studies 17, 1167‐1184.
Hayashi, Fumio. 1982. Tobin's marginal q and average q: A neoclassical interpretation. Econometrica 50, 213
Holderness, Clifford, Randall Kroszner & Dennis Sheehan. 1999. Were the Good Old Days That Good? Changes in
          Managerial Stock Ownership since the Great Depression. Journal of Finance 54 2, 435‐69
Jahera, J. S. & W. Pugh. 1991. State Takeover Legislation ‐ The Case of Delaware. Journal of Law Economics &
          Organization 7, 410‐428
Jarrell, Gregg & Annette Poulsen. 1987. Shark Repellents and Stock Prices: The Effects of Antitakeover
          Amendments since 1980. Journal of Financial Economics 19 1, 127‐68
Jarrell, Gregg & Annette Poulsen. 1988. Dual‐Class Recapitalizations as Antitakeover Mechanisms: The Recent
          Evidence. Journal of Financial Economics 20 1/2, 129‐52
Jarrell, Gregg, James Brickley & Jeff Netter. 1988. The Market for Corporate Control: The Empirical Evidence Since
          1980. Journal of Economic Perspectives 2 1, 49‐68
Jensen, Michael & Richard Ruback. 1983. The Market for Corporate Control: The Scientific Evidence. Journal of
          Financial Economics 11 1‐4, 5‐50
Jensen, Michael & William Meckling. 1976. Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behavior, Agency Costs and Ownership
          Structure. Journal of Financial Economics 3 4, 305‐60
Jensen, Michael & William Meckling. 1979. Rights and Production Functions: An Application to Labor‐managed
          Firms and Codetermination. Journal of Business 52 4, 469‐506
Jensen, Michael. 1986. Agency Costs of Free Cash Flow, Corporate Finance, and Takeovers. American Economic
          Review 76 2, 323‐29
Johnson, A. H. 1910. The age of the enlightened despot, 1660‐1789. Macmillan, New York.
Johnson, Simon, et al. 2000. Tunneling. American Economic Review 90 2, 22‐27
Johnson, W. Bruce, Robert Magee, Nandu Nagarajan, Harry Newman & G. WIlliam Schwert. 1985. An Analysis of
          the Stock Price Reaction to Sudden Executive Deaths: Implications for the Managerial Labor Market.
          Journal of Accounting & Economics 7, 151.
Karpoff, Jonathan & Paul Malatesta. 1989. The Wealth Effects of Second‐Generation State Takeover Legislation.
          Journal of Financial Economics 25 2, 291‐322
Khanna, Tarun & Jan Rivkin. 2001. Estimating the performance effects of business groups in emerging markets.
          Strategic Management Journal 22, 45
Khanna, Tarun & Krishna Palepu. 2000a. Emerging Market Business Groups, Foreign Intermediaries, and Corporate
          Governance. In: Morck RK (ed.) Concentrated corporate ownership. University of Chicago Press, Chicago,
          pp. 265‐92.
Khanna, Tarun & Krishna Palepu. 2000b. Is Group Affiliation Profitable in Emerging Markets? An Analysis of
          Diversified Indian Business Groups. Journal of Finance 55 2, 867‐91
Khanna, Tarun & Krishna Palepu. 2005. The Evolution of Concentrated Ownership in India: Broad Patterns and a
          History of the Indian Software Industry. In: Morck RK (ed.) A History of Corporate Governance around the
          World: Family Business Groups to Professional Managers. University of Chicago Press, A National Bureau
          of Economic Research Conference Report. Chicago and London, pp. 283‐320.

                                                         39
Khanna, Tarun & Yishay Yafeh. 2005. Business Groups and Risk Sharing around the World. Journal of Business 78 1,
          301‐40
Khanna, Tarun & Yishay Yafeh. 2007. Business Groups in Emerging Markets: Paragons or Parasites? Journal of
          Economic Literature 45 2, 331‐72
Kramarz, Francis & David Thesmar. 2006. Social Networks in the Boardroom. SSRN eLibrary
Krueger, Anne. 1974. The Political Economy of the Rent‐Seeking Society. American Economic Review 64, 13
Krueger, Anne. 2002. Why Crony Capitalism is Bad for Economic Growth. In: Haber SH (ed.) Crony capitalism and
          economic growth in Latin America : theory and evidence. Hoover Institution Press, Stanford, Calif., pp. 1‐
          23.
Kydland, Finn & Edward Prescott. 1977. Rules Rather Than Discretion ‐ The Inconsistency of Optimal Plans. Journal
          of Political Economy 85, 473
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez‐de‐Silanes & Andrei Shleifer. 2006. What Works in Securities Laws? Journal of
          Finance 61 1, 1‐32
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez‐de‐Silanes &, Andrei Shleifer. 1999. Corporate Ownership around the World.
          Journal of Finance 54 2, 471‐517
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez‐de‐Silanes, Andrei Shleifer & Robert Vishny. 1997. Legal Determinants of External
          Finance. Journal of Finance 52 3, 1131‐50
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez‐de‐Silanes, Andrei Shleifer & Robert Vishny. 2002. Investor Protection and
          Corporate Valuation. Journal of Finance 57 3, 1147‐70
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez‐de‐Silanes, Andrei Shleifer & Robert Vishny. 1997. Trust in large organizations.
          American Economic Review 87, 333
Lakonishok, Josef, Andrei Shleifer, Richard Thaler & Robert Vishny. 1991. Window Dressing by Pension Fund
          Managers. American Eocnomic Review
Landier, A., D. Sraer & David Thesmar. 2009. Optimal Dissent in Organizations. Review of Economic Studies 76, 761
Lang, Larry & Robert Litzenberger. 1989. Dividend Announcements: Cash Flow Signalling vs. Free Cash Flow
          Hypothesis? Journal of Financial Economics 24 1, 181‐91
Lang, Larry, Rene Stulz & Ralf Walkling. 1991. A Test of the Free Cash Flow Hypothesis: The Case of Bidder Returns.
          Journal of Financial Economics 29 2, 315‐35
Lee, Ian. , 2005. Peoples Department Stores V. Wise and the "Best Interests of the Corporation”. Canadian Business
          Law Journal 41, 212
Linn, Scott & John McConnell. 1983. An Empirical Investigation of the Impact of 'Antitakeover' Amendments on
          Common Stock Prices. Journal of Financial Economics 11 1‐4, 361‐99
Maier, Pauline, 1993. The Revolutionary Origins of the American Corporation. William and Mary Quarterly, 3rd ser
          50, 76‐79
Malmendier, Ulrike. 2005. Roman Shares. In: Goetzmann W & Rouwenhorst G (eds.) The Origins of Value. The
          Financial Innovations that Created Modern Capital Markets. Oxford University Press, pp. 31‐42, 361‐365.
McConnell, John & Henri Servaes. 1990. Additional Evidence on Equity Ownership and Corporate Value. Journal of
          Financial Economics 27 2, 595‐612
McWilliams, Victoria & N. Sen. 1997. Board monitoring and antitakeover amendments. Journal of Financial and
          Quantitative Analysis 32, 491‐505
McWilliams, Victoria. 1990. Managerial Share Ownership and the Stock Price Effects of Antitakeover Amendment
          Proposals. Journal of Finance 45 5, 1627‐40
Mikkelson, Wayne & Megan Partch. 1997. The Decline of Takeovers and Disciplinary Managerial Turnover. Journal
          of Financial Economics 44 2, 205‐28
Milgram, Stanley. 1974. Obedience to authority; an experimental view. Harper & Row: New York.
Milgram, Stanley. 1974. Obedience to authority; an experimental view. Harper & Row, New York.
Mitchell, M. & Ken Lehn. 1990. Do Bad Bidders Become Good Targets. Journal of Political Economy 98, 372‐398
Mitchell, Mark & Jeff Netter. 1989. Triggering the 1987 Stock Market Crash: Antitakeover Provisions in the
          Proposed House Ways and Means Tax Bill? Journal of Financial Economics 24 1, 37‐68
Moeller, Sara, Frederik Schlingemann & Rene Stulz. 2005. Wealth Destruction on a Massive Scale? A Study of
          Acquiring‐Firm Returns in the Recent Merger Wave. Journal of Finance 60 2, 757‐82
Morck, Randall & Bernard Yeung. 1992. Internalization: An Event Study Test. Journal of International Economics 33
          1‐2, 41‐56

                                                        40
Morck, Randall & Bernard Yeung. 2004. Family control and the rent‐seeking society. Entrepreneurship: Theory and
         Practice 28, 18
Morck, Randall & Masao Nakamura. 2005. A Frog in a Well Knows Nothing of the Ocean: A History of Corporate
         Ownership in Japan. In: A History of Corporate Governance around the World: Family Business Groups to
         Professional Managers. University of Chicago Press, A National Bureau of Economic Research Conference
         Report. Chicago and London, pp. 367‐459.
Morck, Randall & Masao Nakamura.2007. Business Groups and the Big Push: Meiji Japan's Mass Privatization and
         Subsequent Growth. Enterprise and Society 8 3, 543‐601
Morck, Randall, Andrei Shleifer & Robert Vishny. 1988. Management Ownership and Market Valuation: An
         Empirical Analysis. Journal of Financial Economics 20 1/2, 293‐315
Morck, Randall, Andrei Shleifer & Robert Vishny. 1989. Alternative Mechanisms for Corporate Control. American
         Economic Review 79 4, 842‐52
Morck, Randall, Andrei Shleifer & Robert Vishny. 1990. Do Managerial Objectives Drive Bad Acquisitions? Journal
         of Finance 45 1, 31‐48
Morck, Randall, Daniel Wolfenzon & Bernard Yeung. 2005. Corporate Governance, Economic Entrenchment, and
         Growth. Journal of Economic Literature 43 3, 655‐720
Morck, Randall, David Stangeland & Bernard Yeung. 2000. Inherited Wealth, Corporate Control, and Economic
         Growth: The Canadian Disease? In: Concentrated corporate ownership. University of Chicago Press, NBER
         Conference Report series. Chicago and London, pp. 319‐69.
Morck, Randall. 2008. Behavioral finance in corporate governance: economics and ethics of the devil's advocate.
         Journal of Management & Governance 12, 179
Mueller, Dennis C. & B. Yurtoglu. 2007. Corporate governance and the returns to acquiring firms' shareholders: an
         international comparison. Managerial and Decision Economics 28, 879
Mueller, Dennis C. & Mark Sirower. 2003. The causes of mergers: Tests based on the gains to acquiring firms'
         shareholders and the size of premia. Managerial and Decision Economics 24, 373
Mueller, Dennis C. 1992. The Corporation and the Economist. International Journal of Industrial Organization 10,
         147.
Mueller, Dennis C. 1996. Constitutional democracy. Oxford University Press, New York.
Mueller, Dennis C. 2005 The Economics and Politics of Corporate Governance in the European Union ECGI ‐ Law
         Working Paper No. 37/2005.
Mueller, Dennis C. 2006a. The Anglo‐Saxon Approach to Corporate Governance and its Applicability to Emerging
         Markets. Corporate Governance : An International Review 14, 207
Mueller, Dennis C. 2006b. Corporate Governance and Economic Performance. International Review of Applied
         Economics 20, 623
Mueller, Dennis C. 2010, Mergers and the Market for Corporate Control, Ch. 16, this Handbook.
Mulherin, Harold & Annette Poulsen. 1998. Proxy Contests and Corporate Change: Implications for Shareholder
         Wealth. Journal of Financial Economics 47 3, 279‐313
Murphy, Kevin Andrei, Shleifer & Robert Vishny. 1989. Industrialization and the Big Push. Journal of Political
         Economy 97 5, 1003‐26
North, Douglass, John Wallis & Barry Weingast. 2009. Violence and social orders : a conceptual framework for
         interpreting recorded human history. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Opler, Tim & Sheridan Titman. 1993. The Determinants of Leveraged Buyout Activity: Free Cash Flow vs. Financial
         Distress Costs. Journal of Finance 48 5, 1985‐99
Perez‐Gonzalez, Francisco. 2006. Inherited Control and Firm Performance. American Economic Review 96, 29
Pound, John. 1988. Proxy Contests and the Efficiency of Shareholder Oversight. Journal of Financial Economics 20
         1/2, 237‐65
Rajan, Raghuram & Luigi Zingales. 1998. Financial Dependence and Growth. American Economic Review 88 3, 559‐
         86
Rajan, Raghuram & Luigi Zingales. 2003. The Great Reversals: The Politics of Financial Development in the
         Twentieth Century. Journal of Financial Economics 69 1, 5‐50
Rajan, Raghuram & Luigi Zingales. 2004. Saving capitalism from the capitalists: Unleashing the power of financial
         markets to create wealth and spread opportunity. Princeton University Press.


                                                       41
Rhodes‐Kropf, Matthew & S. Viswanathan. 2004. Market Valuation and Merger Waves. Journal of Finance 59 6,
          2685‐2718
Rhodes‐Kropf, Matthew, David Robinson & S. Viswanathan. 2005. Valuation Waves and Merger Activity: The
          Empirical Evidence. Journal of Financial Economics 77 3, 561‐603
Romano, Roberta. 1993a. Public Pension Fund Activism in Corporate Governance Reconsidered. Columbia Law
          Review 93, 795‐853
Romano, Roberta. 1993b. Foundations of corporate law. Oxford University Press, New York.
Romano, Roberta. 1993c. Getting Politics out of Public Pension Funds and out of Corporate Board Rooms.
          American Enterprise 4 6, 42‐49
Romano, Roberta. 1995. The politics of public pension funds. Public Interest, 42
Romano, Roberta. 2003. Does Confidential Proxy Voting Matter? Journal of Legal Studies 32 2, 465‐509
Romano, Roberta. 2005. The Sarbanes‐Oxley Act and the Making of Quack Corporate Governance. Yale Law Journal
          114 7, 1521‐1611
Rosenberg, Nathan and L.E. Birdzell. 1986. How the West grew rich: the economic transformation of the industrial
          world. Basic Books, New York.
Rosenstein‐Rodan, Paul. 1943. Problems of Industrialisation of Eastern and South‐Eastern Europe. Economic
          Journal 53, 202‐11
Ross, Stephen. 1973. “The Economic Theory of Agency: the Principal’s Problem,” American Economic Review, Vol.
          63 No. 2, May. 134‐139.
Ryngaert, Michael & J. Netter. 1990. Shareholder Wealth Effects of the 1986 Ohio Antitakeover Law Revisited ‐ Its
          Real Effects. Journal of Law Economics & Organization 6, 253‐262
Ryngaert, Michael. 1988. The Effect of Poison Pill Securities on Shareholder Wealth. Journal of Financial Economics
          20 1/2, 377‐417
Scharfstein, David & Jeremy Stein. 1990. Herd Behavior and Investment. American Economic Review 80 3, 465‐79
Schumpeter, Joseph. 1912. Theorie der wirtschaftlichen entwicklung. Duncker & Humblot, Leipzig,.
Sheard, Paul. 1991. The economics of interlocking shareholding in Japan. Richerche Economiche 45
Shleifer, Andrei & Daniel Wolfenzon. 2002. Investor Protection and Equity Markets. Journal of Financial Economics
          66 1, 3‐27
Shleifer, Andrei & Robert Vishny. 1986. Large Shareholders and Corporate Control. Journal of Political Economy 94
          3, 461‐88
Shleifer, Andrei & Robert Vishny. 1997. A survey of corporate governance. Journal of Finance 52, 737
Shleifer, Andrei & Robert Vishny. 2003. Stock Market Driven Acquisitions. Journal of Financial Economics 70 3, 295‐
          311
Shleifer, Andrei, 2000. Inefficient markets: An introduction to behavioral finance. Oxford University Press,
          Clarendon Lectures in Economics. Oxford and New York.
Smith, Brian & Ben Amoako‐Adu. 2005. Management Succession and Financial Performance in Family Controlled
          Firms. In: Governance and Ownership. Elgar, Cheltenham, p. 27.
Stein, Jeremy C. 1996. Rational Capital Budgeting in an Irrational World. Journal of Business 69 4, 429‐55
Stein, Jeremy. 1989. Efficient Capital Markets, Inefficient Firms: A Model of Myopic Corporate Behavior. Quarterly
          Journal of Economics 104 4, 655‐69.
Stulz, Rene. 2005. The Limits of Financial Globalization. Journal of Finance 60(4)1595–1638.
Tian, Gloria. 2006. Pyramidal Groups and Firm Performance: Empirical Evidence from Canadian Corporations.
          University of New South Wales, Sydney
Tiebout, Charles, 1956. A Pure Theory of Local Expenditures. Journal of Political Economy 64, 416‐424
Tobin, James. 1984. On the Efficiency of the Financial System. Lloyd's Bank Review 153:1‐15.
Tobin, James & William Brainard. 1976. Asset Markets and the Cost of Capital. In Richard Nelson and Bela Balassa,
          eds., Economic Progress: Private Values and Public Policy (Essays in Honor of William Fellner), Amsterdam:
          North‐Holland, 235‐62.
Tobin, James, 1969. A General Equilibrium Approach to Monetary Theory. Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 1
          1, 15‐29
Turner, John & Lorna Dailey. 1991. Pension policy: an international perspective. U.S. Dept. of Labor, Washington,
          DC.


                                                        42
Van Nuys, Karen, 1993. Corporate governance throught the proxy process: Evidence from the 1989 Honeywell
         proxy solicitation. Journal of Financial Economics 34, 101
Villalonga, Belen & Raphael Amit. 2006. How Do Family Ownership, Control and Management Affect Firm Value?
         Journal of Financial Economics 80 2, 385‐417
Wahal, Sunil, 1996. Pension fund activism and firm performance. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 31,
         1
Woidtke, Tracie, 2002. Agents Watching Agents? Evidence from Pension Fund Ownership and Firm Value. Journal
         of Financial Economics 63 1, 99‐131
Wurgler, Jeffrey, 2000. Financial Markets and the Allocation of Capital. Journal of Financial Economics 58 1‐2, 187‐
         214
Yermack, David, 2006. Flights of Fancy: Corporate Jets, CEO Perquisites, and Inferior Shareholder Returns. Journal
         of Financial Economics 80 1, 211‐42
Zingales, Luigi, 1994. The Value of the Voting Right: A Study of the Milan Stock Exchange Experience. Review of
         Financial Studies 7, 125




                                                         43
