NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

IDENTIFYING SIBLING INFLUENCE ON TEENAGE SUBSTANCE USE
Joseph G. Altonji
Sarah Cattan
Iain Ware
Working Paper 16508
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16508

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2010

We are grateful to Greg Duncan, Amanda Kowalski, Robert T. Michael and participants in seminars
at Yale University, University of Chicago, New York University, the NLSY97 conference at the Bureau
of Labor Statistics (May 2008), NBER Health 2009 Summer Institute, the Institute for Fiscal Studies,
UC San Diego, the SOLE/EALE 2010 Meetings, and the University of Toronto for valuable comments.
Our research has been supported by the Economic Growth Center, Yale University. We are responsible
for the remaining shortcomings of the paper. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Joseph G. Altonji, Sarah Cattan, and Iain Ware. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Identifying Sibling Influence on Teenage Substance Use
Joseph G. Altonji, Sarah Cattan, and Iain Ware
NBER Working Paper No. 16508
October 2010
JEL No. D1,I1
ABSTRACT
A number of studies have found substantial correlations in risky behavior between siblings, raising
the possibility that adolescents may directly influence the actions of their brothers or sisters. We assess
the extent to which correlations in substance use and selling drugs are due to causal effects. Our identification
strategy relies on panel data, the fact that the future does not cause the past, and the assumption that
the direction of influence is from older siblings to younger siblings. Under this assumption along with
other restrictions on dynamics, one can identify the causal effect from a regression of the behavior
of the younger sibling on the past behavior and the future behavior of the older sibling. We also estimate
a joint dynamic model of the behavior of older and younger siblings that allows for family specific
effects, individual specific heterogeneity, and state dependence. We use the model to simulate the
dynamic response of substance use to the behavior of the older sibling. Our results suggest that smoking,
drinking, and marijuana use are affected by the example of older siblings, but most of the link between
siblings arises from common influences.

Joseph G. Altonji
Department of Economics
Yale University
Box 208264
New Haven, CT 06520-8269
and NBER
joseph.altonji@yale.edu
Sarah Cattan
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
scattan@uchicago.edu

Iain Ware
Bain Capital LTD
Devonshire House 6th flr
Mayfair Place
London, W1J 8AJ
iain.ware@gmail.com

1

Introduction

Teenage smoking, substance abuse, involvement in property and violent crime, and involvement in risky sexual activity fluctuate, but remain at high levels.1 Understanding
the factors that lead adolescents to engage in these behaviors is a high research priority.
This paper examines whether substance use of one child directly influences the behavior of a younger sibling. Several studies have found significant correlations between risky
behavioral patterns among siblings.2 In keeping with this literature, in Table 2 below,
we show that the probability an adolescent has smoked, used alcohol, smoked marijuana,
used hard drugs, or sold drugs in the past year is dramatically higher if an older sibling
engaged in the corresponding behavior when at the same age, even after one includes a
basic set of control variables. Findings of this nature are consistent with the possibility
that substance use and other risky behaviors are contagious among siblings in a household. However, siblings share many influences, including common family backgrounds,
neighborhoods, schools, and genes. These common influences could potentially account
for most or even all of the correlations. It is diﬃcult to successfully control for the range
of shared characteristics that aﬀect siblings. As a result, there are very few convincing
attempts to distinguish direct sibling influences from the plethora of unobserved factors
that might contribute to the high correlation in delinquent behavior among siblings.
We address the problem of shared influences using two related empirical strategies.
Both exploit a basic fact, and both are based on a key maintained assumption. The
fact is that only actions of a youth that occur at or before a point in time can causally
influence his or her sibling’s action at that time. The assumption is that older siblings
influence younger siblings, but younger siblings do not influence older siblings.
The first of our empirical strategies uses a correlated random eﬀects (CRE) design
in the spirit of Mundlak (1978) and Chamberlain (1984). We estimate models relating
the behavior of the younger sibling at time t to the behavior of the older sibling before
that date using the sum of the older sibling’s behaviors before and after time t as a
See Levitt and Lochner (2001) on teenage homicide, Gruber and Zinman (2001) on smoking, Pacula
et al. (2001) on marijuana usage, and Grossman et al. (2004) on teenage sex.
2
For example, Amuedo-Derantes and Mach (2002) find that having a sibling who abuses illegal drugs
significantly increases the likelihood that an adolescent will also take drugs. Duncan et al. (2005) compare
correlations of various measures of achievement and delinquency across siblings, peers, neighbors, and
schoolmates and find that these correlations are substantially stronger among siblings than among other
groups.
1

2

control variable. Our estimate of the sibling influence is the coeﬃcient on the early
behavior. The coeﬃcient on the sum of the past and future behaviors identifies the part
of the link in the behavior of siblings that is due to common unobserved influences. Our
interpretation of the CRE evidence is conditional on the assumption that the direction of
the influence between siblings is from the older sibling to the younger one. Several studies
in the psychology literature support this assumption as a first approximation, including
Buhrmester (1992) and Rodgers and Rowe (1988). To the extent that it is false, our
estimates are likely to understate the influence of the older sibling on the younger one.
Both state dependence (e.g., habit formation) and nonstationarity with respect to age
could lead the past behavior and the future behavior of the older sibling to have diﬀerent
relationships with the sibling fixed eﬀect. This would bias the CRE estimate of the
older sibling’s influence, although the direction of the bias is not clear.3 In part for this
reason, we also develop and estimate a dynamic model of the behavior of the older and
younger siblings. The model allows for state dependence and unobserved heterogeneity
at the individual and sibling pair levels. It consists of a dynamic system of discrete
choice equations in which the behavior of each sibling depends on exogenous variables,
past behavior, and a person specific error component. The behavior of the younger
sibling also depends on the past behavior of the older sibling. We estimate the system
by maximum likelihood and use our estimates to simulate the dynamic response of the
behavior of the younger sibling to the behavior of his or her older sibling.
Our results using the CRE approach point to positive eﬀects of the behavior of the
older sibling on smoking cigarettes and drinking alcohol of the younger sibling. The results
using the dynamic model show positive eﬀects on smoking, drinking, and marijuana use.
We also obtain positive point estimates for using hard drugs and selling drugs, but the
estimates fall short of statistical significance. Overall, we conclude that there is a modest
positive sibling eﬀect on substance use. However, most of the very large correlation in
sibling behavior is due to common influences rather than a peer eﬀect.
While our focus is on sibling influences, the qualitative findings may be of some interest
to the rapidly growing literature on peer influences among adolescents. Estimates of peer
eﬀects may be biased upward by the fact that adolescents select friends who share similar
interests, while children cannot choose their siblings. On the other hand, the problem
Below we also report regression estimates controlling for sibling fixed eﬀects, which are subject to a
similar problem.
3

3

of common genes and family factors is less severe for friends and acquaintances than for
siblings. Furthermore, some of the strategies that have been employed recently in studies
of peer eﬀects, such as variation arising from quasi-random assignment of roommates,
are not feasible for siblings.4 Perhaps for this reason, there is little quantitative evidence
on peer influences among siblings. This knowledge gap provides the motivation for our
study, despite the limitations of our identification strategies.
The paper continues in section 2, which provides a brief review of the existing economic
and psychology literature on social influences on adolescent substance use, with a focus
on sibling eﬀects. In sections 3 and 4, we discuss the NLSY97 data and document the
strong correlation in substance use across siblings. In section 5, we present a simple
model of sibling links in behavior that underlies our econometric analysis. We explain
the CRE strategy and present the joint dynamic probit model of substance use. We
present our results using the CRE approach in section 6 and those using the dynamic
probit and the dynamic ordered probit models in sections 7 and 8, respectively. In section
9, we explore the extent to which the link between siblings depends on the gender match,
the age gap, and family process variables. Unfortunately, in most cases, our estimates
of interaction eﬀects are not suﬃciently precise to support strong conclusions. We close
with conclusions and a research agenda.

2

Literature Review

Developmental psychologists and sociologists were first to investigate the importance of
social environment on adolescent development and behavior. Peers, parents, and siblings
are widely viewed as the most significant domains of influence on adolescents, but their
relative importance remains controversial. While some perceive peer group influence as
the single most important factor shaping a child’s behavior (Harris (1998)), a number of
psychologists continue to emphasize the primacy of the family in shaping a child’s attitudes and behaviors (Jessor and Jessor (1977), Kandel (1980)). With regard to alcohol
for example, Barnes (1990) considers the diverse channels through which the family poSee Sacerdote (2001), Marmaros and Sacerdote (2002), Duncan et al. (2005), and Stinebrickner and
Stinebrickner (2006). One could examine whether the sibling influence is larger for siblings who share
a bedroom. With data on the number bedrooms and the number of male and female children by age,
one could create a proxy even if information on sharing a bedroom is unavailable. We do not have the
necessary data to perform this analysis.
4

4

tentially exerts influence on behavior. Not only does a child often get his first exposure to
and experience with alcohol within the family, but family members are powerful agents of
socialization. A number of mechanisms, including imitation, role modeling, and parental
tolerance toward certain behaviors, help shape an adolescent’s attitudes and values and
hence influence his or her future behavior.
Within the family, siblings occupy a particular social position. An extensive literature
in psychology analyzes the diﬀerent mechanisms through which siblings are hypothesized
to influence each other’s behaviors. One can distinguish two main hypotheses: the “role
model” and the “opportunity” hypotheses. First, a sibling, most likely the younger one,
may see his older sibling as a role model to observe, directly imitate, and use in shaping his
notions about what types of behaviors are suitable (Widmer (1997), Buhrmester (1992),
and Rodgers and Rowe (1988)). Patterson (1984) proposes a variant of this hypothesis
in his “theory of siblings as key pathogens” to explain how siblings can encourage each
other to have antisocial tendencies, such as delinquent behavior. He argues that siblings
provide learning or training models to develop this behavior. This is particularly likely to
happen between siblings who have conflict ridden and aggressive relationships, because
these promote antisocial behavior.
The second mechanism through which siblings influence each other’s behaviors is by
providing opportunities (friends and settings) for substance use and sexual intercourse.
In contrast to Patterson’s hypothesis, this mechanism is more likely to occur with siblings
who have a better and warmer relationships, have common friends, and hence engage in
risky behavior together. For the purpose of our study, it is important to note that most
of the literature surveyed here argues that the pattern of influence runs from the older
to the younger child (Buhrmester (1992), Rodgers and Rowe (1988)).
In the economics literature, the models of Akerlof (1997) and Bernheim (1994) concerning social conformity are also relevant to the present study of sibling influences. In
his social distance model, Akerlof (1997) represents social interactions as a mutually beneficial trade between agents. Agents occupy a location on the social space, which is partly
inherited. The model creates incentives for agents to interact with those that are close
in the social space, thus possibly explaining their tendency to conform to the behavioral
norms of those who share their inherited social location. Bikchandani et al. (1992) argue that it may be optimal for individuals to base their decisions on observed behavior

5

of others because they lack complete information about the consequences of a specific
action. These ideas can be applied to sibling interactions as well as to other groupings.
In addition to the theoretical work reviewed above, there are a number of empirical
studies of social influence on youth behavior. While many focus on peer group eﬀects only
(e.g., Furman and Buhrmester (1992), Berndt (1992), Steinberg and Silverberg (1986)),
some recent papers have incorporated parents and siblings into the analysis. Most of
these papers provide evidence of large correlations between siblings in a variety of behaviors, without necessarily devising a strategy for distinguishing causality from the eﬀect of
common unobserved factors. For example, Duncan et al. (2001) examine sibling correlations in measures of delinquency for sample of adolescents in grades 7 through 12 (Add
Health data). The sample includes genetically diﬀerentiated siblings within a family,
peers, grade mates, and neighbors, thus allowing the authors to compare correlations in
the same behavior across diﬀerent types of relationships. The correlations are highest for
siblings, especially for twins, thus suggesting a large scope for family influences.
Investigating further the role of genes in the same data set, Slomkowski et al. (2005)
finds that both genetic and environmental factors contribute to similarities between siblings’ smoking behavior. Data on the quality of the relationship between siblings reveal
that a better sibling relationship magnifies the importance of shared environmental effects. Conger and Reuter (1996) stress the importance of both siblings’ and parents’
drinking behavior and find evidence that a sibling’s drinking exacerbates an adolescent’s
tendency to drink both directly, through imitation or increased exposure, and indirectly,
through the selection of friends who drink. Windle (2000) finds that peer and siblings’
substance use more strongly predict adolescent’s substance use than parents’. Furthermore, siblings’ substance use is a strong predictor of coping motives for drinking, thus
indicating that imitation and role modeling in stressful situations might be important
channels of influence among siblings. Several papers have also looked at sibling influences on smoking patterns, although results for this activity are mixed (Otten et al.
(2007), Bricker et al. (2005), and Slomkowski et al. (2005)).
Using the Arizona Sibling Study, Rowe and Gulley (1992) find that correlations in
substance use and delinquent behavior are higher when interactions are warmer, less
conflict ridden and more frequent, when siblings have more mutual friends, and for samesex pairs of siblings. Although these results do not directly test for the presence of a direct

6

sibling influence, they are consistent with one, as suggested by the opportunity hypothesis
described above. In contrast, using sibling pair data from the longitudinal Iowa Youth
and Family project, Slomkowski et al. (2001) obtains mixed results on how the level of
support and hostility between siblings influences the strength of the relationship between
sibling behavior.
While some of the studies mentioned above control for a large array of family and
parental characteristics and some find interactions that are consistent with a sibling eﬀect,
the sibling eﬀects they estimate could reflect the impact of unobserved common factors.
A few studies, mostly in economics, attempt to identify a sibling causal eﬀect by using
instrumental variables strategies. One of them, Oettinger (2000), examines high school
graduation by age 19 using the NLSY 1979. He estimates linear probability models of
high school graduation of an older sibling on the probability that the younger sibling
graduates and vice-versa. To address the endogeneity of the sibling’s achievement, he
uses the gender of the older sibling, measures of the family’s “intactness” during his or
her childhood, and local and national unemployment rates at age 18 as instrumental
variables. He obtains a significant, positive eﬀect of the older sibling’s graduation status
on that of the younger sibling, but no eﬀect of the younger sibling’s graduation status on
that of the older sibling. This would suggest that a sibling influence runs mostly from
the older to the younger sibling, although the exclusion restrictions seem questionable.
Ouyang (2004) develops a dynamic model of the older and younger siblings’ behaviors,
which allow for state dependence and for the older sibling’s behavior to contemporaneously aﬀect that of the younger sibling. She estimates the model with NLSY97 data on
cigarettes, marijuana, and alcohol consumption and finds strong evidence of a sibling
eﬀect. In contrast to our approach, however, she does not allow for individual specific
unobserved heterogeneity, and she proxies family specific heterogeneity with the older
sibling’s smoking history.
Finally, Harris and Lopez-Valcarel (2008) propose an interesting theoretical model
in which siblings learn about whether smoking is desirable by observing their siblings’
decisions. They allow the decision not to smoke to have a diﬀerent eﬀect than the decision
to smoke. Using data on smoking behavior of family members from supplements to the
CPS, they estimate a multivariate probit model in which the number of one’s siblings
who smoke appears on the right hand side. They find a powerful sibling influence as well

7

as some evidence that the positive eﬀect of smoking is stronger than the deterrent eﬀect
of not smoking. However, their estimates imply that the variance of the unobservable
that aﬀects the behavior of all siblings is zero. That is, conditional on a limited set of
observables, they find that the entire correlation in the behavior of siblings is due to
common influences. Consider a family with two siblings. In a simple regression model
of the older sibling’s behavior on the younger sibling’s behavior, one cannot separately
identify the causal eﬀect of the younger sibling’s behavior from the correlation in error
components that determine the two. Although Harris and Lopez-Valcarel (2008)’s model
contains exogenous variables and is nonlinear, we suspect that their finding of powerful
sibling eﬀects may be due in part to problems in separately identifying the common
factors that influence smoking, from the sibling influence.
In sum, there are good theoretical reasons for believing that substance use and other
behaviors of adolescents are causally influenced by siblings. However, the strong similarity
in the behavior of siblings may be due to genes, shared environments, as well as a direct
influence of one sibling on another. To date, little is known about the relative contribution
of these mechanisms, let alone the precise nature of sibling interactions.

3

The NLSY97 Data

The empirical analysis uses the first eight rounds of the National Longitudinal Survey
of Youth 1997 (NLSY97), which is a panel study of men and women who were between
12 and 16 years of age at the end of 1996. In the first round, the NLSY surveyed 8,984
individuals originating from 6,819 households in the United States. Because the sample design selected all household residents in the appropriate age range, the NLSY97
original cohort includes 1,892 households with more than one respondent. Using information about the relationship between the diﬀerent respondents of the same household,
we created a sample of pairs of biological siblings.
For every year since 1997, the NLSY97 contains extensive information about a wide
range of risky behaviors. In this paper, we focus on smoking cigarettes, using marijuana,
drinking alcohol, using cocaine and/or other hard drugs, and selling or helping to sell
drugs.5 The main outcome we analyze is whether the individual reports having engaged
In preliminary work, we also examined gang membership and sexual behavior. We did not find
strong evidence of a sibling eﬀect for these variables.
5

8

at all in the particular behavior since the last interview date. We construct this binary
variable using answers to questions that were introduced in the survey in 1998 (1999 for
cocaine and hard drug use), and we select those observations that are part of uninterrupted sequences of non-missing answers. Because individuals do not answer questions
about all behaviors in every round, the analysis sample is slightly diﬀerent for each behavior. In the case of cigarette smoking for example, the analysis sample is composed of
1646 pairs of siblings, for whom we have between 1 and 6 rounds of observations.
We also estimate models that use reports of the number of days the person engaged in
the behavior in the previous month to construct an indicator for high consumption and an
indicator for low consumption. We chose 7, 7, and 4 as the maximum number of days for
the low consumption category for cigarettes, drinking, and marijuana use, respectively.
These cutoﬀs insure that reasonable fractions of the observations fall in both the high
and the low categories. Our results are fairly robust to the choice of cutoﬀs.
The younger siblings are between 15 to 19 years old when they enter our analysis
sample, while the older siblings are between 16 and 20. The average age of the younger
sibling is 16.04, while the average age of the older sibling is 18.06. We use all pairs with
adjacent birth orders (i.e., the first born with the second born, and the second born with
the third born if we have the three oldest siblings in our sample). A total of 1,453 pairs
come from two-sibling families, while 375, 12, and 6 come from three, four, and five sibling
families respectively.6 Our sample is 24% Black and 23% Hispanic. The high minority
proportions stem from the fact that we use supplemental and military samples along
with the cross sectional sample. Unless we indicate otherwise, descriptive statistics and
multivariate analyses we report are unweighted, and we do not account for nonrandom
attrition.7
In all of our empirical work, we control for a set of individual and environmental characteristics. These consist of race, gender, AFQT percentile score, education completed
314 of the families who contribute sibling pairs have children who were excluded from NLSY97
because they were older than 16 at the end of 1996. 353 of the families had children who were younger
than 12 at the end of 1996. 142 had children who were older than 16 and younger than 12. No data
were collected on these children.
7
One could use inverse probability weighting to account for eﬀects of attrition at the sibling pair
level in the correlated random eﬀects analysis, but we are not entirely clear about how to construct the
attrition weights for sibling pairs. One possibility would be to estimate the probability that data for a
given observation on a sibling pair are available conditional on the age of the youngest sibling in the
base year, the age gap, and base year characteristics. We are not sure how to correct for attrition when
estimating the joint dynamic discrete choice model given that our models use data from multiple waves
of the survey and that the data need depends on the equation of the model.
6

9

by age 19, number of siblings, birth order dummies, mother’s education, and a dummy
for whether the child lived with both biological parents at age 12. We also include three
dummy variables describing aspects of the individual’s environment up to age 12. These
consist of an indicator for whether the respondent ever heard gun shots or saw someone
get shot at with a gun, an indicator for whether her house was broken into, and a third
indicator for whether she ever was a frequent victim of bullying.8 As a sensitivity check,
we experimented with using the child’s report of the percentage of his peers who engage
in the behavior as an additional control, although the behavior of the child may influence
his choice of peers. In some models, we use variables that characterize parenting styles
and the degree to which the child is influenced by parents and siblings both as controls
and as determinants of the strength of the direct sibling influence.
We wish to stress that the identification strategies underlying both the CRE approach
and the joint dynamic probit approach relies on panel data, the fact that the future
cannot cause the past, and the assumption that substance use by younger siblings does
not causally influence that of older siblings. They are specifically designed to be valid
in the presence of important omitted variables that influence the substance use of both
siblings.9
We provide further details about variable construction and sample selection in the
Data Appendix. Appendix Table 1 reports the age distribution of the sample. Appendix
Table 2 reports unweighted and weighted descriptive statistics for the explanatory variables used in our analysis.

4

Sibling Correlations in Substance Use

To set the stage, we document the strong relationship in substance use among siblings.
Table 1 reports the mean values of the substance use measures for males, females, and
the combined sample. The values are high for many of the behaviors. For example,
62% of the males and 59% of the females report drinking alcohol during the previous
year. 26% of the males and 19.7% of the females report using marijuana. The figure
Since the bullying measure reflects a possibly traumatic childhood experience, we think of it as
measuring, albeit very imperfectly, aspects of the individual’s mental health and social adjustment.
9
Strictly speaking, the fact that we exclude the older sibling’s individual characteristics from the
younger siblings’s substance use equations, and vice versa, also contributes to identification of the joint
dynamic probit and ordered probit models. We impose these questionable exclusion restrictions to reduce
the computational burden. They probably play only a minor role in identification of the sibling eﬀect.
8

10

is about 40% for cigarette smoking. About 6% of the sample reports having used hard
drugs in the previous year. The unweighted means are similar to the weighted means
(see Appendix Table 3). Panel B of the Table 1 reports probabilities of engaging in the
activity in at least one year between age 15 and age 20. The probability of ever using
hard drugs is .147. The probability of ever selling drugs is .219 for males and .100 for
females.10 The fractions who used the substance one or more days in the past month are
lower, not surprisingly. Appendix Table 4 shows that incidence of the behaviors tends to
increase with age until about age 20.
In Table 2, we use a regression to summarize the relationship between substance use
of the sibling pairs when they were at the same age. Specifically, we report OLS estimates
of γ from the regression:
2
1
ya,t
= β0 + γya,t−j
+ X 2 β1 + AGEt2 Γ + u2at

2
1
where ya,t
and ya,t−j
are the behaviors of the younger and older siblings at age a, respec-

tively, j is the sibling age gap, AGEt2 is a set of age dummies for the younger sibling, X 2
is a vector of controls that refer to the younger sibling and that are listed in Section 2.
Throughout the paper, the superscripts 1 and 2 indicate whether a variable refers to the
older sibling or the younger sibling, respectively. We also report estimates with controls
excluded.11
The results are striking. Consider smoking cigarettes. If the older sibling smoked, the
probability shifts by .239, which is very large relative to the sample mean of about .4.
With controls, the shift in the probability remains large at .18. In the case of marijuana,
if the older sibling smoked at a given age, the probability that the younger sibling uses
marijuana at that age increases by .162, which is very large relative to the sample mean
of about .23. Adding controls leads to only a modest reduction in this figure.
Having an older sibling who uses hard drugs shifts the probability for the younger
sibling by .102, a shift that is larger than the unconditional mean of about .06. The
mean shift for selling drugs is also extremely large relative to the sample mean. In all
cases, adding control variables weakens the relationship to some degree, but a strong
10

20.
11

These are estimated using sample members who are observed every year between the age of 15 and
The controls are listed in the table footnote.

11

relationship remains.
We also present separate results for brother pairs and sister pairs. The relationship
across siblings tend to be larger for sister pairs, with the exception of selling drugs, a
behavior in which females engage infrequently. Later in the paper, we experiment with
whether the size of the peer eﬀect depends on the gender match between the older sibling
and the younger sibling.
In the remainder of the paper, we address the key but diﬃcult question of whether
the sibling correlations are due, at least in part, to a causal eﬀect of the older sibling’s
behavior.

5

A Model of Substance Use and Sibling Influences

We present a simple model of substance use with the purpose of motivating the econometric strategies used in the paper and to help interpret the parameters. In particular,
we treat the sibling influence parameter as a reduced form parameter and do not attempt to identify the specific mechanisms that underlie it, such as information provision,
shaping of preferences, etc.12 As we shall see, even with a very simple formulation, the
CRE estimation strategy does not work if there is state dependence from sources such as
habit formation or information eﬀects or because of parental reactions to past behavior
of children.
Consider a set of families, each with two children. We continue to use a for age and
to refer to the older and younger sibling as 1 and 2, respectively. Normalize a so that
substance use is 0 for all people when a < 1. Without loss of generality, assume that the
1
older sibling is aged 1 in year t − 1 and the younger sibling is aged 1 in t. Let yt+a
1 −2,
2
denote the behavior of sibling 1 in year t + a1 − 2 when sibling 1 is age a1 . Let yt+a
2 −1,

denote the behavior of the younger sibling in year t + a2 − 1 when he is age a2 . We usually
suppress the age subscripts. We also suppress the control variables that appear in our
empirical models of y because they are not essential to our identification strategy. We
leave the subscript for the family implicit throughout the paper. For present purposes,
it is convenient to treat y as a continuous variable and ignore corner solutions at y = 0,
although we work with a discrete indicator in the empirical work.
See the papers cited in the literature survey for a discussion of theories of sibling influence on
substance use.
12

12

5.1

Choices of the older sibling

In every period t, the older sibling chooses yt1 to solve the objection function
1
1
2
max
[ε + υ 1 + u1t + (g + h)yt−1
+ hyt−1
]yt1 − (yt1 )2 ,
1
2
yt

(1)

where the above expression captures the diﬀerence between the perceived benefit and
the cost of consuming y11 (including the opportunity costs of foregoing other goods).13
In the above equation, the term between brackets represents the marginal benefit of an
additional unit of y, where � is a family specific component, v 1 is the value of the person
specific component for the older sibling, which, without loss of generality, is not correlated
with the corresponding component v 2 of the younger sibling. The error component u1t is a
transitory error component u for the older sibling in period t. Below we place restrictions
on the distributions of u1 and u2 over time and across siblings. Additionally, the marginal
benefit of an additional unit of y depends on the actions of both siblings in the previous
period, through two mechanisms. The first one, captured by the parameter g, is the eﬀect
of habit formation and informational eﬀects. The second one, captured by the parameter
h, is the eﬀect of the information the parent has about the children, as well as the positive
or negative influence of the parents’ reaction on the marginal net benefit of y to the older
sibling. Although there is no direct peer influence from the younger to the older sibling,
the parental response creates an indirect dependence of the older child’s behavior on the
behavior of the younger child. To keep the notation simple, we assume that the parental
reaction aﬀects the marginal benefits of future choices of y by the same amount for all
siblings. One could instead assume that parents’ reactions are birth order specific or that
2
they only influence the behavior of the particular child. In the latter case, hyt−1
would

drop out of the older sibling’s objective function.
The younger sibling faces a similar problem to that of the older one, except that the
marginal benefit of his behavior also depends directly on the action of his older sibling
The above objective function allows for the possibility that agents account for the action’s costs and
benefits that play out over time. They may also consider the eﬀects of their actions on the utility of
others, including parents and siblings. The costs include punishment by the parents, school authorities,
criminal sanctions, etc. However, we assume that agents are myopic in the sense that they do not account
for the eﬀects of the choice of y today on the marginal costs and benefits of choosing y in the future. The
budget constraint, which we leave implicit, is static. Costs of substance use include opportunity cost of
consuming other goods. We do not allow the marginal benefit to the older child of an action to depend
upon the characteristics or choices of the younger child. Furthermore, older siblings do not consider the
influence of their behavior on the younger sibling’s choice.
13

13

in t − 1. He chooses yt2 to solve
1 2 2
2
2
2
1
2
max
[ε
+
υ
+
u
+
(g
+
h)y
+
(λ
1 + h)yt−1 ]yt − (yt ) ,
t
t−1
2
yt2
where � is the family specific component introduced in (1), v 2 is a component specific
to the younger sibling, and u2t is a transitory error component for the younger sibling at
time t. The parameter λ1 captures the direct influence of the older sibling on the younger
sibling.14
1
Since the older sibling is age 1 and the younger sib is age 0 in t − 1, yt−2
= 0 and

2
yt−1
= 0. For periods t − 1, t, t + 1, the behavior of the older sibling can be expressed as
1
yt−1
= ε + υ 1 + u1t−1
1
yt1 = ε + υ 1 + u1t + (g + h)yt−1
1
yt+1
= ε + υ 1 + u1t+1 + (g + h)yt1 + hyt2

Notice that the behavior of the younger sibling only starts aﬀecting that of the older
sibling at t + 1 because y 2 is 0 until t.
Similarly, the optimal choices for the younger sibling at t and t + 1 are
1
yt2 = ε + υ 2 + u2t + (λ1 + h)yt−1
2
yt+1
= ε + υ 2 + u2t+1 + (g + h)yt2 + (λ1 + h)yt1

5.2

Using Correlated Random Eﬀects Regression to Estimate
the Direct Sibling Eﬀect

Consider the linear least squares projection:
1
1
1
yt2 = β0 + β1 (yt−1
+ yt+1
) + β2 yt−1
+ error .

(2)

Assume:
A1. h = 0, i.e. no parental response
14
The parental reaction parameter h and state dependence parameter g could be diﬀerent for the older
and younger children. In the joint dynamic probit model we allow state dependence to diﬀer but do not
allow for unobserved heterogeneity in the state dependence or sibling influence parameters.

14

A2. g = 0, i.e. no state dependence
A3. The distribution of u1a,t is covariance stationary over a and t, with var(u1a,t ) = σu21 .
u1a,t may be serially dependent.
A4. cov(u2t , u1t−1 ) = cov(u2t , u1t+1 ) .
In this case,
1
yt−1
= ε + v 1 + u1t−1
1
yt+1
= ε + v 1 + u1t+1

Using the above equations and A3 and A4, it is easy to show that the coeﬃcients of the
1
1
projection of ε + v 2 + u2t onto yt−1
and yt+1
both equal [var(ε) + cov(u2t , u1t−1 )]/[2var(ε) +

var(v 1 ) + σu21 + cov(u1t−1 , u1t+1 )]. Consequently, β1 and β2 in (2) are given by
β1 = [var(ε) + cov(u2t , u1t−1 )]/[2var(ε) + var(v 1 ) + σu21 + cov(u1t−1 , u1t+1 )],
β2 = λ1 .
In this case, β2 is λ1 , the direct sibling eﬀect. The basic argument carries over to the
case in which y is a binary variable determined according to:
1
yt−1
= 1(ε + v 1 + u1t−1 ) > 0)

(3)

1
= 1(ε + v 1 + u1t+1 > 0)
yt+1

(4)

1
yt2 = 1(ε + v 2 + u2t + λ1 yt−1
> 0),

(5)

although one must replace A3 with the assumption that the u1a,t+a−1 are identically distributed. However, if any of the four assumptions above are false, then β2 �= λ1 in (2),
except in special cases. Indeed, if any of the assumptions fail, then the coeﬃcients of the
1
1
projection of ε + v 2 + u21t on yt−1
and yt+1
will diﬀer, and the diﬀerence will be reflected
1
in β2 . For the same reason, if the eﬀects of ε or v 1 on ya,t+a−1
vary with a, as would be

the case if preferences and costs are such that
1
ya,t+a−1
= f (a) + ga ε + πa v 1 + u1a,t+a−1 ,

15

where ga and πa are age dependent coeﬃcients, then the equality restriction on the
1
1
coeﬃcients of the projection of ε + v 2 + u2t on yt−1
and yt+1
will fail. The function f (a) is

not a problem if the model is additively separable in age, provided that one also controls
for the age of each of the siblings in year t. However, in a nonlinear setting such as (4)
the presence of f (a) is enough to invalidate the restriction on the projection coeﬃcients,
even if ga and πa do not depend on age.
5.2.1

Bias If the Younger Sibling Influences the Older Sibling

If the assumption that younger siblings do not influence older siblings fails and the
younger sibling positively influences the behavior of the older sibling, then we are likely
to underestimate the sibling eﬀect λ1 . To see why, maintain assumptions 1-4, but now
allow the behavior of the older sibling in t + 1 to depend upon yt2 with coeﬃcient γ1 .
Then the model becomes
1
yt−1
= ε + v 1 + u1t−1
1
yt+1
= γ1 yt2 + ε + v 1 + u1t+1
1
yt2 = λ1 yt−1
+ ε + v 2 + u2t .

Reparameterize (2) as:
1
1
yt2 = β0 + β1 yt+1
+ (β2 + β1 )yt−1
+ error.

1
1
The dependence of yt+1
on yt2 will raise the coeﬃcient on yt+1
relative to the coeﬃcient
1
1
on yt−1
. This will reduce the estimate of the causal eﬀect of yt−1
since the estimate is
1
the diﬀerence in the coeﬃcients on yt+1
and yt2 . In the presence of state dependence, the

implications of reverse causality are less transparent. However, it will tend to increase
the strength of the link between future values of y 1 and past values of y 2 . Intuitively, we
expect that this will lead to underestimation of the direct sibling influence in econometric
models that assume that the sibling influence goes in only one direction. Note 22 below
summarizes a simulation experiment that supports this intuition.

16

5.2.2

Contemporaneous Sibling Eﬀects

Suppose both contemporaneous and lagged behaviors of the older sibling influence the
younger child with coeﬃcients λ0 and λ1 , respectively. Consider the projection equation:
1
1
1
yt2 = β0 + β1 (yt−1
+ yt1 + yt+1
) + β2 yt−1
+ β3 yt1 + error

(6)

In addition to assumptions A1-A4 above, assume:
A5. The idiosyncratic error components u2t and u1t� are independent across siblings at
all leads and lags.
A6. u1t is serially uncorrelated.
Then,
β1 = var(ε)/[3var(ε) + var(v 1 ) + σu21 ]
and
β2 = λ1 and β3 = λ0
where λ0 is the direct eﬀect of yt1 on yt2 . Consequently, under the six assumptions, one
can identify the direct sibling eﬀects.
However, if any of the assumptions A1 through A6 fails, then in general β2 �= λ1 and
β3 �= λ0 in (6). (Nonseparable forms of age dependence will also pose problems in this
case.) If only A6 fails, one can still estimate an average of λ0 and λ1 and test, as we do
below, for sibling eﬀects using the regression:
1
1
1
1
yt2 = β0 + β1 (yt−1
+ yt1 + yt+1
+ yt+2
) + β2 (yt−1
+ yt1 ) + error.

(7)

We are particularly concerned that temporal variation in factors such as stresses within
the family (e.g., parental unemployment, marital conflict, parental substance abuse) or
variation in access to drugs or alcohol in a neighborhood or in a school will lead u2t and
u1t to co-vary. Consequently, we place less weight on specification (7). If one uses (2)
1
when (6) is correct, then the coeﬃcient on yt−1
will pick up part of the eﬀect of yt1 , but

we will still detect sibling influences.
The idea of using the diﬀerence between the eﬀect of the past or contemporaneous
value and the future value of a treatment variable to identify the causal eﬀect of the treat17

ment is, of course, a standard approach in the program evaluation literature. However,
it is sometimes forgotten that one requires strong assumptions about how time or age
interacts with the error components that influence both the treatment and the outcome.
One also needs strong restrictions on dynamics. An alternative approach is to estimate a
joint dynamic model of the outcome of interest and the “treatment”, which, in our case,
is the past behavior of the older sibling. In Section 5.3, we provide such a model, which
is close in spirit to the model above. Nevertheless, the CRE approach has the advantage
of simplicity. While state dependence and nonstationarity will lead to inconsistency in
the estimates of λ1 , it is a natural place to start the search for evidence of a causal eﬀect
of sibling behavior on substance use.
5.2.3

Fixed Eﬀects Estimation

We also estimate the sibling influence parameter in
1
yt2 = λ1 yt−1
+ ε + v 2 + u2t ,

(8)

treating ε + v 2 as a fixed eﬀect. The advantage of the fixed eﬀects estimator is that it
requires assumptions A1 and A2, but not A3. On the other hand, it requires A5, while
u2t and u1t� may be correlated in the case of the CRE procedure subject to A1-A4. This
is a substantial disadvantage. A second disadvantage is that the fixed eﬀect estimator
requires multiple observations on the younger sibling, which reduces power. When we
include fixed eﬀects we use a linear probability model rather than a probit specification.

5.3

A Joint Dynamic Model of Sibling Behavior

We work with two specifications. The first treats substance use as a binary choice. The
second distinguishes the level of consumption. We start with the binary choice model,
which has four equations. Since behavior is dynamic and we do not observe behavior at
the age of initiation, we include an equation for the initial condition of the older sibling.
This equation refers to the choice in year t1min , the first year we observe the older sibling.
The second equation refers to the choice of the older sibling in year t, given the choice in
the previous year. The last two equations are the initial conditions for the younger sibling
and the younger sibling’s choice in year t given the younger sibling’s choice in t − 1. The
18

initial condition refers to behavior in t2min , the first year we observe the behavior of the
younger sibling.15
Older sibling’s choice at t = t1min (initial condition):
yt1 = 1(X 1 β11 + AGEt1 Γ11 + ε + v 1 + u1t > 0)

(9)

Older sibling’s choices at t > t1min :
1
1
1 1
yt1 = 1(γ 1 yt−1
+ X 1 β21 + AGEt1 Γ12 + δ2ε
ε + δ2v
v + u1t > 0)

(10)

Younger sibling’s choice at t = t2min (initial condition):
1
2
yt2 = 1(λ21 yt−1
+ X 2 β12 + θ12 a1t−1 + AGEt2 Γ21 + δ1ε
ε + v 2 + u2t > 0)

(11)

Younger sibling’s choices at t > t2min :
2
1
2
2 2
yt2 = 1(γ 2 yt−1
+ λ22 yt−1
+ X 2 β22 + θ22 a1t−1 + AGEt2 Γ22 + δ2ε
ε + δ2v
v + u2t > 0)

(12)

where:
• yt1 and yt2 are the behaviors of the older and younger siblings in year t
• X 1 and X 2 are vectors of control variables for the older and the younger siblings
• a1t−1 is the age of the older sibling in year t − 1
• AGEt1 and AGEt2 are vectors of age dummies indicating whether the sibling is aged
a in year t
• ε ∼ N (0, σε2 ) is a sibling pair specific error component
• v 1 ∼ N (0, σv21 ) and v 2 ∼ N (0, σv22 ) are independent person specific error components
• u1t ∼ N (0, 1) and u2t ∼ N (0, 1) are person/time specific error components that are
independent across siblings and years
• λ21 is the sibling influence parameter in the initial condition (t = t2min )
and
• λ22 is the sibling influence parameter for t > t2min .
15

The value of t1min varies from 1998 to 2000 in (9) while a1t1

varies from 1999 to 2001 while

a2t2
min

varies from 15 to 19.

19

min

ranges from 15 to 20. The value of t2min

We allow the coeﬃcients on X to be diﬀerent in the initial conditions and in the
equations for the later periods. We also allow them to diﬀer between the older and
younger siblings. We experiment with two specifications for the error structure. Error
specification A restricts the factor loadings on the family eﬀect ε to be 1 in all equations.
It also restricts the factor loadings on the individual eﬀects v 1 and v 2 to equal 1 in all
1
2
2
1
2
equations. That is, δ2ε
= δ2ε
= δ1ε
= 1 and δ2v
= δ2v
= 1. Note, however, that we allow

the variance of the individual person specific eﬀect v to diﬀer between the older sibling
and the younger sibling. In error specification B, we allow all the factor loadings on the
1
2
2
family eﬀect (δ2ε
, δ2ε
, and δ1ε
) and the factor loadings on the individual personal specific
1
2
eﬀect in the later equations (δ2v
and δ2v
) to be freely estimated. We restrict the variance

of v to be the same across siblings.16 For some outcomes, we have diﬃculty identifying
the separate roles of family heterogeneity and individual heterogeneity when we use the
less restricted version.
We also experimented with a more general version of the above model in which we
use error specification A but allow linear interactions between the elements of X 1 and a1t
in (9) and (10) and linear interactions between X 2 and a2t in (11) and (12).17 For the
most part, the state dependence parameters and sibling eﬀects parameters are not very
sensitive to addition of the interaction terms, and so we present the models without the
interaction terms.18 We estimate the models by maximum likelihood.19
Note that we restrict the variance of the idiosyncratic error components to be 1 in both the initial
condition and the later years. This is implicitly a normalization, because we allow the coeﬃcients of all
variables to diﬀer across these equations for both the older and younger siblings.
17
One would expect age interactions to be particularly important in the initial conditions equation.
We do not allow the state dependence eﬀects or the sibling influence eﬀects to interact with the age of
the older sibling or the age of the younger sibling in the specification of the index for the latent variable
that determines yt1 and yt2 .
18
For both error specifications A and B, the state dependence parameter for the younger sibling is
lower for all five behaviors when age interaction terms are added. In the case of error specification B, the
sibling influence parameters are higher for all of the behaviors except smoking, although the coeﬃcients
are also less precisely estimated. Some of the factor loadings change, but there is no clear pattern.
19
For computational ease, each pair coming from the same household is assumed to receive an independent draw of the common component ε. This means that we are implicitly allowing for the possibility
that the common household environment is sibling pair specific. Our reported standard errors for the
joint dynamic probit and ordered probit models (see below) do not account for the possible error correlation across pairs that come from the same household. Relatively few households supply more than one
pair of observations, so any bias in the standard errors is likely to be small (see Section 3). Standard
errors for the regression and probit results in Tables 2, 3, A5, and A6 are clustered at the household
level.
16

20

5.3.1

A Dynamic Ordered Probit Model

The degree of state dependence and the strength of the peer influence are likely to depend
on the amount of substance use. To investigate this parsimoniously, we supplement our
main analysis by estimating a joint dynamic ordered probit model. Consider cigarettes.
1
We define yLt
equal to 1 if the person smoked between one and 7 days during the last
1
month. We define yHt
to be 1 if the older sibling smoked more than 7 days in the

previous month. The corresponding threshold values are 7 days for alcohol and 4 days
1
for marijuana. The indicators are determined according to yL,t
= 1(qH ≥ yt1∗ > qL ) and

1
yH,t
= 1(yt1∗ ≥ qH ) where qH and qL are threshold parameters and yt1∗ is the latent index

given by:
1 1
1
1
1 1
yt1∗ = γH
yH,t−1 + γL1 yL,t−1
+ X 1 β21 + AGEt1 Γ12 + δ2ε
ε + δ2v
v + u1t , t > t1min .

The initial condition for yt1∗ for t = tmin is determined by an ordered probit model
1
that is an obvious generalization of (9). We expect γH
> γL1 , since the positive influence

of habit, social connections, and information on the propensity to engage in substance
use is likely to be increasing in the quantity consumed in the previous period.
2
Similarly, the younger sibling’s choice is summarized by yL,t
= 1(qH ≥ yt∗2 > qL ) and

2
yH,t
= 1(yt∗2 ≥ qH ), where

1
1
2
yt2∗ = λ21H yH,t−1
+ λ21L yL,t−1
+ X 2 β12 + θ12 a1t−1 + AGEt2 Γ21 + δ1ε
ε + v 2 + u2t , t = t2min
2 2
2
1
1
yt2∗ = γH
yH,t−1 + γL2 yL,t−1
+ λ22H yH,t−1
+ λ22L yL,t−1
+ X 2 β22 + θ22 a1t−1
2
2 2
+AGEt2 Γ22 + δ2ε
ε + δ2v
v + u2t , t > t2min .

2
We expect the state dependence parameters to obey γH
> γL2 > 0. If sibling influ-

ences are positive and increasing in the intensity of the older sibling’s behavior, then
λ21H > λ21L > 0 and λ22H > λ22L > 0. One can easily generalize the model to allow for additional positive categories. We stop at two because of sample size considerations. Error
specification A and error specification B are the same as in the binary probit case.

21

6

Sibling Eﬀect Estimates Based on the CRE Model

In Table 3, we present estimates of sibling eﬀects using the correlated random eﬀect
model discussed in section 5.2. Each column refers to a diﬀerent outcome. The top panel
of Table 3 presents estimates of our main specification, which we refer to as Model 1.
Model 1 is a variant of (2) for the case in which yt2 is binary and control variables and
age dummies are added:
1
1
1
yt2 = 1(β0 + β1 (yt−1
+ yt+1
) + β2 yt−1
+ X 2 β3 + AGEt1 Γ1 + AGEt2 Γ2 + e > 0).

(13)

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
In the middle panel, we replace β1 (yt−1
+ yt+1
) + β2 yt−1
with β1 (yt−2
+ yt−1
+ yt+1
+ yt+2
)+
1
1
β2 (yt−2
+ yt−1
) (Model 2). If the sibling influence operates over two or more periods,

adding the additional lead and lag might increase power, but it comes at a substantial
cost in sample size. In the bottom panel, we allow for the possibility of a contemporaneous
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
influence. We replace β1 (yt−1
+yt+1
)+β2 yt−1
with β1 (yt−1
+yt1 +yt+1
+yt+2
)+β2 (yt−1
+yt1 )
1
(Model 3). As we discussed in Section 5.2.2, the peer influence coeﬃcient on (yt−1
+yt1 ) in

Model 3 are likely to be positively biased if transitory environmental factors are correlated
across siblings.
We report marginal eﬀects of the raw variables on the probability that yt2 = 1 based
on MLE probit estimates of β1 , β2 and the other parameters in the model. Standard
errors are clustered at the household level.20
1
Column 1 refers to smoking. The results for Model 1 indicate that yt−1
raises the

smoking probability by .063 (.027). This estimate is statistically significant and sub1
1
stantial relative to the mean probability. The marginal eﬀect of (yt−1
+ yt+1
) is .086, so

about 3/5th of the link between the older sibling’s past smoking and the younger sibling’s
current smoking is due to common influences and 2/5th is due to the sibling eﬀect. The
results for Model 2 and Model 3 suggest an even stronger causal sibling eﬀect on smoking.
1
For drinking, the estimates of Model 1 indicate that yt−1
raises the probability of

The sample sizes diﬀer substantially across models due to the requirement for additional leads and
lags in the case of Model 2 and, to a minor extent, the loss of observations due to missing data on yt1
in the case of Model 3. In Appendix Table 5, we report the marginal eﬀects of the control variables
for Model 1. The estimates for variables that are correlated across siblings are reduced by about 10%
1
1
in absolute value by the presence of yt−1
, yt+1
and the age dummies for the older siblings. We also
experimented with a number of additional controls, including self reports of the percentage of peers who
engage in the behavior. These did not have much eﬀect on the correlated random eﬀects estimates or
the joint dynamic probit estimates of the sibling influence parameters.
20

22

drinking by about .060 (.025), while the link due to common influences is .116. The
evidence for a causal eﬀect in the case of marijuana is weak. The estimates are positive, but are statistically significant only in the case of Model 3, which allows for a
contemporaneous influence.
The point estimate for use of hard drugs and selling drugs are positive and substantial
relative to the sample mean. For example, in the case of hard drugs, the marginal eﬀect
1
of yt−1
is .0147 (0.0204) for Model 1 while the sample mean is .062. However, the eﬀect

is not statistically significant. We obtain even larger estimates using Model 2 and Model
3. In the case of selling drugs, we obtain a large, positive, and statistically significant
estimate using Model 2. Overall, the results for hard drugs and selling drugs suggest a
positive causal eﬀect but are too noisy to support strong conclusions.

6.1

Fixed Eﬀects Estimates

In Appendix Table 6, we report estimates of (8) using dummy variables for each younger
sibling, thus treating ε + v 2 as a fixed eﬀect for every sibling pair. The estimates of
1
the coeﬃcient on yt−1
are .029 (.014) for smoking and .043 (.015) for drinking. Both

coeﬃcients are significant at the .05 level, but are smaller than the estimates based on
(13). We also obtain a small positive coeﬃcient for marijuana that is larger than the
CRE estimate, but is significant at only the 0.25 level. The coeﬃcients for use of hard
drugs and selling drugs are also positive and close to the CRE values but not statistically
significant. Thus the results are qualitatively consistent with our findings based upon
(13), but the point estimates tend to be smaller. We do not know why this is the case,
although the nature of the variation in the behavior of the older sibling that the two
estimators use to identify the sibling eﬀect is diﬀerent. The diﬀerence in the magnitude
across estimation strategies is robust to selecting the sample for (8) to match the sample
for (13) and to using a linear probability specification for the CRE model in place of the
probit specification.21
Keep in mind that in Table 3, we report marginal eﬀects on the probability of substance use rather
than the probit coeﬃcients.
21

23

7

Estimates of the Joint Dynamic Probit Model

We now turn to estimates of the joint dynamic probit model. Table 4A presents the results
for error specification A, our basic specification. The first column reports the results for
smoking cigarettes. The estimates of the state dependence parameter λ are .947 (.068) for
the younger sibling and .899 (.064) for the older sibling. Thus, lagged behavior matters.
Dynamic simulations reported below indicate that smoking today raises the probability
that the older sibling smokes by .196 (.021) next year and by .051 (.010) two years out.
The value of σ̂ε is .710. This confirms the CRE result that there is a substantial
common error component that drives the smoking behavior of siblings. We also find an
important individual specific error component: σ̂v1 and σ̂v2 are 1.05 and .815, respectively.
Consequently, temporal correlation in cigarette smoking comes from the influence of
the family specific and individual specific error components, as well as from true state
dependence.
Next we turn to the sibling influence parameters λ21 and λ22 , which are the coeﬃcients
1
on yt−1
in the equations for yt2 . A priori, we would expect both to be positive. We
2
also would expect λ21 to exceed λ22 because we do not condition on yt−1
in the initial

condition. λ̂21 is .215 (0.101), which is significant at the 1% level. Comparing this value
to the state dependence term indicates that having the older sibling smoke shifts the
latent variable for smoking by about one fourth the amount that smoking in the past
does. The coeﬃcient λ̂22 for subsequent years is .049 (0.069), which is positive but not
significant.22
Column 2 reports results for drinking. We find strong evidence of state dependence,
although the lag coeﬃcient is somewhat smaller than for cigarette smoking. One must
keep in mind that the coeﬃcients on the lagged dependent variables should be judged
relative to the standard deviation of the composite error, which is smaller for drinking
In Section 5.3.1 we argued that our estimates of λ1 and λ2 will be biased downward if younger
siblings influence older siblings. To investigate this, we simulated data from the joint dynamic probit
model after adding a term that allows the younger sibling to positively influence the older sibling. We set
the coeﬃcient to a positive value. All other parameters were set to the estimates for the dynamic probit
model for smoking reported in Table 4A. We then used the simulated data to estimate the model with the
parameter governing influence of the younger sibling on the older sibling set to 0, and examined the eﬀect
on sibling influence parameters λ1 and λ2 in the dynamic probit model presented below, confirming our
conjecture. As expected, the estimates of λ1 and λ2 decline when the data come from a model in which
younger sibling influences the other sibling. We also used the simulated data to examine the behavior
of the estimates of λ1 using the CRE specification(2). Increasing the size of the eﬀect of the younger
1
sibling on the older sibling leads to a reduction in the coeﬃcient on yt−1
.
22

24

than for smoking. Nevertheless, the dynamic simulations in Table 5 indicate that state
dependence is indeed a bit weaker for drinking.
The sibling influence parameter λ21 is .411 and is highly significant. The estimate of
λ22 is close to zero and insignificant. The results suggest that siblings have a substantial
influence at early ages but not later, which makes some intuitive sense, but we would
have expected less of a diﬀerence between λ21 and λ22 . The results for the other error
structures are basically similar.
Column 3 reports estimates for marijuana. The results are very similar to the results for drinking. We find strong evidence for a sibling eﬀect that operates primarily
through the initial condition. The point estimate of λ22 is actually negative, although it
is not significant. Overall, the evidence from the dynamic model for a sibling eﬀect on
marijuana use is substantially stronger than the evidence from the CRE model. We also
find substantial state dependence and an important role for both family and individual
heterogeneity.
Column 4 reports results for the use of hard drugs. Qualitatively, the results are
similar to the results for drinking and marijuana use. The point estimates suggest a
considerable sibling influence. However, the estimates are not statistically significant. In
the case of selling drugs (column 5), we find that family heterogeneity is less important
relative to individual heterogeneity. State dependence in this behavior is substantial.
The point estimates of the peer influence terms are large in magnitude and substantial
relative to the state dependence term, but they are not statistically significant. We do
not have enough power to determine whether there is an important sibling influence on
selling drugs.23
Table 4B reports estimates using error restriction B, which allows the factor loadings
in ε to diﬀer between the younger and older siblings and to diﬀer between the initial
condition and the subsequent periods. The results for alcohol and marijuana are similar
to those in Table 4A and show strong evidence of a sibling influence. Sibling coeﬃcients
for hard drugs and selling drugs rise, but are imprecisely estimated. In the case of
cigarettes, the sibling coeﬃcient in the initial condition falls while the sibling coeﬃcient
for subsequent periods rises, although neither is statistically significant.
We noted earlier that selling drugs is more a male than a female activity. Our model includes a
gender dummy but does not allow the factor loading on the family error component to depend upon
gender. This may have the eﬀect of increasing the importance of the individual specific error component.
Below we discuss models that allow the sibling influence to depend upon the gender pairing.
23

25

Overall, the evidence from the joint dynamic probit model points to a positive sibling
eﬀect on substance use. The evidence is strongest for smoking, drinking and marijuana
use, although the point estimates are positive for hard drug use and selling drugs.
Investigating Possible Bias from Treatment of Initial Conditions The fact we
typically find a stronger sibling eﬀect in the initial condition than in the equation for
subsequent periods could reflect the fact that λ21 captures influence over more than one
period but also raises questions. We conducted a simulation exercise to investigate the
possibility that misspecification of the initial condition biases upward the estimate of λ21
and biases downward λ22 . We generated data from our model for smoking from age 13
forward using the estimated parameter values (Table 4A, column 1). We then estimated
the model using the simulated data corresponding to the ages that we see in the NLSY97.
The data were generated with λ21 set to 0.215 and λ22 set to 0.0488. The estimates
of λ21 and λ22 using the simulated data are 0.1330 (0.0239) and 0.0486 (0.0157) (table
omitted). These results suggest that there is little bias in λ22 and that, if anything, we
are underestimating λ22 .24

7.1

The Dynamic Response to the Older Sibling’s Substance
Use Behavior

The estimates of the parameters of the dynamic probit model refer to eﬀects on the latent
variable index rather than to eﬀects on the probability of substance use. Furthermore,
they do not provide a quantitative sense of how persistent the eﬀects are. To address
these issues, we simulate the eﬀect of an exogenous switch in the behavior of the older
sibling from 0 to 1 in period (t2min − 1) on the time paths of substance use of both the
older and younger siblings.25

Interestingly, the state dependence parameters for the younger sibling seem to be underestimated
and the variance of person specific error component for the younger sib (v 2 ) seems to be overestimated.
25
In all but four cases, t1min = (t2min − 1), and so we use the actual age of the older sibling in creating
1
the Dat
. In the 4 cases, we set the age of the older sibling in year t1min to the actual age minus the value
2
of (tmin − t1min − 1) for the pair and construct dummies for subsequent years accordingly.
We obtain the mean baseline path as follows. Using the sample distribution of X 1 and estimated
parameters based on error structure 1, we first simulate yt1 from (t2min − 1) to (t2min + 4) using (9) and
(10). With simulated values of yt1 and the estimated model parameters for the younger siblings, we
simulate yt2 from t2min to (t2min + 5) using (11) and (12). All error terms are drawn from the distributions
implied by the model estimates. We obtain the eﬀect of an exogenous shift in behavior of the older sibling
from 0 to 1 in period (t2min − 1) by conducting a similar simulation with yt12 −1 set to 0 for all pairs
24

min

26

Figure 1a presents the results for smoking using the model in the first column of Table
4A. The vertical axis measures the change in behavior relative to the baseline probability.
The horizontal axis measures the time period relative to (t2min − 1), so 0 corresponds to
(t2min − 1). Appendix Table 7A reports point estimates and standard errors, which are
based on a parametric bootstrap method.26

We begin with the older sibling’s response. The solid line in the graph reports the
1
eﬀect of exogenously switching yt−1
from 0 to 1 on the time path of the average value of
1
1 27
ya,t
, relative to the baseline average for ya,t
. The vertical bars represent 90% confidence

bands. One can see that the exogenous change in smoking behavior from 0 to 1 in (t2min −1)
raises the probability of smoking 1 year later by .467 of the baseline value (.419). The
eﬀect is .119 of the baseline value 2 years later and essentially dies out after 4 periods.
2
The broken line in the graph displays the eﬀect on the time path of ya,t
, relative to
2
the baseline average of ya,t
, of a one-time exogenous shift in the smoking behavior of the

older sibling from 0 to 1 in (t2min − 1), with the distribution of the future behavior of the
older siblings unaﬀected. Smoking by the older sibling increases smoking among younger
siblings in t2min by .143 (.087) of the baseline value. This is 31 percent of the eﬀect of the
older sibling’s behavior in (t2min − 1) on his own behavior in the next period. The value
is .034 (.021) in the second period. The eﬀect on the probability of the younger sibling
smokes relative to baseline is essentially zero after three years.28
Figure 1b displays simulations for drinking. For the older sibling, drinking last year
rather than the value implied by (9) and a simulation with yt12 −1 set to 1 for all pairs. For each sibling
min
pair i, we performed each of the three simulations 20 times. We then averaged over the 20 simulations
for all the pairs.
26
We draw 75 values of the parameter vector for the joint dynamic probit model from a multivariate
normal distribution with mean and variance matrix set to the point estimates of mean and variance of
the parameter vector. For each draw of the parameter vector we perform 20 simulations and take the
average, as described in the previous footnote. The standard errors are the standard deviations across
the 75 averages. The 90% confidence bands are computed from the point estimate and standard error
estimates under a normality assumption.
27
1
To be more specific, for each older sibling we first set ya,t−1
to 1 in (t2min − 1), simulate forward,
1
and take the average of ya,t−1 for the values of t − 1 reported in the column. We repeat the procedure
1
with ya,t−1
set to 0 in (t2min − 1), take the diﬀerence in the two averages for each value of t − 1, and then
divide by baseline value in the top row of Appendix Table 7A.
28
2
In Appendix Table 7A, we report the baseline simulation for ya,t
. In the rows for the younger sibling
2
labelled “W/ Feedback” we report the path of the diﬀerence in ya,t relative to the baseline simulation for
1
younger siblings when ya,t−1
is set to 1 in (t2min − 1) and when it is set to 0 in (t2min − 1), respectively, and
1
1
the shift in ya,t−1 is allowed to aﬀect future values of ya,t−1
in accordance with the model. The eﬀect of
2
2
the shift on ya,t is the same in tmin (by construction). It is a bit larger in subsequent periods, because
of the persistence in the behavior of the older sibling when we allow for feedback. However, the values
are pretty similar to the eﬀect of a one time shift in the older sibling’s behavior, which are reported in
the rows ”W/out feedback” and graphed in Figure 1.

27

period raises the probability of drinking this year .292 (.042) of the baseline value. The
baseline value is about .56. After three periods the eﬀect is only .01 (.004) of the baseline
value. An exogenous change in the drinking behavior of the older sibling in (t2min − 1)
increases drinking among younger siblings by .240 (.071) of the baseline probability (.47).
The eﬀect on the younger sibling is essentially zero after three periods.
Figure 1c graphs changes relative to baseline for marijuana. Marijuana use by the
older sibling in (t2min − 1) increases the probability that the older sibling uses marijuana 1
year later by 0.58 (.08) of the baseline probability (.27). The eﬀect on the older sibling’s
behavior is .0229 (.009) 3 years later and close to 0 after that. A one-time exogenous
shift in the smoking behavior of the older sibling from 0 to 1 in (t2min − 1) increases the

probability that the younger sibling uses marijuana in t2min by .239 of the baseline value.
The eﬀect on the younger sibling is under .01 after two periods.
When we use the model parameters for error specification B to perform the simulations, we obtain similar results to those in the figure in the case of marijuana and
drinking (see Appendix Table 7B). However, the eﬀect of smoking by the older sibling on
the younger sibling is essentially zero, although the standard error is large.
Overall, the eﬀects of substance use by the older sibling in one period on the younger
sibling are substantial, but die out fairly quickly. It is important to note that most of our
parameter estimates indicate that the peer influence is biggest in the initial condition for
the younger sibling. For this reason, when we simulate the average eﬀect of exogenously
shifting the behavior of the older sibling from no substance use in all periods to substance
use in all periods, we find only modest eﬀects on the behavior of the younger sibling for
t > t2min + 2 (not reported). The fact that our estimates imply the younger siblings’
behavior is relatively insensitive to whether the older sibling consumes the substance in
all periods versus not at all indicates that only a small part of the strong substance use
correlations reported in Table 2 are causal.

8

Ordered Probit Results

We now turn to the estimates of the joint dynamic ordered probit models using error specification A, which are reported in Table 5.29 We limit the analysis to smoking cigarettes,
The results based upon error specification B are similar. See Appendix Table 8 and corresponding
simulations in Appendix Table 9B
29

28

drinking alcohol, and smoking marijuana because these behaviors are more common in
the sample. The estimates of the sibling influence parameters in the initial conditions,
λ21H and λ21L , are both positive for all three outcomes. In the case of cigarettes and
drinking, λ21H is larger than λ21L , which accords with our expectation, and is statistically
significant. The opposite is true in the case of marijuana, but the standard errors on these
estimates are substantial. The estimates of λ22H and λ22L , the sibling influence parameters
for the periods t > t2min , are small and not always positive. In the case of alcohol, λ22H is
actually negative and statistically significant at the 5% level. This runs counter to our
expectations and is troubling. However, we are looking at results for multiple parameters
so sampling error might be the explanation.30 In keeping with the binary probit results,
we find that both family heterogeneity and individual heterogeneity are important for
all three outcomes. We also find evidence of substantial state dependence for both the
1
older sibling and the younger sibling. As expected, γH
, the coeﬃcient on the indicator
1
yH,t−1
for the high consumption level, is substantially larger than γL1 , the coeﬃcient on

the indicator for the low consumption level. The same is true of the state dependence
parameters for the younger sibling.
Figures 2a and 2b graph simulations based on estimates of the eﬀects of an exogenous
shift in the behavior of the older sibling from no smoking to the highest consumption
category in t2min − 1. (Point estimates and standard errors are in Appendix Table 9A.)
One period later, the shift raises the low consumption probability for the older sibling by
.19 and the high consumption probability by .47 relative to the baseline averages. The
eﬀects become very close to 0 after four periods. The shift in the older sibling’s behavior
increases the probability that the younger sibling is in the high consumption category one
year later by .316 relative to baseline and also boosts the probability of low consumption.
The eﬀects are very small after two periods. In the case of marijuana (Figures 3a and b)
and alcohol (Figures 4a and b), the dynamic eﬀect on the behavior of the younger sibling
is similar to smoking, but smaller.
We examined the sensitivity of our results to the specific categories we chose for the cut oﬀ values of
yH and yL . In the case of smoking and drinking, we estimated the models using all possible partitions
between 0/1-3/4-30 days in the last month to 0/1-20/21-30 days (the partition we actually use is 0/1-7/830 days). In the case of marijuana, we tried all partitions ranging from 0/1-2/3-30 days to 0/1-14/15-30
days. The state dependence coeﬃcients on yL and yh tend to rise a bit as we increase the cutoﬀ between
yL and yH . The sibling eﬀect parameters do not vary much relative to standard errors, although in
the case of marijuana the sibling eﬀect parameters tend to be a bit larger for partitions in the range of
0/1-4/5-30, which is the one we report results for, than when we choose a high cutoﬀ between yL and
yH .
30

29

9

Determinants of the Strength of the Sibling Eﬀect

In the section, we examine a number of possible determinants of the sibling eﬀect, including the gender mix, the age gap, and a number of family process and relationship
variables. For simplicity, and because power is limited, we restrict the analysis to the
binary probit specification.

9.1

Gender Mix Interactions and Age Diﬀerence Interactions

As we noted earlier, the psychology literature (and common sense) might lead one to
expect the strength of the peer influence to depend on the gender mix of the siblings.31
1
In Appendix Table 10, we report estimates for a specification that replaces λ21 yt−1
and
1
λ22 yt−1
with

1
[λ21mm (M 2 × M 1 ) + λ21f f (F 2 × F 1 ) + λ21mf (M 2 × F 1 + M 1 × F 2 )]yt−1

and
1
[λ22mm (M 2 × M 1 ) + λ22f f (F 2 × F 1 ) + λ22mf (M 2 × F 1 + M 1 × F 2 )]yt−1
,

where M 1 and M 2 (F 1 and F 2 ) are dummies that equal 1 if the older and the younger
siblings are males (females), respectively. For smoking and marijuana use, the sibling
influence parameters are substantially larger for sister pairs. However, the standard
errors are relatively large (see Appendix Table 10).32
We also estimated models in which we allow the sibling influence to depend upon
1
whether the siblings were more than two years apart by replacing the terms λ21 yt−1
and
1
1
1
λ22 yt−1
with [λ21 + λ21,2+ 1(a1t − a2t > 2)]yt−1
and [λ22 + λ22,2+ 1(a1t − a2t > 2)]yt−1
, respectively.

On the one hand, siblings who are close in age may spend more time together and have
a closer bond. On the other hand, the diﬀerence between the younger and the older
31
We would like to control for siblings’ co-residence and examine whether the sibling influence varies
with co-residence, as one would expect it would. Unfortunately, it is impossible to infer this information
from the NLSY97. Data on co-residence is contained in the household roster, where respondents are
indexed by an identification number that is diﬀerent from their identification number in the youth
questionnaire, which we use for the rest of the analysis. The NLSY does not provide a direct way to
match these two identification numbers. One could match respondents based on their characteristics,
but this method only allows one to match about half of the sample. We thank Steven McClasky for
helpful consultations on this point.
32
We examined whether the eﬀects for mixed pairs depend on whether female is oldest but the estimates
are imprecise.

30

siblings in the degree of access to alcohol, marijuana, and other drugs may increase with
the age gap, thus increasing the impact of the older sibling even when the age of the older
sibling and the younger sibling are held constant. Furthermore, with a wider age gap,
the assumption that older siblings influence younger siblings, but not vice versa is more
likely to be true.33 The point estimates of λ21,2+ and λ22,2+ are positive in the models for
cigarette smoking, drinking, and marijuana use, but have large standard errors and are
never statistically significant (see Appendix Table 11). We simply do not have enough
data to draw strong conclusions about how the age gap between siblings influences the
sibling eﬀect.34

9.2

Family Process Interactions

The child psychology literature stresses the importance of family process variables for
child outcomes. It would be interesting to know how parenting styles and the nature of
the child’s relationship with his parents and with his sibling influences the size of the
peer eﬀect. The NLSY97 contains a rich set of measures, and we use several indices
that were constructed from them. The variable Youth-Parent Relationship is an index
that measures the supportiveness of the parent-child relationship on a scale of 0 to 32.
The index Parental Monitoring measures how much the parents know about their child’s
environment, friends, and school on a 0 to 16 scale. The Parenting Style index is defined to
be 1 if uninvolved, 2 if permissive, 3 if authoritarian, and 4 if authoritative. The variable
Sib Advice is 1 if the first person the youth turns to for advice is his or her “brother or
sister”(the question does not identify which sibling). The variable NoParent advice is 1
if the youth turns to someone other than the parents for advice.35 We incorporated the
This discussion mirrors the diﬀerent predictions of opportunity versus role model views of sibling
influence that we touched upon in the literature review.
34
Coeﬃcients on gender mix interactions and age gap interactions in the correlated random eﬀects
models are also imprecise (not reported).
35
The questions underlying the first index (youth-parent relationship) are administered in the first
three rounds of the survey to kids between 12 and 14 years old by 12/31/96. The second one (parental
monitoring) are administered in the first 4 rounds of the survey to kids between 12 and 14 years old by
12/31/96. The third one (parenting style) is administered in the first four rounds to all respondents of
the survey. Given the requirement for lagged values of the behavior of the older sibling, our sample for
the random eﬀects models start with the 1999 survey. Consequently, to increase sample size, we use the
average of the available responses for the younger sibling rather than the value corresponding to year
t. This reduces possibility of reverse causality from child’s choice of y to the family process variables.
The question Sib advice and NoParent advice are based on the response to the question ”If you had an
emotional problem or personal relationship problem, who would you first turn to for help?”. It is asked
of kids aged 12-14 as of December 31 1996, in years 1997, 1998, 1999, 2000, 2002, 2004. We use average
of the 2000 and 2002 responses as the value for 2001 and the average of 2002 and 2004 as the value for
33

31

additional variables one at a time into our CRE specification by adding the interaction
between the family process variable and the older sibling’s lagged behavior as well as with
the sum of the sibling’s lagged and lead behaviors. We also included the family variable
itself as a control variable.
1
The coeﬃcients on the interaction terms with yt−1
often have the sign that we ex-

pected, but they are usually not statistically significant (not reported).36 We lack suﬃcient power to detect small or modest interaction eﬀects. One might expect the sibling
eﬀect to be larger for adolescents who get advice from siblings. The marginal eﬀect for
1
Sib advice × yt−1
is .116 (.084) for smoking and .136 (.108) for drinking. However, the

estimate is -.030 (.064) for marijuana.
We also estimated CRE models with interactions between a dummy for whether the
1
1
1
child lives with both of their biological parents and yt−1
and yt−1
+ yt+1
. On the one hand,

one might speculate that adolescents living with their biological mother and father are
subject to more influence from parents and less influence from older siblings. Alternatively, the presence of both biological parents might strengthen the family in general,
making both parental influences and sibling influences more important relative to outside
influences, particularly peers. As it turns out, living with one’s biological mother and
1
father at age 12 boosts the eﬀect of yt−1
by .040 (.056) in the case of smoking, by .075

(.049) in the case of drinking, and by .021 (.045) for marijuana (table not reported).
The main eﬀects of several of the variables are significant. The point estimates indicate that smoking, drinking, and marijuana use are more likely for children who have
unsupportive parents, uninformed parents, and uninvolved parents. They are also much
more likely for children who receive advice from people other than their parents and who
do not live with both biological parents. However, all the estimates of the main eﬀects
should be taken with a grain of salt because of the possibility of reverse causality and
omitted variable bias.
2003.
36
In keeping with discussion in the literature, we expected negative eﬀects for parent relationship,
parental monitoring, parenting style and NoParent advice. We do not have a clear prior about the sign
of the main eﬀect of Sib Advice.

32

10

Conclusion

Parents frequently implore their older children to set a good example for younger brothers
and sisters. Social scientists, particularly psychologists, have long been interested in the
influences that siblings have on each other. Many studies, including ours, have found
strong sibling correlations in a variety of behaviors, including substance use, that are
robust to the inclusion of a rich set of controls. The diﬃcult question is whether these
correlations reflect causal influences or result from shared genes and environment. To
identify causal eﬀects, we use the fact that the future cannot cause the past and make
the key assumption that older siblings influence younger siblings, but not vice versa. Our
first empirical strategy is based upon a CRE model, in which we regress the younger
sibling’s behavior on the lagged behavior of the older sibling and the sum of the lagged
and future behaviors of the older sibling. As we point out, the CRE design is only valid
in the absence of state dependence and requires strong stationarity assumptions that are
unlikely to hold for behaviors that gradually emerge during adolescence. Furthermore,
the estimates do not provide much information about how the eﬀect of sibling behavior
plays out over time. Consequently, we also make use of a joint dynamic probit model and
a joint dynamic ordered probit model that allow for state dependence and nonstationarity.
Using a CRE design, we find that smoking, drinking, and, more tentatively, marijuana
use by the older sibling increases the probability that the younger sibling engages in these
behaviors. Our sibling influence estimates are too imprecise in the case of hard drugs and
selling drugs to draw strong conclusions, although the point estimates suggest a positive
eﬀect. Using the dynamic probit models, we find a positive and significant sibling eﬀect
for cigarettes, drinking, and marijuana use. We also find a positive eﬀect for hard drugs
and selling drugs, but the coeﬃcients are not statistically significant. For the most part,
the eﬀects are largest in the equation for the initial condition for the younger sibling.
Although we find large and significant eﬀects of past behavior on the latent variable that
determines substance use, the eﬀect on the younger sibling of a one-time shift in the
behavior of the older sibling dies out quickly.
There is a substantial research agenda. First, the analysis should be repeated with
additional data sets containing panel data on substance for large samples. These are
steep data requirements. Add Health, which has been used in a number of previous
studies of sibling links in risky behavior, is a natural possibility, but the time between
33

interviews makes it less than ideal. Second, other behaviors, including positive behaviors
such as volunteering and study time, could be examined. Third, one might model the
dynamic interrelationship among the use of the substances rather than consider them one
at a time, as we have done in this paper. Such a model would permit one to consider the
degree to which smoking, say, leads to marijuana use. The question of “gateway” drugs is
salient in policy discussions of drug law reform, but given limited information in the data
it would be hard to quantify the linkages without strong a priori information about which
linkages are most likely. Finally, one could also examine how family process determines
the strength and direction of the sibling eﬀect. We are pessimistic, however, that much
more can be done on this question with the NLSY97 because of power considerations.
A more structured approach in which the researcher constrains the way in which home
environment measures alter the strength of the sibling eﬀect on a multiple set of behaviors
is worth trying.

34

References
Akerlof, G. (1997). Social distance and social decisions. Econometrica 65 (5), 1005 –
1027.
Amuedo-Derantes, C. and T. Mach (2002). Impact of families on juvenile substance
abuse. Journal of Bioeconomics 4, 269 – 281.
Barnes, G. (1990). Impact of the family on adolescent drinking patterns. In R. L. Collins,
K. E. Leonard, and J. S. Searles (Eds.), Alcohol and the family: research and clinical
perspectives. Guilford Press.
Berndt, T. (1992). Friendship and friends’ influence in adolescence. Current Directions
in Psychological Science 1 (5), 158 – 159.
Bernheim, B. D. (1994). A theory of conformity. Journal of Political Economy 102 (5),
841 – 877.
Bikchandani, S., D. Hirshleifer, and I. Welch (1992). A theory of fads, fashion, custom,
and cultural change as informational cascades. Journal of Political Economy 100 (5),
992 – 997; 1010 – 1014.
Bricker, J., A. Peterson, B. Leroux, M. Andersen, K. Rajan, and I. Sarason (2005).
Prospective prediction of children’s smoking transitions: role of parents’ and older
siblings’ smoking. Addiction 101 (1), 128 – 136.
Buhrmester, D. (1992). The developmental courses of sibling and peer relationships.
In F. Boer and J. Dunn (Eds.), Children’s Sibling Relationships: Developmental and
Clinical Issues. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Chamberlain, G. (1984). Panel data. In Griliches and Intrilogator (Eds.), Handbook of
Econometrics, Volume 2. Amsterdam, Holland: Elsevier.
Conger, R. and M. Reuter (1996). Siblings, parents, and peers: a longitudinal study of
social influences in adolescent risk for alcohol use and abuse. In G. Brody (Ed.), Sibling
relationships: their causes and consequences. Normood, NJ: Ablex.

35

Duncan, G., J. Boisjoly, and K. Harris (2001). Sibling, peer, neighbor, and schoolmate
correlations as indicators of the importance of context for adolescent development.
Demography 38, 437 – 447.
Duncan, G., J. Boisjoly, M. Kramer, D. Levy, and J. Eccles (2005). Peer eﬀects in drug
use and sex among college students. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology 33 (3), 375
– 385.
Furman, W. and D. Buhrmester (1992). Age and sex diﬀerences in perceptions of networks
of personal relationships. Child Development 63 (1), 103.
Grossman, M., R. Kaestner, and S. Markowitz (2004). Get high and get stupid: the eﬀect
of alcohol and marijuana use on teen sexual. Review of Economics of Household 2 (4),
413 – 441.
Gruber, J. and J. Zinman (2001). Youth smoking in the United States. In J. Gruber
(Ed.), Risky Behavior Among Youths. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Harris, J. (1998). The Nurture Assumption. New York: Touchstone.
Harris, J. and B. Lopez-Valcarel (2008). Asymmetric peer eﬀects in the analysis of
cigarette smoking among young people in the United States, 1992-1999. Journal of
Health Economics 27, 249 – 264.
Jessor, R. and S. Jessor (1977). Problem behavior and psychosocial development: a longitudinal study of youth. New York: Academic Press.
Kandel, B. (1980). Drug and drinking behavior among youth. Annual Review of Sociology 6, 235 – 285.
Levitt, S. and L. Lochner (2001). The determinants of juvenile crime. In J. Gruber (Ed.),
Risky Behavior Among Youths. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Marmaros, D. and B. Sacerdote (2002). Peer eﬀects in occupational choice for Dartmouth
students. European Economic Review 46.
Mundlak, Y. (1978). On the pooling of time series and cross section data. Econometrica 46, 69 – 85.

36

Oettinger, G. (2000). Sibling similarity in high school graduation outcomes: causal
interdependency or unobserved heterogeneity? Southern Economic Journal 66 (3), 631
– 648.
Otten, R., R. Engels, M. van de Ven, and J. Bricker (2007). Parental smoking and
adolescent smoking stages: the role of parents current and former smoking, and family
structure. Journal of Behavioral Medicine 30 (2), 143 – 154.
Ouyang, L. (2004). Sibling eﬀects on teen risky behaviors. Unpublished paper, Department of Economics, Duke University.
Pacula, R., M. Grossman, and F. Chaloupka (2001). Marijuana and youth. In J. Gruber
(Ed.), Risky Behavior Among Youths. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Patterson, G. (1984). Siblings: fellow travelers in coercive family process. In R. Blanchard
and D. Blanchard (Eds.), Advances in the Study of Aggression, Vol. I. Orlando, Fla.:
Academic Press.
Rodgers, J. and D. Rowe (1988). Influence of siblings on adolescent sexual behavior.
Developmental Psychology 24 (5), 722 – 728.
Rowe, D. and B. Gulley (1992). Sibling eﬀects on substance use and deliquency. Criminology 30, 217 – 233.
Sacerdote, B. (2001). Peer eﬀects with random assignment: results for Dartmouth roommates. Quarterly Journal of Economics 166.
Slomkowski, C., R. Rende, K. Conger, J. Simons, and R. Conger (2001). Sisters, brothers,
and delinquency: evaluating social influence during early and middle adolescence. Child
Development 72 (1), 271 – 283.
Slomkowski, C., R. Rende, S. Novak, E. Lloyd-Richardson, and R. Niaura (2005). Sibling
eﬀects on smoking in adolescence: evidence for social influence from a genetically
informative design. Addiction 100, 430 – 438.
Steinberg, L. and S. Silverberg (1986). The vicissitudes of autonomy in early adolescence.
Child Development 57 (4), 841– 846.

37

Stinebrickner, R. and T. Stinebrickner (2006). What can be learned about peer eﬀects
using college roommates? Evidence from new survey data and students from disadvantaged backgrounds. Journal of Public Economics 90 (8-9), 1435 – 1454.
Widmer, E. (1997). Influence of older siblings on initiation of sexual intercourse. Journal
of Marriage and the Family 59 (4), 928 – 938.
Windle, M. (2000). Parental, sibling, and peer influences on adolescent substance use
and alcohol problems. Applied Developmental Science 4 (2), 98 – 110.

38

Data Appendix
The paper uses data from the first eight rounds of the NLSY97. In the following paragraphs, we explain how we constructed the variables used in the analysis and list the
question names and reference numbers (in parentheses) of the NLSY97 variables we used
to construct our dataset.

Sibling pairs
The NLSY original cohort includes 1,892 households with more than one NLSY97 respondent. In order to link respondents to their siblings, we used the variables:
YOUTH SIBID01.01 (R1308300), YOUTH SIBID02.01 (R1308400), YOUTH SIBID03.01
(R1308500), YOUTH SIBID04.01 (R1308600). For each respondent, these variables return the identification number of up to four other respondents from the same household.
Then, we used the variable HHI2 RELY.01 (R1309100, R1309200, R1309300, R1309400),
which characterizes the type of relationship between these respondents. For siblings, the
NLSY97 distinguishes between full (biological), half, step, foster, and adoptive siblings.
The analysis presented in the paper is conducted on a sample of full siblings only. In
preliminary work, we estimated many of the models using pairs of full, half, and step siblings, and obtained results similar to those reported in the paper. Finally, as mentioned
in the paper, in households supplying more than one sibling pair, we only included pairs
with adjacent birth order. To select these pairs, we used the variable CV AGE 12/31/96,
which gives the age of each respondent as of December 31, 1996.

Control Variables
Our set of controls includes several individual, familial and environmental characteristics.
Below, we describe each of them and list the raw variables we used to construct them.
- Age is computed using the variable named CV AGE 12/31/96 (R1194000), which
measures the respondent’s age as of December 31st 1996
- A male dummy, which equals 1 if the respondent is a male, was created using the variable KEY !SEX(R0536300).
- Two separate dummy variables for race were created for the categories of black and
Hispanic, using the variable KEY !RACE ET HN ICIT Y (R1482600). Each category is
mutually exclusive, and white is the reference group.
39

- Education is measured as the respondent’s highest grade completed by age 19, and
the grade is normalized by subtracting 12 from it. This variable is constructed by combining the age of the respondent and the yearly variables returning the respondent’s
highest grade completed by each survey round CV HGC EV ER (R1204400, R2563100,
R3884700, R5463900, R7227600, S1541500, S2011300, S3812200).
- Mother’s education is measured as the biological mother’s highest grade completed, as
reported by the respondent in 1997. Her grade is also normalized by subtracting 12 from
it. This variable was constructed from the variable CV HGC BIO M OM (R1302500).
- AFQT score is measured in percentile and standardized by the age of the respondent at the time of the test. From the summer of 1997 through the spring of 1998,
most NLSY97 round 1 respondents took the computer-adaptive form of the Armed Services Vocational Aptitude Battery (CAT-ASVAB). The results of the diﬀerent math
and verbal tests were combined and weighted by the NLS Program staﬀ to produce the
percentile score recorded under the variable ASV AB M AT H V ERBAL SCORE P CT
(R9829600), which is similar to the AFQT score. This variable assumes three decimal
places, so we constructed our variable by simply dividing the score by 1000.
- Family structure is measured by a dummy for whether the individual lived with both
biological parents at age 12. In 1997, the question CV Y T H REL HH AGE 12 (
R1205000) asks respondents about their relationship to the parent figure or guardian
in the household at age 12. If the individual replied that the parent figure was both the
biological mother and the biological father, we set our dummy variable to 1, otherwise to
0.
- We created three binary variables, describing aspects of the individuals’ environment
up to age 12. We build these directly from three NLSY questions about particularly
violent or traumatizing childhood experiences. The first one is the variable Y SAQ − 517
(R0443900), which records whether the respondent ever had her house or apartment
broken into before turning 12 years old. The second one is the variable Y SAQ − 519
(R0444100), which records whether the respondent ever saw anyone get shot or shot at
with a gun before turning 12. The third one is the variable Y SAQ − 518 (R0444000),
which records whether the respondent was ever the victim of repeated bullying before
turning 12. Since the bullying measure reflects a possibly traumatic childhood experience, it may be thought of as measuring, albeit very imperfectly, some aspect of the

40

individual’s mental state and social adjustment.
- We created birth order dummies and a variable measuring the number of full siblings who
live in the household, using the household roster data. In particular, we used the variable
”YOUTH ID.01” (R0533400), which gives the respondent’s ID number in the household
roster, and the variables describing the relationship between household members and the
variables returning the ages of the other household members. These variables have names
of the form ”HHI2 RELX.0Y”, where X is the respondent’s roster ID and Y is the ID of
the other household respondents, and ”HHI2 AGE.0Y” where Y is the ID of the other
household respondents.
Substance Use Measures
In most of our analysis, the main dependent variable is a dummy indicating whether the
respondent reports having engaged at least once in a particular behavior since the last
interview date. For example, for smoking, the variable takes the value 1 if the respondent
reports having smoked since the last interview, and 0 otherwise. For each behavior, we
construct this variable from two NLSY variables. The first and most important one is a
dummy variable indicating whether the respondent has engaged in this type of behavior
since the last date of interview. When it is available (i.e. for the first survey rounds in
general), we use a second dummy variable, which indicates whether the respondent has
ever engaged in this type of behavior. This second variable allows checking the consistency of some of the answers in the first question, as well as filling in some of the missing
observations. These questions were not asked in every year, and we report below the
exact name, reference numbers (in parentheses), and years of the variables we used.

Smoking, Drinking, Marijuana, and Selling drugs
For smoking, drinking, marijuana smoking, and selling drugs, the first question (about
the respondent’s activity last year) was not asked in the first survey round (1997). As a
result, we only use data starting in 1998, when respondents are aged 14 through 18. The
NLSY variables used to form the dependent variables are:
-Smoking: Y SAQ359 (R2189400, R3508500, R4906600, R6534100, S0921600, S2988300,
S4682900) for 1998 through 2004, and Y SAQ360C (R0357900, R2189100, R3508200,
R4906400) for 1997 through 2000.

41

- Drinking: Y SAQ364D (R2190200, R3509300, R4907400, R6534700, S0922200, S2988900,
S4683700) from 1998 through 2004, and Y SAQ363 (R0358300, R2189900, R3509000,
R4907100) from 1997 through 2000.
- Marijuana: Y SAQ370C (R2191200, R3510300, R4908400, R6535600, R6535600, S0923200,
S2989700) from 1998 through 2004, and Y SAQ369 (R0358900, R2190900, R3510000,
R4908100) from 1997 through 2000.
- Selling or helping to sell drugs: Y SAQ394B (R2196400, R3516000, R4914000, R6540500,
S0928000, S2994000) for 1998 through 2004, and Y SAQ430 (R0365000, R2199300, R3518900,
R4916900, R6543400, S0930900) for 1997 through 20002.

Cocaine and other hard drugs use
The NLSY97 asked respondents about cocaine and other hard drugs use starting in the
second survey round (1998). In 1998, the survey asked whether the respondent had ever
used these types of drugs, and it is only in 1999 that it started asking whether the respondent had used hard drugs since the last interview. As a result, we restricted our analysis
to the last six rounds (1999 to 2004) for this behavior, starting when respondents are between 15 and 19. We used the following variables: Y SAQ372CC (R3511100, R4909200,
R6536400, S0924000, S2990300, S4685500) for 1999 through 2004, and Y SAQ372B
(R2191500, R3510800, R4908900, R6536100, S0923700) for 1998 through 2002.

Finally, to estimate the dynamic ordered probit models, we created indicators of
zero, low, and high consumption of cigarettes, alcohol, and marijuana. These indicators were constructed using NLSY97 questions about how many days the respondent
engaged in the behavior in the previous month. Respectively, these refer to the NLSY97
questions Y SAQ361 (R035810, R2189500, R3508600, R4906700, R6534200, S0921700,
S2988400, S4683000) for smoking cigarettes, Y SAQ365 (R0358500, R2190300, R3509400,
R4907500, R6534800, S0922300, S2989000, S4683800) for drinking alcohol, and Y SAQ371
(R0359100, R2191300, R3510400, R4908500, R6535700, S0923300, S2989800, S4684800)
for smoking marijuana. Note that all of these questions were asked to all respondents
from 1997 through 2004. However, since the rest of the analysis is conducted on data
from 1998 onwards, we did not use the first round of the survey when using these variables.

42

Family processes and parenting variables
In several rounds of the survey, the NLSY asks respondents about their relationship to
their residential and non-residential parents. Based on these questions, Child Trends,
Inc. created a number of scales that measure diﬀerent aspects of this relationship. In
the paper, we used three of these scales for both residential mother and residential father. The first one is an index from 0 to 32, measuring how supportive the youth reports
her parents to be (a high score indicates a more supportive relationship). The second
one is an index from 0 to 16, measuring the youth’s perception of her parents’ degree
of monitoring (a high score indicates greater monitoring). Results for this index were
very noisy and are not discussed in the paper. The third index is a four-category variable describing the youth’s perception of her parents’ parenting style; this variable equals
1 if the parents are uninvolved, 2 if permissive, 3 if authoritarian, and 4 if authoritative. The corresponding NLSY variables are: F P Y M SU P P (R1485200, R2600700,
R3924100) and F P Y F SU P P (R1485300, R2600800, R3924200) for the first index,
F P Y M M ON IT (R1485700, R2601000, R3924400, R5510900) and F P Y F M ON IT
(R1485800, R2601100, R3924500, R5511000) for the second index, and F P Y M P ST Y L
(R1486500, R2601400, R3924800, R5511100) and F P Y F P ST Y L (R1486600, R2601500,
R392490, R5511200) for the third index. Note that questions used to create the first and
second indexes were only asked to respondents aged 12 to 14 as of December 31, 1996,
while questions underlying the third index were asked to the entire cohort. These NLSY
variables are available for 1997 through 1999 for the first index, and for 1997 through 2000
for the other two. In our analysis, the variable we use is the index mean over the years
with available data. If the respondent’s answers were missing for one residential parent,
we used the mean for the residential parent that had non-missing values. If the respondent had a non-missing value for both residential parents, we averaged the answers across
the parents and used that value in our regressions.

Finally, we constructed a dummy

that equals 1 if the first person the youth turns to for advice is his or her ”brother or
sister” and another dummy that equals 1 if the youth turns to someone other than the
parents for advice. To build these variables, we used a variable reporting who the youth
turns to for help if he or she has an emotional problem or personal relationship problem. This variable is named YSAQ-351A(R0357300, R2176000, R3493900, R4892300,
S0919200, S4681600).

43

Treatment of Missing Data
With the exception of the black, Hispanic, and male dummies, the other variables used in
the analysis contain a small number of missing values. We dropped the few observations
for which we were missing household roster data and were not able to determine the
number of siblings and birth order.

In the case of highest grade completed, AFQT,

mother’s education, family structure, and the three childhood environment dummies, we
imputed missing values using predicted values from a regression of the variables on all
other six variables. For the substance use measures of the younger sibling and older
sibling, we dropped cases involving missing values for current values, leads, or lags of y 2
or y 1 that appear in a particular model as well as cases for subsequent years even if the
necessary data are available. For example, if an individual has non-missing answers from
1998 to 2000, a missing one in 2001, and a non-missing one in 2002, we only included
his answers for 1998 through 2000. We made this choice because we wanted to estimate
each of the equations of the dynamic model in section 7 on a sample that is fairly stable
across the years. We estimated both the correlated random eﬀect models on the same
sample as the one for the joint dynamic model, so the same observation selection rules
apply.

44

TABLE 1
Sample Means for Substance Use Behaviors
Smoking
Cigarettes

Full sample
Males
Females

Full sample
Males
Females

Full Sample
Males
Females

1-4 days last month
5-7 days last month
8 + days last month

Drinking
Alcohol

Smoking
Marijuana

Using
Hard Drugs

Selling
Drugs

Panel A: Probability of engaging in behavior last year
0.402
0.603
0.229
0.062
0.058
(0.004)
(0.004)
(0.003)
(0.002)
(0.002)
0.424
0.619
0.261
0.067
0.081
(0.005)
(0.005)
(0.005)
(0.003)
(0.003)
0.380
0.586
0.197
0.057
0.034
(0.005)
(0.005)
(0.004)
(0.003)
(0.002)
Panel B: Probability of engaging in behavior between age 15 and 20
0.573
0.795
0.441
0.147
0.162
(0.009)
(0.007)
(0.009)
(0.006)
(0.006)
0.602
0.810
0.481
0.159
0.219
(0.012)
(0.009)
(0.012)
(0.009)
(0.010)
0.542
0.779
0.399
0.134
0.100
(0.013)
(0.010)
(0.012)
(0.009)
(0.008)
Panel C: Number of days engaged in behavior in the last month
6.73
3.00
1.87
(0.091)
(0.059)
(0.069)
7.08
3.66
2.48
(0.092)
(0.067)
(0.080)
6.37
2.32
1.24
(0.090)
(0.048)
(0.054)
Panel D: Distribution of sample in each consumption category (last month)
0.067
0.269
0.075
(0.002)
(0.003)
(0.002)
0.022
0.091
0.016
(0.001)
(0.003)
(0.001)
0.245
0.130
0.074
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.002)

Note: Standard errors of the sample means in parentheses. Sample sizes in Panels A, C, and D vary from 16379 to 16456
for full sample, from 8320 to 8339 for males, and from 8057 to 8062 for females. Sample sizes in Panel B vary from 3172
to 3313 for full panel, 1647 to 1720 for males, and from 1525 to 1593 for females.

TABLE 2
Estimates of the Coefficient on the Older Sibling's Behavior in a
Linear Probability Model of Younger Sibling's Behavior at the Same Age
Smoking

Drinking

Smoking

Using

Selling

Cigarettes

Alcohol

Marijuana

Hard Drugs

Hard Drugs

Panel A: All siblings
No controls
Full set of controls

0.239***

0.259***

0.162***

0.102***

0.057***

(0.012)

(0.012)

(0.012)

(0.013)

(0.012)

0.185***

0.172***

0.139***

0.085***

0.041***

(0.012)

(0.012)

(0.012)

(0.013)

(0.012)

Panel B: Brothers
No controls
Full set of controls

0.238***

0.243***

0.151***

0.081*

0.083***

(0.033)

(0.033)

(0.032)

(0.042)

(0.031)

0.192***

0.172***

0.129***

0.051

0.059**

(0.032)

(0.035)

(0.031)

(0.037)

(0.028)

Panel C: Sisters
No controls
Full set of controls

0.339***

0.332***

0.240***

0.244***

0.014

(0.039)

(0.032)

(0.035)

(0.079)

(0.028)

0.229***

0.205***

0.191***

0.189***

-0.002

(0.039)

(0.034)

(0.033)

(0.071)

(0.026)

Note: Standard errors clustered at the household level in parentheses. * denotes significant at 10% level, ** at 5%
level, and *** at 1% level. Sample sizes vary from 6504 to 6551 for full sample, 1705 to 1723 for brothers, 1629
to 1637 for sisters. The controls consist of male (Panel A only), black and hispanic dummies, younger sibling's age
dummies, highest grade completed by age 19, mother's highest grade completed, AFQT percentile score, number of
siblings, birth order dummies, whether the respondent reported that her house had been broken in by age 12,
whether she reported that she had been a victim of bullying by age 12, whether she reported having witnessed a
shooting by age 12, and whether she lived with both biological parents at age 12.

TABLE 3
Marginal Effects of the Older Sibling's Behavior on the Younger Sibling's Behavior
(Correlated Random Effects Model)

Smoking

Younger Sibling's Behavior
Drinking
Smoking
Using

Cigarettes

Alcohol

Older Sibling's Behavior:

Marijuana

Selling

Hard Drugs Hard Drugs

Model 1
0.063**

0.060**

0.011

0.015

0.009

(0.027)

(0.025)

(0.022)

(0.020)

(0.019)

0.086***

0.116***

0.087***

0.032**

0.016

(0.018)

(0.018)

(0.015)

(0.015)

(0.013)

Model 2
0.092***

0.023

0.035

0.025

0.043**

(0.027)

(0.025)

(0.022)

(0.018)

(0.018)

0.025

0.080***

0.040***

0.016

-0.013

(0.016)

(0.016)

(0.013)

(0.013)

(0.013)

Model 3
0.093***

0.044**

0.054***

0.025*

0.015

(0.024)

(0.021)

(0.018)

(0.015)

(0.015)

0.023*

0.071***

0.031***

0.013

0.002

(0.014)

(0.014)

(0.011)

(0.011)

(0.011)

Note: Marginal effects are based on probit estimates. Standard errors clustered at the household level in
parentheses.* denotes significant at 10% level, ** at 5% level, and *** at 1% level. Sample sizes vary between
6132 and 6596 for Model 1, 2435 and 3776 for Model 2, and 3721 and 5108 for Model 3. All models include the set
of controls listed in the footnote to Table 2, as well as older sibling's age dummies.

TABLE 4A
Estimates of Dynamic Probit Model (Error A)
Smoking

Drinking

Smoking

Using

Selling

Cigarettes

Alcohol

Marijuana

Hard Drugs

Drugs

0.899***

0.632***

0.680***

0.564***

0.570***

(0.064)

(0.057)

(0.063)

(0.138)

(0.136)

0.947***

0.666***

0.734***

0.754***

0.502***

(0.068)

(0.056)

(0.065)

(0.144)

(0.131)

0.215**

0.411***

0.312***

0.379

0.128

(0.101)

(0.086)

(0.107)

(0.288)

(0.220)

0.049

0.006

-0.053

0.071

0.006

(0.069)

0.057

0.067

0.218

0.177

0.771***

0.629***

0.640***

0.535***

0.472***

(0.052)

(0.034)

(0.043)

(0.093)

(0.089)

1.055***

0.609***

0.690***

0.758***

0.742***

(0.082)

(0.064)

(0.069)

(0.135)

(0.107)

0.815***

0.610***

0.693***

0.848***

0.750***

(0.082)

(0.064)

(0.069)

(0.149)

(0.118)

-7248.88

-8094.33

-6691.13

-2503.31

-2955.64

State dependence
Old sibling
Young sibling

Sibling's influence

Standard deviation of
error term specific to:
Family
Older sibling
Younger sibling

Log likelihood value

Notes: The table reports probit model parameters rather than marginal effects. Standard errors in parentheseses.
* denotes significant at 10% level, ** at 5% level, and *** at 1% level. Sample sizes vary from 1173 to 1586 for the
older siblings' models and from 1079 to 1658 for the younger siblings' models. All models include the set of controls
listed in the footnote to Table 2, as well as older sibling's age dummies.

TABLES 4B
Estimates of Dynamic Probit Model (Error B)
Smoking

Drinking

Smoking

Doing

Selling

Cigarettes

Alcohol

Marijuana

Hard Drugs

Drugs

0.824***

0.632***

0.622***

0.524***

0.536***

(0.069)

(0.058)

(0.068)

(0.144)

(0.142)

0.912***

0.611***

0.709***

0.767***

0.461***

(0.073)

(0.059)

(0.068)

(0.154)

(0.140)

0.008

0.278**

0.264*

0.362

0.229

(0.173)

(0.124)

(0.138)

(0.394)

(0.226)

0.116

0.039

-0.036

0.032

0.030

(0.076)

(0.062)

(0.074)

(0.223)

(0.182)

0.862***

0.754***

0.547***

0.364

0.345

(0.126)

(0.105)

(0.101)

(0.238)

(0.257)

1.111***

0.918***

1.289***

1.266*

0.777*

(0.183)

(0.152)

(0.243)

(0.728)

(0.440)

1.003***

0.840***

1.239***

2.099

1.243

(0.264)

(0.195)

(0.337)

(1.513)

(1.952)

0.728***

0.755***

1.166***

2.020

2.181

(0.162)

(0.153)

(0.325)

(2.089)

(2.754)

0.747***

0.451***

0.558***

0.696***

0.733***

(0.071)

(0.067)

(0.078)

(0.178)

(0.144)

1.485***

1.191***

1.381***

1.273***

1.207***

(0.184)

(0.298)

(0.276)

(0.378)

(0.272)

1.349***

1.756***

1.355***

0.954

0.798

(0.160)

(0.276)

(0.248)

(0.692)

(0.903)

-7241.23

-8088.18

-6686.51

-2502.85

-2954.12

State dependence
Older sibling
Younger sibling

Sibling's Influence

Family-specific error term
Standard deviation
Factor loadings:
Older sibling
Younger sibling
Younger sibling

Individual- specific error term
Standard deviation
Factor loadings
Older sibling
Younger sibling

Log likelihood value
Note: See Table 4A.

TABLE 5
Estimates of Joint Dynamic Ordered Probit Model (Error A)

State dependence
Older sibling

Low consumption
High consumption

Younger sibling

Low consumption
High consumption

Sibling's influence
t min

Low consumption
High consumption

!
t > t min

Low consumption
High consumption

!

Standard deviation of error term
specific to:
Family
Older sibling
Younger sibling
Low consumption threshold
High consumption threshold
Log likelihood value

Smoking
Cigarettes

Drinking
Alcohol

Smoking
Marijuana

0.328***
(0.080)
0.797***
(0.066)
0.587***
(0.077)
1.023***
(0.071)

0.341***
(0.044)
0.602***
(0.065)
0.541***
(0.045)
0.848***
(0.068)

0.321***
(0.082)
0.700***
(0.079)
0.611***
(0.080)
1.035***
(0.087)

0.103
(0.183)
0.462***
(0.121)
0.060
(0.089)
0.085
(0.077)

0.081
(0.080)
0.217*
(0.131)
-0.020
(0.044)
-0.147**
(0.065)

0.340*
(0.177)
0.218
(0.170)
0.073
(0.089)
-0.009
(0.095)

0.796***
(0.058)
1.308***
(0.079)
0.888***
(0.077)
-0.069
(0.697)
0.520
(0.698)
-9180.28

0.553***
(0.027)
0.521***
(0.043)
0.464***
(0.046)
-0.824
(0.537)
0.799
(0.538)
-12850.29

0.652***
(0.052)
0.864***
(0.073)
0.600***
(0.081)
0.851
(0.994)
1.470
(0.994)
-7126.49

Note: Standard errors in parentheses. * denotes significant at 10% level, ** at 5% level, and *** at 1% level. Sample sizes
vary from 1165 to 1555 for the older siblings' models and from 1054 to 1639 for the younger sibling's models. All models
include the set of controls listed in the footnote to Table 2, as well as older sibling's age dummies.

Effect of Shifting the Older Sibling's Probability of Behavior from 0 to 1 on the
Older and Younger Sibling Probabilities of Behavior, Relative to Baseline (Error A)

Fig. 1a - Smoking cigarettes

Fig. 1b - Drinking alcohol

0.5

Fig. 1c - Smoking marijuana

0.6

0.3

0.55
0.45
0.25
0.25

0.2

0.2

0.15
0.15

0.1
0.1
0.05
0.05

0.05

0

0

0
1

2

3

4

5

6

1

2

3

4

5

6

1

2

3

4

5

6

Note: The solid line and the broken line represent the effects on the probabilities of behavior, relative to baseline, of the older sibling and of the younger sibling, respectively. Error bars show the 90% confidence intervals. The xaxis measures the number of periods after the exogenous change in the older sibling's behavior. Baseline probabilities for smoking in the first and last period displayed on the graphs are, respectively: 0.4188 (0.0433) and 0.4346
(0.0592) for the older sibling and 0.3322 (0.0795) and 0.3796 (0.0926) for the younger sibling. For drinking, they are 0.5573 (0.0527) and 0.6926 (0.0428) for the older sibling and 0.4664 (0.0803) and 0.5754 (0.0829) for the
younger sibling. For smoking marijuana, they are 0.2511 (0.0609) and 0.2889 (0.0489) for the older sibling and 0.2291 (0.0682) and 0.3088 (0.0883) for the younger sibling.

Effect of Shifting the Older Sibling's Consumption of Substance from Zero to High Level
on the Older and Younger's Probabillities of Consumption, Relative to Baseline (Error A)
Low consumption of cigarettes

High consumption of cigarettes
0.5

0.22

0.45
0.2

0.4
0.35

0.18

0.3
0.16

0.25

0.14
0.1
0.05
0.01
0

0
1

2

3

4

5

1

6

Low consumption of alcohol

2

3

4

5

6

5

6

High consumption of alcohol
0.7

0.22
0.2

0.6

0.18

0.3

0.08
0.06

0.2

0.04
0.1

0.02

0

0
1

2

3

4

5

1

6

Low consumption of marijuana

2

3

4

High consumption of marijuana
0.6

0.26

0.55

0.22

0.5
0.45
0.12
0.2
0.15

0.8

0.1
0.04
0.05
0

0
1

2

3

4

5

6

1

2

3

4

5

6

Note: The solid line and the dashed line represent the effect for the older siblings and the younger siblings, respectively. Error bars show the 90% confidence intervals. The xaxis measures the number of periods after the exogenous change in the older sibling's behavior. Baseline probabilities for being in the low smoking category in the first and last
period displayed on the graphs for the older and younger siblings, respectively are: 0.0835 (0.0147), 0.084 (0.0105), 0.0946 (0.0258), and 0.088 (0.0147). For being in the high
smoking category, they are: 0.2677 (0.1056), 0.3075 (0.1135), 0.2175 (0.1034), and 0.2932 (0.1183). For being in the low drinking category, they are: 0.3127 (0.0791), 0.3684
(0.0400), 0.2758 (0.0996), and 0.3639 (0.0493). For being in the high drinking category, they are: 0.1467 (0.0935), 0.2754 (0.1076), 0.0816 (0.0996), and 0.2499 (0.1031). For
being in the low marijuana category, they are: 0.0773 (0.0390), 0.0814 (0.0324), 0.0755 (0.0428), and 0.0826 (0.0290). For being in the high marijuana category, they are:
0.1652 (0.1448), 0.1863 (0.1318), 0.1382 (0.1323), and 0.1707 (0.1328).

APPENDIX TABLE 1
Age Distribution by Birth Order
Age

Younger sibling

Older siblings

15

36.45

16

31.71

6.56

17

23.88

21.63

18

7.59

34.39

19

0.36

34.87

20

1.94

21

0.61

Note: This distribution refers to the age distribution of the
younger and older siblings in the year used as the initial
condition for the younger siblings' dynamic smoking probit
model.

APPENDIX TABLE 2
Summary Statistics of Sample Characteristics
Variable

Weighted sample

Male

Unweighted sample
0.509

Black

0.240

0.135

Hispanic

0.232

0.140

Lived with biological parents at 12

0.519

0.575

House broken in by age 12

0.158

0.147

Witness of gun shooting by age 12

0.102

0.080

Victim of bullying by age 12

0.179

0.179

Highest grade completed by 19

11.837

11.970

(1.173)

(1.095)

44.402

50.930

(28.515)

(28.211)

12.243

12.784

(2.933)

(2.733)

2.116

1.992

(1.290)

(1.225)

16.037

15.983

(0.969)

(0.952)

18.058

18.048

(0.978)

(0.977)

2.021

2.065

(0.877)

(0.879)

AFQT percentile score
Mother's highest grade completed
Number of (full) siblings
Age of younger sibling
Age of older sibling
Age gap

0.512

Note: Based on the sample used for estimation of the dynamic smoking model (N=16456). Weighted
statistics are computed using a set of cross-sectional weights for the survey round in which the
respondent is 19 years old. Ages of the younger and older siblings refer to the age in the first year
the behavior of younger siblings is observed.

APPENDIX TABLE 3
Means of Risky Behaviors in Weighted Sample

Smoking cigarettes last year
Drinking alcohol last year
Smoking marijuana last year
Using hard drugs last year
Selling drugs last year
Days smoked cigarettes last month
Days drank last month
Days smoked marijuana last month

Full

Male

Female

Sample

Sample

Sample

0.438

0.443

0.434

(0.004)

(0.005)

(0.006)

0.652

0.654

0.650

(0.004)

(0.005)

(0.005)

0.248

0.270

0.226

(0.003)

(0.005)

(0.005)

0.071

0.071

0.070

(0.002)

(0.003)

(0.003)

0.062

0.082

0.041

(0.002)

(0.003)

(0.002)

7.726

7.759

7.692

(0.096)

(0.135)

(0.138)

3.374

3.999

2.716

(0.044)

(0.069)

(0.051)

2.003

2.542

1.434

(0.049)

(0.079)

(0.057)

Note: Standard errors of sample means in parentheses. Means are computed using a set of crosssectional weights for each survey round in which the data are available. Sample sizes vary from 16379
to 16456 for full sample, from 8320 to 8339 for males, and from 8057 to 8062 for females.

APPENDIX TABLE 4
Risky Behaviors by Age

Age
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23

Smoking
cigarettes
last year

Drinking
alcohol
last year

Smoking
marijuana
last year

Using
hard drugs
last year

Selling
drugs
last year

Days smoked
cigarettes
last month

Days drank
alcohol
last month

Days smoked
marijuana
last month

0.300

0.405

0.164

0.059

0.061

3.033

1.154

0.792

(0.458)

(0.491)

(0.370)

(0.237)

(0.239)

(0.109)

(0.042)

(0.051)

0.337

0.450

0.216

0.059

0.066

4.342

1.416

1.211

(0.473)

(0.498)

(0.412)

(0.236)

(0.249)

(0.088)

(0.031)

(0.043)

0.362

0.523

0.243

0.067

0.078

5.533

1.808

1.725

(0.481)

(0.499)

(0.429)

(0.249)

(0.268)

(0.079)

(0.029)

(0.043)

0.416

0.579

0.244

0.073

0.067

6.678

2.684

1.805

(0.493)

(0.494)

(0.429)

(0.260)

(0.249)

(0.077)

(0.034)

(0.039)

0.423

0.627

0.248

0.060

0.061

7.120

3.145

2.167

(0.494)

(0.484)

(0.432)

(0.238)

(0.240)

(0.081)

(0.037)

(0.045)

0.417

0.653

0.239

0.065

0.049

7.770

3.434

2.266

(0.493)

(0.476)

(0.427)

(0.246)

(0.215)

(0.086)

(0.040)

(0.048)

0.438

0.721

0.229

0.052

0.046

8.112

4.629

2.226

(0.496)

(0.449)

(0.420)

(0.222)

(0.209)

(0.100)

(0.052)

(0.054)

0.440

0.729

0.182

0.051

0.027

8.224

4.559

1.782

(0.496)

(0.444)

(0.386)

(0.220)

(0.161)

(0.127)

(0.064)

(0.063)

0.450

0.724

0.174

0.055

0.028

9.059

5.012

1.651

(0.498)

(0.447)

(0.380)

(0.227)

(0.166)

(0.206)

(0.115)

(0.092)

Note: Standard errors of sample means in parentheses. Based on the sample used for the estimation of the dynamic smoking model (N=16456).

APPENDIX TABLE 5
Estimated Marginal Effect of Control Variables in the CRE Model

Male
Black
Hispanic
Highest grade completed by 19
AFQT percentile score
Mother's highest grade completed
Lived with biological parents at 12
Number of (full) siblings
2nd born
3rd born
House broken in by 12
Witness of gun shooting by 12
Victim of bullying by 12

Smoking

Drinking

Smoking

Using

Selling

Cigarettes

Alcohol

Marijuana

Hard Drugs

Hard Drugs

0.028

-0.010

0.039**

0.004

0.033***

(0.022)

(0.020)

(0.016)

(0.008)

(0.008)

-0.214***

-0.175***

-0.065***

-0.043***

-0.031***

(0.026)

(0.028)

(0.021)

(0.009)

(0.009)

-0.149***

-0.019

-0.017

-0.008

-0.008

(0.027)

(0.028)

(0.022)

(0.011)

(0.010)

-0.079***

-0.022**

-0.038***

-0.011***

-0.015***

(0.011)

(0.010)

(0.007)

(0.004)

(0.003)

0.0002

0.002***

0.001***

0.000

0.000

(0.001)

(0.000)

(0.000)

(0.000)

(0.000)

0.002

0.005

0.001

0.004**

-0.001

(0.005)

(0.004)

(0.003)

(0.002)

(0.002)

-0.052**

0.001

-0.025

-0.017

-0.011

(0.026)

(0.023)

(0.020)

(0.011)

(0.010)

-0.027**

-0.038***

-0.030***

-0.006

-0.011**

(0.011)

(0.009)

(0.008)

(0.004)

(0.004)

-0.093*

-0.145***

-0.113***

-0.038*

-0.009

(0.051)

(0.043)

(0.038)

(0.023)

(0.020)

-0.016

-0.080*

-0.054*

-0.019

0.009

(0.047)

(0.043)

(0.030)

(0.015)

(0.020)

0.089***

0.004

0.030

0.002

0.009

(0.029)

(0.028)

(0.020)

(0.011)

(0.010)

0.087**

0.103***

0.073***

0.038***

0.050***

(0.037)

(0.035)

(0.025)

(0.014)

(0.011)

0.044

0.049*

0.048**

-0.006

0.013

(0.030)

(0.028)

(0.021)

(0.011)

(0.009)

Young sibling age 16
Young sibling age 17
Young sibling age 18
Young sibling age 19
Young sibling age 20
Young sibling age 21
Young sibling age 22
Old sibling age 17
Old sibling age 18
Old sibling age 19
Old sibling age 20
Old sibling age 21
Old sibling age 22
Old sibling age 23

0.020

0.034

0.046*

-

-0.014

(0.027)

(0.028)

(0.026)

-

(0.010)

0.0360

0.111***

0.059*

-0.025***

-0.005

(0.035)

(0.033)

(0.031)

(0.008)

(0.014)

0.111**

0.187***

0.052

-0.010

-0.028**

(0.044)

(0.039)

(0.037)

(0.012)

(0.013)

0.138**

0.237***

0.060

-0.034***

-0.033**

(0.055)

(0.045)

(0.045)

(0.013)

(0.015)

0.189***

0.262***

0.029

-0.036***

-0.042***

(0.067)

(0.050)

(0.053)

(0.013)

(0.012)

0.245***

0.317***

0.062

-0.037***

-0.038***

(0.080)

(0.046)

(0.068)

(0.013)

(0.014)

0.352***

0.341***

0.062

-0.044***

-0.050***

(0.095)

(0.049)

(0.097)

(0.012)

(0.008)

0.086

0.038

0.016

-

0.024

(0.055)

(0.058)

(0.051)

-

(0.036)

0.089

0.042

0.032

0.242*

0.036

(0.062)

(0.062)

(0.054)

(0.127)

(0.037)

0.092

0.027

0.062

0.171*

0.053

(0.067)

(0.068)

(0.060)

(0.100)

(0.040)

0.068

-0.011

0.071

0.186**

0.071

(0.072)

(0.075)

(0.065)

(0.095)

(0.048)

0.060

-0.036

0.069

0.182*

0.083

(0.080)

(0.081)

(0.070)

(0.101)

(0.055)

0.019

-0.038

0.089

0.258**

0.095

(0.087)

(0.089)

(0.079)

(0.129)

(0.065)

-0.040

-0.058

0.053

0.307**

0.146

(0.093)

(0.099)

(0.086)

(0.156)

(0.092)

Note: These estimates refer to the coefficients on control variables in Model 1 of Table 3. Standard errors clustered at household
level in parentheses.* denotes significant at 10% level, ** at 5% level, and *** at 1% level. The sample sizes vary between 6132
and 6596. For all behaviors but doing hard drugs, the reference category for dummies is age 15 for the younger siblings and age 16
for the older siblings. For doing hard drugs, the reference cateogory is taken to be one year later since there are no data available on
hard drug use for younger siblings at 15 and older siblings at 16.

APPENDIX TABLE 6
Linear Probability Model of Young Sibling's Behavior with Fixed Effects

Smoking
Drinking
cigarettes
alcohol
last year
last year
0.029**
0.043***
(0.014)
(0.015)
Younger sibling's age dummies:
16
0.019
0.031
(0.020)
(0.022)
17
0.016
0.099***
(0.023)
(0.025)
18
0.059**
0.150***

Smoking
marijuana
last year
0.017
(0.015)

Using
hard drugs
last year
0.017
(0.016)

Selling
drugs
last year
0.002
(0.015)

Days
smoked
cigarettes
last month
0.024*
(0.014)

Days
drank
alcohol
last month
0.022
-(0.015)

Days
smoked
marijuana
last month
-0.005
(0.017)

0.062***
(0.018)
0.089***
(0.021)
0.095***

-0.010
(0.013)
0.015

-0.003
(0.012)
0.013
(0.014)
-0.007

0.597
(0.367)
1.733***
(0.454)
2.397***

0.357*
(0.207)
0.823***
(0.259)
1.555***

0.896***
(0.242)
1.614***
(0.338)
1.412***

(0.025)
(0.027)
19
0.064**
0.193***
(0.026)
(0.031)
20
0.076***
0.201***
(0.026)
(0.032)
21
0.089**
0.229***
(0.028)
(0.034)
22
0.101***
0.211***
(0.031)
(0.038)
Older sibling's age dummies:
17
-0.017
-0.068*
(0.030)
(0.037)
18
0.011
-0.053
(0.030)
(0.035)
19
0.020
-0.054
(0.029)
(0.033)
20
0.020
-0.068**
(0.028)
(0.032)
21
0.026
-0.070**
(0.025)
(0.029)
22
0.019
-0.058**
(0.022)
(0.025)
23
-0.014
-0.051**
(0.018)
(0.021)

(0.024)
0.119***
(0.027)
0.107***
(0.028)
0.108***
(0.030)
0.025
(0.031)

(0.015)
0.003
(0.016)
0.007
(0.016)
-0.001
(0.016)
-0.001
(0.017)

(0.014)
-0.010
(0.016)
-0.029*
(0.015)
-0.033*
(0.017)
-0.044**
(0.019)

(0.567)
2.787***
(0.637)
3.339***
(0.659)
3.250***
(0.682)
3.406***
(0.733)

(0.313)
1.587***
(0.344)
1.530***
(0.379)
2.453***
(0.430)
1.609***
(0.506)

(0.376)
1.863***
(0.398)
1.770***
(0.385)
1.811***
(0.391)
1.248***
(0.373)

0.019
(0.030)
0.022
(0.028)
0.015
(0.027)
0.003
(0.026)
-0.017
(0.025)
-0.016
(0.023)
-0.038**
(0.019)

0.062***
(0.020)
0.032*
(0.016)
0.023
(0.016)
0.008
(0.016)
0.018
(0.014)
0.009
(0.012)

0.020
(0.019)
0.019
(0.017)
0.023
(0.016)
0.023
(0.015)
0.025*
(0.014)
0.020
(0.013)
0.022*
(0.012)

-1.569**
(0.685)
-0.967
(0.669)
-0.709
(0.649)
-0.791
(0.618)
-0.637
(0.593)
-0.310
(0.506)
-0.058
(0.407)

-0.893**
(0.408)
-1.142***
(0.391)
-1.346***
(0.391)
-1.298***
(0.371)
-1.032***
(0.358)
-0.454
(0.332)
-0.261
(0.306)

-0.080
(0.327)
-0.493
(0.364)
-0.207
(0.397)
-0.394
(0.412)
-0.304
(0.398)
-0.215
(0.346)
-0.223
(0.288)

Note: Standard errors clustered at household level in parentheses. * denotes significant at 10% level, ** at 5% level, and *** at 1%
level. Sample sizes vary between 6733 and 8733. For all behaviors but doing hard drugs, the reference category for dummies is age 15
for the younder siblings and age 16 for the older siblings. For doing hard drugs, the reference cateogory is taken to be one year later
since there are no data available on hard drug use behavior for younger siblings at 15 and older siblings at 16.

APPENDIX TABLE 7A
Effect of Shifting the Older Sibling's Probability of Behavior from 0 to 1 in

on

the Older and Younger Sibling's Probabilities of Behavior Relative to Baseline (Error A)
Smoking cigarettes
Older Siblings
Baseline
W/ feedback

0.4027

0.4188

0.4275

0.4339

0.4364

0.4346

(0.0637)

(0.0433)

(0.0477)

(0.0545)

(0.0578)

(0.0592)

2.483

0.4674

0.1192

0.0339

0.0102

0.0032

(0.0000)

(0.0504)

(0.0238)

(0.0098)

(0.0038)

(0.0015)

Younger Siblings
Baseline
W/ feedback
W/out feedback

0.3322

0.3676

0.3786

0.3913

0.3849

0.3796

(0.0795)

(0.0597)

(0.0724)

(0.0787)

(0.0865)

(0.0928)

0.1427

0.0374

0.0113

0.0037

0.0013

0.0004

(0.0865)

(0.0273)

(0.0102)

(0.0040)

(0.0016)

(0.0006)

0.1427

0.0335

0.0092

0.0027

0.0009

0.0003

(0.0865)

(0.0207)

(0.0060)

(0.0020)

(0.0008)

(0.0003)

Drinking Alcohol
Older Siblings
Baseline
W/ feedback

0.5502

0.5573

0.6031

0.6558

0.6861

0.6926

(0.0773)

(0.0527)

(0.0519)

(0.0458)

(0.0415)

(0.0428)

1.8175

0.2916

0.0518

0.0095

0.002

0.0005

(0.0000)

(0.0421)

(0.0147)

(0.0040)

(0.0011)

(0.0004)

Younger Siblings
Baseline
W/ feedback
W/out feedback

0.4664

0.5041

0.5428

0.5657

0.5767

0.5754

(0.0803)

(0.0536)

(0.0617)

(0.0673)

(0.0759)

(0.0829)

0.2403

0.0448

0.0089

0.002

0.0004

0.0001

(0.0709)

(0.0158)

(0.0042)

(0.0012)

(0.0004)

(0.0001)

0.2403

0.0447

0.0088

0.0019

0.0004

0.0001

(0.0709)

(0.0142)

(0.0034)

(0.0009)

(0.0003)

(0.0001)

Smoking Marijuana
Older Siblings
Baseline
W/ feedback

0.2511

0.2663

0.2832

0.2939

0.2912

0.2889

(0.0609)

(0.0496)

(0.0558)

(0.0544)

(0.0524)

(0.0489)

3.9824

0.5766

0.1089

0.0229

0.0054

0.0011

(0.0000)

(0.0846)

(0.0286)

(0.0089)

(0.0029)

(0.0009)

Younger Siblings
Baseline
W/ feedback
W/out feedback

0.2291

0.2643

0.2804

0.2938

0.3044

0.3088

(0.0682)

(0.0530)

(0.0614)

(0.0701)

(0.0806)

(0.0883)

0.2385

0.0375

0.0072

0.0015

0.0003

0

(0.1533)

(0.0341)

(0.0099)

(0.0032)

(0.0010)

(0.0003)

0.2385

0.0429

0.0095

0.0024

0.0006

0.0001

(0.1533)

(0.0285)

(0.0070)

(0.0020)

(0.0005)

(0.0001)

Note:"Baseline" corresponds to probabilities of simulated behaviors using the dynamic probit model. "W/ feedback" corresponds to an
exogenous shift of the older sibling's probability of behavior from 0 to 1 in the first period, allowing for the effect of this shift on the
older sibling's behavior in the later periods. "W/out feedback" corresponds to an exogenous shift of the older sibling's probability of
behavior from 0 to 1 in the first period, setting the older sibling's behavior in the later periods to its baseline level. The numbers
recorded in the rows labeled "W/out feedback" and "W/ feedback" refer to the average change in said probabilities due to the
corresponding exogenous switches in older siblings' behavior, divided by the baseline probability of these behaviors. Bootstrapped
standard errors are in parentheses.

APPENDIX TABLE 7B
Effect of Shifting the Older Sibling's Probability of Behavior from 0 to 1 in

on

the Older and Younger Siblings' Probabilities of Behavior Relative to Baseline (Error B)
Smoking cigarettes
Older Siblings
Baseline
W/ feedback

0.4114

0.4062

0.4129

0.4213

0.4243

0.4223

(0.0667)

(0.0541)

(0.0604)

(0.0592)

(0.0591)

(0.0610)

2.4309

0.4169

0.1003

0.0272

0.0079

0.0024

(0.0000)

(0.0686)

(0.0271)

(0.0103)

(0.0040)

(0.0015)

Younger Siblings
Baseline
W/ feedback
W/out feedback

0.3504

0.3747

0.3809

0.3918

0.3818

0.3718

(0.0712)

(0.0535)

(0.0686)

(0.0787)

(0.0883)

(0.0955)

0.0000

0.0586

0.0709

0.0713

0.0738

0.0743

(0.1519)

(0.0676)

(0.0697)

(0.0689)

(0.0720)

(0.0727)

0.0000

0.0117

0.0061

0.0024

0.001

0.0003

(0.1519)

(0.0359)

(0.0110)

(0.0036)

(0.0014)

(0.0005)

Drinking Alcohol
Older Siblings
Baseline
W/ feedback

0.5435

0.555

0.6003

0.6455

0.6803

0.6956

(0.0616)

(0.0417)

(0.0497)

(0.0497)

(0.0490)

(0.0496)

1.8398

0.2871

0.0504

0.009

0.0017

0.0003

(0.0000)

(0.0451)

(0.0135)

(0.0034)

(0.0009)

(0.0002)

Younger Siblings
Baseline
W/ feedback
W/out feedback

0.4546

0.5082

0.5531

0.5793

0.5897

0.5919

(0.0706)

(0.0695)

(0.0820)

(0.0871)

(0.0951)

(0.1050)

0.1577

0.0444

0.0262

0.0215

0.0196

0.0189

(0.1054)

(0.0397)

(0.0395)

(0.0371)

(0.0353)

(0.0339)

0.1577

0.0274

0.0054

0.0012

0.0003

0.0001

(0.1054)

(0.0170)

(0.0039)

(0.0010)

(0.0003)

(0.0001)

Smoking Marijuana
Older Siblings
Baseline
W/ feedback

0.2488

0.2602

0.2781

0.2922

0.2966

0.2929

(0.0573)

(0.0486)

(0.0550)

(0.0568)

(0.0572)

(0.0584)

4.0187

0.4898

0.081

0.0146

0.0028

0.0006

(0.0000)

(0.0932)

(0.0259)

(0.0065)

(0.0017)

(0.0005)

Younger Siblings
Baseline
W/ feedback
W/out feedback
Note: See Appendix Table 7A.

0.2155

0.261

0.2865

0.3026

0.3109

0.312

(0.0589)

(0.0637)

(0.0815)

(0.0889)

(0.1012)

(0.1102)

0.2145

0.0311

0.0060

0.0011

0.0003

0.0000

(0.1757)

(0.0289)

(0.0071)

(0.0019)

(0.0006)

(0.0002)

0.2145

0.0346

0.0071

0.0015

0.0004

0.0001

(0.1757)

(0.0286)

(0.0062)

(0.0014)

(0.0004)

(0.0001)

APPENDIX TABLE 8
Estimates of Joint Dynamic Ordered Probit Model (Error B)

State dependence
Older sibling

Low consumption
High consumption

Younger sibling

Low consumption
High consumption

Sibling's influence
t min

Low consumption
High consumption

!

t > t min

Low consumption
High consumption

!

Family-specific error term
Stand. deviation
Factor loadings

Older sibling
Younger sibling
Younger sibling

Individual- specific error term
Stand. deviation
Factor loadings

Older sibling
Younger sibling

Low consumption threshold
High consumption threshold
Log likelihood value
Note: See Table 5.

Smoking
Cigarettes

Drinking
Alcohol

Smoking
Marijuana

0.300***
(0.082)
0.755***
(0.071)
0.560***
(0.080)
0.971***
(0.077)

0.348***
(0.045)
0.616***
(0.068)
0.531***
(0.045)
0.821***
(0.070)

0.298***
(0.083)
0.646***
(0.084)
0.563***
(0.083)
0.952***
(0.095)

0.057
(0.201)
0.392**
(0.199)
0.070
(0.091)
0.098
(0.086)

0.093
(0.112)
0.255
(0.186)
-0.022
(0.045)
-0.155**
(0.069)

0.351*
(0.185)
0.247
(0.188)
0.074
(0.095)
-0.011
(0.104)

1.158***
(0.155)
0.920***
(0.128)
0.525***
(0.147)
0.543***
(0.125)

0.454***
(0.054)
0.922***
(0.110)
1.654***
(0.298)
1.679***
(0.219)

0.881***
(0.155)
1.282***
(0.206)
0.418***
(0.133)
0.493***
(0.124)

0.934***
(0.077)
1.302***
(0.130)
1.173***
(0.134)
-0.098
(0.702)
0.496
(0.702)
-9181.54

0.626***
(0.060)
1.006***
(0.106)
-0.156
(0.153)
-0.841
(0.538)
0.811
(0.539)
-12852.93

0.661***
-(0.086)
0.365
(0.287)
1.345***
(0.199)
0.876
(1.013)
1.508
(1.014)
-7121.72

APPENDIX TABLE 9A
Effect of Shifting the Older Sibling's Behavior from Zero to High Consumption in
on the Older and Younger Siblings' Probabilities of Behavior Relative to the Baseline (Error A)
Smoking cigarettes
Older Siblings
Baseline
Low consumption
High consumption

0.0878

0.0835

0.0837

0.0845

0.0848

0.084

(0.0192)

(0.0147)

(0.0138)

(0.0124)

(0.0114)

(0.0105)

0.2343

0.2677

0.2903

0.3036

0.3067

0.3075

(0.1048)

(0.1056)

(0.1147)

(0.1170)

(0.1139)

(0.1135)

0.0000

0.1882

0.0113

0.0003

0.0004

0.0000

(0.0000)

(0.1281)

(0.0263)

(0.0099)

(0.0040)

(0.0019)

4.2681

0.4665

0.088

0.0192

0.0045

0.0011

(0.0000)

(0.1018)

(0.0271)

(0.0081)

(0.0025)

(0.0008)

W/ feedback
Low consumption
High consumption

Younger Siblings
Baseline
Low consumption
High consumption

0.0946

0.0879

0.0876

0.089

0.088

0.088

(0.0258)

(0.0190)

(0.0158)

(0.0147)

(0.0142)

(0.0147)

0.2175

0.2438

0.2652

0.2853

0.2872

0.2932

(0.1034)

(0.1019)

(0.1133)

(0.1172)

(0.1193)

(0.1183)

0.1384

0.019

0.0019

-0.0002

0.0003

0.0002

(0.0877)

(0.0323)

(0.0104)

(0.0039)

(0.0019)

(0.0013)

0.3164

0.0767

0.0203

0.0058

0.0017

0.0005

(0.1689)

(0.0386)

(0.0107)

(0.0037)

(0.0013)

(0.0005)

0.1384

0.0158

0.0018

-0.0002

0.0001

0.0001

(0.0877)

(0.0306)

(0.0093)

(0.0036)

(0.0016)

(0.0009)

0.3164

0.0693

0.0171

0.0046

0.0014

0.0004

(0.1689)

(0.0363)

(0.0094)

(0.0030)

(0.0011)

(0.0004)

W/ feedback
Low consumption
High consumption
W/out feedback
Low consumption
High consumption

Drinking alcohol
Older Siblings
Baseline
Low consumption
High consumption

0.2905

0.3127

0.3327

0.3541

0.3629

0.3684

(0.0895)

(0.0791)

(0.0677)

(0.0555)

(0.0454)

(0.0400)

0.0922

0.1467

0.1838

0.2212

0.2583

0.2754

(0.0682)

(0.0935)

(0.0983)

(0.1035)

(0.1096)

(0.1076)

0

0.1969

0.0166

0.0007

0.0000

-0.0001

(0.0000)

(0.1352)

(0.0138)

(0.0025)

(0.0006)

(0.0002)

10.8517

0.6148

0.0791

0.0113

0.0016

0.0003

(0.0000)

(0.2543)

(0.0308)

(0.0050)

(0.0008)

(0.0002)

W/ feedback
Low consumption
High consumption

Younger Siblings
Baseline
Low consumption
High consumption

0.2758

0.2939

0.324

0.3424

0.3527

0.3639

(0.0996)

(0.0884)

(0.0764)

(0.0655)

(0.0575)

(0.0493)

0.0816

0.1189

0.1613

0.1989

0.2252

0.2499

(0.0690)

(0.0815)

(0.0994)

(0.1062)

(0.1081)

(0.1031)

0.0811

0.0063

0.0002

0.0001

0.0001

0.0000

(0.0985)

(0.0168)

(0.0030)

(0.0006)

(0.0004)

(0.0002)

0.2335

0.0169

0.0006

-0.0004

-0.0002

0.0000

(0.3081)

(0.0474)

(0.0099)

(0.0024)

(0.0006)

(0.0002)

0.0811

0.0114

0.0013

0.0002

0.0000

0.0000

(0.0985)

(0.0161)

(0.0028)

(0.0005)

(0.0002)

(0.0001)

0.2335

0.0359

0.0066

0.0013

0.0002

0.0001

(0.3081)

(0.0468)

(0.0087)

(0.0018)

(0.0004)

(0.0001)

W/ feedback
Low consumption
High consumption
W/out feedback
Low consumption
High consumption

Smoking marijuana
Older Siblings
Baseline
Low consumption
High consumption

0.0712

0.0773

0.0805

0.0821

0.0816

0.0814

(0.0398)

(0.0390)

(0.0363)

(0.0341)

(0.0328)

(0.0324)

0.1279

0.1652

0.1842

0.1899

0.1882

0.1863

(0.1278)

(0.1448)

(0.1470)

(0.1408)

(0.1370)

(0.1318)

0

0.2648

0.023

0.003

0.0012

0.0002

(0.0000)

(0.1643)

(0.0268)

(0.0059)

(0.0024)

(0.0009)

7.8174

0.5241

0.0724

0.0122

0.0023

0.0005

(0.0000)

(0.2880)

(0.0491)

(0.0099)

(0.0021)

(0.0006)

W/ feedback
Low consumption
High consumption

Younger Siblings
Baseline
Low consumption
High consumption

0.0755

0.0828

0.0817

0.0815

0.081

0.0826

(0.0428)

(0.0400)

(0.0355)

(0.0330)

(0.0319)

(0.0290)

0.1382

0.1782

0.1814

0.1821

0.1712

0.1707

(0.1323)

(0.1633)

(0.1654)

(0.1601)

(0.1460)

(0.1328)

0.1297

0.0108

0.0026

0.0003

0.0003

0.0001

(0.1474)

(0.0258)

(0.0077)

(0.0029)

(0.0014)

(0.0007)

0.1855

0.0324

0.0076

0.0021

0.0006

0.0002

(0.2333)

(0.0482)

(0.0132)

(0.0040)

(0.0013)

(0.0005)

0.1297

0.0097

0.0018

0.0004

0.0001

0.0000

(0.1474)

(0.0244)

(0.0072)

(0.0019)

(0.0012)

(0.0005)

0.1855

0.0341

0.0086

0.0024

0.0007

0.0002

(0.2333)

(0.0458)

(0.0122)

(0.0037)

(0.0012)

(0.0004)

W/ feedback
Low consumption
High consumption
W/out feedback
Low consumption
High consumption

Note: "Baseline" corresponds to probabilities of simulated behaviors using the dynamic ordered probit model. "W/ feedback" corresponds to
an exogenous shift of the older sibling's behavior from zero to high consumption in the first period, allowing for the effect of this shift on the
older sibling's behavior in the later periods. "W/out feedback" corresponds to an exogenous shift of the older sibling's behavior from zero to
high consumption in the first period, setting the older sibling's behavior in the later periods to the baseline level. The numbers recorded in the
rows labeled "W/out feedback" and "W/ feedback" refer to the average change in said probabilities due to the corresponding exogenous
switches in older siblings' behavior, divided by the baseline probability of these behaviors. Bootstrapped standard errors are in parentheses.

APPENDIX TABLE 9B
Effect of Shifting the Older Sibling's Behavior from Zero to High Consumption in
on the Older and Younger Siblings' Probabilities of Behavior Relative to the Baseline (Error B)
Smoking cigarettes
Older Siblings
Baseline
Low consumption
High consumption

0.0916

0.0818

0.0828

0.0852

0.0855

0.0857

(0.0190)

(0.0154)

(0.0142)

(0.0134)

(0.0125)

(0.0115)

0.2491

0.2781

0.3044

0.3209

0.3242

0.3275

(0.1203)

(0.1233)

(0.1268)

(0.1214)

(0.1160)

(0.1137)

0

0.1737

0.0045

-0.0014

0.0001

-0.0001

(0.0000)

(0.1325)

(0.0325)

(0.0092)

(0.0032)

(0.0012)

4.0147

0.4173

0.0744

0.0155

0.0033

0.0008

(0.0000)

(0.1072)

(0.0283)

(0.0080)

(0.0022)

(0.0007)

W/ feedback
Low consumption
High consumption

Younger Siblings
Baseline
Low consumption
High consumption

0.0907

0.0865

0.0856

0.088

0.0881

0.0875

(0.0254)

(0.0176)

(0.0155)

(0.0139)

(0.0136)

(0.0137)

0.2072

0.2501

0.2712

0.293

0.2987

0.3075

(0.1080)

(0.1076)

(0.1126)

(0.1099)

(0.1073)

(0.1124)

0.1352

0.0139

0.0023

0.0000

0.0002

0.0000

(0.1126)

(0.0277)

(0.0082)

(0.0040)

(0.0020)

(0.0011)

0.2766

0.0604

0.0158

0.0044

0.0012

0.0004

(0.2024)

(0.0350)

(0.0091)

(0.0028)

(0.0009)

(0.0003)

0.1352

0.0110

0.0011

0.0000

0.0001

-0.0001

(0.1126)

(0.0261)

(0.0067)

(0.0029)

(0.0013)

(0.0008)

0.2766

0.0522

0.0126

0.0032

0.0008

0.0002

(0.2024)

(0.0356)

(0.0089)

(0.0026)

(0.0008)

(0.0003)

W/ feedback
Low consumption
High consumption
W/out feedback
Low consumption
High consumption

Drinking alcohol
Older Siblings
Baseline
Low consumption
High consumption

0.3096

0.3257

0.3483

0.367

0.3771

0.3802

(0.0826)

(0.0724)

(0.0612)

(0.0477)

(0.0397)

(0.0347)

0.1079

0.1532

0.1988

0.244

0.272

0.2895

(0.0787)

(0.0947)

(0.1071)

(0.1093)

(0.1090)

(0.1113)

0

0.1864

0.0128

-0.0001

-0.0002

0

(0.0000)

(0.1360)

(0.0198)

(0.0031)

(0.0009)

(0.0002)

9.2711

0.6314

0.0847

0.0127

0.002

0.0003

(0.0000)

(0.2708)

(0.0414)

(0.0072)

(0.0016)

(0.0003)

W/ feedback
Low consumption
High consumption

Younger Siblings
Baseline
Low consumption
High consumption

0.2644

0.3113

0.3295

0.3513

0.3611

0.3692

(0.0785)

(0.0704)

(0.0578)

(0.0461)

(0.0391)

(0.0366)

0.0955

0.1264

0.1715

0.2055

0.2329

0.2629

(0.0606)

(0.0702)

(0.0866)

(0.0892)

(0.0896)

(0.0975)

0.1121

0.0082

0.0005

0.0000

-0.0001

0.0000

(0.1080)

(0.0161)

(0.0028)

(0.0007)

(0.0003)

(0.0001)

0.2877

0.0244

0.0013

-0.0003

-0.0001

0.0000

(0.2931)

(0.0422)

(0.0076)

(0.0018)

(0.0005)

(0.0001)

0.1121

0.0136

0.0016

0.0002

0.0000

0.0000

(0.1080)

(0.0161)

(0.0027)

(0.0006)

(0.0002)

(0.0001)

0.2877

0.0458

0.008

0.0015

0.0003

0.0001

(0.2931)

(0.0447)

(0.0078)

(0.0015)

(0.0004)

(0.0001)

W/ feedback
Low consumption
High consumption
W/out feedback
Low consumption
High consumption

Smoking marijuana
Older Siblings
Baseline
Low consumption
High consumption

0.0779

0.0797

0.0847

0.0878

0.0868

0.0866

(0.0407)

(0.0351)

(0.0334)

(0.0301)

(0.0283)

(0.0284)

0.1511

0.1849

0.2093

0.2184

0.2104

0.2081

(0.1427)

(0.1429)

(0.1456)

(0.1351)

(0.1232)

(0.1170)

0

0.2321

0.0124

0.0007

0.0002

-0.0001

(0.0000)

(0.1579)

(0.0225)

(0.0052)

(0.0021)

(0.0007)

6.6167

0.4612

0.0623

0.0104

0.002

0.0004

(0.0000)

(0.2374)

(0.0463)

(0.0098)

(0.0028)

(0.0007)

W/ feedback
Low consumption
High consumption

Younger Siblings
Baseline
Low consumption
High consumption

0.084

0.0857

0.0836

0.0855

0.087

0.0879

(0.0465)

(0.0380)

(0.0329)

(0.0303)

(0.0286)

(0.0267)

0.1415

0.1711

0.1836

0.187

0.1851

0.1889

(0.1263)

(0.1392)

(0.1468)

(0.1310)

(0.1195)

(0.1178)

0.1093

0.0100

0.0006

-0.0001

0.0003

0.0000

(0.1323)

(0.0204)

(0.0076)

(0.0024)

(0.0014)

(0.0008)

0.2060

0.0325

0.0066

0.0015

0.0003

0.0001

(0.2481)

(0.0411)

(0.0093)

(0.0023)

(0.0008)

(0.0003)

0.1093

0.0114

0.0013

0.0002

0.0001

0.0001

(0.1323)

(0.0195)

(0.0063)

(0.0015)

(0.0009)

(0.0005)

0.206

0.0334

0.0071

0.0017

0.0005

0.0001

(0.2481)

(0.0428)

(0.0098)

(0.0027)

(0.0008)

(0.0003)

W/ feedback
Low consumption
High consumption
W/out feedback
Low consumption
High consumption
Note: See Appendix Table 9A.

APPENDIX TABLE 10
Estimates of Dynamic Probit Model Allowing for Dependence of Sibling's Influence on Gender Mix

State dependence

Older Sibling
Younger sibling

Smoking

Drinking

Smoking

Cigarettes

Alcohol

Marijuana

0.824***

0.632***

0.622***

(0.069)

(0.059)

(0.068)

0.914***

0.612***

0.710***

(0.073)

(0.059)

(0.068)

-0.151

0.273

0.193

(0.231)

(0.185)

(0.215)

0.195

0.234

0.492**

(0.252)

(0.192)

(0.241)

0.004

0.283*

0.233

(0.202)

(0.150)

(0.170)

0.026

0.022

-0.179

(0.120)

(0.105)

(0.127)

0.323**

0.114

0.141

(0.137)

(0.109)

(0.150)

0.088

0.018

-0.012

(0.097)

(0.080)

(0.092)

0.863***

0.758***

0.542***

(0.127)

(0.106)

(0.102)

1.109***

0.911***

1.304***

(0.184)

(0.152)

(0.250)

1.014***

0.842***

1.253***

(0.274)

(0.196)

(0.349)

0.716***

0.748***

1.165***

(0.160)

(0.153)

(0.329)

0.748***

0.452***

0.562***

(0.072)

(0.068)

(0.078)

1.487***

1.196***

1.371***

(0.185)

(0.297)

(0.275)

1.346***

1.747***

1.342***

(0.161)

(0.277)

(0.247)

-7241.73

-8087.47

-6684.64

Sibling's influence
Brothers
Sisters
Mixed Pair
Brothers
Sisters
Mixed Pair
Family-specific error term
Stand. Deviation
Factor Loadings

Older sibling
Younger sibling
Younger sibling

Individual-specific error term
Stand. Deviation
Factor loadings

Older sibling
Younger sibling

Log likelihood value
Note: See Table 4A.

APPENDIX TABLE 11
Estimates of Dynamic Probit Model Allowing for Dependence of Sibling's Influence on Age Gap

State dependence

Older Sibling
Younger sibling

Smoking

Drinking

Smoking

Cigarettes

Alcohol

Marijuana

0.834***

0.632***

0.622***

(0.069)

(0.059)

(0.068)

0.910***

0.612***

0.708***

(0.073)

(0.059)

(0.068)

0.134

0.245*

0.233

(0.131)

(0.133)

(0.154)

0.078

0.133

0.118

(0.207)

(0.185)

(0.217)

0.079

0.026

-0.072

(0.084)

(0.067)

(0.080)

0.109

0.058

0.146

(0.132)

(0.124)

(0.141)

1.160***

0.757***

0.540***

(0.173)

(0.105)

(0.102)

1.219***

0.916***

1.304***

(0.187)

(0.152)

(0.250)

0.445***

0.834***

1.253***

(0.099)

(0.194)

(0.349)

0.379***

0.749***

1.165***

(0.090)

(0.152)

(0.329)

0.910***

0.453***

0.562***

(0.087)

(0.067)

(0.079)

0.339*

1.187***

1.369***

(0.196)

(0.298)

(0.279)

1.223***

1.744***

1.351***

(0.139)

(0.274)

(0.245)

-7241.73

-8087.47

-6684.64

Sibling's influence
Brothers
Sisters
Brothers
Sisters
Family-specific error term
Stand. Deviation
Factor Loadings

Older sibling
Younger sibling
Younger sibling

Individual-specific error term
Stand. Deviation
Factor loadings

Older sibling
Younger sibling

Log likelihood value
Note: See Table 4A.

