                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 EFFICIENCY ADVANTAGES OF GRANDFATHERING IN RIGHTS-BASED FISHERIES
                           MANAGEMENT

                                        Terry L. Anderson
                                         Ragnar Arnason
                                         Gary D. Libecap

                                       Working Paper 16519
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w16519


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2010




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Terry L. Anderson, Ragnar Arnason, and Gary D. Libecap. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Efficiency Advantages of Grandfathering in Rights-Based Fisheries Management
Terry L. Anderson, Ragnar Arnason, and Gary D. Libecap
NBER Working Paper No. 16519
November 2010
JEL No. D23,K11,N5,Q22

                                               ABSTRACT

We show that grandfathering fishing rights to local users or recognizing first possessions is more dynamically
efficient than auctions of such rights. It is often argued that auctions allocate rights to the highest-valued
users and thereby maximize resource rents. We counter that rents are not fixed in situ, but rather depend
additionally upon the innovation, investment, and collective actions of fishers, who discover and enhance
stocks and convert them into valuable goods and services. Our analysis shows how grandfathering
increases rents by raising expected rates of return for investment, lowering the cost of capital, and
providing incentives for collective action.


Terry L. Anderson                                     Gary D. Libecap
PERC                                                  Bren School of Environmental Science
2048 Analysis Drive, Suite A                          and Management and Economics Department
Bozeman, Montana 59718                                University of California, Santa Barbara
tla@perc.org                                          Bren Hall 4412
                                                      Santa Barbara, CA 93106-5131
Ragnar Arnason                                        and ICER
Department of Economics                               and also NBER
University of Iceland                                 glibecap@bren.ucsb.edu
101 Reykjavik Iceland
ragnara@hi.is
I. Introduction

         The recognition that weak property rights have been the major cause of the

world-wide depletion in ocean fish stocks has led to the adoption of rights-based

management (RBM) in fisheries (Neher et al. 1989, Shotton 2000, Beddington et al.

2007). Although the potential for RBM to improve fisheries is widely accepted, the

mechanisms for allocating rights are controversial. By far the most common way of

assigning rights has been to grant them on the basis of historical participation in the

fishery (National Research Council 1999, Shotton 2000, Arnason 2002, FAO 2004).

This practice is termed grandfathering or first possession (Epstein 1979, Rose 1985,

Lueck 1995).

         Some economists, however, favor auctions over grandfathering. They contend

that auctions allocate rights to users who place the highest value on the rights; that

they transfer resource rents to the state (which can then distribute them beneficially to

the polity); and that efficiency in resource use is invariant to the rights distribution

mechanism (see Grafton 1995, Morgan 1995, Bromley 2009).1

         In this paper, we examine the efficacy of grandfathering relative to other rights

allocation mechanisms. Our basic proposition is that grandfathering increases

dynamic efficiency compared to the alternatives. We maintain that natural resource

rents, far from being fixed, evolve over time and can either expand or contract. They

are increased by productive investments in fish stocks and ocean habitat, by finding

new fishing opportunities, by implementing improved production practices, by

developing new products and marketing processes, and by producing public (or club)

goods through local collective action. These advances do not happen automatically.


1
  Similar views have been expressed in other natural resource uses. For example, Parry et al. (1999)
and Goulder et al. (2010) endorse auctioning allocations in a cap and trade program rather than
grandfathering or free distribution because of the indirect advantages of using the funds to
lower more distortive taxes.

                                                   1
They require the appropriate incentives in the form of expected returns on investments

undertaken relative to the cost of capital.

         Because natural resource rents constitute a significant part of the social wealth

of many nations (World Bank 2006, 4), it follows that a major task of economic

policy is to promote the expansion of such rents. Crucially, the act of fully or partially

expropriating them generally will reduce the incentives for or the ability to undertake

the necessary investments, or both. Although auctions may increase short-run

government revenue and maximize the share of resource rents going to the state, the

investments required to expand future rents are discouraged by such transfers. Long-

term investments, by contrast, are encouraged by secure property rights that promote

entrepreneurship and lower the cost of capital to firms that are in a position to exploit

time- and place-specific information.2

         To develop these arguments, we describe the movement toward RBM, discuss

various allocation methods, elaborate on the role of rents for dynamic efficiency,

develop formal arguments of the economic advantages of grandfathering relative to

auctions, and provide empirical evidence supportive of our arguments. We conclude

by speculating as to whether the advantages of grandfathering rights in fisheries holds

for other resources and calling for increased research on the long-term effects of

property rights distribution mechanisms.

II. Rights-Based Management

         Fishery rents are vulnerable to dissipation under common-pool or open-access

conditions through excessive short-term harvest, overinvestment in capital and labor,

underinvestment in stocks, and distorted technical progress in the industry. These

2
  Auctions transfer rents to the auctioneer, usually the state, in a similar way to Pigouvian taxes that
extract resource rents (Pigou 1920, Baumol 1972). Although Pigouvian taxes are seldom used, relative
tax rates across jurisdictions are important determinants of resource flows and investments. For a
discussion of this, see Findlay (1978, 13) and Calomiris & Hubbard (1995). To the extent that auctions
transfer rents, it is likely that they will have similar negative consequences for investment.

                                                   2
losses were first described by Jens Warming in 1911 (in Danish, translated by

Andersen 1983) and Scott Gordon in 1954. As suggested by Anthony Scott (1955),

the fundamental cause of this waste is the lack of private property rights. The absence

of clear property rights (informal or formal, group or individual) leads to dissipation

of resource rents and prevents bargaining solutions of the type outlined by Coase

(1960). With declining catch-per-unit-of-effort and depletion of the fish stock, the

opportunity for fisheries to provide a basis for long-term wealth creation is lost

(World Bank & FAO 2009, xvii).

         Prescriptive regulation to control entry and production has been costly and

ineffective at halting the decline in fish stocks (see, for example, Johnson & Libecap

1982, Shotton 2000, Beddington et al. 2007), thus returning attention to rights-based

management (see Neher et al. 1989, Shotton 2000, Hannesson 2004, Stavins 2007,

Beddington et al. 2007).3 For fisheries, individual transferable quotas (ITQs) were

first suggested by Francis Christy in 1973 as a means of incorporating property rights.

Under this arrangement, the total allowable catch (TAC) is set by regulators and catch

shares are assigned to fishers as a property right to the flow of harvest.4 Other rights-

based mechanisms include territorial user rights (TURFs), sole ownership, and

community rights (Arnason 2007b).

         By establishing property rights, RBM creates incentives and mechanisms for

reducing the number of fishers and vessels, for increasing output-per-unit-of-effort,

for improving access to capital markets, for trading rights to the most productive


3
  The literature on fishery regulation is very large and we cannot be inclusive. Some relevant papers are
those by Crutchfield (1961), Brown (1974), Anderson (1985), Homans & Wilen (1997), and Wilen
(2000).
4
  The literature on design and implementation of ITQs is also large. For a discussion, see Grafton
(1996). Arnason (2009) notes that fishers holding ITQs could collectively set the annual TAC. Chu
(2009) has a more moderate assessment of the impact of ITQs on the stock. See also the debate
between Clark et al. (2010) and Grafton et al. (2010) on incentives to harvest and maintain the stock
under ITQs.

                                                   3
fishers, for encouraging investment in fish stocks and habitat, and for engaging in

Coasean bargaining to reduce rent dissipation.5 To be most effective, the rights must

be permanent, secure, exclusive, and tradable (Scott 1989, Arnason 2007b).

        Economists have documented many advantages of RBM in fisheries. Grafton

et al. (2006) outline the process and impact of ITQs. Hannesson (2004) describes a

general pattern of moving from uncontrolled entry to centralized governmental

regulation (command and control) to the adoption of property rights of some type.

Arnason (2000, 2002) summarizes international experiences with ITQs. Casey et al.

(1995), Grafton et al. (2000), and Fox et al. (2003) demonstrate changes in harvest

practices and product quality under adoption of ITQs in the British Columbia halibut

fishery. Newell et al. (2005) and Arnason (2008) report rising quota prices in ITQ

fisheries, implying the success of RBM. Finally, using a global database for over

11,000 fisheries from 1950 to 2003, Costello et al. (2008) find evidence that the use of

catch shares generally halts and, in some cases, even reverses the declining trend in

fish stocks.

III. Mechanisms for Allocating Rights

        Despite clear theoretical arguments and empirical evidence of how RBM can

improve fisheries, the adoption of such systems has evolved slowly. In 2005,

according to Arnason (2005), some form of ITQs were used by only 15 major fishing

nations, accounting for perhaps 20 percent of global landings.6 While this represents a

great change from 25 years before when only two to three nations were using ITQs,

most global fisheries are still harvested as open access or regulated common-pool


5
  There were similar gains in the shift to emission permits from regulation in the SO2 emissions
program in the United States. See Stavins (2007).
6
  Among these nations are: New Zealand, Australia, Namibia, Morocco, Chile, Peru, USA, Canada,
Greenland, Iceland, Norway, Denmark, Russia, Netherlands, Estonia, and South Africa. Costello et al.
(2008) provide an estimate of smaller coverage of ITQs, at 2% of the world’s fisheries. The economics
literature on fishery RBM is large and we do not summarize its broad coverage here.

                                                  4
resources. One of the main impediments to adoption of RBM systems is disagreement

over how to allocate the rights. Here we briefly summarize the four rights allocation

mechanisms.

         A. Political allocation refers to the direct assignment of property rights by

government officials. This mechanism has a clear potential for rent seeking (Kruger

1975, Buchanan et al. 1980).7 It has rarely been used in fisheries perhaps because of

the widespread respect for first possession, the specific information and human capital

required for entry into the industry, and because RBM typically has been

implemented when fish stocks have been dangerously depleted, reducing available

rents and their value as political rewards (Hannesson 2004, 111; Libecap 2008).8

         B. Uniform allocation distributes equal shares to all fishers. It is attractive

because it appears equitable and because it avoids the transaction costs associated

with designing auctions or with verifying claims based on past production for

grandfathering. Moreover, if subsequent exchange of rights is allowed and the costs of

trade are low, uniform allocation leads to an efficient solution via Coasean bargaining.

The resource still migrates to high-valued users and rents remain in the fishery.

Nonetheless, uniform allocation such as lottery distribution has not, to our knowledge,

been used for fisheries RBM.

         C. First possession or grandfathering assigns ownership to existing fishers

based on historical catch, capital investment, or some combination of the two. First

possession rules recognize current parties, who have experience in exploiting the




7
  Competition for resource rents in the presence of weak institutions results in rent dissipation and the
so-called resource curse. See Sachs &Warner (2001) and Torvik (2002).
8
  Namibia and South Africa are examples of countries where political allocation of fishing rights has
been used.

                                                    5
resource. As noted above, it is the most common allocation mechanism for fisheries

(Shotton 2000, Hatcher et al. 2001, Arnason 2002, Libecap 2007).9

        D. Auctions allocate rights to the highest bidder with the revenues going to

the seller, generally the state.10 Therefore, not surprisingly, they tend to be favored by

governments (Milgrom 2004). Auctions are commonly used to grant use rights for

previously unexploited resources for which the state may have clear ownership, such

as timber concessions, oil and gas leases, and the division of the electro-magnetic

spectrum. Auctions have also been adopted for allocating emissions permits under

cap-and-trade policies for various types of air pollution control and proposed in new

programs for greenhouse gas regulation.11 In fisheries, they have rarely been used.12

IV. Resource Rents from RBM

        Economic rents incorporate several distinguishable components. One is

Ricardian or resource rent, generated by an asset that is naturally relatively fixed in

supply, such as land (Ricardo 1821, 34−5, 44). This is the surplus value above costs

and normal returns not necessary for production of the asset. Another is

Schumpeterian rent, generated when the value of the asset is increased due to

innovative activities (Schumpeter 1950). A third concept is inframarginal resource

rent generated by individuals or firms characterized by greater skill, human capital,

9
  Equity or fairness issues are major arguments raised against first possession as part of the
privatization of fisheries (Bromley 2009, McCay 2010). McCay (2010) is concerned about
consolidation in the industry under ITQs and the gradual decline of fishing communities. She advocates
community rights or common property. The conditions under which common property regimes
function effectively, however, are limited as outlined by Ostrom (1990, 90). Also, ironically, we argue
that grandfathering is most likely to assist small, undiversified fishing firms and hence, reduce
pressures for consolidation due to lack of access to funding.
10
   The literature on the efficiency advantages of auctions is large (Vickrey 1961, Bulow & Roberts
1989, Dasgupta & Maskin 2000, Milgrom 2004, Klemperer 2004).
11
   For a discussion of the arguments, see Goulder et al. (1997), Parry et al. (1999), Crampton & Kerr
(2002), Goulder & Parry (2008, 160−61), and Goulder et al. (2010).
12
   We are only aware of four cases of auctions being used as a primary tool to allocate ITQ rights in
fisheries—in certain fisheries in Russia and Estonia in the late 1990s (Vetemaa et al. 2002, Hønneland
2005), in a few small fisheries for squat lobster, yellow prawn, black hack, and orange roughy in
southern Chile (Pena-Torres 1997), and in the Washington State Puget Sound geoduck fishery
(Huppert 2005). In Russia and Estonia, the outcome of these auctions was found to be unsatisfactory
and they were discontinued.

                                                  6
and/or risk tolerance in production using the asset. This rent is earned even in open-

access settings where only the marginal actors earn zero rents (Johnson & Libecap

1982, Johnson 1995). Individuals with more skill and enterprise are more likely to

invest and innovate and thereby generate additional Schumpeterian rent, an issue we

emphasize below. Finally, there is monopoly rent, generated when the asset’s supply

is artificially reduced in order to raise profits (Tullock 1967). Because monopoly rents

are often short term and potentially competed away, they have been termed quasi

rents (Klein et al.1978).

         Some discussions of rent allocation mechanisms in fisheries appear to be

restricted to a static framework and regard rents as a constant (Clark et al. 1989,

Morgan 1995). With that perception, resource rents may be seen as a “fortuitous gift

of nature” (Bromley 2009, 14) that “can either be taxed away by the government or

left in the fishery to be capitalized into the value of the ITQ” without efficiency

implications (Clark et al. 1989, 138). Morgan (1995) presents the case for auctions of

fishing rights apparently along similar lines, and Bromley goes a step further to say

that “the government should tax away that excess profit and return it to the owner

[the government] of the fish” (Bromley 2009, 15, emphasis added).13

         We take exception to the presumption that efficiency is invariant to the

allocation of rights. Our main reason is that it ignores the dynamic process whereby

rents are created. Even the resources that generate Ricardian rents must be discovered,

and discovery requires effort. Moreover, rents can be augmented by entrepreneurship

and innovation (see Schumpeter1950). Once entrepreneurship is introduced into the

production process, Ricardian and Schumpeterian rents cannot be easily separated.


13
  Curiously, in these arguments, little attention is paid to how the rents collected by the government
might be distributed. Volden & Wiseman (2007), for example, discuss the political obstacles in the
legislative process to using government funds to provide public goods, rather than rewarding special
interests in the legislative process. See also Grafton et al. (2009) for a response to Bromley.

                                                   7
They become a return to discovery and exploration, research and innovation, and

other investments in the fishery, and not simply a “fortuitous gift of nature.” Our

contention, therefore, is that taxing away resource rents reduces the incentives for and

raises the costs of activities that discover and create rents.

        These negative effects are likely to be most important for more efficient,

inframarginal fishers who apply their superior fishing, management skills, and

knowledge to innovative actions that raise industry-wide rents. The prospect of

obtaining and retaining these rents motivates producers to improve the productivity of

the resource, to find lower-cost production methods, and to fund these activities.

        Grandfathering rights thus increases the incentive for innovative discovery and

investment by fishers and increases rents in three ways, all of which are less likely if

rents are expropriated by government via lump sum taxes or auction. First, it

generates higher private returns through generation of better information about the

fishery, investments in human and physical capital, new marketing efforts, and

investments to increase fish stocks.

        Second, secure property rights to fishery rents reduce the cost of internal

capital finance. Rent retention not only rewards past investment decisions, it signals

the opportunity for similar benefits from future wealth-increasing actions. Risky new

investments by entrepreneurial actors are difficult to finance in impersonal capital

markets and therefore often must be funded internally by retained earnings or other

informal sources. Evans & Jovanovic (1989) examine the role of liquidity constraints

on entrepreneurial behavior and conclude that capital markets provide too little capital

to entrepreneurs because of asymmetric information, moral hazard, and adverse




                                             8
selection problems. This means entrepreneurs must finance themselves and bear the

risk of failure.14

         Like retained earnings in other enterprises, retained fishery rents provide a

source of self-financing. All firms rely on internal financing, but risky new activities

in particular, depend upon such sources (Myers & Majluf 1984).15 The expropriation

of retained earnings by any means increases firm-specific risk because of reduced

funds and the greater likelihood of negative earnings outcomes. This increased risk

raises the cost of external financial capital. This impact is felt more by small

undiversified firms which are very common in fisheries, than by large diversified

companies.

         The third dynamic effect of grandfathering rights is that it encourages fishers

to undertake collective action.16 Johnson (1995, 337) notes that a quota system

“provides incentives for the industry to act collectively to lower costs and to engage in

activities such as product development and fishery management that have the

potential to increase quota value.” Pooling information on resource availability

increases collective rents by reducing search costs. Cooperation to invest in

technology dependent on economies of scale is more likely if the returns on such

investments cannot be competed away by unrestricted entry or expropriated by

taxation. Again quoting Johnson (1995, 337) “because the identities of the

participants are known, organizational costs are lower than in an open access setting.”

Creating collective rents requires undertaking coordination costs for which there is


14
   Evans & Jovanovic develop a static model of entrepreneurial investment and test it against National
Longitudinal Survey of young men over the period 1966−1981. They estimate the probability of
entering into self-employment as a function of assets and other variables. They find strong support for
liquidity constraints on new startups.
15
   There appears to be a “pecking order” theory of corporate finance that says that corporations first use
retained earnings, then debt (senior claims on the firm have lower asymmetric information costs), and
then equity when debt capacity is exhausted (Myers & Majluf 1984).
16
   Deacon et al. (2008, 2010) document such collective action in the Alaska salmon fishery. See also
Arnason (2009).

                                                    9
only a return once rights are established. Obviously, these group investments are risky

with highly uncertain returns so that standard capital markets are less likely to provide

funding. Extracting resource rents not only reduces incentives for coordinated

investment, but reduces the ability of participants to support such actions.

       The negative effects on all three types of rent creation are greater if there are

repeated actions by government to extract the rents through new taxation or repeated

auctions as new rents are generated. As fishers anticipate this, their incentives and

funding abilities are reduced, and the rent-generating process is curtailed.

V. A Formal Model of Rent Retention

       In this section, we formalize some of the arguments for grandfathering

described above. Due to limitations of space, we restrict the analysis to the impact of

rent expropriation on the financial costs of investments. We compare grandfathering

to a once-and-for-all auction because it creates the least distortion (Arnason 2007a).

The analysis proceeds in three step steps. First, we establish that auctions reduce the

wealth of the successful bidders. Second, we argue that reduced wealth will lead to

higher costs of financial capital to the company. Third, we show that higher capital

costs will lead to less investment in research and development and, therefore, lower

resource rents in the future.

       Consider a company with resource use rights. Let the maximum present value

of the profits function of this company at resource level x(0) and efficiency level (0)

be V(x(0),(0)). Thus, before the auction, the wealth of this company is V(x(0),(0))

plus any other net assets the company may own, say w. We represent initial wealth

by:

       W(0)= V(x(0),(0))+w.

       Let the auction price be A. Then, following the auction, the wealth of the


                                           10
company is:

        W(1)=W(0)-A.

Note that if the auction is truly competitive, AV(x(0),(0)) so W(1)w.

        Now, let us assume that perfect capital markets are accessible to this company.

In these markets, the company will be faced with financial capital prices. The prices at

which it can borrow depend, among other things, on the default risk associated with

the company perceived by potential lenders (Merton 1974). Clearly, ceteris paribus,

this risk is a declining function of the company’s wealth―higher wealth implies

greater ability to pay if things go wrong and, besides, offers a wider scope of

marketable collateral. Thus, other things being equal, the wealthier the company, the

lower is its cost of capital.

        Let the profit function (on a cash-flow basis) of the company at a point of

time, t, be:

         (t )   (t )   ( q (t ), x (t ))  C (i (t ), W (t )) .

        The function  ( q (t ), x (t )) is the company’s base profit function with q(t)

denoting harvest and x(t) biomass. This function is the typical profit function in

fisheries economic analysis (Clark & Munro 1975, Anderson 1986). The technical

coefficient, (t), standard in dynamic production analysis, represents productivity due

inter alia to R&D (research and development) (Solow 1957). This coefficient shifts

the profit function over time just as a neutral technical progress would shift the

production function. Non-neutral technical impacts on the profit function are, of

course, possible but add nothing material to this analysis. Note that the technical

coefficient in the current context is a wider concept than in standard production

theory. It represents anything that shifts the profit function, including marketing

development, management improvements, organization changes, and so on.


                                                           11
        The function C (i (t ), W (t )) represents the cost of R&D with i(t) denoting

investment in R&D and W(t) the company’s wealth. In accordance with the discussion

above, we assume that both the cost and the marginal cost of R&D falls with the

company’s wealth, i.e., CW, CiW<0.

        Note that this profit function contains two state variables, x(t) and (t) and two

control (decision) variables q(t) and i(t) determining the evolution of the state

variables over time. In order to simplify the presentation we will, in what follows,

restrict our attention to the technical coefficient and its evolution in discrete time.

        In discrete time, let the change in the technical coefficient be:

(1)      (t  1)   (t )  F (i (t )) ,

where the function F(i(t)) determines how investments in R&D modify the technical

coefficient. Presumably, this function is increasing in investments, and we assume

that this increase is diminishing with the level of investments, i.e., that the function is

concave.

        Write the maximum value function (present value of profits) at time zero as:

        V ( x(0),  (0))   (0)     (1)   2 V ( x(2),  (2)) ,

             1
where          is the company’s discount factor.
            1 r

        Consider initial time t=0. At this time, the firm is faced with deciding on

investment in R&D and harvest. To focus on the investment decision, assume the path

of harvests {q} is somehow exogenous, e.g., due to a harvest quota system. Thus, the

path of base profits, {  ( q (t ), x (t )) }, is given too. At time t=0, the optimal choice of

investment in R&D is given by:

                                                                                                           (2)
(2)     Ci (0) (i (0), W (0))    Fi (0) (i (0))   ( q (1), x (1))   2  V (2) ( x (2),  (2))           .
                                                                                                          i (0)

By repeated substitutions into (2), we find:
                                                         12
                                                   
(3)     Ci (0) (i (0), W (0))  Fi (0) (i (0))    t   ( q (t ), x (t )) .
                                                   t 1



For equilibrium base profits (i.e., equilibrium harvest and biomass),  , condition (3)

reduces to

                                                   
(4)     Ci (0) (i (0), W (0))  Fi (0) (i (0))           .
                                                   r

        Differentiating (3) or (4) with respect to initial wealth shows that investment

in R&D increases as initial wealth increases. More precisely, from (3) we find:


         i (0)                                    Ciw
(5)                                                           
        W (0)
                     Cii (i (0), W (0))  Fii (i (0))    t   (q (t ), x(t ))
                                                               t 1
And from (4)

         i (0)                Ciw
(6)             
        W (0) Cii (i (0), W (0))  Fii (i (0))   r

On the assumptions made (Cii, Ciw>0 and Fii<0), both derivatives are unequivocally

positive. It immediately follows that reduced company wealth leads to less

investments in R&D, and therefore less future rents in the fishery than would

otherwise have been the case.

        The wealth effect on investments in R&D defined by (5) and (6) operates via

the cost of financial capital, i.e., the interest rate demanded by providers of finance

who require a higher risk premium from less wealthy companies and vice versa. In

addition to this direct effect, it will generally be the case that changes in the interest

rate on external finance will affect the company’s weighted cost of capital in the same

direction and therefore also the discount factor used by the company to calculate the

present value of profits (Ross et al. 2008). This further reinforces the above results.




                                                              13
       These arguments establish that extraction of rents, by auctions or other means,

will reduce company wealth, increase the cost of capital, and generally reduce

investment in R&D.

       In addition to the effect of reduced wealth at time zero delineated in

expressions (5) and (6), the reduced wealth in period one and in future periods will

have a similar effect. Thus, there will be an accumulative impact on investments in

R&D over time stemming from the initial extraction of rents from the industry.

       Note that the marginal impact of wealth on the marginal cost of investments

measured by the derivative Ciw in expressions (5) and (6) is likely smaller for a large

diversified company than for a small specialized fishing company. Thus, by the usual

laws of economic competition, auctions of fishing rights will, ceteris paribus, favor

the former type of companies and encourage concentration in the industry—an

outcome feared by other researchers (McCay 2010).

VI. Empirical Evidence

       To test our arguments, we require comparable fisheries with different rights

allocation mechanisms. We do not have such data, but there is supportive empirical

evidence from several fisheries and from other industries consistent with the

hypotheses that follow from our model. Below we provide evidence showing that: 1)

fisheries are characterized by small, specialized companies; 2) grandfathering

facilitates the continuing existence of smaller, specialized firms that are more able to

take advantage of time- and place-specific information and avoid principal-agent

problems than are larger companies; 3) grandfathering encourages investment in

resource discovery and innovation in extraction; and 4) taxing rents discourages self-

financing and reduces expansion, especially in newer industries.

       A. Rents Finance and Reward Small, Undiversified Fishing Firms


                                           14
         We argue that rents increase with investments specific to fisheries but that

there are asymmetric information problems that raise the cost of obtaining capital in

formal markets. Hence we would expect fisheries to be dominated by small,

undiversified firms, and this is confirmed by FAO for several fisheries. According to

FAO (2007), in 2004, the total number of fishing vessels was approximately 4

million. This means that the average annual catch was just over 20 metric tons, the

landed value of which was unlikely to be in excess of US$20,000 on average.17

         Table 1 shows that the number and average size of decked fishing vessels in a

few fishing countries is dominated by relatively small vessels with low engine power.

The only exception is Iceland where the average vessels size is almost 200 gross tons

(GT). However, the Iceland data, like those for the other countries, ignore a large

number (at least 500) of undecked vessels (under 10 GT) which also participate in the

fishery on an occasional basis. For the rest of the world, especially developing

nations, the average size of vessels is even smaller.18

                                           [Insert Table 1 Here]

         The Icelandic decked fishing vessels have been operating under an ITQ

system since the 1980s, but have not been subject to auctions of ITQ rights or other

significant form of rent expropriation.19 According to Icelandic Fisheries Directorate

data, permanent quota share holdings of all companies in this fishery at the beginning

of the 2009−10 fishing season were held by 571 companies and were assigned to less

than 700 vessels. Hence, the great majority of companies operated only one vessel.

The average size of each company in terms of quota share was less than 0.2 percent.

17
   According to the World Bank & FAO (2009, 9), the average landed price of fish in 2004 was US$
918 per metric ton.
18
   The data in the Table do not provide direct information about the size of companies―they could
conceivably operate a number of vessels. However, it is our belief that the great majority of the world’s
fishing companies (or concerns) hold only one vessel. Unfortunately, data on fishing companies are not
routinely collected by the FAO.
19
   A special fishing fee has been imposed to pay for the cost of management.

                                                   15
This corresponds to approximately US$1 million in annual turnover. Only three

companies held more than 5 percent of the total quota.

       The size distribution of Icelandic companies is further described in Table 2.

These data show that the Icelandic fishing industry is dominated by small or very

small fishing companies.

                                     [Insert Table 2 here]

       The California urchin and wetfish fisheries also are characterized by small,

undiversified operations. The urchin fishery is very gear- and knowledge-specific.

With a mean length of 29 feet and a mean haul capacity of 6,410 pounds, vessels on

the North Coast of California make day trips and support specialized dive equipment

for the collection of urchins (Scholz et al. 2010). These vessels are too small to

support line or net towing, and the human capital associated with urchin diving is not

easily transferable to other fisheries. Scholz et al. (2010) also found that the fishermen

obtained 100 percent of their income from fishing and 88 percent of that from the

urchin fishery.

      Similarly, the wetfish fishery uses specific equipment and knowledge that is not

readily applied elsewhere. Wetfishing is defined by the practice of offloading the

catch directly from vessel holds that are specifically designed to maintain the catch in

water or ‘wet’ (California Wetfish Producers Association, n.d.). It includes northern

anchovy, jack mackerel, pacific mackerel, pacific sardine, market squid, various tunas

(bluefin, skipjack and yellowfin) and pacific bonito (Hackett 2002). Equipment and

knowledge are relatively malleable within this list and fishermen do fish multiple

species (Pomeroy et al. 2002). The data in Table 3 reveal the relatively small size of

vessels in the industry.

                                 [Insert Table 3 here]


                                           16
       The evidence in Tables 1, 2, and 3 and other anecdotal evidence showing that

many fisheries are dominated by small, undiversified companies is consistent with our

hypothesis that such companies generate greater dynamic resource rents. Because

fisheries are characterized by pervasive asymmetric information and principal-agent

problems, small specialized companies are better at internalizing the value of

location-specific fishery information, at monitoring on-board processing and quality

control, and at adjusting to marketing.20 If auctions of fishing rights tilt the balance

toward large diversified companies, it follows that fishery rents associated with RBM

will be reduced.

         B. Rents Encourage Investment, Innovation, and Collaboration in
         Fisheries Management

         An example from the New Zealand abalone fishery illustrates investments that

are rent-creating under grandfathered ITQs (Anderson & Libecap 2010). Until RBM

was implemented in 1986, abalone divers needed only a non-transferable license to

harvest in what was otherwise an open-access resource. Under these conditions, they

harvested as much as possible and had no incentive to invest in the stock, which was

declining due to open access.21 RBM, however, provided divers with a tradable share

in the TAC established by fishery authorities. As a result, quota values rose an order

of magnitude in just five years from approximately NZ$33,000 per metric ton in 1988

to NZ$320,000 per metric ton in 1993.

         Some of this increase resulted directly from reduced access, but additional

returns were due to value-enhancing investments by individual fishers. To achieve

20
   One indication of the asymmetric information and principal-agent problems in fisheries is the almost
universal practice of remunerating fishing vessel crews with share in the value of the landed catch. A
similar argument is made by Allen & Lueck (2002) regarding the pervasiveness of small family farms
in the United States despite apparent economies of scale in agriculture.
21
   There was an indirect limit imposed on the abalone harvest because abalone processors faced a cap
on what they would buy due to export quotas. These export quotas were neither property rights nor
transferable, however, and so they did nothing to encourage divers to stop the fishery’s decline or help
the fishery grow.

                                                  17
these gains, the diving business had to be redefined. Specialized dive boats with

support crews for harvesting abalone were introduced. Research into other abalone

fisheries, market trends, and processing operations was conducted, and abalone

aquaculture was started with the development of an “aqua barrel,” a molded

polyethylene barrel in which abalone could be planted, grown, and harvested.

       For instance, Sea-Right Investments Limited obtained permits for developing

a five-hectare marine farm site for abalone pearl culture in Akaroa Harbour, New

Zealand, in 1994. The CEO, Roget Beattie described the importance of RBM for the

success of his business: “Property rights changed the company from a hunter/gatherer

at the ends of the earth to a business launching into the top end of the fine jewelry

market in sophisticated world capitals” (Sea-Right Investments Limited, e-mail

communication, December 2, 1999).

       Another example of investment encouraged by the prospect of retaining rents

is drawn from Alaska. Deacon et al. (2008, 2010) describe the effects of a cooperative

that operated between 2002 and 2004 in the Chignik sockeye salmon fishery. The

fishery had suffered from overexploitation, even though access was limited by

regulation of season, licensing, and equipment. In 2002, however, the Alaska Board

of Fisheries approved a self-selected cooperative involving between 77 and 87 of the

100 permits in the fishery. Because members of the cooperative shared in the rents

created by the cooperative, they had an incentive to undertake the costs of collective

action. These cooperative efforts included a) reducing the portion of permits actively

fished to between 25−28 percent as compared to 92−100 percent for nonmembers,

thus reducing pressure on the fishery; b) coordinating the location of harvest with a

focus on lower-cost areas and positioning barriers or “fences” to channel fish so that

they could be more effectively caught in nets; c) increasing the fishing season by 48


                                           18
percent; d) improving fish quality; and e) increasing the quota value and the

associated rents by at least 25 percent (Deacon et al. 2010, 20−32).

        C. Rents Encourage Franchisee Investment

        As we have noted above, all firms rely on internal financing, but risky new

activities are particularly dependent upon in-house financing because of asymmetric

information and the problem of volatile expected earnings. If franchisers tried to

extract all of the Schumpeterian rents from franchisees, not only would they reduce

the incentive for innovation, they would increase the cost of capital for innovation.

Kaufmann & Lafontaine (1994) report that McDonald’s and other franchisers do not

extract all (ex ante) rents via their royalties and franchise fees.

        Queues for McDonald’s franchises suggest that the company is not pricing the

franchises so as to capture all of the rents. Instead, the firm leaves some rents

available for the initial franchisees as an incentive mechanism for good operations,

development of the franchise location, and investment in the overall franchise

reputation that also benefits the parent firm. Additionally, McDonald’s seeks

undiversified, small operators focused on the potential rents from a new franchise.

The resulting asymmetric information, however, increases downstream liquidity

constraints and raise borrowing costs. Accordingly, franchisees must rely on cash

flow resulting from franchise rents.

        This practice applies especially for new franchises because they face greater

uncertainty and more time- and place-specific information. For subsequent franchise

sales, McDonald’s retains the right of first refusal, but also allows the franchisee to

extract as much of the rents as possible in the sale. By that time, there may be less

information asymmetry about the franchise, making capital markets a more likely

source of capital.


                                             19
         D. Rents Encourage Discovery and Innovation in U.S. Hard Rock Mining

         The U.S. hard rock mining industry in the 19th and early 20th centuries was

notoriously risky and initially dominated by small, undiversified exploration and

mining firms. Clay & Wright (2010) build on David & Wright (1997) and argue that

the U.S. minerals industry was able to develop rapidly because entry into exploration

and patenting of mining claims was low cost. Procedures under the Mining Act of

1862 allowed mining companies to retain rents and thereby encouraged exploration,

adaptation, and innovation in hard rock mining.

         Early efforts to tax mining, beginning in California in 1850 and later with the

federal mining law in 1866, were dropped not only at the insistence of the industry,

but also because of the arguments of local governments seeking to promote economic

development. The federal mining laws of 1866, 1870 and 1872 which still govern

today, essentially established free mining discovery and development. 22

         The United States was more thoroughly prospected than other countries such

as Mexico, where property rights were less secure and rents were extracted, at least in

part, by the state or politicians. Moreover, investment in risky new exploration and

extraction techniques in the United States resulted in repeated expansion of economic

mineral stocks, even as initial ore grades declined, generating substantial additional

economic rents. Further, the innovative, entrepreneurial nature of the U.S. mining

industry encouraged the creation of and interaction with mining colleges throughout

the country and the development of new mining technologies that added dynamically

to the knowledge base. As a result, the United States became the world leader in

mining technology and methods for extracting low-quality ores.

         E. Taxing Rents Discourages Self-Finance and Economic Growth
22
   It is the case that the Mining Law of 1872 is criticized today for the failure to require payments to
cover externalities occasioned by mining. These are legitimate payments and not wholesale rent
transfers that we caution against here.

                                                    20
       In 1983, Ben Bernanke argued that one reason the Great Depression was so

long and deep in the United States was the high cost of external financing and the

associated negative impact on investment. Calomiris & Hubbard (1995) use

manufacturing firm-level data to test Bernanke’s claim by examining the effects of the

Undistributed Profits Tax of 1936−37 that reduced the availability of in-house

funding. Between 1934 and 1939, 98 percent of investment funds of nonfinancial

companies were supplied internally (Calomiris & Hubbard 1995, 445). The tax,

however, changed payout strategies, reducing retained earnings at the firm level and

the funds available for innovation.

       Taking advantage of differential impacts of the tax and costs of external funds

across the firms within their sample, Calomiris & Hubbard find that the tax reduced

investment in positive net present value projects. Further, many of the most

vulnerable firms with high surtax margins were concentrated in growing industries.

The negative effects of the tax were apparent enough that the legislation was repealed

as an impediment to the growth of young, dynamic companies—just the kinds that

were necessary for expansion and recovery from the Depression.

VII. Conclusion

       The adoption of RBM in many fisheries has demonstrated how this approach

can mitigate losses from open access. Despite the economic gains from RBM, the

mechanism for allocating rights ― usually to existing fishers ― has been

controversial. A major reason is distribution, that the increased value of the rights is

for the most part captured by the initial recipients.

       Most economists who argue against allocating fishing rights to existing

fisheries through grandfathering, implicitly or explicitly assume that another

allocation mechanism will have no negative efficiency consequences. This


                                            21
assumption seems to be based on the notion that fisheries rents (and rents from other

similar resources) are naturally provided and independent of human action. Therefore,

on equity grounds, rents should not accrue to existing parties, who by assumption

have done little to earn them. Moreover, these rents can be captured via auctions or

lump sum taxes for distribution by governments for public purposes—perhaps to

reduce distortive income taxes—with no significant adverse effects.

     We contend that these conclusions neglect dynamic investment outcomes that

can create and expand rents through discovery, technological advances, coordination,

innovation and other investments. Moreover, our theory suggests that firms,

especially smaller, undiversified companies, rely upon internal funding to take

advantage of information asymmetries and to reduce principal-agent costs.

Grandfathering rights increases rents relative to auctions and other mechanisms for

extracting rents from RBM in three ways: 1) it retains industry-generated rents within

firms, thus providing rewards for rent-enhancing investments; 2) it increases the

ability to self-finance besides lowering the cost of external financial capital associated

with asymmetric information and principal-agent problems; and 3) it encourages

collective action among rights holders that lowers information costs and reduces rent

dissipation.

       Taking away resource rents, particularly through auctions, which are designed

to fully extract them from the fishery, inevitably raises the cost of capital and reduces

discovery and innovation. Empirical evidence from some fisheries and other

industries supports our argument that rent retention promotes discovery, innovation,

collaboration, and self-finance.

       We have formulated out arguments mainly in terms of the fishery. However,

the same basic arguments appear to apply in other natural resource use. In all cases


                                           22
RBM would improve the economic efficiency of resource use, compared to the

alternative, and the secure retention of the resulting rents by the rights-holders would

encourage them to discover ways to take further steps for increasing the economic

efficiency of the utilization.

        More research is needed to test for and measure the importance of rent

retention for dynamic efficiency. Until that research is forthcoming, economists do

not, in our opinion, have a reasonable basis for suggesting that the efficiency of RBM

is invariant to the rights allocation and rent distribution mechanism.




                                           23
                              LITERATURE CITED



Allen DW, Lueck D. 2002. The Nature of the Farm: Contract, Risk, and Organization

       in Agriculture. Cambridge: MIT Press


Andersen P. 1983. On rent of fishing grounds: A translation of Jens Warming’s 1911

           article with an Introduction. Hist. Polit. Economy 15: 391−96.

Anderson LG. 1985. Potential economic benefits from gear restrictions and license

       limitation in fishery regulation. Land Econ. 61(4): 409−18.


Anderson LG. 1986. The Economics of Fisheries Management. Baltimore: Johns

       Hopkins University Press


Anderson TL, Libecap D. 2010. The allocation and dissipation of resource rents:

       Implications for fishery reform. In Political Economy of Natural Resource

       Use: Lessons for Fisheries Reform, ed. D Leal, pp. 79−95. Prepared for the

       Global Program on Fisheries (PROFISH). Washington D.C.: Agriculture and

       Rural Development Department, World Bank


Arnason R. 2000. Property rights as a means of economic organization. In Use of

       Property Rights in Fisheries Management: Proceedings of the FishRights 99

       Conference, ed. R Shotton. Freemantle: Western Australia, 11−19 November

       1999. FAO Fisheries Technical Paper 404/1. Rome: FAO


Arnason R. 2002. A review of international experiences with ITQ. In Annex to Future

       Options for UK Fishing Management. Report to the Department for the




                                         24
       Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, CEMARE, University of Portsmouth,

       UK


Arnason R. 2005. Property rights in fisheries: Iceland’s experience with ITQ’s. Rev.

       Fish Biol. Fish.15: 243−64.


Arnason R. 2007a. Fisheries management: Basic principles. In Fisheries and

       Aquaculture, ed. P Safran, in Encyclopedia of Life Support Systems (EOLSS).

       Developed under the auspices of the UNESCO. Oxford, UK: Eolss Publishers


Arnason R. 2007b. Property rights quality and economic efficiency of fisheries

       management regimes: Some basic results. In Advances in Fisheries

       Economics, ed.T Bjorndal, D Gordon, R Arnason, R Sumaila. Oxford:

       Blackwell Publishing


Arnason R. 2008. Iceland’s ITQ system creates new wealth. Elec. J Sust. Dev. 2:

       35−41.


Arnason R. 2009. Conflicting uses of marine resources: Can ITQs promote an

       efficient solution? Australian J. Agr. Resource Econ. 53(1): 145−74.


Baumol WJ. 1972. On taxation and the control of externalities. Amer. Econ. Rev.

       62(3): 307−22.


Beddington JR, Agnew DJ, Clark CW. 2007. Current problems in the management of

       marine fisheries. Science 316 (June): 1713−16.


Bernanke BS. 1983. Non-monetary effects of the financial crisis in the propagation of

       the Great Depression. Amer. Econ. Rev. 73(3): 257−76.



                                         25
Bromley DW. 2009. Abdicating responsibility: The deceits of fisheries policy.

       Fisheries 34(6): 280−90.


Brown G. 1974. An optimal program for managing common pool resources with

       congestive externalities. J Polit. Economy 82(1): 163−74.


Buchanan JM, Tollison RD, Tullock G. 1980. Toward a Theory of the Rent-Seeking

       Society. College Station: Texas A&M University Press


Bulow J, Roberts J 1989. The simple economics of optimal auctions. J. Polit.

       Economy: 97:1060−90.


California Wetfish Producers Association. n.d. Retrieved June 3, 2010, from

       http://www.californiawetfish.org/backgrounder.html.

Calomiris CW, Hubbard R. 1995. Internal finance and investment: Evidence from the

       undistributed profits tax of 1936−37. J. Bus. 68(4): 443−82.

Casey KE, Dewees CM, Turris BR, Wilen JE. 1995. The effects of individual vessel

       quotas in the British Columbia halibut fishery. Marine Resource Econ. 10:

       211−30.


Christy FT. 1973. Fisherman quotas: A tentative suggestion for domestic

       management. Occasional Paper No. 19 of the Law of the Sea Institute,

       University of Rhode Island


Chu C. 2009. Thirty years later: The global growth of ITQs and their influence on

       stock status in marine fisheries. Fish and Fisheries 10: 217−30.


Clark CW, Munro GR. 1975. The economics of fishing and modern capital theory: A

       simplified approach. J. Enviro. Econ. Manage. 2:92−106.


                                         26
Clark CW, Munro GR, Sumaila UR. 2010. Limits to the privatization of fishery

       resources. Land Econ. 86(2): 209−18.


Clark IN, Philip JM, Mollett N. 1989. The development and implementation of New

       Zealand’s ITQ management system. In Rights Based Fishing, ed. PA Neher, R

       Arnason, N Mollett , pp. 117−45. London: Kluwer Academic Publishers


Clay K, Wright G. 2010. Gold rush legacy: American minerals and the knowledge

       economy. See Ostrom, Cole 2010.


Coase R. 1960. The problem of social cost. J. Law Econ. 3: 1–44.


Costello C, Gaines SD, Lynham J. 2008. Can catch shares prevent fisheries collapse?

       Science 321(5896): 1678 – 81.


Crampton P, Kerr S. 2002. Tradable carbon permit auctions: How and why to auction

       not grandfather. Energy Policy 30(4): 333−45.


Crutchfield JA. 1961. An economic evaluation of alternative models of fishery

       regulation. J. Law Econ. 4(October): 131−43.


Dasgupta P, Maskin E. 2000. Efficient auctions. Quart. J. Econ. 115(2): 341−88.


David PA, Wright G. 1997. Increasing returns and the genesis of American resource

       abundance. Ind. Corp. Change 6: 203−45.


Deacon RT, Parker DP, Costello C. 2008. Improving efficiency by assigning harvest

       rights to fishery cooperatives: Evidence from the Chignik Salmon Co-op. Ariz.

       L. Rev. 50(2): 480−509.




                                         27
Deacon RT, Parker DP, Costello C. 2010. Overcoming the common pool problem

       through voluntary cooperation: The rise and fall of a fishery cooperative.

       NBER Working Paper 16339.


Epstein R. 1979. Possession as the root of title. Georgia Law Review 13: 1221–44.


Evans DS, Jovanovic B. 1989. An estimated model of entrepreneurial choice under

       liquidity constraints. J Polit. Economy 97(4): 808−27.


Findlay R. 1978. Relative backwardness, direct foreign investment, and the transfer of

       technology: A simple dynamic model. Quart. J. Econ. 92(1): 1−16.


Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO). 2004. The State of

       World Fisheries and Aquaculture 2004. Rome, Italy: FAO


Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO). 2007. The State of

       World Fisheries and Aquaculture 2006. Rome, Italy: FAO


Fox KJ, Grafton RQ, Kirkley J, Squires D. 2003. Property rights in a fishery:

       Regulatory change and firm performance. J. Environ. Econ. Manage. 46:

       156−77.


Gordon HS. 1954. The economic theory of a common-property resource: The fishery.

       J. Polit. Econ. 62(2): 124–42.


Goulder LH, Hafstead MAC, Dworsky M. 2010. Impacts of alternative emissions

       allowance allocation methods under a Federal Cap-And-Trade Program. J.

       Environ. Econ. Manage. 60(3): 161−81.




                                          28
Goulder LH, Parry IWH. 2008. Instrument choice in environmental policy. Rev.

       Environ. Econ Manage. 2(2): 152−74.


Goulder LH, Parry IWH, Burtraw D. 1997. Revenue-raising vs. other approaches to

       environmental protection: The critical significance of pre-existing tax

       distortions. RAND J. Econ. 28(4): 708−31.


Grafton RQ. 1995. Rent capture in a rights-based fishery. J. Environ. Econ. Manage.

       28: 48−67.


Grafton RQ. 1996. Individual transferable quotas : Theory and practice. Rev. Fish

       Biol. Fish 6(1): 5−20.


Grafton RQ, Arnason R, Bjørndal T, Campbell D, Campbell HF, et al. 2006.

       Incentive-based approaches to sustainable fisheries. Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci.

       63:699−710.


Grafton RQ, Campbell D, Costello C, Hilborn R, Kompas T. 2009. Comment on

       “abdicating responsibility: The deceits of fisheries policy.” Fisheries 34: 292–

       94.


Grafton RQ, Kompas T, Hilborn R. 2010. Limits to the privatization of fishery

       resources: Comment. Land Econ. 86(3): 609−13.


Grafton RQ, Squires D, Fox KJ. 2000. Private property and economic efficiency: A

       study of a common-pool resource. J. Law Econ. 43(2): 679–713.


Hackett S. 2002. An economic overview of the California wetfish industry complex.

       In California’s “Wetfish” Industry: Its Importance Past, Present and Future,

       ed. D Pleschner-Steele. Santa Barbara, CA: California Seafood Council

                                          29
Hannesson R. 2004. The Privatization of the Oceans. Cambridge: The MIT Press


Hatcher A, Pascoe S, Banks R, Arnason R. 2001. Future Options for UK Fish Quota

       Management. CEMARE Report 58. Portsmouth, UK: University of

       Portsmouth


Homans FR, Wilen JE. 1997. A model of regulated open access resource use. J.

       Environ. Econ. Manage. 32: 1−21.


Hønneland G. 2005. Fisheries management in post-Soviet Russia: Legislation,

       principles, and structure. Ocean Dev. & Int’l L. 36: 179−94.


Huppert DD. 2005. An overview of fishing rights. Rev. Fish Biol. Fish. 15: 201−15.


Icelandic Fisheries Directorate. Online: http://en.fiskistofa.is/.


Johnson RN. 1995. Implications of taxing quota value in an individual transferable

       quota fishery. Marine Resource Econ. 10(4): 327−40.


Johnson RN, Libecap GD. 1982. Contracting problems and regulation: The case of

       the fishery. Amer. Econ. Rev. 72(5): 1005–22.


Kaufmann PJ, Lafontaine F. 1994. Costs of control: The source of economic rents for

       McDonald’s franchisees. J. Law Econ. 37(2): 417−53.


Klein B, Crawford RG, Alchian A.1978. Vertical integration, appropriable rents, and the

       competitive contracting process. J. Law Econ. 11: 297−326.

Klemperer P. 2004. Auctions: Theory and Practice. Princeton: Princeton University

       Press




                                            30
Kruger AO. 1975. The political economy of the rent-seeking society. Amerir. Econ.

       Rev. 64(3): 291−303.


Libecap GD. 2007. Assigning property rights in the common pool: Implications of the

       prevalence of first possession rules for ITQs in fisheries. Marine Resource

       Econ. 22: 407−23.


Libecap GD. 2008. Open-access losses and delay in the assignment of property rights.

       Ariz. L. Rev. 50(2): 379−408.


Lueck D. 1995. The rule of first possession and the design of the law. J. Law Econ.

       38(2): 393–436.


McCay BJ. 2010. Enclosing the fishery commons: From individuals to communities.

       See Ostrom, Cole 2010


Merton RC. 1974. On the pricing of corporate debt: The risk structure of interest

       rates. J. Finance 29:449–70.


Milgrom P. 2004. Putting Auction Theory to Work. New York: Cambridge University

       Press


Morgan G. 1995. Optimal fisheries quota allocation under a transferable quota (TQ)

           management system. Mar. Policy 19:379−90.


Myers S, Majluf NS. 1984. Corporate financing and investment decisions when firms

       have information that investors do not have. J. Finan. Econ. 13(2): 187−221.


National Research Council. 1999. Sharing the Fish: Toward a National Policy on

           Individual Fishing Quotas. Committee to Review Individual Fishing


                                          31
           Quotas. Ocean Studies Board, Commission on Geosciences, Environment

           and Resources, National Research Council. Washington DC: National

           Academy Press


Neher PA, Arnason R, Mollett N, eds. 1989. Rights Based Fishing. Dordrecht:

       Kluwer Academic Publishers


Newell RG, Sanchirico JN, Kerr S. 2005. Fishing quota markets. J. Environ. Econ.

       Manage. 49: 437−62.


Ostrom, E. 1990. Governing the Commons: The Evolution of Institutions for

           Collective Actions. New York: Cambridge University Press


Ostrom E, Cole D, eds. 2010. Evolution of Property Rights Related to Land and

       Natural Resources. Cambridge, MA: Lincoln Institute


Parry IWH, Williams III RC, Goulder LH. 1999. When can carbon abatement Policies

       increase welfare? The fundamental role of distorted factor markets. J. Environ.

       Econ. Manage. 37: 52−84.


Pena-Torres J. 1997. The political economy of fishing regulation: The case of Chile.

       Marine Resource Econ. 12: 253–80.


Pigou AC. 1920. The Economics of Welfare. London: Macmillan


Pomeroy C, Hunter M, Los Huertos M. 2002. Socio-economic profile of the

       California wetfish industry. In California's “Wetfish” Industry: Its Importance

       Past, Present and Future, ed. DB Pleschner. Santa Barbara, CA: California

       Seafood Council



                                         32
Ricardo D. 1821. The Principles of Political Economy and Taxation, 3rd ed.

       Reprinted 1992. Rutland, Vermont: Charles E. Tuttle Co. Inc

Rose CM. 1985. Possession as the origin of property. U. Chicago L. Rev. 52(1): 73–

       87.

Ross SA, Westerfield RW, Jaffe J. 2008. Corporate Finance, 8th ed. New York:

             McGraw-Hill/Irvin


Sachs, JD, Warner AM. 2001. The curse of natural resources. Europ. Econ. Rev.

       45(4−6): 827−38.


Scholz A, Steinback C, Kruse S, Bonkoski J, Hetrick S, et al. 2010. Commercial and

       recreational fishing grounds and their relative importance off the South Coast

       of California. Report to the California Marine Life Protection Action

       Initiative. Portland, OR: Ecotrust


Schumpeter JA. 1950. Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy, 3rd ed. New York:

       Harper and Row


Scott A. 1955. The fishery: The objectives of sole ownership. J. Polit. Economy 63:

       116−24.


Scott A. 1989. Conceptual origins of rights based fishing. In Rights Based Fishing, ed.

       Neher et al., pp. 11−38. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers


Shotton R, ed. 2000. Use of property rights in fisheries management. FAO Fisheries

       Technical Paper 404/1 & 2. Rome: Food and Agriculture Organization of the

       United Nations




                                            33
Solow R. 1957. Technical change and the aggregate production function. Rev. Econ.

       Statist. 39:312−20.


Stavins RN. 2007. Market-based environmental policies: What can we learn from

       U.S. experience (and related research)? In Moving to Markets in

       Environmental Regulation, Lessons from Twenty Years of Experience, ed.

       JFreeman, CD Kolstad, pp. 63−94. New York: Oxford University Press


Torvik R. 2002. Natural resources, rent seeking and welfare. J. Devel. Econ. 67:

       455−70.


Tullock G. 1967. The welfare costs of tariffs, monopolies, and theft. Western Econ. J.

       5(3): 224–32.

Vetemaa M, Zero M, Hannesson R. 2002. The Estonian fisheries: From the Soviet

       system to ITQs and quota auctions. Mar. Policy 26: 95−102.

Vickrey W.1961. Counterspeculation, auctions and competitive sealed tenders. J.

       Finance 16(1): 8−37.


Volden C, Wiseman AE. 2007. Bargaining in legislatures over particularistic and

       collective goods. Amer. Polit. Sci. Rev. 101(1): 79−92.


Wilen JE. 2000. Renewable resource economists and policy: What difference have we

       made? J. Environ. Econ. Manage. 39(3): 306−27.


World Bank. 2006. Where is the Wealth of Nations : Measuring Capital for the 21st

       Century. Washington DC: The World Bank




                                          34
World Bank & FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations).

      2009. The Sunken Billions: The Economic Justification for Fisheries Reform.

      Washington D.C: World Bank & FAO




                                       35
Table 1 Characteristics of fishing fleets in selected countries

                     China          South         EU-15           Iceland   Norway
                                    Korea
Number of
                    509,717        87,207         85,480           939      8,184
decked vessels
Mean tonnage
                       14             8             22             199        48
(GT)
Mean engine
                       30            192            81             493       162
power (kw)


Source: FAO 2004




                                            36
Table 2 Size distribution of Icelandic fishing companies
Share of allocated quota Number of companies
   Less than 0.005%                          198
        0.005-0.01%                          102
         0.01-0.02%                           67
         0.02-0.05%                           64
         0.05-0.10%                           42
           0.1-0.15%                          20
         0.15-0.25%                           24
           0.25-0.5%                          23
              0.5-1%                          11
              1-2.5%                           8
              2.5-5%                           9
               5-10%                           2
     More than 10%                             1
                   Total                     571


Source: Icelandic Fisheries Directorate




                           37
Table 3 Characteristics of respondents’ vessels in the California wetfish fleet
                                       MEAN                          RANGE
       Length (ft)                       60.1                          19-86
                                             a
        Net Tons                        55.4                         18-107a
       Horsepower                       357.2                        165-750
 Market Value of Vessel
                                      605,469b                  125,000-1,800,000b
         (US$)


Note: N=45, a N=44, b N=30


Source: Pomeroy et al. (2002).




                                         38
