                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    HOW MUCH DO EDUCATIONAL OUTCOMES MATTER IN OECD COUNTRIES?

                                          Eric A. Hanushek
                                         Ludger Woessmann

                                        Working Paper 16515
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16515


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2010




Paper presented at the 52nd Panel Meeting of Economic Policy in Rome. We thank the editor and
four anonymous referees for their comments. Woessmann gratefully acknowledges the support and
hospitality provided by the W. Glenn Campbell and Rita Ricardo-Campbell National Fellowship of
the Hoover Institution, Stanford University, as well as support by the Pact for Research and Innovation
of the Leibniz Association. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Eric A. Hanushek and Ludger Woessmann. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
How Much Do Educational Outcomes Matter in OECD Countries?
Eric A. Hanushek and Ludger Woessmann
NBER Working Paper No. 16515
November 2010
JEL No. H0,I2,J24,J48,O4

                                              ABSTRACT

Existing growth research provides little explanation for the very large differences in long-run growth
performance across OECD countries. We show that cognitive skills can account for growth differences
within the OECD, whereas a range of economic institutions and quantitative measures of tertiary education
cannot. Under the growth model estimates and plausible projection parameters, school improvements
falling within currently observed performance levels yield very large gains. The present value of OECD
aggregate gains through 2090 could be as much as $275 trillion, or 13.8 percent of the discounted
value of future GDP. Extensive sensitivity analyses indicate that, while differences between model
frameworks and alternative parameter choices make a difference, the economic impact of improved
educational outcomes remains enormous. Interestingly, the quantitative difference between an endogenous
and neoclassical model framework – with improved skills affecting the long-run growth rate versus
just the steady-state income level – matters less than academic discussions suggest. We close by discussing
evidence on which education policy reforms may be able to bring about the simulated improvements
in educational outcomes.


Eric A. Hanushek
Hoover Institution
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6010
and NBER
hanushek@stanford.edu

Ludger Woessmann
University of Munich
Ifo Institute for Economic Research and CESifo
Poschingerstr. 5
81679 Munich, Germany
woessmann@ifo.de
EDUCATIONAL OUTCOMES IN OECD COUNTRIES                                                                                       1




How much do educational
outcomes matter in OECD
countries?*


Eric A. Hanushek and Ludger Woessmann
Hoover Institution, Stanford University, NBER and CESifo; University of Munich, Ifo Institute
for Economic Research, CESifo and IZA




1. INTRODUCTION

     Despite its surge over the past two decades, research in the economics of growth –
   both theoretical and empirical – has produced surprisingly few resilient results about
   policies that might promote long-run growth in developed countries (cf. Aghion and
   Howitt (2006)). Most of the robust results that exist refer either to the importance of
   basic economic institutions, with important policy implications for developing countries,
   or to policies that affect short- to medium-term growth in developed countries. Here we
   present evidence that improved human capital, measured by cognitive skills, has the
   potential for substantial improvements in the long-run economic well-being of OECD
   countries.
     The immense variation in the long-run growth experiences of developed countries has
   largely escaped notice. For example, from 1960 to 2000, GDP per capita grew by less
   than 1.5 percent on average per year in New Zealand and Switzerland, but by more than
   4 percent per year in Ireland, Japan, and South Korea. As a consequence, the average
   Korean was about 10 times as well off in 2000 as in 1960, and the average Irish and
   Japanese about 5 times. By contrast, the average New Zealander and Swiss was only

   *
     Paper presented at the 52nd Panel Meeting of Economic Policy in Rome. We thank the editor and four anonymous referees
   for their comments. Woessmann gratefully acknowledges the support and hospitality provided by the W. Glenn Campbell and
   Rita Ricardo-Campbell National Fellowship of the Hoover Institution, Stanford University, as well as support by the Pact for
   Research and Innovation of the Leibniz Association.
EDUCATIONAL OUTCOMES IN OECD COUNTRIES                                                                                      2

  1.6-1.8 times as well off than 40 years before. These stark differences are directly
  visible when comparing the three fastest-growing and the three slowest-growing
  countries highlighted (together with the US) in Figure 1, which plots GDP per capita in
  1960 and 2000: Korea surpassed several other OECD countries, including Mexico;
  Japan and Ireland went from 40-45 percent to 131-140 percent of New Zealand’s
  income; and Ireland caught up to Switzerland from an initial level of 35 percent of its
  GDP per capita.
    This paper focuses on these long-run growth differences among OECD countries. Our
  results show that educational outcomes play a leading role in their understanding, and we
  estimate how much improvements in educational outcomes could matter for developed
  economies. The paper builds on existing growth analyses that focus attention on
  cognitive skills, as opposed to the more commonly measured school attainment or years
  of school completed (see Hanushek and Woessmann (2008) for a review). But while
  much of the existing analysis is focused on developing countries and their difference
  from developed countries, here we focus on whether cognitive skills also matter in
  understanding growth differences among rich countries.
    The basis of assessment of the role of human capital is a series of cross-country growth
  regressions that characterize variations in growth rates between 1960 and 2000. Our
  analysis of growth differences relies largely on the 24 OECD countries with consistent
  data on cognitive skills and economic growth across the period, although we also
  provide some relevant comparisons with the expanded sample of 50 countries that
  incorporates non-OECD countries.1 Section 2 provides the basic estimates of growth
  models along with investigation of the sensitivity of the results to sample, model
  specification, and the like. The clear result is that richer measures of human capital
  based on international math and science tests dramatically increase the ability of the
  statistical models to explain growth differences across OECD countries. Moreover, the
  estimated relationship is generally impervious to altered specifications of the model.
    Perhaps the leading candidate for being a more fundamental explanation of growth is
  the quality of a country’s economic institutions such as having secure property rights or
  an open economy. This idea – most fully developed by Daron Acemoglu and his co-
  authors – does not, however, have clear application in OECD countries where there is
  limited variation in these broad institutions (see Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson
  (2001, 2005)). Beyond these, considerable attention has been given to variations across
  the OECD in regulations of labor and product markets, bureaucratic burdens, and the
  like (see Nicoletti and Scarpetta (2003); Nicoletti and Pryor (2006)). The empirical
  application has, however, mostly addressed short-term growth effects at the industry
  level within countries.
    Section 3 provides new evidence on the role of various economic institutions in
  growth. While property-rights and free-trade institutions have been shown to contribute
  to differences in long-run growth between rich and poor countries, and while labor- and

  1
    With the limited country samples, there is a distinct trade-off between incorporating the added observations from the full
  world sample and restricting the economic relationships to being the same across all countries. Throughout the analysis, we
  provide information on the similarities and differences of developed and developing countries.
EDUCATIONAL OUTCOMES IN OECD COUNTRIES                                                       3

  product-market regulations have been shown to contribute to differences in short-run
  growth among rich countries, we show that neither set of institutions helps us understand
  differences in long-run growth rates within the group of OECD countries.
    In part, this analysis also enters into the debates about the relative importance of
  institutions and human capital as stressed by Glaeser, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and
  Shleifer (2004). Our results strongly favor cognitive skills, our measure of human
  capital, over institutions as a fundamental source of OECD-country growth differences.
    While cognitive skills can be developed in a variety of ways, we focus on some
  fundamental questions about school policy. Educational policy differs considerably by
  country, with different countries pursuing very different investment approaches. At one
  level, it is seen in very different levels of tertiary education. For example, while
  Australia currently has 86 percent of a cohort entering tertiary education, Norway has 66
  percent, and Italy has 53 percent (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
  Development (2009a)).
    Indeed, Vandenbussche, Aghion, and Meghir (2006) argue that tertiary schooling is
  key for developed countries (see also Aghion and Howitt (2006)). They develop a
  model where countries close to the world technology frontier should invest in colleges
  and universities in order to move the frontier out through innovation. Developing
  countries on the other hand should invest in more basic education since they will grow
  by imitating the technologies of more developed countries. This conclusion represents
  one of the few pieces of policy advice coming out of growth modeling that apply to
  developed countries. The evidence, however, comes entirely from consideration of
  school attainment and not the more refined measures of human capital used here.
    The central issue of Section 4 is whether different levels or types of skills have payoffs
  that differ between developing and developed countries. We separately measure basic
  and top skills, based on the micro data of the international achievement tests, and then
  consider the implications both of high skills and of tertiary schooling on growth. The
  results suggest that basic skills have substantial growth payoffs in OECD countries, and
  that if anything, the return to top skills is lower, not higher, in the OECD – i.e., opposite
  of the innovation/imitation hypothesis. We do not find a specific role of tertiary
  attainment for OECD growth once the focus is on long-run growth and direct measures
  of skills are taken into consideration.
    Results of the regression analyses suggest a strong and robust effect of cognitive skills
  on economic growth in OECD countries, but the regression analyses by themselves do
  not describe the path of benefits from any program of changing the skills of the
  population. In the next part of the paper (Section 5), we therefore perform projections of
  the economic value of a set of education reform alternatives for each OECD country
  under different parameter assumptions. Our focus is on understanding the dynamics of
  economic impacts of educational programs. Three elements of the dynamics are
  particularly important for our consideration: programs to improve cognitive skills
  through schools take time to implement; the impact of improved skills will not be
  realized until the students with greater skills move into the labor force; and the economy
  responds over time through the development and implementation of new technologies.
EDUCATIONAL OUTCOMES IN OECD COUNTRIES                                                                           4

     In order to capture these elements, a simple simulation model is developed.
  Specifically, we evaluate the economic outcomes of a series of plausible policy
  programs including improving student performance by 25 PISA points (1/4 standard
  deviation); bringing all countries in the OECD up to the level of Finland; and bringing
  all students in OECD countries to minimum proficiency (400 points on the PISA tests).
     The present value of the reform efforts vary by country, depending on current
  economic performance and current educational performance. However, the simulation
  exercises suggest that the aggregate gains across all OECD countries range from $90-
  275 trillion for the different policy alternatives. These gains, for example, far exceed the
  level of stimulus funds in the current global recession.
     We also provide detailed sensitivity analyses of the simulations with respect to a range
  of alternative specifications and parameter choices, including use of endogenous-growth
  and neoclassical-type specifications of the growth model; consideration of alternative
  coefficient estimates from the growth regressions; assessment of the lower and upper
  bound of the significance band around the growth-regression estimates; alternative time
  horizons for the future effects considered; alternative durations of the reform; alternative
  discount rates and growth rates of potential GDP; and alternative durations of working
  life.
     Knowledge of the potential gains from improving schools does not, however, indicate
  what should be done to obtain these results. In fact, school improvement has been high
  on the policy agenda of a large number of OECD countries, but the results of actions
  have many times fallen short of expectations. Emerging research results suggest that
  there are general policies that can promote significantly higher achievement. The final
  section considers policy options that could support achievement improvements along the
  lines of the simulations.

2. ECONOMIC MODELS AND BASIC RESULTS

    The basic theoretical and empirical framework follows developments of growth
  modeling over the past two decades. In this work, human capital typically plays a
  prominent role, but we present evidence that the measurement of human capital
  dramatically alters the assessment of its importance. Building on our database of
  international educational outcomes, we provide basic results on the relationship between
  educational outcomes and long-run growth in OECD countries.


2.1. Conceptual framework

    Economists have considered the process of economic growth for much of the last 100
  years, but most studies remained as theory with little empirical work.2 Over the past two
  decades, economists linked analysis much more closely to empirical observations and in


  2
    For an account of the historical development, see Barro and Sala-i-Martin (2004). The associated empirical work
  concentrated on within-country analyses such as Solow (1957), Jorgenson and Griliches (1967), or Denison (1985).
EDUCATIONAL OUTCOMES IN OECD COUNTRIES                                                     5

  the process rediscovered the importance of growth. The analysis here particularly
  concentrates on the role of human capital. Human capital has been a central focus of
  much of the recent growth modeling, and it is a standard element of any empirical work.
    The prior analytical work has nonetheless diverged in important ways. Economists
  have developed a number of alternative models designed to highlight important
  determinants of economic growth. These theoretical views about the determinants of
  growth have gone in a variety of directions (see Box 1). Two aspects of theoretical
  investigations stand out for the discussion here. First, each of the approaches suggests
  somewhat different empirical specifications for any statistical modeling. Second, while
  each of the approaches has some conceptual appeal, it has been difficult to test the
  validity of the alternatives in an adequate manner. The restricted variation of
  experiences across countries plus general data limitations have made it difficult to
  distinguish among the competing models of growth – and such is the case here.



  Box 1. Education in theories of economic growth

    Theoretical models of economic growth have emphasized different mechanisms
  through which education may affect economic growth. As a general summary, three
  theoretical models have been applied to the modeling of economic growth, and each has
  received support from the data. At the same time, it has been difficult to compare the
  alternative models and to choose among them based on the economic growth data.
    The most straightforward modeling follows a standard characterization of an aggregate
  production function where the output of the macro economy is a direct function of the
  capital and labor in the economy. The basic growth model of Solow (1957) began with
  such a description and then added an element of technological change to get the
  movement of the economy over time. The sources of this technological change,
  although central to understanding growth, were not an integral part of the analysis.
  Augmented neoclassical growth theories, developed by Mankiw, Romer, and Weil
  (1992), extend this analysis to incorporate education, stressing the role of education as a
  factor of production. Education can be accumulated, increasing the human capital of the
  labor force and thus the steady-state level of aggregate income. The human capital
  component of growth comes through accumulation of more education that implies the
  economy moves from one steady-state level to another; once at the new level, education
  exerts no further influence on growth. The common approach to estimating this model is
  to relate changes in GDP per worker to changes in education (and capital).
    A very different view comes from the “endogenous growth” literature that has
  developed over the past two decades. In this work, a variety of researchers (importantly,
  Lucas (1988), Romer (1990a), and Aghion and Howitt (1998)) stress the role of
  education in increasing the innovative capacity of the economy through developing new
  ideas and new technologies. These are called endogenous growth models because
  technological change is determined by economic forces within the model. Under these
EDUCATIONAL OUTCOMES IN OECD COUNTRIES                                                                                    6

  models, a given level of education can lead to a continuing stream of new ideas, thus
  making it possible for education to affect growth even when no new education is added
  to the economy. The common way to estimate these models is to relate growth rates in
  GDP per worker (or per capita) to the level of education.
    A final view of education in production and growth centers on the diffusion of
  technologies. If new technologies increase firm productivity, countries can grow by
  adopting these new technologies more broadly. Theories of technological diffusion such
  as Nelson and Phelps (1966), Welch (1970), and Benhabib and Spiegel (2005) stress that
  education may facilitate the transmission of knowledge needed to implement new
  technologies. In tests involving cross-country comparisons, Benhabib and Spiegel
  (1994) find a role for education in both the generation of ideas and in the diffusion of
  technology.



    Our empirical analysis adopts a very simple growth model that combines elements of a
  general “endogenous growth” framework and a basic “augmented neoclassical”
  approach. Specifically, we model a country’s growth rate as a function of the skills of
  workers and other factors that include initial levels of income and technology, economic
  institutions, and other systematic factors. Skills are frequently referred to simply as the
  workers’ human capital stock.

                             growth = α1 human capital + α2 other factors + ε                                          (1)

    In this formulation, nations with more human capital tend to continue to make greater
  productivity gains than nations with less human capital. The fact that the rate of
  technological change and productivity improvement is directly related to the stock of
  human capital of the nation makes it an endogenous growth model. The relationship
  between cognitive skills on the one hand and innovations and technology on the other
  seems to be a natural view of the role of education. At the same time, by including the
  initial level of income among the control variables, our model does allow for conditional
  convergence, a leading feature of the “augmented neoclassical” approach, the commonly
  suggested alternative view.
    The empirical macroeconomic literature focusing on cross-country differences in
  economic growth has overwhelmingly employed measures related to school attainment,
  or years of schooling, to test the human capital aspects of growth models.3 Initial
  analyses employed school enrollment ratios (e.g., Barro (1991); Mankiw, Romer, and
  Weil (1992)) as proxies for the human capital of an economy. An important extension
  by Barro and Lee (1993, 2010) was the development of internationally comparable data
  on average years of schooling for a large sample of countries and years, based on a
  combination of census and survey data.


  3
    The earliest studies used adult literacy rates (e.g., Azariadis and Drazen (1990); Romer (1990b)) but these data cover a
  limited number of countries and are error prone.
EDUCATIONAL OUTCOMES IN OECD COUNTRIES                                                                                         7

    The vast literature of cross-country growth regressions has tended to find a significant
  positive association between quantitative measures of schooling and economic growth.4
  To give an idea of the robustness of this association, an extensive empirical analysis by
  Sala-i-Martin, Doppelhofer, and Miller (2004) of 67 explanatory variables in growth
  regressions on a sample of 88 countries found that primary schooling was the most
  robust influence factor (after an East Asian dummy) on growth in GDP per capita in
  1960-1996.
    Nevertheless, we believe that these formulations introduce substantial bias into the
  estimation. Average years of schooling is a particularly incomplete and potentially
  misleading measure of education for comparing the impacts of human capital on the
  economies of different countries. It implicitly assumes that a year of schooling delivers
  the same increase in knowledge and skills regardless of the education system. For
  example, a year of schooling in South Africa is assumed to create the same increase in
  productive human capital as a year of schooling in Korea. Additionally, formulations
  relying on this measure assume that formal schooling is the primary (sole) source of
  education and that variations in non-school factors have negligible effects on education
  outcomes and skills. This neglect of cross-country differences in the quality of
  education and in the strength of family, health, and other influences is probably the
  major drawback of such a quantitative measure of schooling.
    To see this, consider a standard version of an education production function as
  employed in a very extensive literature (see Hanushek (2002) for a review), where skills
  are expressed as a function of a range of factors:

                        human capital = β1 family inputs + β 2 schooling inputs +                                           (2)
                              β 3 individual ability + β 4 other factors + υ

  In general, human capital combines both school attainment and its quality with the other
  relevant factors including education in the family, labor market experience, health, and
  so forth.
    Thus, while school attainment has been convenient in empirical work because of its
  ready availability across countries, its use as a proxy for human capital is very
  restrictive. Not only does it ignore differences in school quality, but also any other
  important determinant of people’s skills. Still, human capital is a latent variable that is
  not directly observed. To be useful and verifiable, it is necessary to specify its
  measurement.
    A more satisfying alternative is to incorporate variations in cognitive skills, which can
  be determined by results of international assessments of mathematics, science, and
  reading achievement, as a direct measure of the human capital input into empirical
  analyses of economic growth. The focus on cognitive skills has a number of potential
  advantages. First, it captures variations in the knowledge and ability that schools strive
  to produce and thus relates the putative outputs of schooling to subsequent economic

  4
    For extensive reviews of this literature, see, e.g., Topel (1999); Temple (2001); Krueger and Lindahl (2001); Sianesi and Van
  Reenen (2003).
EDUCATIONAL OUTCOMES IN OECD COUNTRIES                                                                                          8

  success. Second, by emphasizing total outcomes of education, it incorporates skills from
  any source – families, schools, and ability. Third, by allowing for differences in
  performance among students with differing quality of schooling (but possibly the same
  quantity of schooling), it opens the investigation of the importance of different policies
  designed to affect the quality aspects of schools.5 Fourth, it is practical because of the
  extensive development of consistent and reliable cross-country assessments.


2.2. Data

    Our analysis relies on the measures of cognitive skills developed in Hanushek and
  Woessmann (2009). These combine data from international tests given over the past 45
  years in order to develop a single comparable measure of skills for each country that can
  be used to index skills of people in the labor force.6
    Between 1964 and 2003, twelve different international tests of math, science, or
  reading were administered to a voluntarily participating group of countries (see
  Hanushek and Woessmann (2010) for a review). These include 36 different possible
  scores for year-age-test combinations (e.g., science for students of grade 8 in 1972 as
  part of the First International Science Study or math of 15-year-olds in 2000 as a part of
  the Programme on International Student Assessment). The assessments are designed to
  identify a common set of expected skills, which were then tested in the local language.
  It is easier to do this in math and science than in reading, and a majority of the
  international testing has focused on math and science. Each test is newly constructed,
  until recently with no effort to link to any of the other tests.
    The methodology used to construct consistent measures at the national level across
  countries relies on empirical calibration of the different tests. By transforming the
  means and variances of the original country scores (partly based on external longitudinal
  test score information available for the United States), each is placed into a common
  distribution of outcomes (see Hanushek and Woessmann (2009) for details).7 Each age
  group and subject is normalized to the PISA standard of mean 500 and individual



  5
    Some recent work has introduced the possibility that noncognitive skills also enter into individual economic outcomes (see
  importantly Bowles, Gintis, and Osborne (2001), Heckman, Stixrud, and Urzua (2006), and Cunha, Heckman, Lochner, and
  Masterov (2006)). Hanushek and Woessmann (2008) integrate noncognitive skills into the interpretation of general models
  such as above and show how this affects the interpretation of the parameter on school attainment and other estimates. While
  there are no agreed-upon measures of noncognitive skills, at the aggregate level they might well be incorporated in “cultural
  differences.” The importance of such cultural differences in empirical models of growth is considered in Hanushek and
  Woessmann (2009).
  6
    With few exceptions direct measures of achievement of people in the labor force are unavailable, and analysis instead must
  rely upon skills measured during the schooling period. The one exception with measures of the cognitive skills of people in
  the labor force is the 1994-98 International Adult Literacy Survey (IALS), which tested representative samples of people aged
  16-65 years. Coulombe, Tremblay, and Marchand (2004) have used these data to construct synthetic cohorts in order to
  estimate an augmented neoclassical growth model across 14 countries. As discussed below, this construction causes no
  problems if the relative performance of people in different countries has remained constant, but it could introduce problems if
  that is not true.
  7
    Transforming scores based on just the mean and variance is appropriate if the underlying score distribution is normal but
  potentially introduces errors for other underlying distributions. A look at the underlying data reveals that the distribution of
  PISA scores within the OECD is normal, even if the distributions in individual countries may not be. In the analysis of
  minimal and top skills below, the calculations employ the empirical micro distributions for each of the countries and do not
  assume normality.
EDUCATIONAL OUTCOMES IN OECD COUNTRIES                                                                                        9

  standard deviation of 100 across OECD countries, and then all available test scores are
  aggregated to the country level.
    We interpret the test scores as an index of the human capital of the populations (and
  workforce) of each country. This interpretation of our averages over different cohorts is
  reasonable if a country’s scores have been stable over a long period, implying that
  estimates from the current school-aged population provide an estimate of the older
  working population. If scores (and skills) do in fact change over time, some
  measurement error is clearly introduced. We know that scores have changed some
  (Hanushek and Woessmann (2009)), but within our period of observations it still appears
  that the differences in levels dominate any intertemporal score changes.8 Nonetheless,
  any measurement error in this case will tend to bias downward the estimates of the
  impact of cognitive skills on growth, so that our estimates of economic implications will
  be conservative.
    The data on GDP per capita and its growth for our analyses come from the Penn World
  Tables (Heston, Summers, and Aten (2002)). Data on quantitative educational
  attainment are taken from the latest version of the Barro and Lee (2010) database.
  Additional measures of specific control variables will be discussed in the specific
  sections below.
    Table 1 provides basic descriptive statistics on the combined measure of educational
  performance and the underlying economic data. We have already discussed the wide
  variation in growth rates across OECD countries. What is also clear from Table 1 is that
  both school attainment and test scores vary widely, suggesting directly that any impact
  of these human capital measures on growth differences should be easily detected.


2.3. Basic results for OECD countries

    We use the data on educational outcomes to estimate cross-country regressions that
  describe long-run growth for OECD countries. This follows a growing literature which,
  over the past ten years, demonstrates that consideration of cognitive skills dramatically
  alters the assessment of the role of education and knowledge in the process of economic
  development. Analyzing growth in 1960-1990 for a sample of 31 countries with
  available data (including 18 OECD countries), Hanushek and Kimko (2000) first showed
  a statistically and economically significant positive relationship between cognitive skills
  and economic growth. This relationship between cognitive skills and economic growth
  has been subsequently confirmed in a range of studies with different focuses.9 Most
  recently, Hanushek and Woessmann (2009) extend the empirical analysis to incorporate
  50 countries that have participated in one or more international testing occasions
  between 1964 and 2003 and have aggregate economic data for the period 1960-2000.
  We use that database for our analysis focused on OECD countries.

  88
      The subsequent simulations that investigate the impact of changing achievement for each country assume that the increments
  to achievement change for each cohort affects the labor force skills proportionally to their weight in the age distribution.
  9
     Important studies include, for example, Barro (2001), Woessmann (2003b), Bosworth and Collins (2003), and Ciccone and
  Papaioannou (2009). See Hanushek and Woessmann (2008, 2010) for reviews.
EDUCATIONAL OUTCOMES IN OECD COUNTRIES                                                     10

    As a starting point for our analyses, we replicate the basic analysis, only replacing the
  extended version of the Cohen and Soto (2007) data on years of schooling by the newly
  available latest version of the Barro and Lee (2010) database on years of schooling. Our
  sample contains the 24 OECD countries with available data. From the total of 30 OECD
  countries, the sample misses four countries – the Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, and
  the Slovak Republic – because their communist history prevents them from having
  internationally comparable economic data during the period of analysis in the underlying
  database. In addition, Germany drops out because of missing economic and test score
  data for the Eastern parts before 1990, and Luxembourg is left out as a small country
  with a population of less than one million, as is common in growth analysis (see
  Mankiw, Romer, and Weil (1992)).
    Table 2 presents the basic results on the association between educational outcomes and
  long-run economic growth in the sample of OECD countries. The inclusion of initial
  GDP per capita in all specifications simply reflects the fact that it is easier to grow when
  one is farther from the technology frontier, because one just must imitate others rather
  than invent new things. (This “convergence term” enters into the subsequent projections
  of economic impacts from school reform, because it suggests that any differences in
  growth rates from changes in cognitive skills will eventually die out; see Section 5
  below).
    When the cognitive-skill data are ignored (column (1)), years of schooling in 1960 are
  significantly associated with average annual growth rates in real GDP per capita in 1960-
  2000, after controlling for the initial level of GDP per capita. However, once cognitive
  skills are included in the model (column (2)), the whole explanatory power is taken over
  by cognitive skills. Cognitive skills are highly significantly associated with economic
  growth. At the same time, the association between years of schooling and economic
  growth becomes statistically insignificant and drops to close to zero. Furthermore, the
  OECD-sample growth variance explained by the model increases from 56 percent to 83
  percent when measuring human capital by cognitive skills rather than years of schooling.
  Note that in the OECD sample, the bivariate association with initial per-capita GDP
  already accounts for 49 percent of the variance in subsequent growth, making the
  relative increase in understanding non-convergence growth through cognitive skills
  substantial.
    The estimated coefficient on cognitive skills implies that an increase of one standard
  deviation in educational achievement (i.e., 100 test-score points on the PISA scale)
  yields an average annual growth rate over 40 years that is 1.86 percentage points higher.
  This historical experience suggests a very powerful response to improvements in
  educational outcomes, particularly when compared to the average 2.2 percent annual
  growth within the OECD over the past two decades.
    Figure 2 depicts the fundamental association graphically, plotting growth in real per-
  capita GDP between 1960 and 2000 against average test scores after allowing for
  differences in initial GDP per capita and initial average years of schooling. With the
  slight exceptions of New Zealand (below the regression line) and the United States
  (above) – to which we return below – the OECD countries align closely along the
EDUCATIONAL OUTCOMES IN OECD COUNTRIES                                                                              11

  regression line that depicts the positive association between cognitive skills and
  economic growth.
    Column (3) of Table 2 reports the same model excluding years of schooling, whose
  effect could not be significantly differentiated from zero. The point estimate on
  cognitive skills, as well as the adjusted R2, increases slightly in this reduced model.
    Columns (4) and (5) break down the analysis into the 20-year sub-periods of 1960-
  1980 and 1980-2000. The positive association of growth with cognitive skills is clearly
  visible in both sub-periods, with the point estimate slightly larger in the later period.
    To reduce concerns of reverse causality between economic growth and quantitative
  schooling investments, the basic model uses school attainment in 1960 before the growth
  period, but combines that with average test scores over the entire period. However, the
  results are hardly affected by using average years of attainment across the period
  (column (6)).
    Because of the limited sample size, we want to ensure that results are not driven by
  individual outliers. Columns (7) and (8) show the robustness of results to excluding
  specific countries. Column (7) excludes Mexico and Turkey, two countries at the
  bottom of the sample of OECD countries today in terms of measures of GDP per capita,
  socioeconomic background, and educational spending. While the point estimate on
  cognitive skills is slightly reduced, the association remains strong and statistically highly
  significant. The same is true when excluding Korea (column (8)), a country with
  extraordinary conditional test scores and growth experience (see Figure 2).
    Finally, columns (9) and (10) provide tests for differences in the education-growth
  nexus between OECD and non-OECD countries. The sample now is the full sample of
  50 countries with data on test scores and economic growth. In the model without
  cognitive skills (column (9)), the significant association between years of schooling and
  economic growth does not differ significantly between OECD and non-OECD countries.
  However, the OECD dummy is marginally significant at the 10-percent level and
  positive, indicating a remaining growth advantage of OECD countries unexplained by
  the model. But once cognitive skills are included in column (10), neither the OECD
  dummy nor its interaction with cognitive skills are statistically significant, indicating that
  the OECD countries actually fit well within the rest of the world on this association.10
  We return to this issue when considering the separate impacts of economic institutions.

3. CAN INSTITUTIONS EXPLAIN DIFFERENCES IN RICH-COUNTRY
   GROWTH?

    To understand to what extent consideration of institutional differences across OECD
  countries contributes to long-run growth differences and alters the assessment of the
  importance of educational outcomes, this section focuses on fundamental institutional
  measures of property rights and openness as well as measures of the regulation of
  product and labor markets in our OECD-country growth models.

  10
    The OECD dummy and the interactions are also not significant if both interactions – with years of schooling and with
  cognitive skills – are included together.
EDUCATIONAL OUTCOMES IN OECD COUNTRIES                                                                                     12

3.1. Property-rights and free-trade institutions

    Most economists believe that fundamental economic institutions are important for a
  well-functioning economy, and by implication for economic growth. The review in
  Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2005) strongly supports this premise. Many studies
  have by now confirmed that institutions such as security of property rights and openness
  to international trade help to understand long-run differences in economic well-being
  between developed and developing countries. However, the extent to which such
  institutions also help to explain long-run growth differences among developed countries
  is less clear. Indeed, most OECD countries do not differ much in this respect, as they
  have all reached high levels of property-rights security and international openness.
  While these institutional factors may have contributed historically to their development,
  the lack of variation across countries would indicate that they lack power in explaining
  growth differences with the OECD.
    To test whether institutional differences contribute to our understanding of long-run
  growth differences between OECD countries and whether their consideration alters our
  result on the importance of educational outcomes, Table 3 enters basic institutional
  measures into our growth models. Two measures have been most consistently found to
  be associated with growth and income differences in global country samples. The first is
  the measure of security of property rights used, among others, by Acemoglu, Johnson,
  and Robinson (2001). The measure is an index of the protection against expropriation
  risk, averaged over 1985-1995, from Political Risk Services, a private company which
  assesses the risk that investments will be expropriated in different countries. The
  measure is scaled from 0 to 10, with higher values corresponding to higher security of
  property rights. The second is the measure of openness proposed by Sachs and Warner
  (1995, 1997). The index reflects the fraction of years between 1960 and 1998 that a
  country is classified as having an economy open to international trade, based on five
  factors including tariffs, quotas, exchange rate controls, export controls, and whether or
  not a socialist economy (see also Lucas (2009) for a recent application).
    Without considering cognitive skills, protection against expropriation is significantly
  associated with economic growth across the OECD countries between 1960 and 2000
  (column (1) of Table 3). However, when cognitive skills are included in the model, the
  coefficient on the institutional variable drops substantially in size and becomes
  statistically insignificant, whereas the coefficient on cognitive skills remains highly
  significant and close to our previous models without institutional controls (column (2)).
  The statistical model clearly favors educational outcomes over institutions as a
  fundamental source of long-run growth differences between OECD countries. This
  result supports the view expressed in Glaeser, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer
  (2004) that human capital may be the more basic source of growth than institutions.11

  11
     The analysis of Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2001) has provided considerable support for the power of economic
  institutions based on their development of instruments based on historical colonization patterns. An underlying argument is
  that colonists could bring with them a set of fundamental institutions that can be useful in explaining current institutions.
  Glaeser, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2004) argue that the colonists not only brought knowledge of institutions
  but also human capital – and that the human capital might be more fundamental to the growth process.
EDUCATIONAL OUTCOMES IN OECD COUNTRIES                                                                                13

    Conceptually, it is an open question whether any connection between human capital
  and institutions stems from human capital causing better institutions or the opposite. But
  at least within the group of OECD countries, that part of institutional variation that is not
  related to cognitive skills is not related to long-run growth, whereas that part of skill
  variation that is not related to institutions remains a strong predictor of long-run growth.
    Column (3) adds the measure of openness to the model. Property-rights security and
  openness to trade are individually and jointly insignificant in predicting long-run OECD
  growth, whereas cognitive skills remain strongly significant. Again, the insignificance
  in the institutional measures does not mean that institutions are unimportant for long-run
  growth. Rather, they point to the fact that the OECD countries share broadly similar
  institutions, so that this kind of institutional variation is unlikely to account for much of
  the substantial variation in long-run growth in this rich-country sample. For example,
  while there is some variation in the openness measure among OECD countries, it is very
  specific and limited. Most OECD countries are coded as open throughout the period of
  observation. The exceptions are Mexico, New Zealand, and Turkey that had substantial
  periods of being more closed, but the differences between the openness of these and the
  remainder of the OECD explain little of OECD growth differences.
    This argument is underlined by results of the full-country sample (column (4)). The
  institutional measures enter jointly significantly in explaining long-run growth
  differences among the 50 countries with available data. However, as the specification
  reported in column (5) indicates, there is a significant difference in the institutions-
  growth nexus between the OECD countries and the non-OECD countries. The
  interaction between an OECD indicator and protection against expropriation brings the
  institutional effect close to zero in the OECD sample, and the difference is marginally
  significant (at the 13 percent level). The OECD indicator and the interaction jointly
  reach statistical significance at conventional levels.12
    In sum, property-rights and free-trade institutions help us understand long-run growth
  differences between rich and poor countries, but they do not contribute to our
  understanding of long-run growth differences within the group of rich countries. By
  contrast, the significant effect of cognitive skills on long-run growth in the OECD
  sample is robust to the inclusion of the institutional measures.


3.2. Regulation of product and labor markets

    While the variation in fundamental property-rights and free-trade institutions may be
  limited among OECD countries, a substantial literature has stressed significant
  differences in how OECD countries regulate their product and labor markets. For
  example, Nicoletti and Scarpetta (2003) show that short-run growth experiences across
  OECD countries are related to product market regulations, and Cingano, Leonardi,
  Messina, and Pica (2010) find that employment protection legislation is associated with


  12
       An interaction between openness and the OECD indicator does not reach significance when added to this model.
EDUCATIONAL OUTCOMES IN OECD COUNTRIES                                                                            14

  firm-level investment and other firm outcomes across sectors and across firms with
  different financial constraints.
    The question is to what extent the effects found for short- to medium-run growth
  experiences and for between-industry and between-firm growth carry over to the long-
  run growth experiences of countries. For example, effects of product market regulations
  on sectoral productivity may lead to structural change and international specialization,
  thereby reducing any net effects on aggregate growth rates. Similarly, differences in
  employment protection legislation may lead to differential growth experiences in booms
  versus recessions that cancel out over the business cycle.
    To test the importance of product and labor market regulations for long-run OECD
  growth, we add a rich set of regulatory measures that the OECD has developed over the
  past decade to our growth models. Specifically, we employ the latest versions of these
  far-ranging indicators of regulations of both product and labor markets. These are
  documented for product market regulations (PMR) in Venn (2009), who updates
  previous versions since Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
  (1999), and for employment protection legislation (EPL) in Wölfl, Wanner, Kozluk, and
  Nicoletti (2009), who update previous versions since Nicoletti, Scarpetta, and Boylaud
  (2000).13
    The results, reported in Table 4, are unambiguous and telling: Not a single of the large
  battery of measures derived to depict product and labor market regulations comes close
  to being significantly related to the variation in long-run growth experiences across
  OECD countries. At the same time, regulatory practices do not affect the result that
  educational outcomes are a powerful predictor of long-run growth differences among
  OECD countries.
    Specifically, the first six columns of Table 4 employ aggregate and sub-indicators of
  product market regulation. Each indicator is scaled from 0 to 6, with higher values
  reflecting more restrictive policies. The first column uses the most aggregate indicator
  of product market regulation, which is constructed from a total of 18 low-level
  indicators. The coefficient is insignificant and close to zero. The same is true for the
  two broad sub-categories of administrative regulation and domestic economic regulation
  (columns (2) and (3)). The next three columns report results for the specific sub-
  indicators referring to measures of state control, barriers to entrepreneurship, and
  barriers to trade and investment, respectively. None of the measures is significantly
  associated with long-run OECD growth.
    Additional specific robustness specifications (not shown) confirm this basic result. For
  example, the results hold for all underlying sub-indices, including indicators of public
  ownership, involvement in business operations, regulatory and administrative opacity,
  administrative burdens on start-ups, barriers to competition, and explicit and other
  barriers to trade and investment. The available indicators of product market regulation
  refer to 1998, the first year for which they are available. While earlier measures would


  13
     For details on the measures of product market regulation and employment protection, see www.oecd.org/eco/pmr and
  www.oecd.org/employment/protection, respectively.
EDUCATIONAL OUTCOMES IN OECD COUNTRIES                                                     15

  be preferable, these should still capture the most basic overall patterns, under the
  assumption that main institutional variation is in the cross-section. At least, results are
  unaffected by using the available indicators for 2003 or 2008 instead, or by taking the
  average over the three observations, indicating that lack of results is not driven by single
  measurement error. In addition, to align the regulatory measures more closely with the
  period of growth observations, we performed all regressions for growth between 1980
  and 2000. Results were unaffected.
    The final five columns of Table 4 employ aggregate and sub-indicators of labor market
  regulation, which again range from 0 to 6 with higher values reflecting more restrictions.
  Columns (7) and (8) add the two versions of the aggregate employment protection index
  suggested by the OECD to the model. The first version combines regulations of regular
  employment contracts and of temporary contracts, and the second version adds sub-
  indices of additional regulation of collective dismissal to this. Neither measure enters
  the model significantly or affects the estimate on cognitive skills. The same is true when
  the three sub-indicators of protection of permanent workers against (individual)
  dismissal, strictness of regulation on temporary forms of employment, and specific
  requirements for collective dismissal separately (columns (9)-(11)).
    The indicators of employment regulation are measured as averages of the annual
  values between 1985 and 2000. Results are similar when the growth period is restricted
  to 1980-2000, which aligns more closely to the period of observation of the regulatory
  measures, is used instead of 1960 to 2000 (not shown). Results are also robust to the
  new, third version of the aggregate OECD employment protection index, available only
  in 2008, which adds the maximum time to make a claim of unfair dismissal,
  authorization and reporting requirements for temporary work agencies, and regulations
  requiring equal treatment of regular and agency workers at the user firm as three new
  sub-indicators.
    Beyond the regulatory measures reported in Table 4, Nicoletti and Pryor (2006) survey
  a total of 16 objective and subjective measures of governmental regulation from four
  different studies, including Botero et al. (2004), Kaufmann, Kraay, and Zoido-Lobatón
  (1999), Pryor (2002), and earlier versions of the indicators used above. While the above
  objective indicators are based on extensive reviews and quantifications of laws and
  regulations, other more subjective indicators are based on observational data of experts
  familiar with the regulations. The different indicators also cover different sets of
  regulations on product and labor markets, as well as overall business regulations more
  generally. Not a single of the regulation measures is significantly associated with long-
  run growth across OECD countries in our basic model (not shown). These results
  confirm that the lack of a significant association with long-run OECD growth does not
  hinge on a specific objective or subjective method of quantifying institutional realities or
  on a specific area of regulations.
    The results of including institutional and regulatory measures in the growth regressions
  rule out that the strong association of educational outcomes with growth is just driven by
  omitted causal institutional factors. In fact, the analysis provides no convincing
  evidence that institutional or regulatory differences can account for differences in long-
EDUCATIONAL OUTCOMES IN OECD COUNTRIES                                                       16

  run growth among rich countries. Instead, cognitive skills emerge as the one strong
  policy factor underlying growth differences across OECD countries.

4. DIFFERENT LEVELS OF SKILLS AND EDUCATION

    An important and recurring policy question is which level of skills and education is
  most decisive for OECD growth. We analyze several dimensions of this: whether there
  are differential returns across countries to average skills; whether basic skills are more or
  less important than top levels of skills; and whether there is a specific role of tertiary
  attainment for OECD growth.


4.1. Differential returns to average skills

    As a first dimension of heterogeneity, we analyze whether the effect of average
  educational outcomes differs along specific dimensions. First, the graphical plot of
  Figure 2 suggests that there is no obvious non-linearity in the test score-growth
  association across OECD countries. Thus, a squared test-score term does not enter the
  model significantly, and an exponential test-score specification does not improve the fit
  of the model (not shown).
    Second, there is no obvious difference in the effect of average test scores between
  countries with initially low vs. high income. While the small sample size does not allow
  for extensive interaction models, an interaction of test scores with an indicator for above-
  median initial GDP per capita does not enter the model significantly (not shown).
    Third, Figure 3 plots quantile regression estimates in 5 percent steps of the effect of
  average test scores for percentiles of the growth distribution. It is evident that the effect
  is relatively constant across the whole distribution of growth residuals. In fact, all
  quantile regression point estimates fall within standard confidence intervals around the
  OLS estimate. The estimated average effect thus provides a good representation of the
  effect across the full range of quantiles of the conditional growth distribution and is not
  driven by specifics in certain parts of the conditional distribution.
    The combined results of non-linear specifications, skill interactions, and quantile
  regressions suggest no obvious patterns of differential returns to average cognitive skills in
  the sample of OECD countries.


4.2. Basic vs. top skills

    A leading policy question refers to the effects of different ranges of the skill
  distribution. Should developed countries implement relatively egalitarian education
  policies or rather relatively elitist policies? Should they focus on decent basic skills for
  the whole population or on nurturing top scientists and engineers? To address such
  questions, we make use of the micro data of each of the international achievement tests
  to calculate the population shares in each country that reach a threshold of basic skills
EDUCATIONAL OUTCOMES IN OECD COUNTRIES                                                                                    17

  and a threshold of top skills (see Hanushek and Woessmann (2009) for details). Using
  such distributional information allows us to look at different dimensions of the skill
  distribution separately.
    Conceptually, Vandenbussche, Aghion, and Meghir (2006) assume that the innovation
  process is more intensive in high-skill labor than the imitation process. They then
  present an endogenous growth model with innovation and imitation where high-skill
  labor has a greater growth-enhancing effect for countries closer to the technological frontier,
  whereas countries further from the technological frontier get greater value from what they
  call “unskilled human capital”. While the untested underlying assumption seems
  reasonable, there are also reasonable arguments to be made for an opposite assumption –
  in which case the main prediction of the model would be turned around. In particular,
  the innovation literature points out that many innovations emerge from lucky
  coincidences. By contrast, almost by definition purposeful imitation processes require
  the employment of skilled scientists.
    Another conceptual extension starts from the perspective of a high-skilled scientist. If
  this scientist were to work in a country that produces at the technological frontier, his
  only option is to use his skill in the innovation of new technologies. If the scientist, by
  contrast, were to work in a country that produces far below the technological frontier, he
  also has the option to employ his skills in such innovative activities, but he also has the
  alternative additional option to employ his skills in imitating the more productive
  technologies currently employed at the technological frontier. This scientist will tend to
  choose to employ his skills in the activity that promises the higher benefits. In such a
  setting, the return to high-skill labor cannot be smaller below the technological frontier
  than at it, and it may well be larger. While concentrations of high-skilled labor and
  spillovers across them may still be important, the alternative perspectives do introduce
  questions about the underlying assumptions.
    Given the conflicting conceptual predictions, the issue warrants a new empirical look.
  In particular, while the empirical application in Vandenbussche, Aghion, and Meghir
  (2006) measures growth in 5-year periods, which may be substantially influenced by
  business cycles and idiosyncratic shocks across 19 OECD countries, we keep our focus
  on differences in long-term growth experiences across the OECD countries. In addition,
  while Vandenbussche, Aghion, and Meghir (2006) conceptualize the difference between
  high- and low-skill labor as school attainment at the tertiary vs. non-tertiary level, our
  alternative focus on top vs. basic skills may provide an empirical distinction particularly
  relevant for imitation and innovation processes.
    We start by replicating the results in Hanushek and Woessmann (2009) of
  incorporating both the share of students who reach a basic level of skills (a score of at
  least 400 on the tests) and the share of students who reach top-level skills (a score of at
  least 600) in a growth regression of the full 50-country sample of OECD and non-OECD
  countries (column (1) of Table 5).14 Both skill dimensions enter the model significantly,

  14
     These scores are one standard deviation below and above the OECD mean, respectively. The OECD also identifies five
  levels of skills on each of its tests (see, for example, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (2004)). The
  400 falls in the range of level 1 while the 600 falls in the range of level 5.
EDUCATIONAL OUTCOMES IN OECD COUNTRIES                                                      18

  but the point estimate on the top-skill dimension is substantially higher. A ten
  percentage-point increase in the basic-skill share is associated with 0.3 percentage points
  higher annual growth, and a ten percentage-point increase in the top-skill share is
  associated with 1.3 percentage points higher annual growth. (Note that this does not
  necessarily provide an estimate of the relative importance of the two skill dimensions, as
  it may be much more feasible to increase the basic share than to increase the top share by
  the same amount; this might be suggested by the fact that the international standard
  deviation of the basic skill percentage is about four times as large as that of the top-skill
  level).
     When estimating the same model on the OECD sample, though, the point estimate on
  the top-skill share is only a fourth of the one estimated in the full country sample and
  loses statistical significance (column (2)). By contrast, the point estimate on the basic-
  skill share is slightly larger than in the full country sample, and remains highly
  significant. The specification of column (3) shows that the difference in the estimate on
  the top-skill share between OECD and non-OECD countries is statistically significant.
  Of course, the measures of the two skill dimensions are highly collinear (their correlation
  is 0.73 in the full sample and 0.70 in the OECD sample), limiting precision in the joint
  specification. Results in columns (4)-(9), however, reveal that the pattern of results is
  similar when entering one of the two measures at a time.
     While small samples and collinearity obviously suggest caution in the interpretation of
  these results, it seems clear that basic skills are relevant for OECD-country growth.
  Furthermore, if anything, high-level skills appear more important in non-OECD than in
  OECD countries, rather than the other way around.


4.3. Non-tertiary vs. tertiary schooling

    The available test score measures – for average, basic, and top skills – are measured at
  the primary and secondary level of schooling. However, a lot of policy discussion
  focuses on another dimension of schooling, namely whether developed countries should
  place a particular focus on primary, secondary, or tertiary education. Vandenbussche,
  Aghion, and Meghir (2006) suggest that countries close to the technological frontier
  should rather emphasize tertiary education. To investigate this dimension, we make use
  of the new, improved Barro and Lee (2010) database which provides average years of
  schooling separately at the primary, secondary, and tertiary level. With little meaningful
  variation in the completion of primary education across the bulk of OECD countries, we
  combine the two basic levels of schooling into one category of non-tertiary schooling.
    In the full-country sample, the coefficients on non-tertiary and tertiary schooling are
  both close to zero when cognitive skills are controlled for (column (1) of Table 6). By
  contrast, in the OECD sample, the point estimate on years of tertiary schooling becomes
  larger (column (2)), and reaches marginal significance (at the 10 percent level) when
  years of non-tertiary schooling are not included in the model (column (3)). However,
  results in column (4) indicate that this is completely driven by the United States. Once
EDUCATIONAL OUTCOMES IN OECD COUNTRIES                                                                           19

  the United States is excluded, the coefficient on tertiary education is much small and
  insignificant again. The United States is well-known for its extensive tertiary education
  system, and Figure 2 already indicated that the United States has the strongest positive
  residual in the growth model. While this might be an indication of growth-enhancing
  effects of its high-quality higher-education system, the lack of robustness in the sample
  without the United States suggests that it might rather be an indication of the high-skilled
  immigrant population that it attracts, of a particular set of economic institutions (not
  captured by our institutional measures), or of any other idiosyncrasy of the US
  economy.15
    An additional interesting pattern emerges when employing the measures of different
  skill dimensions. When the basic-skill share is used as an alternative skill measure to the
  average skills, years of tertiary schooling reach significance (column (5)). When, by
  contrast, the top-skill share is used, the coefficient on years of tertiary schooling
  becomes smaller and loses any significance (column (6)). This pattern is indicative that
  years of tertiary education proxy for the share of students with high-level skills. When
  the United States is disregarded, the coefficient on years of tertiary schooling declines to
  close to zero in this specification (column (7)).
    While the possibility to distinguish the effects of different dimensions of the skill and
  schooling distribution again is limited in these small samples, some basic patterns prove
  clear. First, the significant effect of cognitive skills is extremely robust to consideration
  of any quantitative measure of different levels of school attainment. Second, the finding
  of Vandenbussche, Aghion, and Meghir (2006) of a particular effect of tertiary
  attainment in rich countries is not robust once the focus is on long-run growth
  experiences and educational outcome measures are taken into account. Of course, this
  does not mean that learning beyond the secondary level does not matter. Rather, in the
  spirit of a lifecycle interpretation where early skills facilitate the development of
  subsequent skills (Heckman (2006); Cunha, Heckman, Lochner, and Masterov (2006)), it
  means that outcome measures of learning in school are a good predictor for the
  accumulation of further skills in life and the capacity to deploy these skills effectively.

5. CALCULATING THE ECONOMIC VALUE OF EDUCATION REFORMS

    The results so far indicate that educational outcomes have a strong effect on long-run
  economic growth of OECD countries. However, they do not tell us directly how much
  improvements in educational outcomes would actually be worth. In particular, the
  growth-rate effects do not map linearly into the economic value of any education reform
  in a country, not least because different time lags are involved between successful
  reform in the education system today and the improvement of skills in the national
  workforce.
    In this section, we therefore perform simulation analyses that use the estimates from
  the previous sections to project what the results mean for the economic impact of


  15
       See Aghion et al. (2010) for additional analyses of tertiary education in Europe and the United States.
EDUCATIONAL OUTCOMES IN OECD COUNTRIES                                                    20

  different scenarios of school improvements in the OECD member states. The
  projections presume that the estimated impacts of cognitive skills on growth are causal
  in nature – that is, changing the achievement of a country’s population will lead to
  improved growth. Of course, considerable controversy surrounds such cross-country
  growth regressions and any causal interpretation of them (see, for example, Levine and
  Renelt (1992), Levine and Zervos (1993), and Bils and Klenow (2000)). In other work,
  we have considered a series of analyses aimed at eliminating many of the natural
  concerns about the identification of the causal impacts of cognitive skills (Hanushek and
  Woessmann (2009)). Each of the analyses points to the plausibility of a causal
  interpretation of the basic models. Nonetheless, with our limited international variations,
  it is difficult to demonstrate identification conclusively. Therefore, here we consider a
  variety of sensitivity analyses designed to show the impact on outcomes when part of the
  estimated effects is non-causal.
     We consider three specific reform scenarios: first, improving average student
  performance 1/4 standard deviation, or 25 PISA points, in each country; second,
  bringing all OECD countries up to the level of the PISA top-performer, Finland; and
  third, bringing all students in OECD countries to minimum proficiency, defined as 400
  points on the PISA test scale. For each scenario, we aim to project the future path of
  development of GDP in a country to calculate the economic value of the education
  reform in present-value terms.
     One final issue of the projections is important. Because we consider economic
  outcomes far into the future, the precise form of the underlying growth model potentially
  makes a noticeable difference. In particular, an endogenous growth model that implies
  constant growth effects from improved skills will differ from a neoclassical growth
  model that sees changes in skills as affecting the level of income but not the long-run
  growth rate of an economy. Our previously estimated models support analysis of this
  range of underlying models, and applying the alternatives gives another idea of the
  bounds on future economic effects from school improvement.


5.1. The projection model

    The projection of the total value of any education reform involves several components.
  First, we calculate the time path of the annual growth rate engendered by education
  reform designed to move students from their current performance to a given new level.
  This pattern of economic outcomes represents the confluence of three separate dynamic
  processes: (1) Changes in schools lead to the progressive improvement in student
  achievement until students fully reach the new steady-state level of achievement; (2)
  students with better skills move into the labor force and the average skills of workers
  increase as new, higher achieving workers replace retiring workers; and (3) the
  economy responds to the progressive improvement of the average skill level of the
  workforce. Second, based on the pattern of predicted growth rates, we model the future
  development of GDP with and without the education reform. Third, based on these
EDUCATIONAL OUTCOMES IN OECD COUNTRIES                                                        21

   projections, we calculate the total value of the reform by aggregating the discounted
   values of the annual differences between the GDP with reform and the GDP without
   reform.
     Our initial depiction is based on the endogenous-growth framework where higher test
   scores yield a permanent increase in the long-run growth rate. We subsequently consider
   a neoclassical framework where the additional convergence term makes the annual
   growth rate a negative function of the (log) level of GDP reached in the previous period.
   This alternative implies that the additional growth due to higher test scores is only
   transitory, leading to a new higher income steady-state path but one where the economy
   grows in the long run at the same rate as it would have without the reform.

5.1.1. Increase in the annual growth rate in the different phases
     For expositional convenience, the description of the projections follows the basic
   Scenario I where each OECD country begins an educational reform program in 2010 that
   takes 20 years to be fully implemented and where subsequent students reach the new
   achievement level. The economic value of the reforms is then traced across an 80-year
   period (which represents the expected lifetime of somebody born in 2010). The basic
   set-up is easily modified to consider alternative scenarios.
     a) Phase 1 (2010-2030): In the baseline simulations, the education reform program is
   assumed to take 20 years to complete, and the path of increased achievement during this
   phase is taken as linear. The additional growth in GDP per capita due to the reform in
   year t is given by:

                                                          1         t − 2010
          Δt = growth coefficient * ΔPISA *                       *          + Δt −1         (3)
                                                     working life      20

   where the growth coefficient stems from the regression estimations presented in the
   previous sections and ΔPISA is the increase in the average PISA test score due to the
   respective reform. The working life term indicates that each cohort of new, higher
   achieving students is only a fraction of the total labor force.
     b) Phase 2 (2031-2050): The education reform is now fully enacted, and achievement
   of all subsequent students remains at the new level. But for the length of a work life
   from the start of reform, which in the baseline simulations is assumed to last 40 years,
   there are still workers with initial levels of skills that are being replaced in retirement by
   higher achieving workers. During this phase, the additional growth in GDP per capita in
   year t due to the reform is given by:

                                                                 1
                 Δt = growth coefficient * ΔPISA *                       + Δt −1             (4)
                                                            working life
EDUCATIONAL OUTCOMES IN OECD COUNTRIES                                                            22

     c) Phase 3 (2051-2070): During this phase, the first 20 labor-market cohorts – which
   only partially profited from the education reform – are replaced by cohorts that profited
   from the fully enacted education reform:


         Δt = growth coefficient * ΔPISA *
                                                         1
                                                    working life
                                                                     (                        )
                                                                 − Δt −40 − Δt − 41 + Δt −1 (5)


     d) Phase 4 (after 2070): Finally, the whole workforce has gone through the reformed
   education system. The annual growth rate is now increased by the constant long-run
   growth effect Δ:

                              Δ = growth coefficient * ΔPISA                                      (6)


5.1.2. Development of GDP with and without reform
     a) Without reform, the economy grows at the constant growth rate of potential GDP:

                    GDPnot reform = GDPnot −1reform * (1 + potential growth )                     (7)


    b) With reform, the annual growth rate is additionally increased by the growth effect
   Δ:t



                       t
                   GDPreform       t −1
                             = GDPreform        (
                                         * 1 + potential growth + Δt                )             (8)


     In the neoclassical specification, an additional term ensures that the growth rate is
   negatively affected by the (log) level of GDP reached in the previous period. As a
   consequence, the annual growth rate without and with reform will converge to the same
   rate of potential growth in the long run.

5.1.3. Total effect of the reform
     The total value of any reform is given by the sum of the discounted values of the
   annual differences between the GDP with reform and the GDP without reform:

                                Total value of the reform =

                ∑ (GDP                              )
               t = 2090                                                                           (9)
                                    − GDPnot reform * (1 + discount rate )
                            t                                                − ( t − 2010 )
                           reform
               t = 2010


   In the baseline scenario, the time horizon over which future returns will be considered is
   the lifetime of a child that is born at the beginning of the reform, which equals the year
   2090.
EDUCATIONAL OUTCOMES IN OECD COUNTRIES                                                                                          23

5.1.4. Parameter values
     Implementing the projection model requires a number of parameter assumptions.
   Three parameter choices have already been indicated: the duration of the education
   reform of 20 years, the length of a working life of 40 years, and the overall time horizon
   of 80 years. In addition, the model requires assumptions about the growth coefficient,
   the rate of potential growth without the education reform, and the discount rate. Here,
   we outline the parameter choices for the baseline scenario. Below, we will also provide
   robustness analyses of results to alternative parameter choices.
     The simulation does not adopt any specific reform package but instead focuses just on
   the ultimate change in achievement. For the purposes here, reforms are assumed to take
   20 years to complete, and the path of increased achievement during the reform period is
   taken as linear. For example, an average improvement of 25 points on PISA is assumed
   to reflect a gain in the student population of 1.25 points per year. This might be realistic,
   for example, when the reform relies upon a process of upgrading the skills of teachers –
   either by training for existing teachers or by changing the workforce through
   replacement of existing teachers. This linear path dictates the quality of new cohorts of
   workers at each point in time.
     The expected work life is assumed to be 40 years, which implies that each new cohort
   of workers is 2.5 percent of the workforce. Thus, even after an educational reform is
   fully implemented, it takes 40 years until the full labor force is at the new skill level. We
   are not aware of direct estimates of this parameter in the literature. However, estimates
   for Germany based on pension insurance data suggest values in the range of 35 to 40
   years for the length of the average working life (see Woessmann and Piopiunik (2009)
   for details).
     The length of the time period over which gains are calculated is somewhat arbitrary
   and depends in part on the use of the analysis for any policy decisions. The benchmark
   here considers all economic returns that arise during the lifetime of a child that is born at
   the beginning of the reform in 2010. According to the most recent data (that refer to
   2006), a simple average of male and female life expectancy at birth over all OECD
   countries is 79 years (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
   (2009c)).16 Therefore, the baseline calculations take a time horizon until 2090,
   considering all future returns that accrue until then, but neglecting any returns that
   accrue after 2090.
     In order to consider the impacts of improvement on OECD countries, the simulations
   rely on the estimates of growth relationships derived from the 24 OECD countries with
   complete data. As indicated in column (2) of Table 2, the coefficient estimate is 1.864,
   suggesting that, e.g., a 50 point higher average PISA score (i.e., one-half standard
   deviation higher) would be associated with 0.93 percent higher annual growth in the long
   run. This estimate clearly includes some uncertainty, a factor that is also included in the
   robustness analyses below. (Below we also consider a neoclassical alternative where the

   16
      Note that these life expectancy numbers are based on age-specific mortality rates prevalent in 2006, and as such do not
   include the effect of any future decline in age-specific mortality rates. Life expectancy at birth has increased by an average of
   more than 10 years since 1960.
EDUCATIONAL OUTCOMES IN OECD COUNTRIES                                                                                          24

  impact on growth rates is not assumed to be permanent but in fact falls over time
  according to the estimated convergence parameter until growth rates return to the current
  level).
     The value of improvement in economic outcomes from added growth depends, of
  course, also on the path of economies that would be obtained without educational
  improvement. The analysis here takes the annual growth of OECD economies in the
  absence of education reform to be 1.5 percent. This is simply the average annual growth
  rate of potential GDP per worker of the OECD area over the past two decades: 1.5
  percent in 1987-1996 and 1.4 percent in 1997-2006 (Organisation for Economic Co-
  operation and Development (2009b)).
     Finally, because economic benefits accrue at varying times into the future, it is
  important to recognize that more immediate benefits are both more valuable and more
  certain than those far in the future. In order to incorporate this, the entire stream is
  converted into a present discounted value. In simplest terms, the present discounted
  value is the current dollar amount that would be equivalent to the future stream of
  returns calculated from the growth model. If we had that amount of funds and invested
  it today, it would be possible to reproduce the future stream of economic benefits from
  the principal amount and the investment returns. Thus, this calculation of present
  discount value allows a relevant comparison for any other current policy actions.
     In doing so, the discount rate at which to adjust future benefits becomes an important
  parameter. A standard value of the social discount rate used in long-term projections on
  the sustainability of pension systems and public finance is 3 percent (e.g., Börsch-Supan
  (2000), Hagist, Klusen, Plate, and Raffelhüschen (2005)), a precedent that is followed
  here.17 By contrast, the influential Stern Review report that estimates the cost of climate
  change uses a discount rate of only 1.4 percent, thereby giving a much higher value to
  future costs and benefits (Stern (2007)). In our robustness analyses, we will also
  consider such alternative discount rates.
     A number of additional assumptions go into the projections. First, they assume that
  skills play the same role in the future as they have in the past, so that the evidence of past
  results provides a direct way to project the future. Second, while the statistical analysis
  did not look at how economies adjust to improved skills, the calculations assume that the
  experience of other countries with greater cognitive skills provide the relevant insight
  into how the new skills will be absorbed into the economy. Third, the projection of
  simultaneous improvement across countries presumes that all countries can grow faster
  without detracting from (or benefiting) growth in other countries.




  17
     As a practical value for the social discount rate in cost-benefit analysis (derived from an optimal growth rate model), Moore
  et al. (2004) suggest using a time-declining scale of discount rates for intergenerational projects that do not crowd out private
  investment, starting with 3.5 percent for years 0-50, 2.5 percent for years 50-100, 1.5 percent for years 100-200, 0.5 percent for
  years 200-300, and 0 percent years over 300. (The proper starting value is actually 3.3 percent based on the parameter values
  they assume for the growth rate in per capita consumption (2.3 percent), the social marginal utility of consumption with respect
  to per capita consumption (1), and the utility discount rate (1 percent)).
EDUCATIONAL OUTCOMES IN OECD COUNTRIES                                                                                       25

5.2. Results of base scenarios

     We start with the results of the baseline projection model in an endogenous-growth
   framework for the three education reform scenarios. All calculations are in real
   (inflation-adjusted) terms – 2010 dollars under purchasing power parity.

5.2.1. Scenario I: Increase average performance by 25 PISA points
     A simple starting point is to consider the economic impact on OECD countries of a
   0.25 standard deviation improvement, equivalent to a 25 point increase on PISA scores.
   The reform policy is begun in 2010 and on average yields 25 point higher scores in 2030
   that remain permanently at that level for all subsequent students.18
     A policy like this is uniform across countries, so the relative improvement is the same
   for all countries.19 Figure 4 provides a summary of the marginal impact on GDP for
   each year into the future. While there are no impacts initially until higher-achieving
   students start becoming more significant in the labor market, GDP will be more than 3
   percent higher than what would be expected without improvements in human capital as
   early as 2041. (The figure also shows a 95 percent confidence bound of 1.9-4.1 percent
   higher GDP, based on the relevant 95 percent confidence bounds for the regression
   coefficient in column (2) of Table 2. By the end of expected life in 2090 for the person
   born in 2010, GDP per capita would be expected to be over 26 percent above the
   “education as usual” level.
     The magnitude of such a change is best understood with an example. In the absence of
   changes in educational policy, France would be expected to have a GDP (in 2010 USD)
   of $3,606 billion in 2041. If on the other hand it achieved the improvement in cognitive
   skills that took it from an average PISA score of 505 to 530, total GDP would be
   expected to be $3,715 in 2041, or $108 billion higher.20 These calculations illustrate a
   simple point: While 3 percent may at first seem like a small change, it is a very large
   number when applied to the entire GDP of any of the OECD countries.
     These calculations are by themselves misleading, because the impacts of improved
   cognitive skills continue to occur far into the future. The 3.0 percent improvement in
   2041 rises to a 5.9 percent improvement in 2050, 15.3 percent in 2070, and 26.3 percent
   in 2090. These dynamic improvements in the economy yield on-going gains to society,
   and the appropriate summary of the impact of educational improvements accumulates
   the value of these annual gains.


   18
      All calculations of PISA scores underlying the following simulations refer to the average performance in math and science
   (in line with the underlying growth model, as noted above), averaged over the three PISA cycles 2000, 2003, and 2006 (see
   Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (2001, 2003, 2004, 2007)). All underlying measures of Gross
   Domestic Product (GDP) are in US dollars, measured in purchasing power parities (PPP), expressed in prices of 2010. The
   GDP measures were calculated from the most recent measure of GDP in current prices and current PPPs available for all
   countries (2007, extracted from http://stats.oecd.org on 10 August 2009), projected to 2010 using OECD estimates of annual
   changes in potential GDP and in GDP deflators (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (2009b)).
   19
      Note that the calculations also assume that the top ranked countries can feasibly improve their scores. The relatively flat
   performance of countries such as Japan and Korea that have been at the top for a number of years raises the question about
   whether there is room for further improvement or whether there is some sort of ceiling effect in the existing tests. As an
   alternative, the next scenario will only assume improvements that do not go beyond the current top performer.
   20
      These calculations assume a constant population size over this period.
EDUCATIONAL OUTCOMES IN OECD COUNTRIES                                                     26

     Importantly, after all people in the labor force have obtained the new and improved
   education (in 2070), annual growth will be 0.47 percentage points higher. This implies
   that each country that achieves the average improvement of ¼ standard deviation of
   achievement will have a cumulative impact on the economy through 2090 that is equal to
   288 percent of current year GDP. The first column of Table 7 provides these discounted
   values of all of the future increases through 2090 for each OECD country. The dollar
   value for each country varies by the level of GDP in 2010 – but the total impact across
   the OECD is $123 trillion in present value.
     Because these are put into present value terms, they can be compared to current
   economic values.       For example, these calculations indicate that the value of
   improvements through long-run growth far outstrips the cost of the current worldwide
   recession (and are much larger than the worldwide fiscal stimulus efforts).

5.2.2. Scenario II: Bring each country to Finland average level (of 546 PISA points)
     The success of Finland on the PISA tests is well-known. In the second scenario, the
   performance of Finnish students is taken as a benchmark for the performance levels that
   are possible. The economic impact calculated is found from projecting the impact on
   growth for each OECD country under the assumption that it could bring itself to the top
   of the rankings as identified by Finland – an average PISA score of 546.
     Obviously, the amount of reform necessary varies by where each OECD country ranks
   on PISA today. Commensurately, the impact on different economies varies by the size
   of reform (in addition to the size of the economy itself). Finland, for example, under this
   scenario would neither change its schools nor see any long-term economic changes. On
   the other side, Mexico and Turkey would require enormous changes in their educational
   achievement, and, if the changes were feasible, would see their economies completely
   transformed.
     Columns (2)-(5) of Table 7 present the country-by-country impacts of these changes.
   On average, the OECD countries would see a nearly 50 point increase in performance
   (one-half standard deviation). While the change in Japan or Korea amounts to about 5
   points, the change in Mexico is 144 points – an almost inconceivable change given
   current knowledge of how to transform schools or cognitive skills in general. (Again,
   the calculations assume that adjustment is complete within 20 years. An alternative view
   would be that a number of countries would actually require more than 20 years for a
   reform program to yield such large changes. We model the implications in the
   robustness analyses below).
     The present value for OECD improvements under this scenario is $275 trillion, or
   more than six times the current GDP of the OECD countries. The United States itself,
   which currently falls over 50 points behind Finland, would by historical growth patterns
   see a present value of improved GDP of over $112 trillion, or some 40 percent of the
   OECD total – reflecting both the size of the country and its distance behind Finland.
   Germany would see a $17 trillion improvement, or more than five times current GDP.
EDUCATIONAL OUTCOMES IN OECD COUNTRIES                                                    27

     The rankings of countries according to increases compared to current GDP are shown
   in Figure 5. One interpretation of this figure is the amount of economic leverage from
   educational improvements that is possible for different OECD countries.

5.2.3. Scenario III: Bring everyone up to minimum skill level of 400 PISA points
     The final scenario considered is a “compensatory” improvement in education where all
   students are brought up to a minimal skill level – which is defined here as obtaining a
   score of 400 on the PISA tests, or one standard deviation below the OECD average.
   While the previous simulations could be thought of as displaying the results of shifting
   the entire achievement distribution, this scenario considers the implications of bringing
   up the bottom of the distribution.
     In order to understand the implications of changing just one portion of the achievement
   distribution, we employ the alternative estimation of the underlying economic growth
   models of column (2) of Table 5. Specifically, instead of relying on just average
   cognitive skills in the growth models, the proportion of the population with scores less
   than 400 and the proportion with scores over 600 are included in the growth models.
     For these calculations, all OECD countries including Finland have room for
   improvement. On average, 18 percent of students in the OECD countries score below
   400. As might be expected from the average scores, the required improvements are
   largest in Mexico and Turkey (see column (9) of Table 7).
     Columns (6)-(8) of Table 7 display the economic outcomes according to historical
   growth patterns of bringing all OECD students up to minimum competence levels. The
   overall OECD change would be an average annual growth rate that was 0.8 percent
   higher after reform was accomplished and after the full labor force had received the
   improved education. The total improvements for the OECD countries from achieving
   universal minimum proficiency would have a present value of $226 trillion. Again,
   there is a wide range of outcomes including relatively small improvements of 219
   percent of current GDP for Canada as compared to nine OECD countries that would
   experience a benefit more than five times their current GDP.
     The range of outcomes is depicted in Figure 6 that ranks countries by the benefits
   compared to current GDP. Even Finland could by these calculations over double its
   current GDP through bringing the relatively modest proportion of low performers (4.7
   percent) up to scores of 400. Note also that the effects of these policies on the separate
   countries differ from the previous scenario, reflecting the differences in the underlying
   distribution of student performance.


5.3. An alternative neoclassical growth framework

     The projections so far assume that higher educational achievement allows a country to
   keep on growing at a higher rate in the long run. Such a specification captures the basic
   ideas of endogenous growth theory, where a better-educated workforce leads to a larger
   stream of new ideas that produces technological progress at a higher rate (see Box 1
EDUCATIONAL OUTCOMES IN OECD COUNTRIES                                                                                             28

  above). By contrast, in the augmented neoclassical growth model, changes in test scores
  lead to higher steady-state levels of income but do not affect the long-run growth path.
  Our empirical growth model captures the conditional convergence implied by the
  neoclassical model – but also by a set of endogenous growth models – through including
  the initial GDP level as a control variable. An alternative approach for the projections is
  thus to interpret the model in the neoclassical rather than endogenous-growth framework
  and have educational reforms affect the steady-state level of income but not its long-run
  growth.
    To do so, we re-estimate our growth model with the logarithmic (rather than linear)
  per-capita GDP as control. The test-score coefficient hardly changes in this specification
  (1.718 rather than 1.864), and the coefficient on log initial income is -1.835. This
  estimated convergence rate of 1.8 percent is very close to the one expected under
  standard parameter assumptions in the augmented neoclassical growth model (Mankiw,
  Romer, and Weil (1992)). It means that (approximating around the steady state) an
  economy moves halfway to its steady state in about 38 years. Including this
  convergence process in our simulations allows us to perform projections that are in line
  with neoclassical growth theory. In these projections, growth rates with and without
  education reform will differ only during the transition to the new balanced growth path.
  In the long run, the economy will grow at the same rate after the reform as without the
  reform.
    We use the estimates from this model to simulate the trajectory from the old to the new
  balanced growth path in each year during our time horizon. To implement the idea that
  the world technological frontier grows at 1.5 percent in the absence of education reform
  in this model, we assume that in the aggregate the three countries with the largest shares
  of patents in the world – the United States, Japan, and Germany – grow at 1.5 percent
  without reform. Together, the three countries currently account for over 70 percent of
  worldwide patents (measured in triadic patent families, Organisation for Economic Co-
  operation and Development (2008)). We thus choose a constant growth parameter for
  each future year that has the weighted average of the three countries grow at 1.5 percent
  each year, where the weights are each country’s share in their combined GDP in the
  previous year.21
    Table 8 shows the results of the projections based on the neoclassical model
  specification. In reform Scenario I, where each country increases by 25 PISA points, the
  value of the reform – the discounted value of the future increases in GDP – amounts to
  $90 trillion in present value terms. While this provides a neoclassical lower bound to
  our previous projection of $123 trillion, the noteworthy fact is that over the time horizon
  of our projections until 2090 (and for a reform that takes until 2070 to take full force in

  21
     We also experimented with alternative ways to implement the growth of the technological frontier, and results fall into the
  same ballpark. The alternatives include holding the following growth rates constant at 1.5 percent: the (weighted) OECD
  average growth rate, the U.S. growth rate, a simple or weighted average of the U.S. and Finish growth rates, and a specification
  where “technological leadership” (as depicted in per-capita GDP) turns from the U.S. to Finland in the 2030s. The latter
  specifications reflect the fact that Finland, the country with the highest test scores, is projected to have the highest steady-state
  level of per-capita GDP in our model. Note that – consistent with such a model – in terms of patenting new technologies,
  Finland is currently already the country with the largest revealed technological advantage in ICT, as measured by ICT-related
  patents in total patents (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (2008)).
EDUCATIONAL OUTCOMES IN OECD COUNTRIES                                                                                      29

  the workforce), the difference between the neoclassical and the endogenous growth
  model has relatively minor political meaning. In either case, the value of the education
  reform is very large, at 288 percent or 211 percent of current OECD GDP. Note that in
  the neoclassical projections, the value of this reform as a share of current GDP differs
  across countries, because the convergence term means that projected growth rates
  depend on the level of GDP reached.
     To illustrate the specific dynamics of the neoclassical projections, it is worth
  discussing a few details of the trajectories of the projection. Initial growth rates (with or
  without reform) in 2010-11 differ across countries, depending on how far away they are
  from their steady state. The United States is projected to grow at 1.1 percent initially,
  whereas the simple mean of OECD-country growth rates is higher at 1.9 percent due to
  many countries’ room for catch-up.22 Due to the convergence process, average OECD-
  country growth is down to 1.6 percent in 2090 without the reform, ranging from 1.0-1.8
  percent across countries. With reform, the range is 1.2-2.0 percent, with an average of
  1.7 percent. By 2104, the average is down to 1.5 percent, and by 2130, all countries’
  growth rates have converged to between 1.3 and 1.6 percent without the reform and to
  1.4-1.7 percent with reform.
     In the neoclassical projections, the difference in average growth rates between the
  scenarios with and without reform grows to a maximum of 0.28 percentage points in
  about 2060 and then declines back to 0.18 percentage points in 2090 and 0.06 percentage
  points in 2150. (Compare this to the endogenous growth model where the long-run
  growth rate stays 0.47 percentage points higher starting in 2070.) By 2300, the
  difference in growth rates would be below 0.004 percentage points in each country.
  Thus, while the difference ultimately converges to zero, the model parameters imply that
  this convergence process takes a very long time to take full effect.
     In reform Scenario II, where each country improves to the test-score level of Finland,
  the present value of the reform amounts to $180 trillion in the neoclassical model,
  compared to the previous $275 trillion in the endogenous growth model – or more than
  four times (rather than six times) current GDP. Note that this scenario implies that in the
  very long run, each country converges to the same steady-state level of per-capita GDP,
  as test scores are the only variable influencing the steady-state level in our model.
  However, in 2090 the per-capita GDP of the most advanced country would still be 70.6
  percent higher than that of the least advanced country. By 2150, this difference would
  be down to 19.7 percent, and by 2300 to 1.2 percent.
     The present value of reform Scenario III, which brings all students to a minimum level
  of 400 PISA points, is $187 trillion in the neoclassical projections, rather than the $226
  trillion of the endogenous-growth type projections.23 Again, the difference over our time

  22
     Based on our model which depicts only effects of test scores and reached levels of income, Luxembourg and Norway – the
  two countries with the highest current levels of GDP per capita – are projected to converge to a lower balanced growth path
  (both without and with reform) and thus initially have the lowest growth rates. If these countries can keep their current
  advantage in per-capita relative to the other OECD countries in the future for reasons outside our model, this would increase
  the projected value of the educational reform in these countries.
  23
     In the underlying growth regression with log per-capita GDP as control variable, the coefficient on the proportion of the
  population with scores higher than 400 is 6.478 and the coefficient on log initial income is -2.107 (both significant at the 1
  percent level).
EDUCATIONAL OUTCOMES IN OECD COUNTRIES                                                    30

  horizon of projections is limited. Across the three reform scenarios, the neoclassical
  projection value is between 65 and 83 percent of the endogenous-growth projection
  value.
    The difference between the two growth models depends on the time horizon chosen.
  The further out the projections are carried, the more substantial does the difference
  between the two growth models get. The final four columns of Table 8 report the
  present value calculated with the estimated neoclassical version for reform Scenario II
  with time horizons varying between 2050 and 2150, respectively. The varying time
  horizons clearly make a huge difference in the estimated returns to reform and illustrate
  how the neoclassical and endogenous growth specifications differ. Compared to the
  endogenous-growth projections evaluated over the same time horizons (discussed in
  Table 9 below), the neoclassical projection is 81 percent of the endogenous-growth
  projection value for a time horizon until 2050, 65 percent until 2090, and 44 percent
  until 2150.
    Several factors contribute to the closeness of the estimates over our time period for the
  impact of improvements in cognitive skills based on the two different growth models.
  First, our reform scenarios gradually introduce changes, due to the lags for the policy to
  become fully effective and for the new, better-educated workers to change the average
  skills of the labor force. Our projections from the time after policies are fully felt
  involve just 20 years, a time too short to have huge differences in the implications of the
  alternative models. Second, the biggest impacts of the differences across the alternative
  models occur in the distant future, and thus the impact is lessened by discounting to
  obtain present values and by disregarding any returns that might accrue after 2090.
  Third, even ignoring discounting, the estimated convergence parameters imply very long
  periods before any country returns to its balanced growth path following a perturbation
  because of policy. Fourth, the present value of any reform keeps increasing even after
  full convergence has taken place and after growth returns to its pre-reform rates, because
  the economy is at a higher level due to the reform.
    As a consequence, for the (already long) time horizon taken here, the different
  dynamics of the neoclassical and endogenous growth model do not make a fundamental
  difference, regardless of whether human capital increases the long-run growth rate or
  not. The alternative set of neoclassical projections places a lower bound on the results
  based on the endogenous growth paradigm but retains the same order of magnitude.


5.4. Sensitivity to alternative parameter choices

    The different scenarios indicate very large economic changes from educational
  improvement, but the estimates come for specific parametric choices. How sensitive are
  the results to these specific choices? We look at sensitivity in terms of reform Scenario
  II of bringing each country to the Finish level of PISA scores in our baseline
  endogenous-growth-type model specification. The qualitative implications for changes
  in results, however, apply similarly for the other scenarios and growth model.
EDUCATIONAL OUTCOMES IN OECD COUNTRIES                                                   31

  Remember that in the baseline specification, the total value of the reform in the OECD
  amounts to $275 trillion, or 645 percent of the current GDP of OECD countries.
     The baseline model is based on the coefficient for education outcomes in the most
  general OECD growth regression framework, i.e., 1.864 percent of additional average
  annual growth for a one standard deviation increase in test scores (see column (2) of
  Table 2). However, not least because of the limited sample size of the growth
  regressions, the precise estimate of the growth effect of a test score increase is an open
  issue. Therefore, to see how sensitive the simulations are to alternative parameter
  assumptions for the growth coefficient, the first four columns of Table 9 perform the
  same projection calculations for the lowest and highest estimated parameters for
  cognitive skills in the different specifications of Table 2 – i.e., 1.398 and 1.968,
  respectively. This leads to an estimate of the total discounted value of the education
  reform for the OECD of $196 trillion and $295 trillion, respectively (or 459% and 690%,
  respectively, of current GDP). Thus, while these alternative parameter choices clearly
  make a difference, the bottom line of the projection analysis still is the same: No matter
  which of the coefficient estimates is used, the aggregate value of the education reform is
  enormous.
     An alternative way to account for the imprecision of the growth coefficient estimate,
  reported in columns (5)-(8) of Table 9, is to use the lower and upper bounds,
  respectively, of the 95 percent confidence interval around the baseline growth coefficient
  in the underlying growth regression. Results based on this analysis suggest that, with 95
  percent confidence, the net present value of the education reform is between $164 trillion
  and $406 trillion. While these differences are economically significant, the ultimate
  conclusion remains: Even at the bottom end of the confidence interval, the value of the
  reform still dwarfs any of the current stimulus packages by several orders of magnitude.
     Results so far incorporate any returns that accrue by the year 2090, but disregard any
  returns beyond that time horizon. Columns (9)-(12) of Table 9 report the net present
  value to which the reform results aggregate for time horizons to the years 2050 and
  2150, respectively. As already indicated by Figure 4, this clearly makes a huge
  difference. When restricting the time horizon to 2050, the value of the reform is “only”
  $36 trillion, and such a horizon neglects much of the very huge long-run growth effects.
  This indicates how important it is to adopt a long-term horizon in order to see the full
  effects of any education reform. Still, even by 2050, the net present value of the reform
  already accumulates to 85 percent of the current GDP of the OECD countries. By
  contrast, when adopting a time horizon until 2150, the (appropriately discounted) value
  of the reform sums to a staggering $948 trillion, or more than 20 time the current GDP.
     The baseline scenarios assume that it takes 20 years for the education reform to be
  fully implemented. The first four columns of Table 10 alternatively assume reform
  durations of 10 and 30 years, respectively. The faster reform implementation leads to an
  increase of the reform value to $341 trillion, whereas the reform value is “only” $223
  trillion if the reform takes 30 years to implement. Thus, while faster reform efforts
  obviously lead to substantially higher returns, even a slow (but successful) reform, if
  begun today, would have enormous impact.
EDUCATIONAL OUTCOMES IN OECD COUNTRIES                                                                                       32

    Columns (5) and (6) of Table 10 report results under the assumption that the average
  working life is 35 years, rather than 40 years, which appears to be a more reasonable
  estimate for many OECD countries. A shorter working life means that the replacement
  of the workforce with better-educated individuals completes faster, so that the aggregate
  value of the education reform increases. Assuming a 35 year work life yields a
  projection estimate of $304 trillion of the total value of the education reform.
    Finally, the rate at which future returns are discounted obviously makes a substantial
  difference for the net present value of a reform whose main returns do not start to pick
  for a whole generation. Thus, rather than using the common-practice 3 percent discount
  rate of the baseline model, columns (7)-(10) of Table instead use discount rates of 2.5
  percent and 3.5 percent, respectively. The resulting discounted present values of the
  projected returns are $369 trillion and $207 trillion, respectively. Thus, the precise
  values of these long-run projections are clearly sensitive to the choice of the discount
  rate. For a larger band of discount rate of 2 percent to 4 percent, the total discounted
  reform value would be $497 trillion and $157 trillion, respectively (not shown).
  However, other projections of long-run effects, in the area of climate change, have used
  much lower rates at which to discount the future. In particular, the influential Stern
  Review report places a much higher value on future costs and benefits by employing a
  discount rate of only 1.4 percent (Stern (2007).24 That report also assumes a slightly
  lower rate of potential growth of 1.3 percent (rather than 1.5 percent as in our other
  models), and this is used in our next estimate. Note that what is ultimately relevant for
  the projections is the difference between discount rate and rate of potential growth,
  yielding an effective discount rate of 0.1 percent in this scenario. If we were to adopt the
  discounting practice of the Stern report, the present value of the education reform would
  sum to a staggering $636 trillion, or roughly 15 times the current GDP, by 2090 (as
  reported in the final two columns of Table 10).
    The alternative projections under different parameter choices indicate that, while some
  of the parameter choices clearly have a big impact on the estimated reform value, even
  highly conservative parameter choices yield extremely large estimates of the aggregate
  value of the reform effects across the OECD.

6. POLICIES TO IMPROVE EDUCATIONAL ACHIEVEMENT

    The previous discussion has stressed the importance of cognitive skills for economic
  growth. The evidence indicates a strong impact of skills that can give rise to immense
  long-term benefits. Table 11 summarizes the projection results for the three scenarios
  and two underlying models under the baseline parameterization. Normalized against the
  discounted value of the projected future GDP of the OECD over the same time span
  (until 2090), the value of the reform amounts to 4.3-13.8 percent of the present value of
  future GDP. Independent on whether the underlying economic model is specified in


  24
     Note that this alternative discount rate is highly disputed in the economics literature (e.g., Nordhaus (2007); Tol and Yohe
  (2006).
EDUCATIONAL OUTCOMES IN OECD COUNTRIES                                                  33

  endogenous-growth or neoclassical terms, improved educational achievement is
  projected to have a large impact on future economic well-being of OECD countries.
    Yet simply knowing that skill differences are important does not provide a guide to
  policies that might promote more skills. Indeed, a wide variety of policies have been
  implemented within various countries without much evidence of success in either
  achievement or economic terms. We believe that the disappointing results of the past
  generally reflect pursuing policies for which there is little empirical support.
    Substantial research has gone into understanding why achievement differs across
  students and across countries. While controversies have existed about the interpretation
  of various individual pieces of evidence, considerable agreement now exists about what
  kinds of approaches are unreliable avenues for change. There is perhaps less agreement
  on the precise approaches that might be followed, but even here there is a growing
  consensus about the general sets of policies that have shown promise based on more
  credible research approaches.
    The work on achievement determinants generally falls under the heading “education
  production functions.” The extensive work has taken a variety of perspectives and
  approaches. The general objective is to sort out the causal impacts of school factors
  (things that can potentially be manipulated through policy) from other influences on
  achievement including family background, peers, neighborhood influences, and the like
  (which are less readily amenable to policy change). In this section, we discuss available
  evidence on the potential for different aspects of school policy – in particular, those
  focused on school resource, teacher quality, and institutional structures –to improve
  educational achievement significantly.


6.1. Evidence on school resources

    The most extensive generally available evidence relates to the effects of resources.
  Many policies undertaken involve substantial flows of resources – direct spending,
  changes in teacher salaries, reductions in class size, and the like – made within the
  context of current school organization. The empirical evidence clearly documents the
  difficulties with such policies. Simply providing more resources gives, according to the
  available evidence, little assurance that student performance will improve significantly.
  The underlying analyses of resources include studies within individual countries and
  across different countries and have been extensively reviewed elsewhere (see Hanushek
  (2003); Woessmann (2007a); Hanushek and Woessmann (2010)).
    The easiest way to see the situation is a simple cross-country picture. Figure 7 plots
  the descriptive association between educational expenditure per student and educational
  outcomes for recent OECD achievement tests, the PISA 2006 study. Ignoring Mexico
  and Turkey where cumulative expenditure per student (over the age range of 6 to 15
EDUCATIONAL OUTCOMES IN OECD COUNTRIES                                                                                        34

  years) of less than $20,000, there is no association between educational spending and
  educational outcomes across OECD countries.25
    Table 12 probes the cross-country expenditure-outcome relationship in education in
  greater detail. Columns (1) to (6) reveal that in all three cycles of the OECD PISA
  student achievement test – 2000, 2003, and 2006 – there is a very small positive
  bivariate association between expenditure per student and educational achievement that
  vanishes once countries below a very basic cumulative spending level of $25,000 are
  excluded. In fact, in the latter samples, the adjusted R2 of a regression of test scores on
  educational expenditure per student is actually negative in all three PISA cycles. Of
  course, many more factors such as students’ family backgrounds enter the determination
  of educational outcomes.
    The simplest way of addressing bias from unobserved time-invariant country factors is
  to ignore level differences and restrict the analysis to changes in expenditure and
  outcomes over time. Thus, column (7) reports a regression in first differences between
  2006 and 2000, and column (8) reports a fixed-effects regression that pools all three
  PISA cycles. In both cases, the association between expenditure per student and
  educational outcomes is far from being statistically significant at conventional levels,
  and the point estimates are actually negative. These descriptive patterns suggest that
  additional resources are not related systematically to improved test scores.26
    For policy deliberations, information on the impact of resources from within individual
  countries is perhaps more appropriate than cross-country information. Researchers have
  studied the determinants of student achievement for more than 40 years. The work was
  begun in the United States in the “Coleman Report” (Coleman et al. (1966)), which
  introduced the idea of using statistical analysis to relate various inputs of schools to
  student outcomes. This work also underscored the importance of including non-school
  factors by demonstrating that family differences were very important in explaining
  variations in achievement across students. While this original study has been subjected
  to considerable criticism, it led to an extensive line of research.
    The general picture about school resources in developed countries is now well known
  and has been reviewed in a variety of places (see Woessmann (2005a) for Europe and
  Hanushek (2002, 2003) for the United States). The available studies concentrate on
  various common inputs to schools such as teacher experience or class size. These
  factors are both readily available in both administrative and survey data sets and
  frequently identified as the focus of policy. The available econometric evidence now
  includes literally hundreds of separate estimates within the U.S. and other developed
  countries. Quite uniformly, however, there is little strong evidence that any of the


  25
     With the two outliers, there is a weak positive association as long as other effects are ignored. Taken literally, the gray
  regression line that includes Mexico and Turkey depicts an association where a doubling of expenditure in these two countries
  is associated with one tenth of a standard deviation in test scores. Note that the test score-growth nexus reported above was
  robust to dropping these two countries from the growth analysis.
  26
     These results also address the concern with the growth analyses reported above that there may be a simple simultaneous
  determination of schooling investments and economic growth. Specifically, if a nation becomes richer through growth, it
  might put more resources into its schools so as to increase its cognitive skills. However, the current results show that such
  expenditure increases are not associated with educational outcomes in the first place. Consequently, additional resources in the
  school system are unlikely to generate important reverse causality from growth to test scores.
EDUCATIONAL OUTCOMES IN OECD COUNTRIES                                                                                  35

  following factors has a consistent impact on achievement: the level of teacher education,
  the pupil-teacher ratio, the characteristics of administration, or the facilities of the
  school. Specifically, aggregating results across studies, a minority of estimates are
  statistically different from zero (at the 5 percent level or better), and the studies do not
  even uniformly indicate improvements in performance with increased resources. A
  second line of studies focuses on financial inputs. A number of studies simply relate
  spending per student to achievement or capture teacher differences by teacher salaries.
  While these studies tend to be lower quality, they also fail to show a consistent
  relationship between financial resources and achievement.
    These results have been controversial. A variety of debates have taken place around
  the correct interpretation of prior work (see, for example, Burtless (1996)). The most
  important line of debate has involved study quality and whether or not these works
  adequately control for various inputs that might complicate the interpretation of
  resources. For example, the statistical models may not adequately account for other
  inputs that affect achievement such as the quality of family inputs. The estimates might
  then erroneously attribute the higher achievement due to better family factors to some of
  the characteristics of schools.
    A simplistic view of this argument – convenient as a straw man in public debates – is
  that ‘money never matters.’27 The research of course does not say that. Nor does it say
  that ‘money cannot matter.’ It simply underscores the fact that there has historically
  been a set of decisions and incentives in schools that have blunted any impacts of added
  funds, leading to inconsistent outcomes. That is, more spending on schools has not led
  reliably to substantially better results.


6.2. Teacher quality

    The most current research on school inputs and achievement has also led to another set
  of conclusions – that teacher quality is enormously important in determining student
  achievement. This work has concentrated on whether some teachers consistently
  produce more gains in student achievement than other teachers.28 Working with
  extensive panel data on individual students from different U.S. states, these studies have
  confirmed large differences among teachers in terms of outcomes in the classroom.
    But, they have also shown that the observed differences are not closely related to
  commonly observed characteristics of teachers (such as amount of teacher education).
  Some attributes of teachers – such as having one or two years of experience – have
  explained part of the differences in teacher quality, but these factors are a small part of
  the overall variance in teacher results.29 This inability to identify specific teacher

  27
     For the historical framing of the question, see the exchange between Greenwald, Hedges, and Laine (1996) and Hanushek
  (1996).
  28
     See, for example, Hanushek (1971, 1992), Rockoff (2004), Rivkin, Hanushek, and Kain (2005), and a number of subsequent
  studies reviewed in Hanushek and Rivkin (2010).
  29
     There is some indication that teachers’ own academic skills measured by scores on achievement tests may be an important
  factor (see Wayne and Youngs (2003), Eide, Goldhaber, and Brewer (2004), and Hanushek and Rivkin (2006) for reviews), but
  methodologically more sophisticated work is needed before conclusive assessments can be given on this dimension.
EDUCATIONAL OUTCOMES IN OECD COUNTRIES                                                      36

  qualities makes it difficult to regulate or legislate having high-quality teachers in
  classrooms. It also contributes to our conclusions below that changes in the institutional
  structure and incentives of schools are fundamental to improving school outcomes.


6.3. Institutional structures and incentives in the school system

    Similar to the importance of economic institutions for national economies, it is
  difficult to have a highly functioning education system without a supportive institutional
  structure. On this matter, however, there are more different opinions and perhaps a
  wider divergence in outcomes. Part of the reason for the divergent opinions is simply a
  lack of sufficient experience, analysis, and evidence.
    The evidence does suggest some clear general policies that are important. Foremost
  among these, the performance of a system is affected by the incentives that actors face.
  That is, if the actors in the education process are rewarded (extrinsically or intrinsically)
  for producing better student achievement, and if they are penalized for not producing
  high achievement, achievement is likely to improve. The incentives to produce high-
  quality education, in turn, are created by the institutions of the education system – the
  rules and regulations that explicitly or implicitly set rewards and penalties for the people
  involved in the education process. Therefore, one might expect that institutional features
  have important impacts on student learning.
    The unifying theme of these institutional studies is that the key to improvement
  appears to lie in better incentives – incentives that will lead to managerial decisions
  keyed to student achievement and that will promote strong schools with high-quality
  teachers. Here, three interrelated policies come to the forefront: promoting more
  competition, so that parental demand will create strong incentives to individual schools;
  autonomy in local decision making, so that individual schools and their leaders will take
  actions to promote student achievement; and, an accountability system that identifies
  good school performance and leads to rewards based on this.
    Choice and Competition. Choice and competition in schools were proposed a half
  century ago by Milton Friedman (1962). The simple idea is that parents, interested in
  the schooling outcomes of their children, will seek out productive schools. This
  demand-side pressure will result in incentives for each school to produce an effective
  education system. These incentives will also put pressure on schools to ensure high-
  quality staff in addition to a good curriculum.
    In many school systems (with the Netherlands being the most obvious example), a
  number of privately managed schools provide alternatives for students. These schools,
  which also often have a religious affiliation, are part of the natural institutional
  framework. Unfortunately, little thorough evaluation has been done of the choice
  possibilities, in large part because there is no obvious comparison group (i.e., choice is
  instituted for an entire country and there is no example of the no-choice alternative). In
  a cross-country comparison, students in countries with a larger share of privately
  managed schools tend to perform better on average (cf. Woessmann (2007b, 2009);
EDUCATIONAL OUTCOMES IN OECD COUNTRIES                                                                                      37

  Woessmann, Luedemann, Schuetz, and West (2009)), and recent evidence corroborates
  the conclusion that this is due to a causal effect of private-sector competition (West and
  Woessmann (2010)).30
    In the U.S., there are limited examples of private school choice, ranging from the
  publicly funded school vouchers in Milwaukee, Cleveland, and Washington, DC, to
  privately financed voucher alternatives.31 The evaluations of these generally show that
  the choice schools do at least as well as the regular public schools, if not better (see
  Rouse (1998); Howell and Peterson (2002)).32
    In Europe, Bradley and Taylor (2002) and Levačić (2004) find similar positive effects
  of school competition on the performance of English schools. Sandström and Bergström
  (2005) and Björklund, Edin, Freriksson, and Krueger (2004) provide evidence on
  significant positive effects of competition from privately operated schools on the
  performance of public schools in Sweden. Filer and Münich (2003) show that the
  introduction of a voucher-type system in the Czech Republic led to the creation of
  private schools in areas where public schools are doing badly and that the public schools
  facing private competition improved their performance.
    The major issue on choice and competition is still the limited experience. Teachers
  unions and administrator groups invariable dislike the idea of competition – because it
  puts pressure on them. Thus, not many examples of operational, large-scale attempts at
  competition have been evaluated.
    Autonomy and Decentralization. Several institutional features of a school system can
  be grouped under the heading of autonomy or decentralization, including local decision
  making on different matters, fiscal decentralization, and parental involvement. Almost
  any system of improved incentives for schools depends upon having school personnel in
  individual schools and districts heavily involved in decision making. It is difficult to
  compile evidence on the impact of autonomy, because the degree of local decision
  making is most generally a decision for a country (or state) as a whole, leaving no
  comparison group within countries. Across countries, students tend to perform better in
  schools that have autonomy in personnel and day-to-day decisions (Woessmann (2003a,
  2007b); Woessmann, Luedemann, Schuetz, and West (2009)), in particular when there is
  accountability (see also the review in Hanushek and Woessmann (2010)).
    The U.S. states have varying amounts of local autonomy. One systematic form of
  school autonomy is “charter schools,” which are public schools that are allowed to
  perform quite autonomously. (Note that these are actually hybrids of choice schools and
  public-school autonomy, because they survive only if sufficient numbers of students are
  attracted to them and continue to attend them). These schools are relatively new, a fact


  30
     Note that private school management does not mean private school funding; the international evidence suggests that both
  private school management and public school funding are associated with better achievement across countries (Woessmann
  (2009)).
  31
     The largest U.S. voucher program in the State of Florida provides vouchers for special needs students (Greene (2007)).
  While there is considerable satisfaction with this program, there is no evaluation available that is based on explicit outcome
  measures.
  32
     A special type of choice in the U.S. is charter schools. These schools are discussed next under autonomy. Also, given U.S.
  residential mobility, individual public school districts compete with each other, and more competition appears to produce
  better results (Hoxby (2000)), although this finding has been controversial (Rothstein (2007); Hoxby (2007)).
EDUCATIONAL OUTCOMES IN OECD COUNTRIES                                                                                    38

  that complicates evaluation since many are still in the start-up phase. The evidence on
  them is mixed but indicates a variety of places where charter schools outperform the
  regular public schools after the initial start-up phase but also suggests in part that the
  regulations governing them and the particular competitive public schools they face have
  an influence.33
    Given the available evidence, support for autonomy also strongly rests on a conceptual
  basis. A system with strong incentives seems likely to capitalize on local decision
  making.
    School Accountability. Many countries around the world have been moving toward
  increased accountability of local schools for student performance. The United Kingdom
  has developed an elaborate system of “league tables” designed to give parents full
  information about the performance of local schools. The United States has legislated a
  federal law (“No Child Left Behind”) that all states develop an accountability system
  that meets certain general guidelines. It also sets into law a series of actions required
  when a school fails to bring sufficient numbers of students up to proficiency in core
  subjects.
    Evidence on the impacts of these systems has begun to accumulate. While there is
  some uncertainty given the newness of the overall federal accountability system
  (introduced in 2002), the best U.S. evidence indicates that strong state accountability
  systems in fact lead to better student performance (Carnoy and Loeb (2002); Hanushek
  and Raymond (2005); Jacob (2005); Dee and Jacob (2009)).
    One institutional set-up that combines accountability with parental choice are systems
  that give students in schools that repeatedly do badly on the accountability test a voucher
  to attend private schools. In Florida, the threat of becoming subject to private-school
  choice if failing on the test has been shown to increase school performance particularly
  for disadvantaged students (West and Peterson (2006); Figlio and Rouse (2006)).
    Curriculum-based external exit exams are another means to introduce some form of
  accountability into the schooling system. They provide performance information which
  can hold both students and schools accountable. Students in countries with external exit
  exam systems tend to systematically outperform students in countries without such
  systems (Bishop (1997, 2006); Woessmann (2003a, 2007b); Woessmann, Luedemann,
  Schuetz, and West (2009)). In Canada and Germany, the two national education systems
  where the existence of external exams varies within the country because some regions
  feature them and others not, it has similarly been shown that students perform better in
  regions with external exams (Bishop (1997); Jürges, Schneider, and Büchel (2005);
  Woessmann (2010b)).
    It is difficult to imagine choice or autonomy working well without a good system of
  student testing and accountability. Thus, the ideas about institutional structure are

  33
     A number of studies have based the analysis on student fixed effects, relying on students moving in and out of charter
  schools to identify the impact of charters (Booker, Gilpatric, Gronberg, and Jansen (2007); Bifulco and Ladd (2006);
  Hanushek, Kain, Rivkin, and Branch (2007)). These studies have generally pointed to a range of quality for charter schools
  but highlight start-up problems. Another set of studies considers charter schools that have more demand than open positions,
  requiring schools to choose their students by lottery (Hoxby and Murarka (2009); Abdulkadiroglu et al. (2009)). Finally,
  matching methods have been used to compare public and private school performance, leading to the conclusion that there is
  wide variation in the quality of charter schools compared to the relevant public schools (CREDO (2009, 2010)).
EDUCATIONAL OUTCOMES IN OECD COUNTRIES                                                     39

  closely linked together. The international evidence clearly suggests that school
  autonomy, in particular local autonomy over teacher salaries and course content, is only
  effective in school systems that have external exams in place (Woessmann (2005b,
  2007b); Fuchs and Woessmann (2007); Woessmann, Luedemann, Schuetz, and West
  (2009)). For example, school autonomy over teacher salaries is negatively associated
  with student achievement in systems without external exams, but positively associated
  with student achievement in external-exam systems. This pattern of results has been
  found in several different TIMSS and PISA studies and in analyses of autonomy in other
  decision making areas such as school autonomy in determining course content and
  teacher influence on resource funding. Similar evidence that accountability policies are
  more effective when there is greater local control has also been found across U.S. states
  (Loeb and Strunk (2007)).
    Finally, given the importance of high teacher quality, a promising candidate for
  improvement is the specific form of accountability that aims incentives directly at
  teachers. While convincing evidence on the effects of performance-related teacher pay
  is scarce, the more rigorous studies in terms of empirical identification tend to find a
  positive relationship between financial teacher incentives and student outcomes (cf. the
  surveys in Atkinson et al. (2009) and Podgursky and Springer (2007); see also Figlio and
  Kenny (2007)). Thus, Atkinson et al. (2009) find that the introduction of performance-
  related pay had a substantial positive impact on student achievement in England.
  Similarly, monetary incentives for teachers based on their students’ performance have
  been shown to improve student learning very significantly in Israel and in India (Lavy
  (2002, 2009); Muralidharan and Sundararaman (2009)). Likewise, the cross-country
  variation provides some indication that students perform better in countries that allow for
  teacher salaries to be adjusted based on performance in teaching (Woessmann (2010a)).
    Clearly, research on how school policy can successfully advance educational
  achievement is an expanding field that still leaves many open questions. At the same
  time, our reading of the available evidence is that institutional reforms – in particular in
  the areas of competition, autonomy, and accountability – that create incentives for
  improving outcomes and focus in particular on teacher quality have substantial potential
  to create the kinds of learning gains that our results above show to be linked to immense
  long-term economic benefits.

7. CONCLUSIONS

    It is generally the case that national attention to economic policies that deal with
  current aggregate demand conditions and with business cycles invariably take priority
  over longer-run policy considerations. Perhaps this has never been as true as today,
  when the most obvious focus of attention is the worldwide recession. Without
  minimizing the need to deal with current unemployment conditions, the message of this
  paper is that considering issues of longer-run economic growth may be more important
  for the welfare of nations. Nobel Laureate Robert Lucas, in his presidential address to
  the American Economic Association, concluded that “Taking US performance over the
EDUCATIONAL OUTCOMES IN OECD COUNTRIES                                                    40

  past 50 years as a benchmark, the potential for welfare gains from better long-run,
  supply-side policies exceeds by far the potential from further improvements in short-run
  demand management.” (Lucas (2003))
    Our results show that education policy is closely associated with the long-run growth
  potentials of OECD countries. The regression analyses suggest that direct measures of
  educational outcomes, in terms of cognitive skills on international achievement tests,
  emerge as the one strong policy factor underlying growth differences across OECD
  countries. By contrast, a long battery of institutional and regulatory measures does not
  add to an explanation of the substantial differences in long-run growth rates that exist
  across OECD countries, mainly because all OECD countries share a common set of
  basic institutional structures that ensure a general functioning of market economies.
  Considering different skill dimensions, basic skills are robustly related to OECD-country
  growth, whereas the relation of the top-skill dimension with growth is at least
  substantially smaller than in non-OECD countries. When cognitive skills are accounted
  for, tertiary attainment is not significantly associated with long-run growth differences
  across OECD countries.
    Our projection analysis suggests that, under plausible parameter assumptions, the real
  present value of future improvements in GDP due to challenging but achievable
  educational reform scenarios amounts to $90-275 trillion. A modest goal of having all
  OECD countries boost their average PISA scores by 25 points (one-quarter standard
  deviation) implies an aggregate gain of OECD GDP of $90-123 trillion dollars. More
  aggressive goals, such as bringing all students to a level of minimal proficiency for the
  OECD or bringing all OECD countries to the level reached by Finland today, would
  imply aggregate GDP increases beyond $200 trillion according to historical growth
  relationships. The precise size of the reform value of such long-run projections is clearly
  up for debate. Nevertheless, our sensitivity analyses indicate that, while differences
  between an endogenous and neoclassical model framework and alternative parameter
  choices clearly make a difference, the estimates of the long-run effect of reasonable
  education reforms still yield enormous values no matter what. The gains from education
  reform far exceed the level of stimulus funds in the current global recession.
    Our projections do not by themselves indicate how schools should be changed. Nor do
  they solve the political economy issues of how any change should be achieved
  politically. They simply underscore the high cost of political inaction or misdirection.
    In order to provide some guidance, we review the extensive relevant research on the
  determinants of educational achievement. Several conclusions appear. First, many of
  the traditional policies of simply providing more funds for schools or of adding specific
  resources such as smaller classes do not provide much hope for significant
  improvements in student achievement. Second, a growing body of research shows that
  teacher quality is a primary driver of student achievement but that differences in quality
  are not closely related to teacher education and experience. Because teacher quality is
  not easily measured and regulated, effective policies to improve quality appear to
  necessitate more careful attention to the incentives faced by schools and teachers. Here
  the research on educational institutions suggests productive policy approaches. In
EDUCATIONAL OUTCOMES IN OECD COUNTRIES                                                                                            41

   particular, evidence from both within and across countries points to the positive impact
   of competition among schools, of accountability and student testing, and of local school
   autonomy in decision making.34 Research on these policies, separately and in
   combination, indicates some continuing uncertainty about the magnitude of any effects
   but does support more aggressive attention to these in setting school policies.
     An important aspect highlighted by the projections is the dynamic nature of human
   capital and growth. Our basic characterization of growth indicates that higher cognitive
   skills offer a path of continued economic improvement, so that favorable policies today
   have growing impacts in the future. However, the full ramifications of schooling
   outcomes will not become apparent until reasonably far into the future. The economic
   gains from education reform are surely not reaped within matters of one or two political
   legislation periods. They rather require a long-run perspective that fully considers the
   time horizon of a child born today. In the discussion of climate policies, it has become
   custom to consider expected outcomes that materialize several generations from now.
   Education policy needs a similar long-term perspective to fully capture the consequences
   of possible current reforms.

REFERENCES

Abdulkadiroglu, Atila, Joshua Angrist, Susan Dynarski, Thomas J. Kane, and Parag Pathak. 2009.
 "Accountability and Flexibility in Public Schools: Evidence from Boston's Charters and Pilots."
 NBER WP15549. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research (November).
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson. 2001. "The colonial origins of
 comparative development: An empirical investigation." American Economic Review 91, no. 5
 (December): 1369-1401.
———. 2005. "Institutions as a fundamental cause of long-run growth." In Handbook of Economic
 Growth, edited by Philippe Aghion and Steven N. Durlauf. Amsterdam: North Holland: 385-472.
Aghion, Philippe, Mathias Dewatripont, Caroline Hoxby, Andreu Mas-Colell, and André Sapir. 2010.
 "The governance and performance of universities: evidence from Europe and the US." Economic
 Policy 25, no. 61: 7-59.
Aghion, Philippe, and Peter Howitt. 1998. Endogenous Growth Theory. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
———. 2006. "Appropriate growth policy: A unifying framework." Journal of the European
 Economic Association 4, no. 2-3: 269-314.
Atkinson, Adele, Simon Burgess, Bronwyn Croxson, Paul Gregg, Carol Propper, Helen Slater, and
 Deborah Wilson. 2009. "Evaluating the impact of performance-related pay for teachers in England."
 Labour Economics 16, no. 3: 251-261.
Azariadis, Costas, and Allan Drazen. 1990. "Threshold externalities in economic development."
 Quarterly Journal of Economics 105, no. 2: 501-526.
Barro, Robert J. 1991. "Economic growth in a cross section of countries." Quarterly Journal of
 Economics 106, no. 2 (May): 407-443.
———. 2001. "Human capital and growth." American Economic Review 91, no. 2: 12-17.
Barro, Robert J., and Jong-Wha Lee. 1993. "International comparisons of educational attainment."
 Journal of Monetary Economics 32, no. 3 (December): 363-394.
———. 2010. "A new data set of educational attainment in the world, 1950-2010." NBER Working
 Paper 15902. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research (April).
Barro, Robert J., and Xavier Sala-i-Martin. 2004. Economic growth. Second ed. Cambridge, MA: The
 MIT Press.
Benhabib, Jess, and Mark M. Spiegel. 1994. "The role of human capital in economic development:
 Evidence from aggregate cross-country data." Journal of Monetary Economics 34, no. 2: 143-174.

   34
      In a variety of other work, the importance of different educational institutions is investigated. See the international study of
   Woessmann, Luedemann, Schuetz, and West (2009) and the United States analysis of Hanushek and Lindseth (2009).
EDUCATIONAL OUTCOMES IN OECD COUNTRIES                                                            42

———. 2005. "Human capital and technology diffusion." In Handbook of Economic Growth, edited
  by Philippe Aghion and Steven N. Durlauf. Amsterdam: North Holland: 935-966.
Bifulco, Robert, and Helen F. Ladd. 2006. "The impacts of charter schools on student achievement:
  Evidence from North Carolina." Education Finance and Policy 1, no. 1 (Winter): 50-90.
Bils, Mark, and Peter J. Klenow. 2000. "Does schooling cause growth?" American Economic Review
  90, no. 5 (December): 1160-1183.
Bishop, John H. 1997. "The effect of national standards and curriculum-based examinations on
  achievement." American Economic Review 87, no. 2: 260-264.
———. 2006. "Drinking from the fountain of knowledge: Student incentive to study and learn -
  Externalities, information problems, and peer pressure." In Handbook of the Economics of
  Education, edited by Eric A. Hanushek and Finis Welch. Amsterdam: North Holland: 909-944.
Björklund, Anders, Per-Anders Edin, Peter Freriksson, and Alan B. Krueger. 2004. "Education,
  equality and efficiency: An analysis of Swedish school reforms during the 1990s." IFAU Report
  2004:1. Uppsala: Institute for Labour Market Policy Evaluation.
Booker, Kevin, Scott M. Gilpatric, Timothy Gronberg, and Dennis Jansen. 2007. "The Impact of
  Charter School Attendance on Student Performance." Journal of Public Economics 91, no. 5-6: 849-
  876.
Börsch-Supan, Axel. 2000. "A model under siege: A case study of the German retirement insurance
  system." Economic Journal 110, no. 461: F24-F45.
Bosworth, Barry P., and Susan M. Collins. 2003. "The empirics of growth: An update." Brookings
  Papers on Economic Activity 2003, no. 2: 113-206.
Botero, Juan C., Simeon Djankov, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-De-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer.
  2004. "The regulation of labor." Quarterly Journal of Economics 119, no. 4: 1339-1382.
Bowles, Samuel, Herbert Gintis, and Melissa Osborne. 2001. "The determinants of earnings: A
  behavioral approach." Journal of Economic Literature 39, no. 4 (December): 1137-1176.
Bradley, Steve, and Jim Taylor. 2002. "The effect of the quasi-market on the efficiency-equity trade-
  off in the secondary school sector." Bulletin of Economic Research 54, no. 3: 295-314.
Burtless, Gary, ed. 1996. Does money matter? The effect of school resources on student achievement
  and adult success. Washington, DC: Brookings.
Carnoy, Martin, and Susanna Loeb. 2002. "Does external accountability affect student outcomes? A
  cross-state analysis." Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis 24, no. 4 (Winter): 305-331.
Ciccone, Antonio, and Elias Papaioannou. 2009. "Human capital, the structure of production, and
  growth." Review of Economics and Statistics 91, no. 1: 66-82.
Cingano, Federico, Marco Leonardi, Julián Messina, and Giovanni Pica. 2010. "The effects of
  employment protection legislation and financial market imperfections on investment: evidence from
  a firm-level panel of EU countries." Economic Policy 25, no. 61: 117-163.
Cohen, Daniel, and Marcelo Soto. 2007. "Growth and human capital: good data, good results." Journal
  of Economic Growth 12, no. 1 (March): 51–76.
Coleman, James S., Ernest Q. Campbell, Carol J. Hobson, James McPartland, Alexander M. Mood,
  Frederic D. Weinfeld, and Robert L. York. 1966. Equality of educational opportunity. Washington,
  D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Coulombe, Serge, Jean-François Tremblay, and Sylvie Marchand. 2004. Literacy scores, human
  capital and growth across fourteen OECD countries. Ottawa: Statistics Canada.
CREDO. 2009. Multiple choice: Charter school performance in 16 states. Stanford, CA: Center for
  Research on Education Outcomes, Stanford University.
———. 2010. Charter school performance in New York City. Stanford, CA: Center for Research on
  Education Outcomes, Stanford University.
Cunha, Flavio, James J. Heckman, Lance Lochner, and Dimitriy V. Masterov. 2006. "Interpreting the
  evidence on life cycle skill formation." In Handbook of the Economics of Education, edited by Eric
  A. Hanushek and Finis Welch. Amsterdam: Elsevier: 697-812.
Dee, Thomas, and Brian Jacob. 2009. "The impact of No Child Left Behind on student achievement."
  NBER Working Paper 15531. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research
  (November).
Denison, Edward F. 1985. Trends in American economic growth, 1929-1982. Washington, D.C.: The
  Brookings Institution.
Eide, Eric, Dan Goldhaber, and Dominic Brewer. 2004. "The teacher labour market and teacher
  quality." Oxford Review of Economic Policy 20, no. 2: 230-244.
EDUCATIONAL OUTCOMES IN OECD COUNTRIES                                                           43

Figlio, David N., and Lawrence W. Kenny. 2007. "Individual teacher incentives and student
  performance." Journal of Public Economics 91, no. 5-6 (June): 901-914.
Figlio, David N., and Cecilia Elena Rouse. 2006. "Do accountability and voucher threats improve low-
  performing schools?" Journal of Public Economics 90, no. 1-2 (January): 239-255.
Filer, Randall K., and Daniel Münich. 2003. "Responses of private and public schools to voucher
  funding." Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Economic Association.
  Washington, D.C.
Friedman, Milton. 1962. Capitalism and freedom. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Fuchs, Thomas, and Ludger Woessmann. 2007. "What accounts for international differences in student
  performance? A re-examination using PISA data." Empirical Economics 32, no. 2-3: 433-462.
Glaeser, Edward L., Rafael La Porta, Forencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. 2004. "Do
  institutions cause growth?" Journal of Economic Growth 9, no. 3: 271-303.
Greene, Jay P. 2007. "Fixing special education." Peabody Journal of Education 82, no. 4: 703-723.
Greenwald, Rob, Larry V. Hedges, and Richard D. Laine. 1996. "The effect of school resources on
  student achievement." Review of Educational Research 66, no. 3 (Fall): 361-396.
Hagist, Christian, Norbert Klusen, Andreas Plate, and Bernd Raffelhüschen. 2005. "Social health
  insurance: The major driver of unsustainable fiscal policy?" CESifo Working Papers 1574. Munich:
  CESifo.
Hanushek, Eric A. 1971. "Teacher characteristics and gains in student achievement: Estimation using
  micro data." American Economic Review 60, no. 2 (May): 280-288.
———. 1992. "The trade-off between child quantity and quality." Journal of Political Economy 100,
  no. 1 (February): 84-117.
———. 1996. "A more complete picture of school resource policies." Review of Educational Research
  66, no. 3 (Fall): 397-409.
———. 2002. "Publicly provided education." In Handbook of Public Economics, edited by Alan J.
  Auerbach and Martin Feldstein. Amsterdam: Elsevier: 2045-2141.
———. 2003. "The failure of input-based schooling policies." Economic Journal 113, no. 485
  (February): F64-F98.
Hanushek, Eric A., John F. Kain, Steven G. Rivkin, and Gregory F. Branch. 2007. "Charter school
  quality and parental decision making with school choice." Journal of Public Economics 91, no. 5-6:
  823-848.
Hanushek, Eric A., and Dennis D. Kimko. 2000. "Schooling, labor force quality, and the growth of
  nations." American Economic Review 90, no. 5 (December): 1184-1208.
Hanushek, Eric A., and Alfred A. Lindseth. 2009. Schoolhouses, courthouses, and statehouses:
  Solving the funding-achievement puzzle in America's public schools. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
  University Press.
Hanushek, Eric A., and Margaret E. Raymond. 2005. "Does school accountability lead to improved
  student performance?" Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 24, no. 2 (Spring): 297-327.
Hanushek, Eric A., and Steven G. Rivkin. 2006. "Teacher quality." In Handbook of the Economics of
  Education, edited by Eric A. Hanushek and Finis Welch. Amsterdam: North Holland: 1051-1078.
———. 2010. "Generalizations about using value-added measures of teacher quality." American
  Economic Review 100, no. 2 (May): 267-271.
Hanushek, Eric A., and Ludger Woessmann. 2008. "The role of cognitive skills in economic
  development." Journal of Economic Literature 46, no. 3 (September): 607-668.
———. 2009. "Do better schools lead to more growth? Cognitive skills, economic outcomes, and
  causation." NBER Working Paper 14633. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research
  (January).
———. 2010. "The economics of international differences in educational achievement." In Handbook
  of the Economics of Education, Vol. 3, edited by Eric A. Hanushek, Stephen Machin, and Ludger
  Woessmann. Amsterdam: North Holland.
Heckman, James J. 2006. "Skill formation and the economics of investing in disadvantaged children."
  Science 312, no. 5782 (June 30): 1900-1902.
Heckman, James J., Jora Stixrud, and Sergio Urzua. 2006. "The effects of cognitive and noncognitive
  abilities on labor market outcomes and social behavior." Journal of Labor Economics 24, no. 3
  (July): 411-482.
Heston, Alan, Robert Summers, and Bettina Aten. 2002. "Penn World Table Version 6.1." Center for
  International Comparisons at the University of Pennsylvania (CICUP) Philadelphia: University of
  Pennsylvania.
EDUCATIONAL OUTCOMES IN OECD COUNTRIES                                                           44

Howell, William G., and Paul E. Peterson. 2002. The education gap: Vouchers and urban schools.
  Washington, DC: Brookings.
Hoxby, Caroline M. 2000. "Does competition among public schools benefit students and taxpayers?"
  American Economic Review 90, no. 5 (December): 1209-1238.
———. 2007. "Does competition among public schools benefit students and taxpayers? Reply."
  American Economic Revew 97, no. 5: 2038-2055.
Hoxby, Caroline M., and Sonali Murarka. 2009. "Charter schools in New York City: Who enrolls and
  how they affect their students' achievement." NBER Working Paper 14852. Cambridge, MA:
  National Bureau of Economic Research (April).
Jacob, Brian A. 2005. "Accountability, incentives and behavior: The impact of high-stakes testing in
  the Chicago Public Schools." Journal of Public Economics 89, no. 5-6 (June): 761-796.
Jorgenson, Dale W., and Zvi Griliches. 1967. "The explanation of productivity change." Review of
  Economic Studies 34, no. 3 (July): 249-282.
Jürges, Hendrik, Kerstin Schneider, and Felix Büchel. 2005. "The effect of central exit examinations
  on student achievement: Quasi-experimental evidence from TIMSS Germany." Journal of the
  European Economic Association 3, no. 5: 1134-1155.
Kaufmann, Daniel, Aart Kraay, and Pablo Zoido-Lobatón. 1999. "Governance matters." World Bank
  Policy Research Working Paper 2196. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Krueger, Alan B., and Mikael Lindahl. 2001. "Education for growth: Why and for whom?" Journal of
  Economic Literature 39, no. 4 (December): 1101-1136.
Lavy, Victor. 2002. "Evaluating the effect of teachers' group performance incentives on pupil
  achievement." Journal of Political Economy 110, no. 6 (December): 1286-1317.
———. 2009. "Performance pay and teachers' effort, productivity, and grading ethics." American
  Economic Revew 99, no. 5 (December): 1979-2011.
Levačić, Rosalind. 2004. "Competition and the performance of English secondary schools: Further
  evidence." Education Economics 12, no. 2: 177-193.
Levine, Ross, and David Renelt. 1992. "A sensitivity analysis of cross-country growth regressions."
  American Economic Review 82, no. 4 (September): 942-963.
Levine, Ross, and Sara J. Zervos. 1993. "What we have learned about policy and growth from cross-
  country regressions." American Economic Review 83, no. 2 (May): 426-430.
Loeb, Susanna, and Katharine Strunk. 2007. "Accountability and local control: Response to incentives
  with and without authority over resource generation and allocation." Education Finance and Policy
  2, no. 1: 10-39.
Lucas, Robert E. 2009. "Trade and the diffusion of the industrial revolution." American Economic
  Journal: Macroeconomics 1, no. 1: 1-25.
Lucas, Robert E., Jr. 1988. "On the mechanics of economic development." Journal of Monetary
  Economics 22(July): 3-42.
———. 2003. "Macroeconomic priorities." American Economic Revew 93, no. 1: 1-14.
Mankiw, N. Gregory, David Romer, and David Weil. 1992. "A contribution to the empirics of
  economic growth." Quarterly Journal of Economics 107, no. 2 (May): 407-437.
Moore, Mark A., Anthony E. Boardman, Aidan R. Vining, David L. Weimer, and David Greenberg.
  2004. "'Just give me a number!' Practical values for the social discount rate." Journal of Policy
  Analysis and Management 23, no. 4 (Autumn): 689-812.
Muralidharan, Karthik, and Venkatesh Sundararaman. 2009. "Teacher performance pay: Experimental
  evidence from India." NBER Working Paper 15323. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic
  Research.
Nelson, Richard R., and Edmund Phelps. 1966. "Investment in humans, technology diffusion and
  economic growth." American Economic Review 56, no. 2 (May): 69-75.
Nicoletti, Giuseppe, and Frederic L. Pryor. 2006. "Subjective and objective measures of governmental
  regulations in OECD nations." Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 59, no. 3: 433-449.
Nicoletti, Giuseppe, and Stefano Scarpetta. 2003. "Regulation, productivity, and growth: OECD
  evidence." Economic Policy 18, no. 1: 10-72.
Nicoletti, Giuseppe, Stefano Scarpetta, and Olivier Boylaud. 2000. "Summary indicators of product
  market regulation with an extension to employment protection legislation." Economic Department
  Working Paper 226. Paris: OECD (February).
Nordhaus, William D. 2007. "A review of the Stern review on the economics of climate change."
  Journal of Economic Literature 45, no. 3: 686-702.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. 1999. Employment outlook. Paris: OECD.
EDUCATIONAL OUTCOMES IN OECD COUNTRIES                                                         45

———. 2001. Knowledge and skills for life: First results from the OECD Programme for
  International Student Assessment (PISA) 2000. Paris: OECD.
———. 2003. Literacy skills for the world of tomorrow: Further results from PISA 2000. Paris:
  OECD.
———. 2004. Learning for tomorrow’s world: First results from PISA 2003. Paris: OECD.
———. 2007. PISA 2006: Science competencies for tomorrow’s world. Vol. 1 – Analysis. Paris:
  OECD.
———. 2008. Compendium of patent statistics. Paris: OECD.
———. 2009a. Education at a glance 2009: OECD indicators. Paris: Organisation for Economic Co-
  operation and Development.
———. 2009b. OECD economic outlook, volume 2009/1, No. 85. Paris: OECD.
———. 2009c. Society at a glance 2009: OECD social indicators. Paris: OECD.
Podgursky, Michael J., and Matthew G. Springer. 2007. "Teacher performance pay: A review."
  Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 26, no. 4: 909-949.
Pryor, Frederic L. 2002. "Quantitative notes on the extent of governmental regulations in various
  OECD nations." International Journal of Industrial Organization 20, no. 5: 693-714.
Rivkin, Steven G., Eric A. Hanushek, and John F. Kain. 2005. "Teachers, schools, and academic
  achievement." Econometrica 73, no. 2 (March): 417-458.
Rockoff, Jonah E. 2004. "The impact of individual teachers on student achievement: Evidence from
  panel data." American Economic Review 94, no. 2 (May): 247-252.
Romer, Paul. 1990a. "Endogenous technological change." Journal of Political Economy 99, no. 5,pt.
  II: S71-S102.
———. 1990b. "Human capital and growth: Theory and evidence." Carnegie-Rochester Conference
  Series on Public Policy 32: 251-286.
Rothstein, Jesse. 2007. "Does competition among public schools benefit students and taxpayers?
  Comment." American Economic Revew 97, no. 5: 2026-2037.
Rouse, Cecilia Elena. 1998. "Private school vouchers and student achievement: An evaluation of the
  Milwaukee Parental Choice Program." Quarterly Journal of Economics 113, no. 2 (May): 553-602.
Sachs, Jeffrey D., and Andrew M. Warner. 1995. "Economic reform and the process of global
  integration." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, no. 1: 1-96.
———. 1997. "Fundamental sources of long-run growth." American Economic Review 87, no. 2: 184-
  188.
Sala-i-Martin, Xavier, Gernot Doppelhofer, and Ronald I. Miller. 2004. " Determinants of long-term
  growth: A Bayesian Averaging of Classical Estimates (BACE) approach." American Economic
  Review 94, no. 4 (September): 813-835.
Sandström, F. Mikael, and Fredrik Bergström. 2005. "School vouchers in practice: Competition will
  not hurt you." Journal of Public Economics 89, no. 2-3: 351-380.
Sianesi, Barbara, and John Van Reenen. 2003. "The returns to education: Macroeconomics." Journal
  of Economic Surveys 17, no. 2: 157-200.
Solow, Robert M. 1957. "Technical change and the aggregate production function." Review of
  Economics and Statistics 39, no. 3 (August): 312-320.
Stern, Nicholas. 2007. The economics of climate change: The Stern review. Cambridge, UK, and New
  York: Cambridge University Press.
Temple, Jonathan. 2001. "Growth effects of education and social capital in the OECD countries."
  OECD Economic Studies 33: 57-101.
Tol, Richard S. J., and Gary W. Yohe. 2006. "A review of the Stern review." World Economics 7, no.
  4: 233-250.
Topel, Robert. 1999. "Labor markets and economic growth." In Handbook of Labor Economics, edited
  by Orley Ashenfelter and David Card. Amsterdam: Elsevier: 2943-2984.
Vandenbussche, Jérôme, Philippe Aghion, and Costas Meghir. 2006. "Growth, distance to frontier and
  composition of human capital." Journal of Economic Growth 11, no. 2 (June): 97-127.
Venn, Danielle. 2009. "Legislation, collective bargaining and enforcement: Updating the OECD
  employment protection indicators." OECD Social, Employment and Migration Working Paper 89.
  Paris: OECD.
Wayne, Andrew J., and Peter Youngs. 2003. "Teacher characteristics and student achievement gains:
  A review." Review of Educational Research 73, no. 1: 89-122.
Welch, Finis. 1970. "Education in production." Journal of Political Economy 78, no. 1
  (January/February): 35-59.
EDUCATIONAL OUTCOMES IN OECD COUNTRIES                                                          46

West, Martin R., and Paul E. Peterson. 2006. "The efficacy of choice threats within school
 accountability systems: Results from legislatively-induced experiments." Economic Journal 116, no.
 510: C46-C62.
West, Martin R., and Ludger Woessmann. 2010. "'Every Catholic child in a Catholic school':
 Historical resistance to state schooling, contemporary private competition and student achievement
 across countries." Economic Journal 120, no. 546: F229-F255.
Woessmann, Ludger. 2003a. "Schooling resources, educational institutions, and student performance:
 The international evidence." Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics 65, no. 2: 117-170.
———. 2003b. "Specifying human capital." Journal of Economic Surveys 17, no. 3: 239-270.
———. 2005a. "Educational production in Europe." Economic Policy 20, no. 43: 446-504.
———. 2005b. "The effect heterogeneity of central exams: Evidence from TIMSS, TIMSS-Repeat
 and PISA." Education Economics 13, no. 2: 143-169.
———. 2007a. "International evidence on expenditure and class size: A review." In Brookings Papers
 on Education Policy 2006/2007. Washington D.C.: Brookings: 245-272.
———. 2007b. "International evidence on school competition, autonomy and accountability: A
 review." Peabody Journal of Education. 82, no. 2-3: 473-497.
———. 2009. "Public-private partnerships and student achievement: A cross-country analysis." In
 School choice international: Exploring public-private partnerships, edited by Rajashri Chakrabarti
 and Paul E. Peterson. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press: 13-45.
———. 2010a. "Cross-country evidence on teacher performance pay." Program on Education Policy
 and Governance Working Paper PEPG 10-11. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University (June).
———. 2010b. "Institutional determinants of school efficiency and equity: German states as a
 microcosm for OECD countries." Jahrbücher für Nationalökonomie und Statistik / Journal of
 Economics and Statistics 230, no. 2: 234-270.
Woessmann, Ludger, Elke Luedemann, Gabriela Schuetz, and Martin R. West. 2009. School
 accountability, autonomy, and choice around the world. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.
Woessmann, Ludger, and Marc Piopiunik. 2009. Was unzureichende Bildung kostet: Eine Berechnung
 der Folgekosten durch entgangenes Wirtschaftswachstum. Gütersloh, Germany: Bertelsmann
 Stiftung.
Wölfl, Anita, Isabelle Wanner, Tomasz Kozluk, and Giuseppe Nicoletti. 2009. "Ten years of product
 market reform in OECD countries: Insights from a revised PMR indicator." OECD Economics
 Department Working Paper 695. Paris: OECD.
Figure 1. GDP per capita in OECD countries in 1960 and 2000
Notes: GDP per capita in constant international dollars, 24 OECD countries with income and
education data for the whole period. Colors for expositional purposes only.
 Source: Authors’ depiction based on data from Heston, Summers, and Aten (2002).
Figure 2. Educational performance and economic growth across OECD countries
Notes: Added-variable plot of a regression of the average annual rate of growth (in percent) of real
GDP per capita in 1960-2000 on the initial level of real GDP per capita in 1960, average test
scores on international student achievement tests, and average years of schooling in 1960 (mean of
the unconditional variables added to each axis).
Source: Authors’ depiction based on the regression analysis reported in column (2) of Table 2.
Figure 3. Quantile regression estimates
Notes: The straight line represents quantile regression estimates in 5-percent steps of the
coefficient on test scores in a model corresponding to column (2) of Table 2. The shaded area
shows the 90-percent confidence interval of the quantile regression estimates. The horizontal
dashed line represents the OLS estimate and the dotted line its 90-percent confidence interval.
Source: Authors’ depiction based on own regression analysis.
                                  60%



                                  50%
 Percent addition to annual GDP




                                  40%



                                  30%



                                  20%



                                  10%



                                  0%
                                    2010   2020   2030   2040   2050   2060   2070   2080   2090   2100   2110
                                                                       Year


Figure 4. Improvement in annual GDP with Scenario I (increase everyone by ¼
std. dev.)
Notes: GDP with reform relative to GDP without reform in each year after the reform starts. Main
line: point estimate of Scenario I. Gray dotted lines: 95% confidence interval of the point
estimate of the growth regression.
Source: Authors’ calculations.
1200%
1100%

1000%

900%

800%

700%

600%
500%

400%

300%

200%

100%
  0%




                                                                                                             Slovak Republic




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Czech Republic

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Belgium
                                                      Luxembourg




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             United Kingdom
        Mexico




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Switzerland
                                                                                                                               OECD



                                                                                                                                                Denmark

                                                                                                                                                          Germany




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Finland
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Korea, Rep.
                          Greece




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Canada
                                   Portugal
                 Turkey




                                                                                           Poland




                                                                                                                                                                    Iceland



                                                                                                                                                                                       Ireland




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          New Zealand
                                              Italy



                                                                   Spain

                                                                           United States




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Netherlands
                                                                                                                                                                              France




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Australia
                                                                                                    Norway




                                                                                                                                      Hungary




                                                                                                                                                                                                 Sweden




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Japan
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Austria
Figure 5. Present value of Scenario II (bring each country to Finish level) in percent of current GDP
Notes: Discounted value of future increases in GDP until 2090 due to a reform that brings each country to the Finish average level of 546 PISA points, expressed as
percentage of current GDP. Value is 2389% for Mexico and 1844% for Turkey.
Source: Authors’ depiction based on the projection analysis reported in column (3) of Table 7.
800%

700%

600%

500%

400%

300%

200%

100%

 0%




                                                                                                                                       Slovak Republic




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Czech Republic
                                                                                                                                                         Belgium
                                                     Luxembourg




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            United Kingdom
       Mexico




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Switzerland
                                                                                  OECD




                                                                                                          Germany




                                                                                                                                                                            Denmark




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Finland
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Korea, Rep.
                         Greece




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Canada
                                  Portugal
                Turkey




                                             Italy




                                                                                         Spain




                                                                                                                                                                                                         Iceland




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Ireland



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             New Zealand
                                                                                                 Poland
                                                                  United States




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Netherlands
                                                                                                                                                                   France




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Australia
                                                                                                                    Norway

                                                                                                                             Hungary




                                                                                                                                                                                                Sweden




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Japan
                                                                                                                                                                                      Austria
Figure 6. Present value of Scenario III (bring everyone up to minimum skills) in percent of current GDP
Notes: Discounted value of future increases in GDP until 2090 due to a reform that brings every individual in the country up to a minimum skill level of 400 PISA
points, expressed as percentage of current GDP. Value is 1794% for Mexico and 1430% for Turkey.
Source: Authors’ depiction based on the projection analysis reported in column (7) of Table 7.
Figure 7. Educational spending and student achievement across countries
Notes: The figure plots the average math achievement in PISA 2006 against cumulative
expenditure on educational institutions per student between age 6 and 15, in US dollars, converted
by purchasing power parities. Gray line: regression line for full sample. Black line: regression
line for countries with expenditure above $20,000.
Source: Authors’ depiction based on Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
(2007).
Table 1: Income, growth, and schooling in OECD countries, 1960-2000
                                     Growth                             GDP per capita                    Years of schooling                    Test scores
                          1960-2000 1960-1980 1980-2000           1960     1980        2000          1960        1980       2000        Mean      Basic       Top
                              (1)       (2)       (3)              (4)      (5)         (6)           (7)         (8)         (9)        (10)      (11)       (12)
Australia         AUS        2.22      2.41      2.03            10,618   17,092      25,535          9.3        11.5        11.8       509.4      93.8       11.2
Austria           AUT        2.96      3.86      2.07            7,365    15,706      23,681          4.2         7.3        9.0        508.9      93.1        9.7
Belgium           BEL        2.84      3.78      1.91            7,759    16,303      23,784          6.9         8.5        10.2       504.1      93.1        9.4
Canada            CAN        2.40      3.06      1.75            10,419   19,022      26,922          8.3         9.7        11.0       503.8      94.8        8.3
Denmark           DEN        2.25      2.61      1.90            10,917   18,282      26,627          7.9         9.3        9.7        496.2      88.8        8.8
Finland           FIN        2.95      3.73      2.17            7,438    15,484      23,798          5.7         8.3        8.2        512.6      95.8       12.4
France            FRA        2.65      3.68      1.63            7,860    16,201      22,371          4.2         6.0        9.5        504.0      92.6        8.5
Greece            GRE        3.19      5.34      1.09            4,159    11,767      14,625          7.4         7.1        8.9        460.8      79.8        4.2
Iceland           ICE        2.84      4.07      1.61            8,106    18,017      24,794          6.2         7.9        9.6        493.6      90.8        7.4
Ireland           IRE        4.14      3.30      4.98            5,208     9,978      26,379          8.0         9.9        10.9       499.5      91.4        9.4
Italy             ITA        2.95      4.08      1.83            6,817    15,161      21,794          4.9         6.5        9.1        475.8      87.5        5.4
Japan             JAP        4.26      6.24      2.31             4,657   15,631      24,672          8.0         9.3        10.9       531.0      96.7       16.8
Korea, Rep.       KOR        5.95      5.78      6.13            1,571     4,830      15,881          4.3         8.3        11.1       533.8      96.2       17.8
Mexico            MEX        2.00      3.30      0.71            3,970     7,603       8,766          2.8         4.9        7.6        399.8      48.9        0.9
Netherlands       NET        2.44      2.82      2.06             9,263   16,164      24,313          6.3         9.4        10.7       511.5      96.5        9.2
New Zealand       NEW        1.23      1.07      1.38            11,555   14,304      18,824         10.2        11.8        12.2       497.8      91.0       10.6
Norway            NOR        3.02      3.62      2.42             8,239   16,772      27,044          7.6         9.1        11.3       483.0      89.4        5.6
Portugal          POR        3.92      4.95      2.89            3,434     9,024      15,955          3.2         5.5        7.6        456.4      80.3        3.2
Spain             SPA        3.43      4.59      2.27             4,693   11,520      18,055          3.3         6.2        9.3        482.9      85.9        7.9
Sweden            SWE        2.15      2.69      1.61            10,112   17,179      23,662          7.3         9.4        11.1       501.3      93.9        8.8
Switzerland       SWI        1.45      2.05      0.85            14,877   22,320      26,422          7.6        10.3        9.6        514.2      91.9       13.4
Turkey            TUR        2.35      2.38      2.32            2,700     4,325       6,838          1.6         3.6        6.0        412.8      58.2        3.9
United Kingdom    GBR        2.10      1.98      2.21            9,682    14,340      22,188          7.0         8.1        9.0        495.0      92.9        8.8
United States     USA        2.50      2.75      2.25            12,414   21,337      33,308          9.2        12.2        13.0       490.3      91.8        7.3
Mean                         2.84      3.51      2.18            7,660    14,515      21,927          6.3         8.3        9.9        490.8      88.1        8.7
Minimum                      1.23      1.07      0.71             1,571    4,325       6,838          1.6         3.6        6.0        399.8      48.9        0.9
Maximum                      5.95      6.24      6.13            14,877   22,320      33,308         10.2        12.2        13.0       533.8      96.7       17.8
Notes: Sample: 24 OECD countries with income and education data for the whole period. Growth = average annual growth rate in GDP per capita (in percent). GDP per
capita: in constant international dollars. Years of schooling: population aged 15 years and above. Test scores: average of math and science, all available tests (1964-
2003); basic/top: percent of students over 400/600. Sources: Heston, Summers, and Aten (2002); Barro and Lee (2010); Hanushek and Woessmann (2009).
Table 2: Basic results on educational outcomes and long-run economic growth in OECD countries

                                                                 1960-1980 1980-2000 Avg. yearsa GDP>10,000b Growth<5%c                Full country sample
                                 (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)       (5)       (6)         (7)          (8)                     (9)         (10)
Cognitive skills                           1.864       1.968       1.737        2.350        1.735         1.398          1.525                      1.978
                                           (5.83)      (6.72)      (2.95)       (3.91)       (5.26)        (2.89)         (4.33)                     (7.98)
Initial years of schooling     0.173       0.046                   0.024        0.147        0.096         0.029          0.056         0.396        0.080
                               (2.09)      (0.82)                  (0.23)       (1.50)       (1.40)        (0.50)         (1.06)        (2.89)       (1.07)
Initial GDP per capita         -0.293      -0.303      -0.285      -0.338       -0.250       -0.311        -0.302         -0.273        -0.405       -0.313
                               (5.20)      (8.61)     (10.33)      (5.23)       (6.18)       (9.55)        (8.58)         (7.41)        (4.67)       (5.61)
OECD                                                                                                                                    1.437        0.859
                                                                                                                                        (1.68)       (0.32)
OECD x Cognitive skills                                                                                                                              -0.203
                                                                                                                                                     (0.36)
OECD x Initial years of                                                                                                                 -0.110
  schooling                                                                                                                             (0.65)
No. of countries                 24          24          24          24           24           24            22             23            50           50
F (OECD and interaction)                                                                                                                 2.37         0.10
R2 (adj.)                       0.559      0.828       0.831        0.630       0.658        0.839          0.835          0.738        0.297        0.723
Notes: Dependent variable: average annual growth rate in GDP per capita, 1960-2000 (unless noted otherwise). Sample: OECD countries (unless noted otherwise).
Regressions include a constant. t-statistics in parentheses. a Years of schooling averaged between 1960 and 2000. b Sample excludes Mexico and Turkey. c Sample
excludes Korea.
Source: Authors’ calculations based on data in Heston, Summers, and Aten (2002), Hanushek and Woessmann (2009), and Barro and Lee (2010).
Table 3: Economic institutions vs. educational outcomes in OECD-country long-run growth models

                                                                     OECD sample                                           Full country sample
                                                     (1)                (2)                     (3)                      (4)                 (5)
Cognitive skills                                                         1.527                 1.388                    1.265                1.266
                                                                         (3.39)                (3.05)                   (4.76)               (4.96)
Initial years of schooling                          0.135                0.058                 0.067                    0.067                0.047
                                                    (2.11)               (1.01)                (1.18)                   (1.02)               (0.74)
Initial GDP per capita                             -0.381                -0.328               -0.322                    -0.373               -0.304
                                                   (7.83)                (7.75)               (7.64)                    (8.10)               (5.65)
Protection against expropriation                    0.729                0.224                 0.081                    0.332                0.492
                                                    (3.95)               (1.06)                (0.36)                   (2.36)               (3.25)
Openness                                                                                       0.750                    0.485                0.645
                                                                                               (1.56)                   (1.34)               (1.83)
OECD                                                                                                                                         2.589
                                                                                                                                             (1.26)
OECD x Protection against expropriation                                                                                                      -0.372
                                                                                                                                             (1.54)
No. of countries                                     24                    24                    23                       48                   48
F (Protection and Openness)                                                                     1.77                     6.17
F (OECD and interaction)                                                                                                                      2.76
R2 (adj.)                                           0.740                0.830                 0.841                    0.789                 0.806
Notes: Dependent variable: average annual growth rate in GDP per capita, 1960-2000. Regressions include a constant. t-statistics in parentheses.
Source: Authors’ calculations based on data in Heston, Summers, and Aten (2002), Barro and Lee (2010), Hanushek and Woessmann (2009), Acemoglu, Johnson, and
Robinson (2001), and an updated version of Sachs and Warner (1995).
Table 4: Regulation of product and labor markets vs. educational outcomes in OECD-country long-run growth models

                                            Product market regulation (PMR)                                 Employment protection regulation (EPR)
                              Product Admini- Domestic                Barriers to Barriers to                             Dismissal Regulation Regulation
                                                               State                                  EP        EP
                               market     strative economic           entrepre- trade and                                  regular temporary collective
                                                              control                              version 1 version 2
                             regulation regulation regulation          neurship investment                                contracts contracts dismissal
                                (1)          (2)      (3)       (4)      (5)         (6)              (7)         (8)        (9)       (10)       (11)
Cognitive skills              1.843      1.897      1.840      1.843       1.859       1.864         1.827       1.788     1.899       1.788        1.913
                              (5.67)     (5.92)     (5.60)     (5.66)      ( 5.75)     (5.67)        (5.41)      (5.06)    (5.39)      (5.00)       (5.95)
Initial years of schooling    0.026      0.015      0.036      0.033       0.025       0.047         0.027       0.025     0.034       0.036        0.071
                              (0.41)     (0.23)     (0.60)     (0.55)      (0.40)      (0.75)        (0.41)      (0.37)    (0.48)      (0.58)       (1.21)
Initial GDP per capita        -0.309     -0.310     -0.309     -0.311      -0.308      -0.303       -0.310      -0.307     -0.308      -0.307      -0.324
                              (8.43)     (8.69)     (8.27)     (8.30)      (8.52)      (8.36)       (8.09)      (8.25)     (7.89)      (8.22)      (8.52)
Product market                -0.157     -0.178     -0.080     -0.084      -0.157      0.004
   regulation                 (0.68)     (1.06)     (0.55)     (0.67)      (0.76)      (0.02)
Employment protection                                                                               -0.081      -0.109     -0.051      -0.047       0.139
  legislation                                                                                       (0.62)      (0.63)     (0.34)      (0.58)       (1.42)
No. of countries                 24        24         24          24        24          24            23          23        23          23           23
R2 (adj.)                      0.824     0.829      0.822       0.824      0.825       0.819         0.822       0.822     0.819       0.821        0.836
Notes: Dependent variable: average annual growth rate in GDP per capita, 1960-2000. Sample: OECD countries. Regressions include a constant. t-statistics in
parentheses.
Source: Authors’ calculations based on data in Heston, Summers, and Aten (2002), Hanushek and Woessmann (2009), Barro and Lee (2010), Venn (2009), and Wölfl,
Wanner, Kozluk, and Nicoletti (2009).
Table 5: Basic vs. high-level skills

                       Sample:        full         OECD             full          full          OECD            full           full         OECD       full
                                      (1)           (2)             (3)           (4)            (5)            (6)            (7)           (8)       (9)
Share of students reaching          2.644          4.434          2.146          4.674          5.272          4.549
  basic literacy                    (3.51)         (3.52)         (2.58)         (6.71)         (5.65)         (5.54)
Share of top-performing             12.602         3.234          16.536                                                     18.904         10.933    21.499
  students                          (4.35)         (0.99)         (4.90)                                                     (7.45)         (3.61)    (7.19)
Initial years of schooling          0.066          0.035          0.070          0.129          0.039          0.131          0.116          0.086    0.122
                                    (0.87)         (0.60)         (0.94)         (1.49)         (0.68)         (1.47)         (1.40)         (1.23)   (1.53)
Initial GDP per capita              -0.305         -0.305         -0.317         -0.326         -0.314         -0.340        -0.297          -.275    -0.314
                                    (6.43)         (8.24)         (5.63)         (5.85)         (8.71)         (5.05)        (5.62)          (6.09)   (5.32)
OECD                                                              -0.659                                       0.150                                  1.018
                                                                  (0.44)                                       (0.10)                                 (2.17)
OECD x basic literacy                                             2.074                                        0.024
                                                                  (0.94)                                       (0.01)
OECD x top-performing                                            -13.422                                                                              -10.733
                                                                  (2.08)                                                                               (2.11)
No. of countries                      50             24             50             50             24            50              50             24      50
F (OECD and interaction)                                           1.62                                        0.10                                   2.66
R2 (adj.)                            0.724         0.822          0.734          0.616          0.822          0.600          0.655          0.720    0.679
Notes: Dependent variable: average annual growth rate in GDP per capita, 1960-2000. Regressions include a constant. t-statistics in parentheses.
Source: Authors’ calculations based on data in Heston, Summers, and Aten (2002), Barro and Lee (2010), and Hanushek and Woessmann (2009).
Table 6: Non-tertiary vs. tertiary schooling

                                                                                                      OECD                                          OECD
                                    Sample:         full           OECD              OECD                              OECD              OECD
                                                                                                     w/o USA                                       w/o USA
                                                    (1)               (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)               (6)        (7)
Cognitive skills                                  1.923             1.888            1.912            2.043
                                                  (9.12)            (6.09)           (6.83)           (8.14)
Share of students reaching basic literacy                                                                               5.458
                                                                                                                        (7.13)
Share of top-performing students                                                                                                         11.597    12.855
                                                                                                                                         (3.93)    (4.44)
Years of non-tertiary schooling                   0.076             0.012
                                                  (0.94)           (0.059)
Years of tertiary schooling                       0.198             1.291            1.344            0.543             1.685            1.014      0.149
                                                  (0.16)            (1.58)           (1.77)           (0.74)            (2.31)           (0.96)     (0.13)
Initial GDP per capita                            -0.325            -0.323           -0.320           -0.323           -0.344            -0.264     -0.263
                                                  (6.81)            (8.85)           (9.78)           (11.22)          (10.53)           (6.08)     (6.37)
No. of countries                                    50               24               24                23               24               24         23
R2 (adj.)                                          0.728            0.839            0.847             0.886            0.856            0.712      0.750
Notes: Dependent variable: average annual growth rate in GDP per capita, 1960-2000. Regressions include a constant. t-statistics in parentheses.
Source: Authors’ calculations based on data in Heston, Summers, and Aten (2002), Barro and Lee (2010), and Hanushek and Woessmann (2009).
Table 7: Baseline projections of the economic value of three education reform scenarios
                           Scenario I: Increase avg.                                        Scenario II:                                                                               Scenario III:
                          performance by ¼ std. dev.                 Bring each country to Finish level of 546 points on PISA                                          Bring all to minimum of 400 points on PISA
                                                                  Value of reform   in % of       L.-r. growth Note: Increase                            Value of reform     in % of      L.-r. growth Note: Share of students
                          Value of reform (billion $)
                                                                    (billion $)   current GDP increase (p.p.) in PISA score                                (billion $)    current GDP increase (p.p.) below minimum skills
                                         (1)                            (2)             (3)             (4)              (5)                                   (6)              (7)            (8)                (9)
Australia                              2,631                           2,092          229%             0.38             20.1                                  2,430           266%            0.43               9.8%
Austria                                  969                           1,545          460%             0.72             38.4                                  1,308           390%            0.62              13.9%
Belgium                                1,208                           1,586          379%             0.60             32.2                                  1,816           434%            0.68              15.3%
Canada                                 4,051                           2,728          194%             0.32             17.2                                  3,075           219%            0.36               8.1%
Czech Republic                           830                           1,177          409%             0.64            34.5                                   1,054           366%            0.58              13.1%
Denmark                                  608                           1,231          584%             0.88             47.5                                   908            430%            0.67              15.2%
Finland                                  594                              0             0%             0.00              0.0                                   255            124%            0.21               4.7%
France                                 6,557                          11,349          499%             0.77             41.3                                  9,844           433%            0.68              15.3%
Germany                                8,822                          17,245          564%             0.86             46.0                                 15,166           496%            0.77              17.3%
Greece                                 1,047                           4,253         1172%             1.59             85.2                                  2,943           811%            1.17              26.5%
Hungary                                  603                           1,323          633%             0.95             51.0                                   972            465%            0.72              16.3%
Iceland                                   36                             66           530%             0.81             43.6                                    46            371%            0.59              13.3%
Ireland                                  585                            995           490%             0.76             40.6                                   664            327%            0.52              11.8%
Italy                                  5,526                          19,353         1010%             1.41             75.6                                 13,503           705%            1.04              23.5%
Japan                                 13,280                           2,871          62%              0.11             5.7                                  10,382           226%            0.37               8.3%
Korea, Rep.                            4,120                            756            53%             0.09              4.8                                  2,544           178%            0.30               6.7%
Luxembourg                               126                            421          963%              1.36            72.7                                    289            662%            0.99              22.3%
Mexico                                 4,753                          39,363         2389%             2.68            143.9                                 29,557          1794%            2.19              49.5%
Netherlands                            2,032                           1,344          191%             0.31             16.9                                  1,779           253%            0.41               9.3%
New Zealand                              361                            275           220%             0.36             19.4                                   385            308%            0.49              11.2%
Norway                                   844                           1,975          675%             1.00             53.9                                  1,391           476%            0.74              16.6%
Poland                                 2,119                           5,320          724%             1.07             57.2                                  3,766           513%            0.79              17.8%
Portugal                                 742                           2,860         1112%             1.52             81.7                                  1,878           730%            1.07              24.2%
Slovak Republic                          343                            787           661%             0.99             52.9                                   549            461%            0.72              16.2%
Spain                                  4,496                          12,332          791%             1.15             61.7                                  8,237           529%            0.81              18.3%
Sweden                                 1,080                           1,761          470%             0.73             39.2                                  1,406           375%            0.59              13.4%
Switzerland                             1,003                          1,159          333%             0.53             28.6                                  1,263           363%            0.58              13.0%
Turkey                                 3,043                          19,450         1844%             2.24            120.1                                 15,089          1430%            1.85              41.8%
United Kingdom                         6,862                           7,892          332%             0.53             28.5                                  7,669           322%            0.52              11.7%
United States                          43,835                        111,923          737%             1.08             58.1                                 86,167           567%            0.86              19.4%
OECD                                  123,108                        275,429          645%             0.93             49.8                                226,333           530%            0.80              18.0%
Notes: Discounted value of future increases in GDP until 2090, expressed in billion $ (PPP) and as percentage of current GDP. “Long-run growth increase” refers to increase in annual growth rate (in percentage points) once the whole labor force has
reached higher level of educational performance. “Increase in PISA score” refers to the ultimate increase in educational performance due to reform scenario II. “Share of students below minimum skills” refers to the share of students in each country
performing below the minimum skill level of 400 PISA points. See text for reform parameters. Source: Authors’ calculations.
Table 8: Projection results with “neoclassical” model specification
                                Scenario I:                   Scenario II:                   Scenario III:
                                                                                                                          Scenario II,                   Scenario II,
                       Increase avg. performance     Bring each country to Finish      Bring all to minimum
                                                                                                                       Time horizon 2050              Time horizon 2150
                              by ¼ std. dev.         level of 546 points on PISA       of 400 points on PISA
                          Billion $         % GDP       Billion $         % GDP         Billion $        % GDP        Billion $      % GDP           Billion $      % GDP
                             (1)             (2)            (3)               (4)          (5)              (6)          (7)           (8)              (9)           (10)
Australia                   2,073           227%          1,656             182%          3,826            419%          276          30%              3,696         405%
Austria                      712            212%          1,120             334%         1,471             438%          186          55%              2,511         748%
Belgium                      926            221%          1,207             288%          2,334            557%          200          48%              2,711         647%
Canada                      3,282           234%          2,227             159%          5,209            371%          368          26%              4,984         355%
Czech Republic               781            271%          1,095             381%         1,631             567%          169          59%             2,570          893%
Denmark                      435            206%           859              407%           869             412%          143          68%             1,932          916%
Finland                      560            272%             0                0%           651             316%            0           0%                0             0%
France                      5,026           221%          8,552             376%         11,090            488%        1,397          61%             19,389        853%
Germany                     6,521           213%         12,466             408%         15,347            502%        2,049          67%             28,191         922%
Greece                       671            185%          2,548             702%         1,459             402%          417         115%             5,837         1609%
Hungary                      618            296%          1,322             632%         1,302             623%          193          93%              3,213        1538%
Iceland                       25            204%            46              367%            46             371%            8          61%               102          819%
Ireland                      386            190%           645              318%           643             317%          111          55%              1,417         698%
Italy                       3,725           194%         12,330             644%         8,102             423%        2,011         105%             28,244        1474%
Japan                      12,584           273%          2,772             60%          24,595            534%          442          10%              6,329         137%
Korea, Rep.                 4,489           314%           839               59%          7,094            497%          128           9%              1,969         138%
Luxembourg                   46             105%           144             330%             93             214%           29          66%               291          665%
Mexico                      3,451           209%         24,773            1504%          7,160            435%         3,583        217%             62,461        3791%
Netherlands                 1,623           230%          1,082             154%          2,979            423%          180          26%              2,413         342%
New Zealand                  360            288%           276              221%           790             632%           42          34%               646          516%
Norway                       435            149%           985              337%           855             292%          181          62%              2,088         714%
Poland                      2,192           298%          5,322             725%          4,651            633%          770         105%             13,051        1777%
Portugal                     579            225%          2,099             816%         1,209             470%          323         126%              4,989        1940%
Slovak Republic              337            283%           749              630%           682             573%          111          93%              1,809        1519%
Spain                       3,142           202%          8,281             531%          6,275            403%        1,359          87%             18,825        1208%
Sweden                       784            209%          1,259             336%          1,542            412%          210          56%              2,818         753%
Switzerland                  722            208%           831              239%          1,598            460%          141          41%              1,837         528%
Turkey                     2,699            256%         15,474            1467%         6,363             603%        2,162         205%             39,523        3747%
United Kingdom              5,504           231%          6,308             265%         10,918            459%         1,032         43%             14,243         599%
United States              25,344           167%          62,386            411%         56,407            371%        10,962         72%            135,962         895%
OECD                       90,031           211%         179,655            421%        187,191            439%        29,183         68%            414,050         970%
Notes: Discounted value of future increases in GDP until 2090, expressed in billion $ (PPP) and as percentage of current GDP. See text for reform parameters. Source: Authors’
calculations.
Table 9: Projection results under alternative parameter assumptions on growth coefficients and time horizon
                    Lowest coefficient       Highest coefficient    Lower bound confidence   Upper bound confidence     Time horizon 2050        Time horizon 2150
                    Billion $    % GDP       Billion $    % GDP       Billion $   % GDP        Billion $   % GDP        Billion $    % GDP       Billion $    % GDP
                       (1)          (2)         (3)           (4)        (5)          (6)         (7)          (8)         (9)         (10)         (11)        (12)
Australia             1,548       170%         2,217        243%        1,317       144%         2,899       318%          308         34%         5,805       636%
Austria               1,128       336%         1,641        489%         954        284%         2,182       650%          219         65%         4,555      1,357%
Belgium               1,163       278%         1,683        402%         986        235%         2,224       531%          227         54%         4,576      1,093%
Canada                2,022       144%         2,888        206%        1,722      123%          3,767      268%           404         29%         7,497       534%
Czech Republic         862        299%         1,249        434%         730       254%          1,655       575%          168         58%        3,423       1,189%
Denmark                893        423%         1,310        621%         753        357%         1,757       833%          171         81%         3,750      1,778%
Finland                 0          0%             0          0%            0         0%             0         0%             0          0%            0          0%
France                8,268       364%        12,065        531%        6,989       308%        16,083       708%         1,596        70%        33,815      1,488%
Germany              12,519       409%        18,348        600%       10,567       346%        24,569       803%         2,400        78%        52,262      1,709%
Greece                2,993       825%         4,558       1256%        2,493       687%         6,354      1751%          540        149%        15,071      4,153%
Hungary                957        458%         1,409        674%         807       386%          1,896       907%          182         87%         4,084      1,954%
Iceland                 48        385%           70         563%          41        325%           94        753%            9         74%          198       1,591%
Ireland                725        357%         1,057        521%         613        302%         1,409       694%          140         69%         2,957      1,457%
Italy                13,726       717%        20,702       1081%       11,473       599%        28,562      1491%         2,516       131%        65,827      3,436%
Japan                 2,145        47%         3,034         66%        1,833        40%         3,920        85%          436          9%         7,618       165%
Korea, Rep.            565         40%          799          56%         483         34%         1,031        72%          115          8%         2,000       140%
Luxembourg             299        685%          450        1030%         250       573%           619       1417%          55         126%        1,415       3,238%
Mexico               26,267      1594%        42,714       2593%       21,416      1300%        63,912      3879%         4,306       261%       186,466     11,318%
Netherlands            996        141%         1,423        202%         849        120%         1,855       263%          199         28%         3,689       524%
New Zealand            204        163%          292         233%         173        139%          381        305%           41         32%          762        610%
Norway               1,425        487%         2,104        719%        1,200       410%         2,839       971%          270         92%         6,162      2,107%
Poland                3,829       521%         5,672        772%        3,221       438%         7,679      1045%          722         98%        16,813      2,289%
Portugal              2,018       785%         3,063       1191%        1,684       655%         4,254      1654%          366        142%         9,983      3,882%
Slovak Republic        568        477%          838         704%         478       402%          1,130      949%           108         91%         2,445      2,054%
Spain                 8,845       568%        13,158        844%        7,428       477%        17,893      1148%         1,656       106%        39,653      2,544%
Sweden                1,285       343%         1,872        500%        1,087       290%         2,490       665%          249         66%         5,208      1,391%
Switzerland            852        245%         1,229        353%         723        208%         1,619       466%          168         48%         3,304       950%
Turkey               13,273      1258%        20,994       1990%       10,920      1035%        30,478      2889%         2,265       215%        81,227      7,700%
United Kingdom        5,804       244%         8,372        352%        4,926       207%        11,029       464%         1,141        48%        22,498       946%
United States        80,503       530%       119,336        785%       67,686       445%       161,693      1064%        15,155       100%       354,821      2,335%
OECD                195,731       459%       294,547        690%      163,804       384%       406,270       952%        36,131        85%       947,885      2,221%
Notes: Scenario II: Bring each country to Finish level of 546 points on PISA. Discounted value of future increases in GDP until 2090, expressed in billion $ (PPP) and
as percentage of current GDP.
Source: Authors’ calculations.
Table 10: Projection results under alternative parameter assumptions on reform duration, working life, and discount rate
                      10-year reform           30-year reform        Working life 35 years     Discount rate 2.5%       Discount rate 3.5%      Disc. rate Stern Report
                    Billion $     % GDP      Billion $     % GDP      Billion $    % GDP       Billion $     % GDP      Billion $     % GDP      Billion $       % GDP
                       (1)           (2)        (3)           (4)        (5)           (6)        (7)           (8)        (9)          (10)        (11)          (12)
Australia             2,541        279%        1,721        189%        2,287        251%        2,788        306%        1,581        173%        4,763         522%
Austria               1,887        562%        1,263        376%        1,694        504%        2,062        614%        1,165        347%        3,533        1,052%
Belgium               1,933        462%        1,299        310%        1,736        415%        2,115        505%        1,197        286%        3,621         865%
Canada                3,310        236%        2,246        160%        2,980       212%         3,633        259%        2,062        147%        6,204         442%
Czech Republic        1,435        499%         963         335%        1,289       448%         1,570        545%         888         309%        2,689         934%
Denmark               1,508        715%        1,004        476%        1,352        641%        1,645        780%         928         440%        2,823        1,338%
Finland                 0           0%            0          0%           0           0%           0           0%           0            0%           0            0%
France               13,875        610%        9,272        408%       12,449        548%       15,152        667%        8,559        377%       25,981        1,143%
Germany              21,116        691%       14,067        460%       18,934        619%       23,034        753%       13,000        425%       39,530        1,293%
Greece                5,279       1455%        3,421        943%        4,705       1296%        5,703       1572%        3,193        880%        9,855        2,716%
Hungary              1,623         777%        1,078        516%        1,454        696%        1,768        846%         997         477%        3,037        1,453%
Iceland                 81         648%          54         432%          72         581%          88         707%          50         399%         151         1,213%
Ireland              1,216         599%         813         401%        1,091        538%        1,328        654%         750         370%        2,277        1,122%
Italy                23,939       1250%       15,624        816%       21,367       1115%       25,926       1353%       14,545        759%       44,724        2,335%
Japan                 3,472         75%        2,372         52%        3,130         68%        3,820         83%        2,173         47%        6,510         141%
Korea, Rep.            914          64%         625          44%         824          58%        1,005         70%         572          40%        1,713         120%
Luxembourg             520        1191%         340         779%         465        1063%         564        1290%         317         724%         972         2,225%
Mexico               50,015       3036%       30,929       1877%       44,093       2676%       53,101       3223%       29,371       1783%        92,736       5,629%
Netherlands           1,630        231%        1,106        157%        1,468        208%        1,790        254%        1,016        144%        3,056         434%
New Zealand            334         267%         227         181%         301         241%         367         293%         208         166%         627          501%
Norway               2,425         829%        1,607        549%        2,172        742%        2,640        903%        1,488        509%        4,537        1,551%
Poland                6,539        890%        4,323        589%        5,854        797%        7,114        969%        4,006        545%        12,233       1,665%
Portugal              3,546       1379%        2,304        896%        3,161       1229%        3,834       1491%        2,148        835%        6,621        2,575%
Slovak Republic        965         811%         640         538%         865        726%         1,051        883%         593         498%        1,807        1,518%
Spain                15,180        974%       10,005        642%       13,579        871%       16,498       1059%        9,282        596%        28,390       1,822%
Sweden                2,152        575%        1,440        385%        1,931        516%        2,351        628%        1,329        355%        4,030        1,076%
Switzerland           1,411        406%         951         273%        1,268        365%        1,545        444%         875         252%        2,643         760%
Turkey               24,470       2320%       15,436       1463%       21,672       2055%       26,174       2481%       14,550       1379%       45,513        4,315%
United Kingdom        9,609        404%        6,475        272%        8,638        363%       10,523        442%        5,960        251%        18,005        757%
United States       137,603        906%       90,922        598%      123,157        811%      149,676        985%       84,272        555%       257,402       1,694%
OECD                340,528        798%      222,527        521%      303,987        712%      368,864        864%      207,075        485%       635,982       1,490%
Notes: Scenario II: Bring each country to Finish level of 546 points on PISA. Discounted value of future increases in GDP until 2090, expressed in billion $ (PPP) and
as percentage of current GDP.
Source: Authors’ calculations.
Table 11: Summary of projection results
                                                         Scenario I:                            Scenario II:                             Scenario III:
                                                 Increase avg. performance            Bring each country to Finish level            Bring all to minimum
                                                       by ¼ std. dev.                      of 546 points on PISA                    of 400 points on PISA
                                                           (1)                                       (2)                                    (3)
“Endogenous-growth” specification
  in billion $                                           123,108                                  275,429                                 226,333
  in % of discounted future GDP                           6.2%                                     13.8%                                   11.3%
“Neoclassical” specification
  in billion $                                            90,031                                  179,655                                 187,191
  in % of discounted future GDP                            4.3%                                    8.5%                                    8.9%
Notes: Discounted value of future increases in OECD GDP until 2090, expressed in billion $ (PPP) and as percentage of discounted value of all annual projected OECD
GDPs until 2090.
Source: Authors’ calculations.
Table 12: Educational spending and student achievement

                                        PISA 2000                          PISA 2003                           PISA 2006                  FD               FE
                   Sample:        all        exp>$25,000             all        exp>$25,000              all        exp>$25,000           all              all
                                  (1)             (2)                (3)             (4)                 (5)             (6)              (7)              (8)
Expenditure per student         1.079            0.069              0.670            0.203             0.697            0.097           -0.260           -0.125
                                (2.76)           (0.13)             (2.06)           (0.58)            (2.70)           (0.33)          (0.44)           (0.35)
No. of countries                   24              19                 26              23                 28               25              23             29 (78)
R2 (adj.)                        0.224           -0.058             0.114           -0.031             0.189            -0.039          -0.038            0.027
Notes: Dependent variable: PISA math test score. Expenditure per student = cumulative expenditure on educational institutions per student between age 6 and 15,
measured in 1,000 US dollars, converted by purchasing power parities. Sample: all = all OECD countries with available data; exp>$25,000 = countries with cumulative
expenditure per student above $25,000. FD = fist differences, 2006-2000. FE = fixed effects, pooling all three PISA tests, model contains time dummies (R2 of FE model
refers to within R2). t-statistics in parentheses.
Source: Authors’ calculations based on Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (2003, 2004, 2007).
