                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          MONETARY SCIENCE, FISCAL ALCHEMY

                                            Eric M. Leeper

                                        Working Paper 16510
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16510


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2010




Prepared for the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City's Jackson Hole Symposium, "Macroeconomic
Policy: Post-Crisis and Risks Ahead,'' August 26--28, 2010. I thank my discussant, Francesco Giavazzi,
and Ralph Bryant, Troy Davig, Jon Faust, Dale Henderson, Maya MacGuineas, Susan Monaco, Chris
Sims, Mathias Trabandt, Anders Vredin, Todd Walker, and symposium participants for valuable conversations
and comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Eric M. Leeper. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Monetary Science, Fiscal Alchemy
Eric M. Leeper
NBER Working Paper No. 16510
October 2010
JEL No. E31,E52,E58,E61,E62

                                             ABSTRACT

Monetary policy decisions tend to be based on systematic analysis of alternative policy choices and
their associated macroeconomic impacts: this is science. Fiscal policy choices, in contrast, spring from
unsystematic speculation, grounded more in politics than economics: this is alchemy. In normal times,
fiscal alchemy poses no insurmountable problems for monetary policy because fiscal expectations
can be extrapolated from past fiscal behavior. But normal times may be coming to an end: aging populations
are causing promised government old-age benefits to grow relentlessly and many governments have
no plans for financing the benefits. In this era of fiscal stress, fiscal expectations are unanchored and
fiscal alchemy creates unnecessary uncertainty and can undermine the ability of monetary policy to
control inflation and influence real economic activity in the usual ways.


Eric M. Leeper
Department of Economics
304 Wylie Hall
Indiana University
Bloomington, IN 47405
and NBER
eleeper@indiana.edu
                    Monetary Science, Fiscal Alchemy∗
                                         Eric M. Leeper




I Introduction
Ten years ago Clarida et al. (1999) proclaimed the arrival of “The Science of Monetary
Policy.” Although the past few years’ experiences may have raised some questions about the
robustness of the science, the paper’s general theme continues to resonate: modern monetary
analysis has progressed markedly from the days of monetary metaphors like “removing the
punch bowl” and “pushing on a string.” Key elements in the progress include modeling
dynamic behavior and expectations, understanding some of the critical economic frictions in
the economy, discussing explicitly central banks’ objectives, communicating policy intentions
to the public, developing operational rules that characterize good monetary policy, and
deriving general principles about optimal monetary policy.
   In a surprising twist of fate, the practice of monetary policy marched along side the
theory. Central banks around the world have adopted clearly understood objectives—such
as inﬂation targeting and output stabilization—and central bankers espouse and articulate
the science in public discussions about managing expectations, the transmission mechanism
of monetary policy, and the role of uncertainty in policymaking. Modern monetary research
and practical policymaking are united in aiming to make monetary policy scientiﬁc.
   No analogous transformation has occurred with macro ﬁscal policy. Although academic
research has progressed, policy discussions reﬂect little of it. In the place of dynamics and
expectations are Keynesian hydraulics and multipliers. Instead of clear objectives and rules,
there are one-oﬀ “reforms” and Blue Ribbon Commissions.
    I mark monetary policy’s transition from alchemy to the time when central bankers
realized that the question “What are the eﬀects of raising the short-term interest rate by 50
  ∗
     October 26, 2010. Indiana University and NBER, 105 Wylie Hall, Bloomington, IN 47405; phone:
(812) 855-9157; eleeper@indiana.edu. Prepared for the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City’s Jackson Hole
Symposium, “Macroeconomic Policy: Post-Crisis and Risks Ahead,” August 26–28, 2010. I thank my dis-
cussant, Francesco Giavazzi, and Ralph Bryant, Troy Davig, Jon Faust, Dale Henderson, Maya MacGuineas,
Susan Monaco, Chris Sims, Mathias Trabandt, Anders Vredin, Todd Walker, and symposium participants
for valuable conversations and comments.
                        Leeper: Monetary Science, Fiscal Alchemy


basis points?” is ill-posed because the answer hinges on the expected path of short rates,
among other things.
   Fiscal policy will shed its alchemy label when the question “What is the ﬁscal multi-
plier?” is no longer asked and detailed analyses of “unsustainable ﬁscal policies” are no
longer conducted without explicit analysis of expectations and dynamic adjustments. Mul-
tipliers depend on the type of spending or tax change, as well as on a host of other factors:
expected sources and timing of future ﬁscal ﬁnancing, whether the initial change in policy
was anticipated or not, and how monetary policy behaves. “Unsustainable policies” can’t
happen. When investors believe current policies will last forever, they bid the value of gov-
ernment bonds to be consistent with those expectations; in severe cases, that value may be
zero. But in economies, like the United States, whose policies are deemed “unsustainable”
despite highly valued debt, traders must not believe current policies will persist. The notion
of “unsustainable policies” builds in assumptions about future policies that are chronically
at odds with bond holders’ beliefs.
    The science-alchemy terminology doesn’t mean monetary policy has achieved the scien-
tiﬁc pinnacle. Neither does it imply that all ﬁscal analysis is voodoo.1 The terminology is
designed to call attention to the generalization that monetary policy tends to employ system-
atic analytics, while ﬁscal policy relies on unsystematic speculation. If you explicitly model
the things that we know matter—expectations, purposeful behavior, dynamic adjustments,
uncertainty—then you are engaged in science. Otherwise, you are doing alchemy.
   How is the claim of monetary science sustained? We have known at least since Fried-
man (1948) that monetary and ﬁscal policies are intricately intertwined and their distinct
impacts are diﬃcult to disentangle. We also know from work over the past few decades that
recalcitrant behavior by one policy authority can easily thwart the other authority’s eﬀorts
to achieve its objectives. One major macro policy tool cannot hope to be scientiﬁc if the
other major tool practices alchemy. Going forward, the sustainability of monetary science
may be in jeopardy.
  The sharp contrast between the science of monetary policy and the alchemy of ﬁscal
policy is puzzling when viewed from the perspective of a macroeconomist. There are clear
parallels between the two macro policy tools. Both can have strong eﬀects on aggregate
demand, inﬂation, and economic activity. Dynamics, expectations, and asset prices play
central roles in transmitting the impacts of both policies. Dynamic private behavior creates
   1
     In fact, there is quite a lot of ﬁscal science being conducted, for example, in the public ﬁnance and optimal
ﬁscal policy ﬁelds [for example, Golosov et al. (2006) and Kocherlakota (2010)]. On the more applied side,
Bryant et al. (1993) and Bryant and Zhang (1996) are examples of ﬁscal science that explored the impacts
of alternative ﬁscal rules that ensure policy is sustainable. That science, however, does not seem to have
spilled over signiﬁcantly into macro ﬁscal policy analyses or into practical ﬁscal policy evaluation.



                                                        2
                     Leeper: Monetary Science, Fiscal Alchemy


time inconsistency problems for both policies. And both are most eﬀective when they are
credible and predictable. Fiscal alchemy is all the more puzzling because in many ways it is
the more powerful tool. Fiscal policy can also have important supply-side impacts through
infrastructure expenditures, spending aimed at human capital accumulation, and taxes that
directly aﬀect the after-tax returns to labor and capital. Adjustments to ﬁscal actions occur
over decades, giving ﬁscal policy long-lasting impacts. Investments in developing the science
of ﬁscal policy are likely to have high social returns.
    Responsibility for the application of ﬁscal alchemy in policymaking falls squarely on
governments and legislatures who, for many years, have refused to invest in the intellectual
capital that could lead to more economically sound policy decisions. Political leaders much
prefer the discretion that alchemy oﬀers over the discipline that science imposes. Resistance
of policymakers to adopting rules to guide their ﬁscal decisions is a key example of this
revealed preference. It’s also an odd state of aﬀairs. One would imagine that political
leaders who seek to implement good economic policies might welcome the cover that ﬁscal
rules provide.2 It is far easier to tell a constituency that it’s impossible to give them more
ﬁscal goodies because the rules prevent it than it is to explain that doing so is unsound
macroeconomic policy. Perhaps it is possible to design institutional reforms that would be
good politics, as well as good economics.

I.A Anchoring Fiscal Expectations                Monetary and ﬁscal policies and their interac-
tions is a vast topic that requires an organizing principle. The anchoring of expectations is
such a principle because it embeds the central tenets of modern economic science: dynamic
behavior, purposeful decision making, the roles of information and uncertainty, and the on-
going nature of policymaking. Anchoring expectations has become so ingrained in monetary
policy that it is something of a mantra; ﬁscal authorities rarely discuss it.3
   In normal times, ﬁscal alchemy poses no insurmountable problems for central banks.
Even if policy institutions do not ﬁrmly anchor ﬁscal expectations, people can use past ﬁscal
behavior to guide their beliefs about the future. But normal times may be nearing their end.
The International Monetary Fund calculates that the net present value impact on deﬁcits
of aging-related government spending averaged across the advanced G-20 countries is over
400 percent of GDP [International Monetary Fund (2009b)]. Gokhale and Smetters (2007)
project that the long-term budget imbalance associated with Social Security and Medicare
in the United States this year is over $75 trillion in present value. In the face of ﬁscal
adjustments of these magnitudes, past policy behavior may be a weak reed on which to base
  2
   Maya MacGuineas made this point to me.
  3
   A recent exception—the only one I know—comes, not from a ﬁscal authority, but from International
Monetary Fund (2009a).


                                                3
                        Leeper: Monetary Science, Fiscal Alchemy


expectations.
   These numbers portend an extended era of ﬁscal stress. Problems for central banks
become far more pressing during periods of ﬁscal stress. Combined with ﬁscal alchemy,
ﬁscal stress threatens to undermine the advances made by monetary policy. Threats do not
arise only from insuﬃcient resolve by central bankers to control inﬂation. Threats arise from
unanchored ﬁscal expectations that can make it diﬃcult or impossible for central banks to
control inﬂation, regardless of the central bankers’ resolve.4
   Unanchored ﬁscal expectations also make it more diﬃcult for consumers and ﬁrms to
make good economic decisions. Should I be saving more in anticipation of entitlements reform
that will reduce my old-age beneﬁts? Should ﬁrms build factories on the planned interstate
route or will new ﬁscal austerity measures rescind the authorized infrastructure spending?
Will the sunset provisions in the 2001 and 2003 U.S. tax cuts be enforced or will the cuts
be extended? Fiscal institutions do not provide the incentives and constraints necessary
to induce policymakers to take actions that would reduce this uncertainty. Consequently,
the private sector treats future policies probabilistically to hedge against possible outcomes.
Hedging retards economic activity and, inevitably, some decisions will turn out to be bad ex
post. Anchoring ﬁscal expectations is a worthy goal in its own right.
   But why should central bankers care whether ﬁscal expectations are anchored? It turns
out that the central bank’s ability to control inﬂation and inﬂuence real activity rests fun-
damentally on ﬁscal behavior and people’s expectations of ﬁscal behavior. When those
expectations center on the appropriate ﬁscal behavior, the central bank can aﬀect economic
activity and inﬂation in the usual ways. But when ﬁscal expectations are anchored elsewhere,
it’s quite possible that monetary policy can no longer do its job controlling inﬂation and sta-
bilizing real activity. In the coming era of ﬁscal stress with no credible government plans to
confront the growing ﬁscal strains, unanchored ﬁscal expectations become a certainty.
   Diﬀerences between the practices of monetary and ﬁscal policy are not intrinsic to their
respective policy tools. Instead, the contrast is an outgrowth of the diﬀerent institutional
settings that societies have chosen for the two types of macro policies. Many countries have
made monetary policy independent, while keeping ﬁscal policy politicized. There is a fairly
clear consensus on the objectives of monetary policy, but none for ﬁscal policy (besides the
minimal requirement that the government be solvent).5 Even “independent” monetary pol-
   4
     In an insightful new paper, Eusepi and Preston (2010) obtain similar results in an environment in which
individuals are learning about the monetary and ﬁscal policy regimes.
   5
     Leeper (2009) points out that solvency is the one objective ﬁscal authorities around the world share. Be-
yond that rather minimal goal, ﬁscal authorities claim a laundry list of inevitably more politicized objectives,
including maximizing economic growth, combatting climate change, reducing smoking, raising productivity,
strengthening national security, predicting and preventing economic and ﬁnancial crises, reducing poverty at
home and abroad, equalizing income distribution, and building infrastructure. These are all worthy goals,


                                                       4
                       Leeper: Monetary Science, Fiscal Alchemy


icy decisions are scrutinized by governments; governments’ ﬁscal choices are not scrutinized
in any organized form (except obliquely through elections and, in s small handful of coun-
tries, by independent ﬁscal policy councils or related agencies). As a consequence of these
institutional diﬀerences, public discourse about monetary policy is far more sophisticated
and helpful to private decision makers than are discussions of ﬁscal policy.

I.B Policy Analysis is Hard                  Faust (2005) observes that applied monetary policy
analysis is “hard” in the sense that even the best dynamic models are “grossly deﬁcient”
and this condition is not likely to improve dramatically in the near term. Despite their
shortcomings, Faust argues that models, appropriately used, can contribute to policymaking.
   For all the reasons that Faust articulates, plus its complex and political nature, ﬁscal
policy analysis is “harder.” And even though ﬁscal models are still more deﬁcient and
urgently need further development, they nevertheless can be used to highlight and understand
elements of ﬁscal policy that policymakers often do not consider. This paper raises some of
these elements and shows how models can help policymakers think about them.
   Fiscal complexity stems from several sources. Myriad tax and spending instruments pro-
duce a wide range of macroeconomic and distributional eﬀects. Deﬁcit ﬁnancing introduces
issues of debt management—the level at which to stabilize debt, the speed of stabilization,
and the maturity structure of the debt. Fiscal changes aﬀect intra- and intertemporal mar-
gins, which induce responses in expectations and behavior over time. Those responses can
take decades to play out, giving ﬁscal actions long-lasting impacts. Fiscal initiatives are de-
bated at length and individuals continually update and act on their beliefs about future taxes
and spending, which creates intricate interactions between ﬁscal news and private behavior.
Finally, ﬁscal eﬀects also vary with the monetary policy environment, so that studying ﬁscal
policy in isolation may distort our understanding of ﬁscal eﬀects. I draw on results that my
coauthors and I have obtained to illustrate many of these complexities.
   Because ﬁscal actions can have strong distributional consequences, ﬁscal decisions are
intrinsically political. A given ﬁscal change almost inevitably has winners and losers who feel
the eﬀects directly and often can link those eﬀects to a speciﬁc policy decision. Democracy
demands that these decisions be ground out by the political process, a process that rarely
conforms to scientiﬁc standards.
   Does this mean we must abandon the aim of elevating ﬁscal analysis to the level to which
monetary policy aspires? I sure hope not. But elevating ﬁscal analysis requires isolating those
but until they are prioritized and checked for internal consistency, they cannot help guide ﬁscal expectations.
This partial list of objectives comes from publications by Australian Treasury (2008), New Zealand Treasury
(2003), Government Oﬃces of Sweden (2009), HM Treasury (2009), and U.S. Department of the Treasury
(2007).



                                                      5
                    Leeper: Monetary Science, Fiscal Alchemy


aspects of ﬁscal policy that are less political and more amenable to science. Less political
aspects of ﬁscal policy, on which societal and professional consensus may be possible, include:
whether a debt target is desirable and what that target should be; how rapidly tax rates and
spending should adjust to stabilize debt; circumstances, if any, when changes in the debt
target are permissible.
   That ﬁscal policy is “harder” calls for more dynamic modeling, more emphasis on ex-
pectations, more attention to information and uncertainty, more eﬀort to confront dynamic
political economy models with data, more professional scrutiny, and more focus on institu-
tional design. In a phrase, more science. It is ironic that ﬁscal policy receives less of all
these things than does monetary policy.

I.C What the Paper Does             The next section presents three topical examples where
ﬁscal alchemy is ﬁnding a voice in current policy debates. Section III steps back to the
abstract world to explain how monetary and ﬁscal policy jointly stabilize inﬂation and the
value of government debt. That section establishes two general principles. First, inherent
symmetry in the two macro policies implies that either policy can stabilize inﬂation and
aggregate demand, so long as the other policy maintains the value of debt. Second, if
monetary policy is to successfully control inﬂation and stabilize the real economy, then ﬁscal
policy must free monetary policy to pursue those objectives. This imposes restrictions on
ﬁscal behavior that may be diﬃcult to achieve in times of ﬁscal stress. Section IV turns
to the literature on ﬁscal multipliers, which is precisely the morass that we would expect
alchemy to produce. The section reports results that coauthors and I have obtained that
show how sensitive ﬁscal multipliers are to aspects of the ﬁscal-monetary policy environment.
Unfortunately, I cannot claim that the research provides all the right answers, but it does
ask some of the right questions and it aims to address them in ways consistent with ﬁscal
science.
    Section V presents long-term ﬁscal projections to explain why many advanced economies
are heading into an era of ﬁscal stress. It deﬁnes the “ﬁscal limit,” the point at which, for
economic or political reasons, ﬁscal policy can no longer adjust to stabilize debt, and explores
some surprising implications that arise when an economy is staring at the prospect of a ﬁscal
limit. For example, information that shifts expected paths of spending or taxation can have
important eﬀects on aggregate demand today, well before the ﬁscal changes occur. Research
discussed in section VI describes one constructive route to modeling economic behavior in
an era of ﬁscal stress. That route posits what people might believe about how future policies
may adjust in response to ﬁscal stress and derives the macroeconomic consequences of those
adjustments. Section VII suggests some roles that central banks and their leaders could play


                                               6
                    Leeper: Monetary Science, Fiscal Alchemy


in the era of ﬁscal stress. Key among these is for central bankers to break the taboo against
saying anything substantive about ﬁscal policy and, instead, to talk precisely and forcefully
about how unresolved ﬁscal stresses can make it diﬃcult or impossible for monetary policy
to do its job.
    Skeptics might say that ﬁscal policy is intrinsically political and eﬀorts to make it more
scientiﬁc are pie in the sky. To those skeptics I address the ﬁnal section. There I oﬀer some
thoughts about separating ﬁscal policy into its micro and its macro components. Micro
components involve distributional issues and rightfully belong in the political realm. But I
try to identify some macro aspects that are largely technical matters that lend themselves
to ﬁscal science. Economists may be able to coalesce on the macro ﬁscal issues, even while
the micro issues remain contentious.


II Fiscal Alchemy in Action: Recent Examples
Fresh examples of alchemy in ﬁscal policymaking appear in the news regularly [for example,
Hilsenrath (2010)]. In this section I highlight three prominent examples of ﬁscal alchemy in
policymaking. I select these examples because they are timely and they are at the forefront
of important policy debates. Far more egregious but less current examples abound.
    Fiscal multipliers: A report authored by Romer and Bernstein (2009) provided impor-
tant support for the Obama administration’s eﬀort to stimulate the U.S. economy through
the $787 billion American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009. Fiscal multipliers as-
sociated with government spending increases and tax cuts, which appear in the report, are
reproduced in ﬁgure 1. Government spending packs more punch than taxes, as shown in the
ﬁgure. The report also provides detailed estimates of the number and types of jobs that a
stimulus package would create.
    Graphics like ﬁgure 1, and hundreds of others that pepper the empirical ﬁscal policy
literature, leave the reader wanting to know more. What are the economic mechanisms
through which the stimulus would add to employment? How will “permanent” changes in
spending or taxes be supported by adjustments in other ﬁscal instruments in the future?
How might alternative adjustments aﬀect the multipliers? Are the ﬁscal changes anticipated
or unanticipated? What happens to the output multiplier in the medium to long run, beyond
the four-year horizon reported? Sources for the multiplier numbers are given as “a leading
private forecasting ﬁrm and the Federal Reserve’s FRB/US model,” which are not in the
public domain and cannot be professionally scrutinized. How would a researcher reproduce
the multipliers that Romer and Bernstein (2009) report? Overall, the report’s rationale for
the stimulus package do not rise to the scientiﬁc standards to which monetary policy analyses


                                              7
                       Leeper: Monetary Science, Fiscal Alchemy


aspire.6

                                 Output Multipliers for Permanent Expansions
           1.6


           1.4                          Spending Increase

           1.2


            1


           0.8
                                             Tax Cut

           0.6


           0.4


           0.2


            0
             0                      4                        8                  12
                                                       Quarters



Figure 1: Output multipliers for a permanent increase in government spending or a perma-
nent decrease in taxes, as reported in Romer and Bernstein (2009).

  Fiscal retrenchments: Defenders of ﬁscal retrenchment often argue that retrench-
ment can actually be expansionary. Research has found some evidence that under some
circumstances ﬁscal consolidations have had beneﬁcial economic eﬀects, or at least have not
produced declines in economic activity [Giavazzi and Pagano (1990), Bertola and Drazen
(1993), Alesina and Ardagna (1998)]. Much of that evidence comes from case studies that
examine a single country that undertakes a sizeable, isolated ﬁscal consolidation. There is no
evidence that if many countries—say, much of Europe—undertake ﬁscal austerity measures
simultaneously, then economic activity will improve.
   To be sure, ﬁscal multipliers depend on the state of the economy and can change over
time. But can they change sign in a little over a year? Does any model exist to show that 18
months ago it made sense for the United Kingdom to expand ﬁscal policy, while now it makes
sense to implement the recently announced 25 percent nearly across-the-board budget cuts?
As Alesina and Ardagna (1998) make clear, an intricate set of conditions needs to be in place
   6
    To be fair, U.S. ﬁscal actions are rarely supported by research that meets generally accepted standards.
U.S. Department of the Treasury (1984) followed the Reagan tax cuts and argued that deﬁcits had no eﬀects
on interest rates. The Bush tax cuts in 2001 initially were justiﬁed by little more than the observation that
the federal budget surpluses were “your money” along with the claim that lower marginal tax rates would
stimulate economic activity.

                                                        8
                    Leeper: Monetary Science, Fiscal Alchemy


for consolidations to be expansionary—“the tightening must be sizeable and occur after a
period of stress when the budget is quickly deteriorating and public debt is building up.. . . To
be long lasting, it must include cuts in public employment, transfers and government wages.
To be politically possible, such a policy must be supported by trade unions.” Those authors
also point out that several issues are “not settled,” but are critical to determining which
ﬁscal consolidations will contract the economy and which will expand it.
    Fiscal ﬂip-ﬂops are being justiﬁed in the name of credibility. Countries feel the need
to contract ﬁscal policy in the midst of a weak recovery because ﬁscal institutions provide
no other mechanism by which ﬁscal decision makers can establish the longer run soundness
of their policies; as a consequence, with ﬁscal expectations unanchored in general, politi-
cal leaders speculate that bold contractionary actions will prove their mettle and, in some
unspeciﬁed way, improve economic conditions. Paul Volcker was forced into an analogous
diﬃcult situation in the early 1980s to demonstrate the Fed’s bona ﬁdes as an inﬂation
ﬁghter. But at that time there was no pretense that tight monetary policy would not hurt
the economy. Current ﬁscal ﬂip-ﬂops are about solving today’s problem; but credibility is
inherently a long-run trait that can be established only by changing the ﬁscal institutions
on which ﬁscal expectations are based. One-time ﬁscal consolidations most often do not
morph into permanent ﬁscal reforms. Many countries institutionalized monetary policy re-
forms by adopting inﬂation targeting. There is, at best, ambiguous scientiﬁc support for the
coordinated ﬁscal contraction that is taking place.
   Long-term fiscal projections: In some countries a ﬁscal agency issues regular reports
on its country’s long-term ﬁscal situation. The reported paths of endogenous ﬁscal vari-
ables, like government debt, typically do not emerge as implications of an economic model:
given a set of assumptions, debt paths pop out from an accounting relation that equates
current debt to past debt plus current deﬁcits. When the resulting paths show debt grow-
ing exponentially at a rate faster than the economy, the agency declares that ﬁscal policy
is on an “unsustainable path.” Logically, though, unsustainable policies cannot occur, so
the agency’s projections cannot happen. Reporting things that cannot happen cannot help
people make economic decisions.
  The Congressional Budget Oﬃce’s (2009; 2010c) long-term projections in 2009 and 2010
make clear how unhelpful government macro ﬁscal analyses can be. This year’s baseline
projection diﬀers dramatically from 2009, with debt at almost 300 percent of GDP at the
end of the projection period in the 2009 report, but at just over 100 percent of GDP in the
2010 exercise [ﬁgure 2]. That’s the rosy scenario. The alternative projections build in policy
changes the CBO deems likely to occur—for example, curtailing the reach of the Alternative
Minimum Tax and extending most of the provisions of the 2001 and 2003 tax cuts—and


                                               9
                                             Leeper: Monetary Science, Fiscal Alchemy


have debt exceeding 700 percent and 900 percent in the 2009 and 2010 projections.



                              900


                                                                                                     Alternative Scenario
                              800
                                                                                                             2010
                                                                                                      Alternative Scenario
                              700                                                                             2009


                              600
          Percentage of GDP




                              500


                              400


                              300
                                                                                                      Baseline Scenario
                                                                                                            2009
                              200                                                              Baseline Scenario
                                                                                                     2010

                              100


                                0
                               1790   1810   1830   1850   1870   1890   1910   1930   1950   1970    1990   2010   2030     2050   2070 2084




Figure 2: Projections of U.S. federal government debt as a percentage of GDP from Con-
gressional Budget Oﬃce (2009, 2010c).

       Figure 2 is amenable to alternative interpretations. (1) According to the baseline, the
long-term U.S. ﬁscal position improved sharply over the past year, in large part because of
substantial cost savings from the recent health reform bills, so the need for serious ﬁscal
reform is less pressing.7 (2) The alternative projection, in contrast, suggests that the ﬁscal
position has deteriorated further, with the debt-GDP ratio rising to almost 1000 percent
at the end of the projection period. (3) Viewing the baseline and alternative as two points
on a probability distribution, the dispersion in the distribution has increased dramatically,
suggesting a signiﬁcant increase in uncertainty about future ﬁscal actions. (4) Because the
   7
    This is the interpretation adopted by some economic bloggers.                      See, for example,
http://www.angrybearblog.com/2010/06/cbo-releases-long-term-budget-outlook.html, which refers to
“deﬁcit hysterics” and then comments: “Interestingly if we examine the above two ﬁgures we see that
’Extended baseline’ which essentially means ’Current law’ shows the deﬁcit vanishing by 2014 and Debt
Held by the Public stabilizing through 2035. Making some of the ‘If this goes on the sky will fall!’ rhetoric
around Obama policy a little overstated, just as with Social Security a plan of ‘Nothing’ getting oddly some
pretty good projected results.”


                                                                                10
                        Leeper: Monetary Science, Fiscal Alchemy


projections are accounting exercises and do not come from any coherent economic model,
they are not economic forecasts and it’s foolhardy to try to draw meaningful economic
inferences from them. This is confusing economics. Because the baseline is a scenario that
nobody believes will happen and the alternative is an outcome that everyone know cannot
happen, the CBO’s projections do little to help people form expectations over future ﬁscal
policies and they do not constitute science.8
   As the introduction suggests, the source of the CBO’s less-than-informative long-term
projections is the tightly circumscribed mandate that the U.S. Congress imposes on the CBO.
By law the CBO must construct projections assuming that current law remains in eﬀect.
Baseline and alternative scenarios are two interpretations the CBO ascribes to “current law.”
But when “current law” is unsustainable, projections conditioned on it have little economic
content. It is important to acknowledge, though, that the CBO is simply a conduit for
Congress’ alchemy.


III Monetary-Fiscal Interactions in Normal Times
Most macroeconomists were raised on the belief that inﬂation is determined by monetary
policy, especially in the long run. Full stop. Sure, especially egregious ﬁscal policy or
wartime ﬁnance might force the central bank to print money, accumulate government bonds,
and generate inﬂation. But even in this instance, the overall price level is being determined
by the interaction of money supply and money demand: inﬂation is a monetary phenomenon.
New Keynesian models couch monetary policy in terms of controlling a nominal interest rate,
rather than high-powered money, but otherwise new Keynesian and old monetarist are close
cousins in terms of thinking about how inﬂation gets determined.
   Central bankers need a broader perspective on price level determination—to at least
understand and acknowledge that there is another channel through which inﬂation can be
determined. The broader perspective is important because the new Keynesian/old mone-
tarist view implicitly embeds a dirty little secret: for monetary policy to successfully control
inﬂation, ﬁscal policy must behave in a particular, circumscribed manner.9 When ﬁscal
policy fails to behave appropriately—as it may during economic crises or periods of ﬁscal
   8
     In fact, these long-term projections build in a variety of assumptions about the economy’s evolution over
the projection period: within a few years, inﬂation is constant at 2.5 percent, real interest rates at 3 percent,
unemployment at 5 percent, and so on. Taken on face value, the economy chugs along just ﬁne even as
government debt explodes. The CBO reports then lapse into wordy bits about the dire consequences of rapid
growth in government debt. These wordy bits are speculative and not derived from some economic model
employed by the CBO. Wordy speculation about the possibility and likely consequences of a ﬁscal crisis in
the United States appears in a special CBO report, Congressional Budget Oﬃce (2010b).
   9
     Although Friedman (1960) is explicit about this necessity in his A Program for Monetary Stability, as is
Tobin (1980) in his monograph Asset Accumulation and Economic Activity.


                                                       11
                    Leeper: Monetary Science, Fiscal Alchemy


stress—then inﬂation can get determined in a very diﬀerent, unconventional, way. In this
section I focus on inﬂation, but this should be construed more broadly as aggregate demand.
In a more detailed model, some inﬂation eﬀects would manifest as eﬀects on output and
employment.
   In the simple model sketched below, macro policies have only two objectives: determine
the inﬂation rate and stabilize government debt. The conventional assignment problem
gives monetary policy responsibility for providing a nominal anchor—inﬂation—and ﬁscal
policy the role of providing a real anchor—the real value of government debt. Because ﬁscal
policy is assigned to stabilize debt, monetary policy is free to target inﬂation. As a logical
matter, however, the assignments can be reversed: ﬁscal policy can determine inﬂation,
while monetary policy prevents debt from becoming unstable. This alternative assignment
may be necessary if, for political or economic reasons, ﬁscal policy simply cannot make the
adjustments needed to stabilize debt.

III.A Fixing Ideas with a Model           To ﬁx ideas about how monetary and ﬁscal policies
must interact to determine inﬂation and stabilize government debt, I draw on results from an
extremely simple model that captures many of the important features of the models used to
study price-level determination [Leeper (1991), Sims (1994), Woodford (1995)]. The model
abstracts from “money,” but this does not mean monetary policy cannot have powerful
eﬀects through changes in the nominal interest rate. The abstraction merely reﬂects the
fact that seigniorage is a trivial fraction of total revenues in most advanced countries, so
for simplicity I set it to zero. Appendix A presents the formal model. Here I bring out key
features of the model and of policy behavior and then jump to their implications.
    Expectations enter the model in two ways. First, individuals’ savings decisions ensure
that the expected returns on real and nominal assets are equalized. This behavior produces
a Fisher relation that connects the nominal interest rate on short-term government bonds
to the real interest rate and the expected inﬂation rate

                                      Rt = rt + Et πt+1                                   (1)

where R and r are the nominal and real interest rates and Et πt+1 denotes the expected rate
of inﬂation between today and tomorrow.
    A second role for expectations comes from individuals’ consumption decisions, which
depend on their wealth. Wealth is composed of the value of current asset holdings plus
the expected present value of after-tax labor income. Because monetary and ﬁscal policies
inﬂuence expectations of both inﬂation and taxes, individuals will track policy behavior and
use that information to help them form those expectations.

                                             12
                       Leeper: Monetary Science, Fiscal Alchemy


    Policy behavior is stylized. Government transfer payments to individuals, denoted by z,
evolve autonomously. Behavior of the monetary and tax authorities is purposeful. Monetary
policy adjusts the short-term nominal interest rate to target inﬂation at π ∗ , with the degree
to which policy leans against inﬂationary winds given by α

                                         Rt = R∗ + α (πt − π ∗ )                                         (2)

Tax policy targets the real value of government debt (or the debt-output ratio) at b∗ by
adjusting taxes in response to the state of government debt with the strength of adjustment
determined by γ                                          
                                        ∗       Bt−1    ∗
                                  τt = τ + γ         −b                                 (3)
                                                Pt−1
where B is the nominal value of bonds outstanding and B/P is their real value. R∗ and τ ∗
are the instrument settings when inﬂation and debt are on target.
   A ﬁnal piece of this stylized model is the government’s budget constraint, which equates
sources of ﬁnancing—new bond sales and taxes—to uses—transfer payments and principal
plus interest on old bonds
                                        Bt             Rt−1 Bt−1
                                           + τt = zt +                                                   (4)
                                        Pt                Pt
    Policy behavior is not completely described until we take a stand on the sizes of the two
critical policy parameters, α and γ, which describe how strongly policies react to deviations
of variables from their targets. It turns out that there are two diﬀerent combinations of
monetary and ﬁscal policies that can jointly stabilize both the inﬂation rate and the value
of debt. I label those two ways Regime M and Regime F.10

III.A.i Regime M The ﬁrst policy mix is familiar to most macroeconomists, accords
well with how many central bankers perceive their behavior, and frequently applies to policy
behavior in normal times. I label this “Regime M” because it is consistent with the mon-
etarist aphorism “inﬂation is always and everywhere a monetary phenomenon.” Regime M
emerges when the central bank aggressively targets inﬂation by raising the nominal interest
rate sharply in response to incipient inﬂation. This is Taylor’s (1993) principle and is called
“active” monetary policy, following the terminology in Leeper (1991). An active authority
is free to pursue its objectives in an unconstrained manner. Naturally, if monetary policy is
attending to inﬂation targeting, then ﬁscal policy must handle debt targeting by adjusting
taxes enough to achieve the debt target. When an increase in debt induces taxes to rise by
   10
      The present model is too simple to provide any insights into which combination of policies is “better”;
it is suﬃcient for our purposes that two such combinations exist.



                                                     13
                    Leeper: Monetary Science, Fiscal Alchemy


more than the real interest rate, future taxes are assured to be suﬃcient both to service the
new debt and to eventually retire debt back to target. This is called “passive” ﬁscal policy.
   Many variants of this regime exist in the literature. Older models of monetary policy
typically couched policy behavior in terms of setting high-powered money, rather than the
nominal interest rate. But the maintained assumption that ﬁscal policy is committed to
targeting the real value of government debt is identical, although the assumption frequently
is not explicitly articulated.
    The equilibrium in this regime implies that inﬂation always equals its target, as does
expected inﬂation
                                            πt = π ∗                                        (5)

   Tax policy stabilizes debt gradually by raising taxes enough to cover interest payments
and to retire a bit of the principal each period. For example, if transfers rise today, they
are initially ﬁnanced entirely through new sales of government bonds. Those new bonds,
though, raise expected and actual future taxes through the tax rule in equation (3).
   In this simple model the only source of uncertainty is random transfers. It appears as
though monetary policy single-handedly keeps inﬂation on target by preventing shocks to
transfers, which in principle aﬀect household wealth and demand for goods, from transmit-
ting into the inﬂation rate. To understand how monetary policy achieves this, we need to
revisit monetary policy’s dirty little secret: ﬁscal policy is ensuring that higher debt-ﬁnanced
transfers today create the expectation of higher taxes in the future. Those higher taxes are
just suﬃcient to gradually retire debt back to target, eliminating the wealth eﬀect of the
higher transfers and relieving the pressure on inﬂation to rise.
    Another perspective on the ﬁscal ﬁnancing requirements when monetary policy is tar-
geting inﬂation emerges from a ubiquitous equilibrium condition. In any dynamic model
with rational agents, government debt derives its value from its anticipated backing. In this
model, that anticipated backing comes from tax revenues net of transfer payments, τt − zt .
The value of government debt can be obtained by imposing equilibrium on the government’s
ﬂow constraint, and taking conditional expectations to arrive at

         Bt
            = expected present value of primary surpluses from t + 1 onward              (IEC)
         Pt

This intertemporal equilibrium condition, (IEC), provides perspective on the crux of passive
tax policy. Because monetary policy nails down the price level and the expected path
of transfers, the z’s, is being set independently of both monetary and tax policies, any
increase in transfers at t, which is ﬁnanced by new nominal bond sales, Bt , must generate an
expectation that taxes will rise in the future by exactly enough to support the higher value

                                              14
                      Leeper: Monetary Science, Fiscal Alchemy


of debt.
    Although here only transfers can change debt, passive tax policy implies that this pattern
of ﬁscal adjustment must occur regardless of the reason that debt increases: economic down-
turns that automatically reduce taxes and raise transfers, changes in household portfolio
behavior, changes in government spending, or central bank open-market operations.
   To expand on the last example, we could modify this model to include money and imagine
that the central bank decides to tighten monetary policy at t by conducting an open-market
sale of bonds. If monetary policy is active, then the monetary contraction both raises Bt —
the dollar value of bonds held by households—and it lowers Pt ; real debt rises. This can be
an equilibrium only if ﬁscal policy is expected to support it by passively raising future tax
revenues.11 That is, given active monetary policy, (IEC) imposes restrictions on the class
of tax policies required for equilibrium; those policies are labeled “passive” because the tax
authority has limited discretion in choosing policy. A passive authority is constrained both
by the inﬂation process that the active authority determines and by the optimal choices
of private economic agents. Refusal by tax policy to adjust appropriately undermines the
ability of open-market operations to aﬀect inﬂation in the conventional manner.12 Evidently,
predictable and reliable ﬁscal adjustments—in a phrase, anchored ﬁscal expectations—are
essential for monetary policy to succeed in targeting inﬂation.
    Although conventional, this regime is not the only mechanism by which monetary and
ﬁscal policy can jointly deliver an equilibrium with stable inﬂation and debt. We turn now
to the other case, which becomes increasingly pertinent in times of ﬁscal stress.

III.A.ii Regime F Passive tax behavior that occurs in Regime M is a stringent re-
quirement: the ﬁscal authority must be willing and able to raise taxes or otherwise adjust
surpluses in the face of rising government debt. For a variety of reasons, this does not always
happen. Sometimes political factors—such as the electorate’s resistance to higher taxes—
prevent taxes from rising as needed to stabilize debt. Some countries simply do not have
the ﬁscal infrastructure in place to generate the necessary tax revenues. Others might be
at or near the peaks of their Laﬀer curves, constraining their ability to raise revenues. In
these cases, tax policy is active. Analogously, there are also periods when the concerns of
monetary policy move away from inﬂation stabilization and toward other matters, such as
output or ﬁnancial stabilization [see, for example, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System (2009) or Bank of England (2009)]. These are periods in which monetary policy
  11
     Higher future taxes also eliminate any wealth eﬀect arising from the higher level of debt in agents’
portfolios, reinforcing the contractionary eﬀects of the open-market sale.
  12
     This is an application of the general insight contained in Wallace (1981). Sargent and Wallace’s “Un-
pleasant Monetarist Arithmetic” (1981) outcome emerges because the tax authority refuses to respond “ap-
propriately,” forcing monetary policy in the future to abandon its inﬂation target.

                                                   15
                       Leeper: Monetary Science, Fiscal Alchemy


is no longer active, instead adjusting the nominal interest rate only weakly in response to
inﬂation. The global recession and ﬁnancial crisis of 2008-2010 is a striking case when central
banks’ concerns shifted away from inﬂation. Then monetary policy is passive.
   We focus on a particular policy mix that yields clean economic interpretations: the
nominal interest rate is set independently of inﬂation, α = 0 and the nominal rate is pegged
at R∗ , and taxes are set independently of debt, γ = 0 and taxes are constant at τ ∗ . These
policy speciﬁcations might seem extreme and special, but the qualitative points that emerge
generalize to other speciﬁcations of passive monetary/active tax policies.
   One result pops out immediately. Applying the pegged nominal interest rate policy to
the Fisher relation, (1), yields
                                   Et πt+1 = R∗ − rt                                (6)

Since we are assuming that the real interest rate is independent of monetary policy—a strong
and unrealistic assumption in practice—expected inﬂation is anchored on the inﬂation target,
an outcome that is perfectly consistent with one aim of inﬂation-targeting central banks.13 It
turns out, however, that another aim of inﬂation targeters—stabilization of actual inﬂation—
which can be achieved by active monetary/passive ﬁscal policy, is no longer attainable.
  The intertemporal equilibrium condition, (IEC), can be written in a more suggestive
manner as

        R∗ Bt−1
                = expected present value of primary surpluses from t onward                        (IEC–2)
          Pt

At time t, the numerator of this expression, R∗ Bt−1 , is already determined by past debt and
the pegged interest rate and represents the nominal value of household wealth carried into
the current period. The right side is the expected present value of autonomously set primary
ﬁscal surpluses from date t on, which reduces to a ﬁxed number in each date. This expression
reveals how the price level is determined each period: it must adjust to set the market value of
debt equal to expected discounted surpluses. Regime F leads to a sharp dichotomy between
the roles of monetary and ﬁscal policy in price-level determination: monetary policy alone
appears to determine expected inﬂation by choosing the level at which to peg the nominal
interest rate, R∗ , while conditional on that choice, ﬁscal variables appear to determine actual
inﬂation.
    Some economists have found this equilibrium to be peculiar in some way. Although it
may not describe most economies in normal times, it is not so strange. To understand the
nature of this equilibrium, we need to delve into the underlying economic behavior. This is
  13
   As I show in section VI, when the real interest rate is endogenous, ﬁscal stress can undermine the central
bank’s ability to target expected inﬂation also.


                                                     16
                       Leeper: Monetary Science, Fiscal Alchemy


an environment in which changes in debt do not elicit any changes in expected taxes, unlike
in Regime M. First consider a one-oﬀ increase in current transfer payments, zt , ﬁnanced by
new debt issuance, Bt . This reduces the right side of (IEC–2). With no oﬀsetting increase
in current or expected tax obligations, at the initial price level households feel wealthier and
they try to shift up their consumption paths. Higher demand for goods drives up the price
level, and continues to do so until the wealth eﬀect dissipates and households are content
with their initial consumption plan when the two sides of (IEC–2) are equalized.
   Now imagine that at time t households receive news of higher transfers in the future.
There is no change in nominal debt at t, but there is still an increase in household wealth
at initial prices. Through the same mechanism, Pt must rise to revalue current debt to be
consistent with the new lower expected path of transfers: the value of debt falls in line with
the lower expected present value of surpluses.
   Cochrane (2010) oﬀers another interpretation of the equilibrium in which “aggregate
demand” is the mirror image of demand for government debt. An expectation that transfers
will rise in the future reduces the household’s assessment of the value of the government debt
they hold. Households can shed debt only by converting it into demand for consumption
goods; hence, the increase in aggregate demand that leads to higher prices.
   Expression (IEC–2) indicates that in this policy regime the impacts of monetary policy
change dramatically. When the central bank chooses a higher rate at which to peg the
nominal interest rate, with no expected change in surpluses, the eﬀect is to raise the price
level next period. This echoes Sargent and Wallace (1981), but the economic mechanism
and the associated policy behavior are diﬀerent. In the current policy mix, a higher nominal
interest rate raises the interest payments the household receives on the government bonds
it holds. Higher nominal interest receipts, with no higher anticipated taxes, raise household
wealth and trigger the same adjustments as above. In this sense, as in Sargent and Wallace,
monetary policy has lost control of inﬂation.14
   Regime F emphasizes that expectations about ﬁscal policy can have important eﬀects
on aggregate demand and inﬂation today. For example, in (IEC–2) news of a future tax
cut makes forward-looking agents feel wealthier, inducing them to shift up their demand for
goods today and in the future. That higher demand translates into higher current inﬂation.
But all these adjustments begin before the tax cut takes place. Current and past budget
deﬁcits may contain little, in any, information about ﬁscal eﬀects on the economy.

  14
    One-period debt implies that if R∗ rises at t, the inﬂation rate rises at t + 1. With long-term debt, the
inﬂation increase is delayed and, as Sims (2010) shows, monetary policy retains its ability to raise nominal
rates and reduce inﬂation in the short run. See also Cochrane (2001).




                                                     17
                    Leeper: Monetary Science, Fiscal Alchemy


III.B Generalizing Policy Behavior             Regimes M and F above maintain the con-
ventional assumption that policy rules do not change over time, so the rule in place today
determines expected future policy behavior. Of course, rules can and do change. The pos-
sibility that future policy rules may diﬀer from current rules can have a profound eﬀect on
expectations and on the resulting equilibrium. For example, Davig and Leeper (2007) show
that if monetary policy ﬂuctuates between being active and passive, then a wider range
of equilibrium outcomes are possible than under Regime M (even though ﬁscal behavior is
perpetually passive), including ones in which temporarily passive monetary policy behavior
ampliﬁes volatility in the macro economy even when monetary policy is active.
    If both monetary and ﬁscal rules ﬂuctuate in a way that shifts the economy between
regimes, say between Regimes M and F, then ﬁscal disturbances always aﬀect inﬂation—
just as they do if Regime F were in place forever—even if monetary policy is currently active.
This idea is explored in Davig and Leeper (2006, 2010b) and Chung et al. (2007). Two key
points come from this reasoning. First, the eﬀects of both monetary and ﬁscal policy can
vary over time, depending on the prevailing mix of monetary and ﬁscal policies, how long
the mix is expected to prevail, and the mix of policies expected in the future.
   Second, the unusual ﬁscal impacts on inﬂation that come from Regime F will be larger
the more time the economy is expected to spend in Regime F now and in the future. These
points underscore the central role of expectations in transmitting ﬁscal policy to the macro
economy.
   Once policy behavior is generalized to allow for changes in regime, surprising results
emerge because in forward-looking models like those commonly employed at central banks,
beliefs about policies in the long run anchor expectations and determine the nature of the
equilibrium. If policy rules can ﬂuctuate, then economic agents’ expectations will depend
on both current and future rules, weighted by the probabilities of the rules. When agents
believe that at times ﬁscal policy will not respond systematically to stabilize debt, then
the properties of Regime F spill over to Regime M and monetary policy’s ability to control
inﬂation will be curtailed.
   Heading into an era of ﬁscal stress, as many advanced economies are, it may be reasonable
for individuals to ascribe some probability to a future ﬁscal regime in which ﬁscal policy is
no longer able or willing to target government debt. And the longer that governments delay
making the ﬁscal reforms that will anchor expectations on the ﬁscal behavior in Regime M,
the more likely it is that central banks will be unable to control inﬂation.




                                             18
                     Leeper: Monetary Science, Fiscal Alchemy


IV Fiscal Multiplier Morass
Fiscal multipliers are extraordinarily complex creatures. Little professional consensus exists
on their magnitudes, in part because it is diﬃcult to perform the same thought experiment
across data sets, econometric techniques, and economic models. There are two signiﬁcant
branches of work on ﬁscal multipliers. One branch, strongly data driven, is represented in
recent work by the research of Blanchard and Perotti (2002), Perotti (2007), Mountford
and Uhlig (2009), and Romer and Romer (2010).15 A second branch employs fully speciﬁed
optimizing models—either estimated or calibrated—and is exempliﬁed by Christiano et al.
(2009), Cogan et al. (2009), Traum and Yang (2009), Coenen et al. (2010), Davig and Leeper
(2010b), Leeper et al. (2010), and Uhlig (2010).
   One clear message emerges from this vast literature: estimates of multipliers are all over
the map, providing empirical support for virtually any policy conclusion. The diversity of
ﬁndings, often based on the same U.S. time series data, highlights the diﬃculties in obtaining
reliable estimates of ﬁscal eﬀects and points to the need for systematic analyses that confront
ﬁscal policy’s complexities. Remarkably, Coenen et al. (2010) and Cogan et al. (2009) are
intended as meta-studies designed to examine the size of ﬁscal multipliers across a wide
range of dynamic optimizing models, yet they arrive at diametrically opposed conclusions.
Coenen et al. (2010) ﬁnds substantial economic stimulus from government spending increases
in the short and medium run, while Cogan et al. (2009) argue that even in the short run
government spending is not eﬃcacious. To date, no eﬀort has been made to reconcile the
divergent ﬁndings from the two groups of respected economists.
    As scientists, we know that a wide range of factors inﬂuence the macroeconomic impacts
of ﬁscal actions. When these factors are inadequately accounted for, we would expect the
inconclusive conclusions that come from alchemy. Of course, even if research economists
were to converge on a consensus about the size of various multipliers based on historical
data, going forward it is dicey to apply those ﬁndings to practical policymaking in an era of
ﬁscal stress when future ﬁscal adjustments are anyone’s guess.
    Much of my work with coauthors attempts to understand whether the forward-looking
issues we emphasize can help to sort through the multiplier morass. Because the work is at an
early stage, I cannot say with conﬁdence what the multipliers are. But our work does show
that dynamic behavior and expectations formation matter a great deal for understanding
how ﬁscal policy aﬀects the macro economy.

 15
     But see the important work of Caldara and Kamps (2010), which carefully examines whether this
literature has successfully isolated ﬁscal shocks.




                                               19
                      Leeper: Monetary Science, Fiscal Alchemy


IV.A Fiscal Complexities             Fiscal eﬀects are complex for all the reasons that monetary
eﬀects are, plus some. Whereas monetary policy normally has a single primary instrument—
the short-term nominal interest rate—ﬁscal policy has many types of spending and taxes and
each instrument has its distinct impacts.16 But multiple instruments is not the most impor-
tant source of ﬁscal complexity. Fiscal multipliers also depend on the expected sources—
taxes, spending, transfers—and timing—soon or in the distant future—of ﬁscal ﬁnancing.
Alternative ﬁscal ﬁnancing schemes change the future intertemporal margins facing decision
makers and can also have important eﬀects on wealth; these two channels can dramatically
alter the dynamics of ﬁscal multipliers, including changing their signs over time.
   I illustrate these points with results from a recent paper. Leeper et al. (2010) ﬁt post-war
U.S. time series to a conventional neo-classical growth model, extended to include substan-
tial ﬁscal detail: government purchases and transfers and proportional taxes levied against
capital and labor income and against consumption expenditures. Fiscal behavior follows
simple rules that allow each instrument to respond contemporaneously to output, reﬂecting
automatic stabilizers, and to the lagged debt-GDP ratio. Each instrument also contains a
component that evolves autonomously.
   Neo-classical growth models cannot produce large multipliers for changes in unproductive
government spending, a fact that is well-documented [Monacelli and Perotti (2008)], so
the results I present are not intended as deﬁnitive measures of “the multiplier.” I seek
to highlight how the dynamic patterns of estimated government spending multipliers vary
systematically with alternative ﬁscal ﬁnancing schemes, a feature that will survive across
other dynamic models. The results put a sharp point on the diﬀerence between ﬁscal science,
which acknowledges and grapples with these complexities, and ﬁscal alchemy, which sweeps
them under the rug.
   Figure 3 reports over a 10-year horizon the output multipliers associated with a persistent
but transitory increase in government consumption. The ﬁgure shows the paths of multipliers
under four ﬁnancing schemes: “All instruments adjust” is the best-ﬁtting model in which all
instruments except consumption taxes respond to stabilize government debt; the remaining
three paths are counterfactuals in which only a single type of instrument adjusts to ﬁnance
the increase in government consumption. Short-run multipliers are nearly identical across
ﬁnancing schemes, but within a year of the initial increase in spending, important diﬀerences
appear. Largest and most persistent positive multipliers emerge when higher spending is
ﬁnanced by lower lump-sum transfers. When higher spending brings forth lower future
spending, the multiplier turns negative in about two years and remains negative even 10 years
  16
    Although recent unusual central bank operations make clear that in non-normal times monetary policy
has many more tools at its disposal.



                                                  20
                          Leeper: Monetary Science, Fiscal Alchemy


out. The sharpest diﬀerence occurs when capital and labor tax rates rise to ﬁnance spending,
with the multiplier turning negative in six quarters and remaining strongly negative.17

                                                Output Multipliers
             0.8


             0.6

                                All instruments adjust
             0.4


             0.2
                                                                              Only transfers adjust
               0

                                                              Only government spending adjusts
           −0.2


           −0.4
                                                                                  Only taxes adjust

           −0.6
               0          5        10         15         20       25       30             35          40
                              Quarters After an Increase in Government Consumption

Figure 3: Output multipliers estimated in a neo-classical growth model using post-war U.S.
data, as reported in Leeper et al. (2010). Various counterfactual exercises.

       The thought experiment underlying ﬁgure 3 is controlled in the sense that the only dif-
ference across the multiplier paths is the policy rules in place, which determine the sources
of future ﬁscal adjustments and the model agents’ expectations of future policies. Evidently,
those expectations are of central importance to determining the dynamic impacts of govern-
ment spending. Statistically, the “All instruments adjust” path is probably the best guess of
the multipliers associated with an exogenous increase in spending, but because in practice
ﬁscal authorities do not follow well-understood rules, any of the adjustments depicted is
possible and the values of multipliers, particularly at longer horizons, should be treated as
  17
       Multipliers are present-value multipliers, computed for horizon k as
                                                             k j         −1
                                                                                
                                                          Et j=0      i=0 Rt+i ΔYt+j
                           Present-Value Multiplier(k) =                     
                                                         Et kj=0      j
                                                                      i=0 R −1
                                                                            t+i   ΔGt+j

where Y and G are real GDP and real government consumption and R is the model-derived discount rate.
Often the k-period multiplier is calculated as ΔYk /ΔG0 , where ΔG0 is the initial change in spending. This
textbook-style multiplier, however, is inadequate when changes in government spending generate dynamics
in both spending and output.


                                                         21
                    Leeper: Monetary Science, Fiscal Alchemy


highly uncertain.
   Timing of ﬁscal adjustments can also be important for determining the size of multipliers.
Postponing adjustments pushes changes in taxes and spending into the future and rational
economic agents discount distant changes more heavily than near-term changes. Within a
week of signing the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (ARRA) into law,
President Obama pledged to cut the ﬁscal deﬁcit in half by 2013 [Calmes (2009)], a promise
that would accelerate the adjustment to rising debt. Figure 4 uses the same neo-classical
model to show how changes in the speed of adjustment of policy instruments aﬀect the path of
the government spending multiplier. Larger multipliers come from slower adjustments, while
faster adjustments can reverse the positive output eﬀects rapidly. Again, ﬁscal expectations
are driving the diﬀerences.

                                        Output Multipliers
         0.7

         0.6

         0.5

         0.4

         0.3
                      Slower Speed of Adjustment

         0.2

         0.1
                                                                   Historically Estimated
          0                                                        Speed of Adjustment

       −0.1
                                         Faster Speed of Adjustment
       −0.2
           0           10          20           30           40           50            60
                        Quarters After an Increase in Government Consumption

Figure 4: Output multipliers estimated in a neo-classical growth model using post-war U.S.
data, as reported in Leeper et al. (2010). Various counterfactual exercises in which all ﬁscal
instruments adjust to stabilize debt.

   Fiscal dynamics can take decades to play out. With an estimated dynamic model of
ﬁscal policy in hand, one can ask, “How long does it take for long-run ﬁscal balance to be
restored after various ﬁscal actions?” Leeper et al. (2010) estimate that ﬁscal adjustments
in the United States have been extremely gradual, taking three or more decades. This is
roughly consistent with the U.S. experience after World War II: debt fell from a peak of 113


                                              22
                     Leeper: Monetary Science, Fiscal Alchemy


percent in 1945 to about 33 percent in the mid-1960s. Adjustments have been most gradual
for government spending and labor tax shocks.
    Another twist in the tale of the multiplier comes from recognizing that ﬁscal policy
changes usually come about only after signiﬁcant delay. Legislative and implementation lags
ensure that private agents receive clear signals about the tax rates they will face and when
important changes in government spending will occur. This phenomenon, which Leeper et al.
(2009) dub “ﬁscal foresight,” can have powerful eﬀects on ﬁscal multipliers, particularly over
the short horizons relevant for countercyclical policy actions [see also Ramey (2010)].
    Infrastructure spending, which composed $132 billion of the ARRA, is an excellent exam-
ple of how ﬁscal foresight can dramatically alter short-run ﬁscal multipliers. Table 1 records
that in 2009 the Act authorized $27.5 billion spending on highways, but the actual outlays
will occur through 2016, with most occurring several years after the authorization. Tracking
the eﬀects on expectations, the “news” about highway spending arrived in 2009 with passage
of the Act, but the outlays over the next six years are fully anticipated. Because a highway
does not contribute to productivity until construction is completed, a ﬁrm planning to build
a new factory will postpone its construction until the highway is nearly completed. More
generally, private investment and employment may be delayed until the new public capital
is on line and raises the productivity of private inputs.

                    American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
                      2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015                   2016   2009-16
 Budget Authority      27.5   0       0     0       0       0      0       0      27.5
 Estimated Outlay      2.75   6.875   5.5   4.125   3.025   2.75   1.925   .55    27.5


Table 1: Estimated costs in billions of dollars for highway construction in Title XII of the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009. Source: Congressional Budget Oﬃce,
www.cbo.gov/ftpdocs/99xx/doc9989/hr1conference.pdf.

   Leeper et al. (2010) estimate a dynamic model with government investment and contrast
the impacts of higher infrastructure spending with diﬀerent periods of implementation de-
lays, the time between authorization and outlays. Figure 5 reports the estimated paths of
employment and output following an injection of new infrastructure spending. The three
lines in the ﬁgure are based on the same level of authorized spending, but represent diﬀer-
ent implementation delays: one-quarter delay (dashed lines), one-year delay (dotted-dashed
lines), and three-year delay (solid lines). With a one-quarter delay, government investment
today is transformed into public capital tomorrow, which raises employment and output
immediately. With more plausible delays, such as a year, the boost to employment is also
delayed and in the very short run, output may actually fall. As the implementation delay

                                             23
                      Leeper: Monetary Science, Fiscal Alchemy



                        Employment                                               Output
                                                        0.08
         0.08                                                     1−quarter delay
                                                        0.06
         0.06
                                                                       1−year delay
         0.04                                           0.04

         0.02
                                                                                 3−year delay
                                                        0.02
           0
                                                          0

            0     2       4       6       8   10           0       2         4            6     8    10



                       Budget Authority                        Implemented Infrastructure Spending
           3                                              3

          2.5                                            2.5

           2                                              2

                                                         1.5
          1.5
                                                          1
           1
                                                         0.5
          0.5
                                                          0
            0     2       4       6       8   10           0       2         4            6     8    10




Figure 5: Impacts of higher government investment under various lengths of implementation
delays in a neo-classical growth model using post-war U.S. data. Dashed lines: one-quarter
delay; dotted-dashed lines: one-year delay; solid lines: three-year delay. All variables are in
percentage deviations from steady state. X-axis is in years. Source: Leeper et al. (2010).

grows, the short-run stimulus to employment and output becomes more muted. Delayed
stimulus arises because private decisions depend on the timing with which infrastructure
spending is expected to aﬀect productivity.
    Up to now, the discussion of multipliers has made no mention of monetary policy. In
principle, though, the monetary policy stance can have major implications for ﬁscal impacts.
Higher current and expected government spending, for example, will tend to raise current
and expected inﬂation. If monetary policy is active and raises the nominal rate more than
one-for-one with inﬂation, then real interest rates rise, inducing individuals to postpone
consumption, oﬀsetting some of the increase in demand for goods. On the other hand,
passive monetary policy, which raises nominal rates only weakly with inﬂation, will tend to
reduce real interest rates—government spending raises expected inﬂation, but the nominal
rate now rises by less—and encourage higher current consumption. Recent research bears out
this reasoning [Christiano et al. (2009), Erceg and Lindé (2009), Eggertsson (2009), Davig
and Leeper (2010b)].
   Table 2 reports present-value government spending multipliers for a new Keynesian model

                                                   24
                       Leeper: Monetary Science, Fiscal Alchemy


similar to those in use at central banks, but in an environment in which monetary and ﬁscal
policies are regularly switching between active and passive stances, as in Regimes M and F
above. Davig and Leeper (2010b) use U.S. time series to estimate more general versions of
the policy rules in section III, where the coeﬃcients on the rules can be diﬀerent in diﬀerent
policy regimes. Those rules are then embedded in a dynamic optimizing model and the model
agents form expectations over future policies using the probability distributions estimated
for the policy rules. Because regimes recur, even if policies today are in Regime M, agents
know that there is some probability policies will switch to Regime F in the future.


                                                       P V (ΔY )
                                                       P V (ΔG)
                                                                   after

                    Regime          5 quarters     10 quarters       25 quarters    ∞

                    M: AM/PF            .79              .80               .84     .86

                    F: PM/AF           1.72            1.58                1.40    1.36


Table 2: Output multipliers for government spending from new Keynesian model with ﬂuc-
tuating monetary and ﬁscal policy rules. AM: active monetary policy; PM: passive monetary
policy; PF: passive tax policy; AF: active tax policy. Source: Davig and Leeper (2010b).

   Conditional on being in Regime M, the government spending multipliers are modest—less
than unity—at all horizons [table 2, row labeled M: AM/PF]. These estimates are close to
the ones that emerge from neo-classical growth models without monetary policy. But when
monetary policy is passive, the same spending impulse is substantially more stimulative, with
output multipliers nearly twice as large [row labeled F: PM/AF]. Accounting for monetary
policy behavior, and modeling that behavior explicitly, is essential to determine the potency
of ﬁscal policy.18
    Multipliers in themselves are not directly interesting to policymakers. But multipliers are
a critical input to predict a particular legislation’s consequences, about which policymakers
  18
    “Modeling that behavior explicitly” means that the details of how monetary policy accommodation is
handled matter. In table 2, it is the policy rule that changes and, because agents know rules can change,
possible ﬂuctuations in rules are embedded in their expectations. An alternative modeling strategy would be
to posit an active monetary policy rule, such as Rt = R∗ + α(πt − π ∗ ) + εt with α > 1 and εt an exogenous
stochastic process. In the face of a ﬁscal expansion, the modeler could suspend this rule temporarily by
feeding in a sequence of εt ’s that allow Rt to track any desired interest rate path. This is a completely
diﬀerent exercise than regime change because agents in the model base their expectations on the active
monetary policy rule and the realized path of the nominal interest rate comes as a surprise to the agents.
Substantive issues rest on the details of the thought experiment. Researchers are not always clear about how
their experiments are conducted.


                                                    25
                     Leeper: Monetary Science, Fiscal Alchemy


do care. Davig and Leeper (2010b) feed into their model the path of government spending
associated with the ARRA—as calculated by Cogan et al. (2009)—to compute the resulting
paths of macro variables. Solid lines labeled AM/PF in ﬁgure 6 condition on being in Regime
M with monetary policy actively targeting inﬂation and ﬁscal policy passively raising taxes
to stabilize debt. Higher current and expected government purchases raise employment and
output modestly, as the multipliers in table 2 suggest. Inﬂation rises but monetary policy
sharply increases the nominal interest rate, which raises the real interest rate and induces
model agents to postpone consumption. An initial budget deﬁcit turns to surplus, retiring
debt.
   Output and inﬂation eﬀects are substantially larger under the alternative assignment of
macro policies that most closely resemble actual American policy in 2008–2010. Passive
monetary policy stabilizes debt and active ﬁscal policy drives inﬂation [dashed lines labeled
PM/AF]. A weak response of monetary policy to inﬂation allows higher expected inﬂation
to reduce real interest rates and stimulate consumption.
   So far the Federal Reserve has signaled its willingness to continue its passive behavior by
keeping the federal funds rate low. Eventually, though, as the recovery gains strength and
inﬂation picks up, it is likely that the Fed will return to its usual active policy stance. In the
absence of a coordinated switch in ﬁscal policy to a passive stance, both policies would be
active, at least for a time. If regime were permanent and both policies were active, debt would
explode and there would be no equilibrium. In this model, as in actual economies, agents
do not expect the active/active regime to last forever, and it is possible for the economy to
visit such a regime temporarily. Doubly active policies mean that no one is attending to
debt stabilization and this produces markedly diﬀerent paths for macro variables [dotted-
dashed lines labeled AM/AF]: inﬂation rises and remains well above its initial level; output
and consumption boom even though the real interest rate rises; government debt grows
with no tendency to stabilize. By conditioning on remaining in the active/active regime,
this counterfactual generates a series of surprisingly low taxes, which boost demand for
consumption goods and induce ﬁrms to demand more labor.
    The message of the doubly active policy scenario in ﬁgure 6 should be disturbing to
central bankers. A switch in monetary policy to ﬁghting inﬂation is doomed to failure if
ﬁscal policy does not simultaneously switch to raising taxes to stabilize debt. Although the
economy experiences a boom, it does so by generating chronically higher inﬂation and a
growing ratio of government debt to GDP.
   This scenario vividly illuminates the alchemy underlying pronouncements of “unsustain-
able policies.” Doubly active policies can and do happen periodically. The early 1980s in the
United States is a graphic case: Chairman Volcker was aggressively ﬁghting inﬂation while


                                               26
                                    Leeper: Monetary Science, Fiscal Alchemy



                                         Output Gap                                                Consumption
                       1.5                                                          0.8
                          1                 PM/AF AM/AF
                                                                                    0.4
       %




                                                                    %
                       0.5
                                                                                     0
                          0
                                         AM/PF
                      −0.5                                                         −0.4
                              0     10           20       30                              0   10         20        30
                                           Inflation                                          Real Interest Rate
                      300                                                           50
       basis points




                                                                    basis points
                      200
                                                                                     0
                      100
                          0                                                        −50

                              0     10           20       30                              0   10         20        30
                                  Government Purchases                                                Taxes
                                                                                     3
                          4
                                                                                     2
                      %




                                                                          %
                          2                                                          1
                                                                                     0
                          0
                                                                                    −1
                              0     10           20       30                              0   10         20        30
                                            Debt                                               Primary Surplus
                       10                                                           20
                                                                                     0
                          5                                                        −20
             %




                                                                    %              −40
                          0                                                        −60
                              0     10           20       30                              0   10         20        30




Figure 6: Impacts of the government spending path implied by the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 in a new Keynesian model with ﬂuctuating monetary and ﬁscal
policy rules. Figure conditions on active monetary/passive ﬁscal (AM/PF) policy (solid
lines), passive monetary/active ﬁscal (PM/AF) policy regimes (dashed lines), and active
monetary/active ﬁscal (AM/AF) regime (dotted-dashed lines). In deviations from steady
state. Time units in quarters. Source: Davig and Leeper (2010b).

President Reagan was running large deﬁcits and steadfastly refusing to raise taxes or cut
defense spending. Pundits declared policy unsustainable, yet investors at home and abroad
continued to buy U.S. treasuries. Evidently, despite the dire predictions of commentators,
investors believed—correctly as it turned out—that ﬁscal adjustments would be forthcoming.
Conventional analyses that do not allow expectations formation to change over time with
policy regime cannot even address the consequences of a policy mix that has occurred and
may recur in times of ﬁscal stress.
   This section has illustrated a variety of reasons why the impacts of changes in even a nar-
rowly deﬁned ﬁscal instrument—unproductive government spending in the examples—can be
wildly diﬀerent over time. It is little wonder that research that treats these considerations as
secondary winds up in the ﬁscal multiplier morass. As research progressively explores these
considerations, ﬁscal analysis will be able to leave alchemy behind.



                                                               27
                       Leeper: Monetary Science, Fiscal Alchemy


V The Coming Era of Fiscal Stress and Its Consequences
Figure 7 neatly encapsulates why the United States is entering an era of ﬁscal stress, an
era that many other countries are also entering. Promised federal government transfers—
Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid—are projected to grow exponentially. The federal
government’s share in GDP almost doubles over the projection period: from an average of
about 18 in 1962 to between 31 and 35 percent in 2083, excluding interest payments on
outstanding debt. Baseline revenues track baseline non-interest spending reasonably well,
which is why in ﬁgure 2 the baseline 2010 debt projection shows moderate growth in debt,
but the spread between revenues and total spending widens in the out years.19
   The ﬁscal problem implied by the ﬁgure is sometimes called “the unfunded liabilities
problem” because promised transfer payments are a future “liability” of the government and,
with no plans on the books to ﬁnance them, they are “unfunded.” “Unfunded liabilities” is
an oﬀspring of “unsustainable policies.” Either the government will keep its promises, which
means they are funded in some fashion or the government will not deliver on the promises, so
they are not liabilities. Taken literally, unfunded liabilities are inconsistent with the notion
of equilibrium because if the spending promises are kept and revenues cannot keep pace, then
investors will anticipate that the government will not be able to service its debt. Unserviced
debt is worthless or at least worth less.
   Many researchers have studied this looming problem, notably Kotlikoﬀ (1992), Auerbach
et al. (1994, 1995), Kotlikoﬀ and Gokhale (1994), and Kotlikoﬀ and Burns (2004). Kotlikoﬀ
(2006) has even argued that the demographic shifts underlying the CBO’s projections in
ﬁgure 7 imply that the United States is “bankrupt.” And many policy-oriented pieces have
been written that point to projections like these and warn of possible ﬁscal crises [Rubin
et al. (2004) and publications by the Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget and
Peter G. Peterson Foundation]. Central bankers have also expressed concerns about the
“unsustainability” of ﬁscal policy in the United States and elsewhere [Bernanke (2010a),
Hoenig (2010), and González-Páramo (2010)].
   If the CBO projections are the ﬁscal iceberg, then there are some ﬁscal ice ﬂoes out
there that may add to the iceberg’s mass. Many U.S. cities and states currently face dire
ﬁscal situations and it seems reasonable to put some probability on the federal government
stepping in to help. American state pensions for public employees is a bigger, long-run
issue. Novy-Marx and Rauh (2009) estimate that state public pensions are underfunded
  19
    The CBO attributes rapid growth in revenues to no relief from the Alternative Minimum Tax and to
enforcement of the sunset provisions in the 2001 and 2003 tax cuts. Taken together, these factors account for
the bulk of the diﬀerence between the two revenue projections in ﬁgure 7 [see Congressional Budget Oﬃce
(2010c, chapter 4)].


                                                     28
                   Leeper: Monetary Science, Fiscal Alchemy



                                        Extended−Baseline Scenario
          40
                                   Actual
                                                                          Total Spending
                                            Projected
                                                                                    Revenues
          30


          20                                                                Medicare, Medicaid,
                                                                            Subsidies plus
                                                                            Social Security
          10

                                                                            Social Security
           0
          1960       1980        2000            2020              2040   2060             2080


                                            Alternative Scenario
          80
                                   Actual   Projected

          60


          40


          20


           0
          1960       1980        2000            2020              2040   2060             2080




Figure 7: Congressional Budget Oﬃce long-term projections of Social Security, Medicare
plus Medicaid and other medical spending, total non-interest spending, and revenues as a
percentage of GDP. Solid lines to left of vertical line are actual data; extended baseline
projection in dashed lines; alternative scenario projection in dotted-dashed lines. Source:
Congressional Budget Oﬃce (2010c).

by $3.23 trillion, which compares to a total state debt in 2008 of under $1 trillion. Rauh
(2010) projects that Illinois may run out of pension funds as early as 2018, followed by
Connecticut, Indiana, and New Jersey in 2019. Some states—Florida and New York—that
are now facing severe short-run budget shortfalls are projected never to run out. Rauh
observes that constitutional protections may prevent states from reneging on these claims,
raising the likelihood of a federal government bailout of defaulting states.
    Greece’s recent experience may foreshadow American events. Politics and arguments
about “systemic risk” made Greece too big to fail. What might have been an isolated instance
of a single member of the European Monetary Union defaulting on its debt became a Europe-
wide problem. But precisely the same arguments could be made about a single American


                                                 29
                        Leeper: Monetary Science, Fiscal Alchemy


state that is having solvency problems. If Illinois defaults, is New Jersey next? Speculation
by political leaders could produce a domino theory of debt default that rationalizes federal
intervention.20 Novy-Marx and Rauh’s (2009) $3.23 trillion shortfall in pension funding
could make the CBO iceberg grow.
    Coming ﬁscal stress is by no means limited to the United States. It may even be worse
in other countries, according to an International Monetary Fund study that computes ﬁscal
costs associated with aging populations [International Monetary Fund (2009b)]. Table 3
reports the net present value of the impacts on ﬁscal deﬁcits of aging-related spending as
a percentage of GDP. In these terms, the U.S. situation is bad, but not the worst; both
Canada and Korea face larger future policy adjustments.

                              Country                          Aging-Related
                                                                   Spending
                              Australia                                  482
                              Canada                                     726
                              France                                     276
                              Germany                                    280
                              Italy                                      169
                              Japan                                      158
                              Korea                                      683
                              Spain                                      652
                              United Kingdom                             335
                              United States                              495
                              Advanced G-20 Countries                    409

Table 3: Net present value of impact on ﬁscal deﬁcit of aging-related spending, in percent
of GDP. Source: International Monetary Fund (2009b).

    It is important to recognize that statements about “unsustainable” policies are always
conditional on the assumption that current policies will remain in eﬀect. Because investors
are happily buying federal government bonds, they must believe that in the long run, policies
are sustainable because current policies will not remain in eﬀect. To understand how these
ﬁscal issues are aﬀecting the economy and interpret any tracks they might be leaving in
data, it is essential to go beyond statements of unsustainability to grasp what kinds of
expectations of future policies are consistent both with policies being sustainable and with
the equilibrium we observe. To do this, we need to consider the notion of a “ﬁscal limit”
and its consequences.

 20
      This is not a claim that such an argument is valid; merely that it may be invoked.




                                                     30
                    Leeper: Monetary Science, Fiscal Alchemy


V.A Fiscal Limits        For both political and economic reasons, at any point in time every
economy faces an upper limit on how much tax revenue it can raise and a lower limit on the
level of government spending. Taken together, these limits imply a maximum level of the
ﬁscal surplus net of interest payments. Of course, these are not constant numbers and they
are not immutable. Limits will ﬂuctuate over time, both with the state of the economy and
with the political leanings of the populace.
   Tax rates vary tremendously across countries, based on evidence that Trabandt and Uhlig
(2009) supply for the United States and 14 European countries. In 2007, the highest labor
income tax rate was in Sweden (54.6 percent) and the lowest was in the United States (28.4
percent); for capital tax rates, the highest was in Denmark (59.3 percent) and the lowest was
in Greece (14.5 percent); the United States had the lowest consumption tax rate by far (4.2
percent), while Denmark had the highest (34.3 percent). Some countries are well below the
peaks of their Laﬀer curves, while others may have high enough tax rates to put them on
the wrong side of the curve, according to Trabandt and Uhlig. Similarly wide ranges exist
for the overall size of governments. In a study of 28 industrial countries, Afonso and Furceri
(2008) report that South Korea had the smallest ratio of general government expenditures
to GDP in 2005 (29.1 percent) and Sweden had the largest (56.3 percent).
   Greece’s recent multi-year ﬁscal reforms underscore that ﬁscal limits are not immutable:
through a variety of tax hikes and cuts in government wages and pensions, and renewed
vigilance in tax collections, Greece is reducing last year’s 13.6 percent of GDP deﬁcit to a
forecasted 3 percent by 2014 [International Monetary Fund European Department (2010)].
    Understanding ﬁscal limits is essential for thinking about monetary and ﬁscal interactions
in the coming era of ﬁscal stress. If a country is approaching its ﬁscal limit, then it no longer
has the ﬁscal ﬂexibility to adjust surpluses to stabilize debt. But Regime M, in which
monetary policy targets inﬂation and ﬁscal policy targets real debt, requires ﬁscal ﬂexibility,
so ﬁscal limits can undermine the eﬀorts of inﬂation targeting central banks to accomplish
their prime objective.
    In practice, the problem is more subtle. A country’s ﬁscal limit is not observable because
it depends on expected future surpluses far more than on the current state of ﬁscal policy.
But those expectations, in turn, depend on the policies people think the government will
adopt in the future. If policy institutions leave those expectations unanchored, then it is
impossible for policy authorities to ensure that people believe that the economy will remain
well below its ﬁscal limit. The more likely people believe it is that the limit will be reached,
the harder it will be for central banks to retain control of inﬂation.




                                               31
                      Leeper: Monetary Science, Fiscal Alchemy


V.B Computing Fiscal Limits                 One way to quantify the economic limit to taxation
is through the Laﬀer curve, which reports how tax revenues vary with tax rates. Figure 8
comes from Trabandt and Uhlig’s (2009) study and reports one measure of Laﬀer curves
for labor income taxes for the United States and the average of 14 European countries.21
Trabandt and Uhlig calibrate neo-classical growth models to data for each of the 15 countries
and compute steady state Laﬀer curves for labor, capital, and consumption tax rates. In
terms of labor taxes, the United States has always been well below the peak, suggesting that
there is plenty of room for raising rates and generating additional revenues. Europe, on the
other hand, is much closer to its peak and, because the slope of the Laﬀer curve between the
EU-14 average rate and the peak is relatively ﬂat, there is little latitude to raise substantially
more revenues through labor taxes. Strictly in terms of labor taxes, then, the United States
is well below its ﬁscal limit, while, on average, Europe is much closer.22
    Steady state Laﬀer curves are useful for getting a sense of ﬁscal limits for various tax
rates, but ﬁscal limits are best thought of as distributions, rather than as ﬁxed objects. Policy
and non-policy shocks will shift the ﬁscal limit around: higher productivity, for example,
raises factor incomes and allows the same tax rates to generate more revenues and support a
higher level of government debt. Institutional features of economies—the structure of labor
markets, the degree of cross-border factor mobility, and the nature of policy rules—can also
have important consequences for the distributions of ﬁscal limits, as Bi (2009) and Bi and
Leeper (2010) show. Those papers also demonstrate that shocks that deteriorate a country’s
ﬁscal position and push it closer to its ﬁscal limit can cause risk premia on government bonds
to rise rapidly.
    I know of no ministry of ﬁnance or treasury department that routinely estimates where on
the relevant Laﬀer curves current or proposed policies place the economy. Implicitly, revenue
scoring exercises employ Laﬀer curve concepts, but because the precise shape and location
of the curve can shift over time, relying on steady-state measures or linear approximations
will be fraught with pitfalls. Laﬀer curves and revenue scores are intrinsically dynamic,
stochastic, non-linear objects produced by general equilibrium behavior.
    Although there is an economic basis for thinking about limits to taxation, there is no
straightforward economic argument for determining the minimum level of government ex-
penditures. Before the current recession, federal spending on goods and services as a share
of GDP in the United States was about as low as it has ever been since World War II. This
suggests that this component of federal spending probably cannot fall much before it hits
  21
    I thank Mathias Trabandt and Harald Uhlig for providing me with their code.
  22
    As Trabandt and Uhlig (2009) report, for capital taxes the United States has far less room to maneuver,
while both the United States and Europe are far from their ﬁscal limits for consumption taxes.



                                                    32
                                                                Leeper: Monetary Science, Fiscal Alchemy


                                                                                                Joint Labor Tax Laffer Curve: USA EU−14
                                                   140

                                                                Minimum                   Maximum
                                                   130          tax rate                  tax rate                                              O


                                                   120                           U.S. avg.
                                                                                                                                        U.S. Peak
         Steady State Tax Revenues (Average=100)




                                                   110
                                                                                                                                            O


                                                   100
                                                                                                                                      EU−14 Peak
                                                                                                           EU−14 avg.
                                                    90


                                                    80


                                                    70


                                                    60


                                                    50


                                                    40
                                                      0   0.1              0.2      0.3              0.4              0.5             0.6           0.7   0.8   0.9   1
                                                                                                             Steady State Labor Tax




Figure 8: Laﬀer curves for labor tax rates for the United States (solid line) and the EU-14
(dashed line), along with historical average marginal labor tax rates (vertical lines). Circles
mark the peaks of the Laﬀer curves. The box surrounding the average U.S. labor tax rate
represents the 25th and 75th percentile of the historical rates between 1947 and 2003. Source:
Trabandt and Uhlig (2009) and author’s calculations using updated marginal tax rate series
from Joines (1981).

its lower bound. Transfers spending, on the other hand, has grown steadily compared to
the size of the economy and is expected to grow even more rapidly in coming decades. But
now the political aspects of ﬁscal limits come into play. Older segments of the populations,
who will be receiving the bulk of these projected transfers, also have unusually high voter
participation rates. Signiﬁcant entitlements reform is likely to be a diﬃcult political battle
whose outcome is far from predetermined.
   Estimates of countries’ ﬁscal limits may be a valuable input to policy decisions during
ﬁscal stress because ﬁscal limits can change monetary and ﬁscal eﬀects in unexpected ways.
Just as a country need not be in default for ﬁnancial markets to assess risk premia to its
debt, a country need not be at its ﬁscal limit to feel the eﬀects of the limit.

V.C Surprising Implications of Fiscal Limits                                                                                                Assets derive their value from their
expected discounted cash ﬂows. In the case of government debt, primary surpluses plus
seigniorage revenues are the “cash ﬂows” [see Cochrane (2005) for a clear statement of this

                                                                                                                 33
                       Leeper: Monetary Science, Fiscal Alchemy


perspective]. Limits to the levels of tax revenues and spending imply limits to the primary
ﬁscal surplus and directly impose a ceiling on the value of government debt the economy can
support. With limits on surpluses, the economy lands in Regime F because ﬁscal policy no
longer has the latitude to adjust surpluses as needed to stabilize debt.
   But ﬁscal policy need not literally be at the limit for the economic mechanisms in Regime
F to operate. If agents know the economy will hit the limit in the future or even if they just
believe a limit is possible, then the equilibrium today will take on the ﬂavor of a Regime F
equilibrium. Fiscal policy will have the same kinds of wealth eﬀects and monetary policy will
be unable to control inﬂation. Davig et al. (2010b) derive analytical results in a setting like
that in section III but where agents know that at some future period, T , taxes will remain
ﬁxed at τ max and monetary policy will shift to peg the nominal interest rate rather than
target inﬂation; that is, in periods t = 0, 1, . . . , T − 1 the economy is in Regime M and for
periods t ≥ T , Regime F prevails. Because expectations of policy in the long run determine
the nature of equilibrium, even before hitting the ﬁscal limit the equilibrium exhibits Regime
F-like traits.23 These results generalize to environments where the policy regime adopted at
period T is uncertain, period T is random, or there is even some chance the ﬁscal limit will
never be hit [see Davig et al. (2010b) and Leeper (2010) for more details].
   Because most of us live in economies where ﬁscal expectations are not anchored well away
from the ﬁscal limit, it is valuable for policymakers to understand inﬂation and aggregate
demand determination at the ﬁscal limit.
   To explore the implications of ﬁscal limits, we modify the intertemporal condition, ex-
pression (IEC–2), in three ways. First, we allow the real interest rate to be endogenous
and respond to policy and non-policy disturbances. Second, we explicitly include high-
powered money, which shows up in the new version of (IEC–2) in two ways: it adds to
the total quantity of nominal government liabilities outstanding and it provides a source of
revenues—seigniorage—that supports the value of those liabilities. Third, instead of assum-
ing that all government bonds mature in one period, we assume that all government bonds
are consols, which are perpetuities that we assume pay $1 each period. The nominal price of
consols sold in period t is pB
                             t . By introducing long-term nominal bonds, we obtain the more
plausible result that news about future net surpluses plus seigniorage will generally feed into
both current inﬂation, as it does with only one-period debt, and the price of bonds. When
long bond prices change, expected inﬂation rates over the maturity of the bond also change,
spreading adjustments in the price level over time. Cochrane (2001) explains the general
  23
    The logic follows in two steps. Because surpluses are exogenous from T on, their expected present value
determines the value of debt at T − 1, BT −1 /PT −1 . That value of debt becomes a terminal condition for
the solution in periods before the ﬁscal limit, which has the eﬀect of bringing policy eﬀects at T and later
forward into the equilibrium in t < T .


                                                    34
                      Leeper: Monetary Science, Fiscal Alchemy


ﬁndings from adding longer term bonds and Cochrane (2010) presents some nice examples
of inﬂation paths generated by lower expected surpluses.
    With money and long bonds, the government’s ﬂow budget constraint is

                           pB
                            t BL,t + Mt        (1 + pB
                                                     t )BL,t−1 + Mt−1
                                        + St =                                                       (7)
                                Pt                       Pt

where St is the net-of-interest surplus, Mt is the amount of high-powered money, and BL,t is
the dollar value of nominal consols outstanding.24 Combining the analog to the intertemporal
equilibrium condition in (IEC–2) with the period t ﬂow budget constraint in (7) yields the
nominal government liability valuation equation

pB
 t BL,t−1 + Mt−1
                 = expected present value of primary surpluses & seigniorage from t onward
        Pt
                                                                                 (IEC–3)
   Several authors have proposed thinking about the concept of “aggregate demand” in
terms of demand for government liabilities [for example, Sims (2010) and Cochrane (2010)].
An increase in the desire to hold liabilities coincides with a decrease in the desire to consume
and, therefore, a decline in aggregate demand. Equilibrium expression (IEC–3) is compatible
with that interpretation. The “ﬂight to quality” that occurred over the past two years can
be understood as investors substituting out of private assets and into government bonds,
reducing discount rates. Lower discount rates raise the present value of any given expected
path of surpluses, raising the value of government debt. Some of that reduction may occur
through a contemporaneous decline in the price level, Pt , and some through higher bond
prices. Lower long-term nominal interest rates imply lower expected inﬂation. In a model
with sticky price adjustment, some the lower expected inﬂation will manifest in declines in
output and employment.
    At the ﬁscal limit, equilibrium condition (IEC–3) is a convenient device for evaluating the
macroeconomic consequences of plausible pieces of news about the present value of surpluses.
I oﬀer a handful of examples from the United States that could arise in the coming years:

   • CBO’s alternative scenario projections build in the likelihood that Congress and the
     White House will extend in some form the 2001 and 2003 tax cuts, which are now
       scheduled to end in the next few years. An extension will substantially shift down
       expected revenue streams, according to the CBO’s (2010c) analysis, and reduce the
       market value of government liabilities. This would trigger higher current and future
  24
    Although there is no short-term interest rate in (7), we can nonetheless pose the monetary authority
as setting such a rate and apply something like the expectations theory of the term structure to link the
long-term rate to current and expected short rates.


                                                   35
                   Leeper: Monetary Science, Fiscal Alchemy


     inﬂation and stimulate the real economy.

   • The non-partisan National Commission on Fiscal Responsibility and Reform, tasked
     with making proposals to signiﬁcantly reduce deﬁcits, may reach an agreement that
     Congress approves and lowers deﬁcits in the short run. By raising the present value of
     surpluses, this news would have a contractionary eﬀect on economic activity.

   • State governments unable to meet pension obligations for public employees may turn
     to the federal government for assistance, as Rauh (2010) warns. Fears that if one state
     defaults others may follow could inspire lawmakers in Washington to grant assistance,
     reducing expected surpluses and raising the expected paths of inﬂation and aggregate
     demand.

   • After the U.S. government took over control of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac in 2008,
     the CBO began to include budgetary costs of the two institutions in its baseline pro-
     jections [Congressional Budget Oﬃce (2010a)]. CBO puts the potential costs at $389
     billion, but Bloomberg reports that the worst-case scenario may be close to $1 trillion
     [Woellert and Gittelsohn (2010)]. News that house foreclosures continue to rise could
     lower expected surpluses, requiring higher inﬂation to reduce the value of debt.

   • As conﬁdence recovers and investors are willing to take on more risk, the ﬂight to
     quality that reduced discount rates will be reversed, reducing demand for treasuries
     and raising discount rates. This is equivalent to “bad news” about the present value
     of surpluses, raising inﬂation and economic activity.

   • The tea party has already shown surprising political strength in primary elections and
     Congressional Republicans now have a tea party caucus. By the midterm elections later
     this year, we will have a better sense of the party’s political viability and potential
     inﬂuence in coming years. If the party turns out to have a large constituency, this
     could lead to sizeable revisions downward in expected tax revenues and the value of
     government liabilities.

    These examples are intended to be suggestive of the types of news that could cause
signiﬁcant revaluations of government debt, with resulting impacts on inﬂation rates and
real activity. Most of these examples would not even generate a ﬂutter in inﬂation during
normal times when other ﬁscal adjustments can be made to oﬀset their impacts on the
value of debt. But in times of ﬁscal stress, when people’s expectations of ﬁscal policies are
unanchored and susceptible to wide swings, they could cause important shifts in aggregate
demand to which central banks may be tempted to respond. Because the ﬂuctuations in

                                             36
                       Leeper: Monetary Science, Fiscal Alchemy


demand are induced by changes in the expected present value of surpluses, their root causes
will be diﬃcult to sort out. To determine whether a monetary policy response is appropriate,
central banks need to have a ﬁrm understanding of all the potential sources of the demand
ﬂuctuations.
   Of course, these short-run events pale by comparison to the looming “unfunded liabilities”
to which we now turn.


VI Some Possible Resolutions to Fiscal Stress
A great many accounting solutions to ﬁscal stress have been oﬀered, but there is surprisingly
little modeling of the macroeconomic consequences of potential resolutions. In keeping with
this paper’s theme, those consequences will depend importantly on people’s beliefs about
how monetary and ﬁscal policies may adjust in the future.
   It is diﬃcult to model the era of ﬁscal stress that confronts economies because in many
ways the era is unprecedented. The problem with unprecedented things is that they don’t
happen a lot. Sargent (2006) characterizes the probability laws governing U.S. monetary
and ﬁscal policies with question marks, arguing that our level of understanding what drives
macro policies is best described by ambiguity or Knightian uncertainty. But if you want to
model the coming ﬁscal situation in the conventional rational expectations paradigm, you
must take some stand on those probability laws.
    Davig et al. (2010b,a) take stands on how policies might adjust in the face of the relentless
rise in promised transfers as a share of GDP, which ﬁgure 7 depicts. They consider three
possible adjustment scenarios:

   1. Tax rates rise with debt, promised transfers are fully honored, and monetary policy
      actively targets inﬂation.

   2. Tax rates hit a politically determined maximum and remain ﬁxed at that rate, the
      government delivers less-than-promised transfers, and monetary policy actively targets
       inﬂation.

   3. Tax rates hit the ﬁscal limit, promised transfers are fully honored, and monetary policy
      switches from targeting inﬂation to pegging the short-term nominal interest rate.25
  25
    The authors take oﬀ the table two other possibilities: that monetary policy will print money to buy
government bonds dollar-for-dollar and that the government will default outright on its debt. Monetizing
deﬁcits is itself subject to a Laﬀer curve, so it cannot raise arbitrarily high levels of revenues and outright
default is surely a highly unlikely outcome for the United States, which has no history of defaulting at the
national level. The authors do not consider cuts in non-transfers government spending because at the federal
level they are already quite low in the United States and, in any case, cannot fall at the rate that transfers
are projected to grow.


                                                      37
                    Leeper: Monetary Science, Fiscal Alchemy


   There is precedent in the United States for each of the three scenarios. Scenario 1 is
the normal state of aﬀairs with tax policy behaving passively and transfers and monetary
policies behaving actively, as in Regime M of section III. Scenario 2 is a variant on the ﬁrst
set of adjustments, with transfers taking on the passive role and taxes being active. Changes
in government promises are commonplace in practice: retirement ages for old-age pensions
are increased, eligibility requirements for medical beneﬁts are tightened, payments to doctors
and hospitals are reduced, and so forth. Various forms of entitlements reform allow delivered
transfers to be below promised levels. A recent survey reports that 60 percent of American
non-retirees believe Social Security may not fully honor its promises [Page (2010)].
   Scenario 3 is similar to wartime ﬁnance. Tax increases no longer keep pace with expendi-
tures and monetary policy supports bond prices to reduce the costs of government borrowing
[see discussions in Friedman and Schwartz (1963, chapter 10), Stein (1969, chapter 9), and
Meltzer (2003, chapter 7)]. The era of ﬁscal stress does resemble World War II with two
important exceptions: based on CBO projections, this is like the Hundred Years’ War, 20
years in, and now the government has the option of eﬀectively scaling back spending by re-
ducing future transfers. Of course, scenario 3 relies on government debt being denominated
in dollars—rather than indexed to the price level—so that increases in the price level reduce
the government’s real liabilities, as in Regime F of section III.
    To lay out these scenarios, Davig, Leeper, and Walker can draw on actual policy expe-
riences, but there is no obvious source of information on the probabilities that economic
agents place on the scenarios. The authors specify some initial probabilities and then show
how equilibrium outcomes change with the probabilities.
    Figure 9 sketches how uncertainty about policy unfolds in the models. The economy
starts in “normal times,” with transfers following a stationary process and the mix of active
monetary, passive tax, and active transfers policy. With probability pZ each period, transfers
switch to a ﬁscal-stress process in which the promised transfers-GDP ratio grows at 1 percent
per year, close to the average growth rate in ﬁgure 7; otherwise, policies remain unchanged.
As transfers grow, debt and taxes rise. Higher tax rates raise the probability, pL,t , of hitting
the ﬁscal limit where the tax rate is ﬁxed permanently at τ max . If the economy hits the
limit, it does so well below the peak of the Laﬀer curve, reﬂecting the view that, at least in
the United States, political intolerance of high taxes is the most likely reason that taxes will
not continue to rise to ﬁnance transfers. Whether the economy hits the limit and when it
hits the limit are uncertain in the model, as they are in reality.
    If taxes reach the limit and rates are ﬁxed at τ max , some other policy adjustments must
occur because promised transfers continue to grow. At the ﬁscal limit, Regime M occurs
with probability q, so transfers policy adjusts, otherwise Regime F occurs and monetary


                                               38
                          Leeper: Monetary Science, Fiscal Alchemy


                                                                                Regime F
                                                                               PM / AF / AT


                                                                    q = 0.5


                                                     PL,t
                                                                        1 − p11           1 − p22
               AM / PF / AT           AM / PF / AT
              Stationary Transfers   Non-stationary Transfers
                                                                 1 − q = 0.5
                                                                               AM / AF / PT
                                                                                Regime M



Figure 9: The unfolding of uncertainty about policy regimes. AM: active monetary policy;
PM: passive monetary policy; AF: active ﬁscal policy; PF: passive ﬁscal policy; AT: active
transfers policy; PT: passive transfers policy. Source: Davig et al. (2010b).

policy adjusts. For the rest of time policies ﬂuctuate between these two regimes, scenarios 2
and 3 above, according to the transition probabilities p11 and p22 .
   Davig, Leeper, and Walker embed this policy setup in an otherwise conventional dynamic
model.26 To understand how this setup plays out, it is useful to consider two limiting cases in
which the sources of uncertainty are random shocks to transfers and the realizations of policy
regimes. First, suppose the economy were to remain forever in the regime with stationary
transfers, inﬂation targeting monetary policy, and debt stabilizing tax policy. This case
exactly mimics Regime M in section III: both actual and expected inﬂation always equal the
inﬂation target and there are no ﬂuctuations in real variables. Second, suppose the economy
switches to the non-stationary transfers regime, so debt, taxes, and the probability of hitting
the ﬁscal limit all rise smoothly. Now set q = 0 so that at the limit policies switch to passive
transfers—actual transfers less than promised—and imagine that the economy were to stay
in that regime forever (p11 = 1). In the period leading up to the ﬁscal limit, distorting
taxes rise, so there are now some real eﬀects from growing transfers, but the active monetary
policy behavior keeps inﬂation ﬂuctuating around its target. Neither of the two cases really
captures the ﬁscal stress arising from growing transfer payments, but they show situations
in which monetary policy can succeed in controlling inﬂation.
       Returning to the Davig, Leeper, and Walker papers, we now turn on all the uncertainty
  26
    Key features of the model include: elastic labor supply, physical capital accumulation, monopolistic
competition, distorting taxes levied against labor and capital income, sticky price adjustment, one-period
nominal government bonds, and ﬁat currency. The probability of the ﬁscal limit, pL,t , evolves according to
a logistic function. See the papers for more complete descriptions.

                                                            39
                    Leeper: Monetary Science, Fiscal Alchemy


about future policies that ﬁgure 9 reﬂects, but instead of random ﬂuctuations in transfers, we
allow promised transfers as a share of GDP to grow deterministically at 1 percent annually.
Because the timing and nature of policy regime changes is random, it is instructive to simulate
the model many times and examine the distribution of macro variables from the model. A
wide range of outcomes is possible, as the cross-sectional distributions in ﬁgure 10 report.
Dashed lines are 25th and 75th percentile bands; solid lines are 10th and 90th percentile
bands.
   There are realizations of regimes in which the economy hits the ﬁscal limit soon—within
this decade—and others where it does not reach the limit over the 50-year horizon considered,
so tax rates continue to drift above τ max . Many realizations have the government fully honor
its transfers promises, though in 10 percent of the draws the government delivers only 70
percent or less of the promised levels. In no realizations does the government debt-GDP
ratio begin to approach the stratosphere, as in the CBO projections. Ninety percent of the
draws keep inﬂation within one-and-a-half percentage points of target. Higher taxes have
real eﬀects in the model: 10 percent of the draws result in output more than six percentage
points below its level in 2009. In the out years, the capital stock could be higher or lower
than where it started because in the period before the ﬁscal limit is reached, if the current
tax rate exceeds the maximum rate at the limit, economic agents anticipate lower future tax
rates, which encourage investment.
   Despite the wide range of outcomes possible, none of the outcomes seems as dire as some
commentators suggest [for example, Kotlikoﬀ and Burns (2004) and Kotlikoﬀ (2006)]. The
results also do not seem to conﬁrm Kotlikoﬀ’s (2006) provocative assertion that the United
States “appears to be running the same type of ﬁscal policies that engendered hyperinﬂations
in 20 countries over the last century.” To see what the model says about this assertion,
ﬁgure 11 reports actual and 10-year-ahead expected inﬂation paths, averaging both across all
simulations and across only those in the upper 0.5 percent tail of the distribution. Evidently,
the overall average (left scale) masks realizations with high inﬂation but low probability (right
scale). These high-inﬂation outcomes are likely to be most worrisome to policymakers, but
eliminating them is not a simple task. In the model, the possibility of these outcomes is
critical for an equilibrium to hang together.
    One reason these outcomes are not nearly as gloomy as some economists predict is that
in the model expectations are anchored on monetary-ﬁscal policy mixes that are sustain-
able. That is, model agents expect policies to adjust and they do adjust in the expected
ways. All policy outcomes are ones that the model’s rational agents have factored into their
decision-making calculus. Policies that behave in an orderly fashion produce orderly average
outcomes.


                                               40
                         Leeper: Monetary Science, Fiscal Alchemy


                                 Output                                                   Capital Stock
                         (% deviation from 2009)                                     (% deviation from 2009)

           0                                                           10

          −2
                                                                        0
          −4

          −6                                                          −10

           2010   2020       2030      2040        2050   2060         2010   2020       2030      2040        2050   2060
                                Tax Rate                                                  Debt / Output
                                                                      1.5
         0.26      Maximum rate at fiscal limit

         0.24                                                           1

         0.22
                                                                      0.5
          0.2
           2010   2020       2030      2040        2050   2060         2010   2020       2030      2040        2050   2060
                              Inflation (%)                                    % of Promised Transfers Paid
          3.5

           3                                                            1

          2.5

           2                                                          0.8

          1.5

            1                                                         0.6
           2010   2020       2030      2040        2050   2060         2010   2020       2030      2040        2050   2060




Figure 10: Range of possible outcomes for macro variables when uncertainty about future
policy is as described in ﬁgure 9. Dashed lines are 25th and 75th percentile bands; solid lines
are 10th and 90th percentile bands. Based on 10,000 draws of sequences of policy regimes.
Source: Davig et al. (2010b).

   Hidden by all the orderliness is a key policy message: the reason that high inﬂation is a
low-probability event is because people believe that some entitlements reform is quite likely
in the future. Policymakers who use the low probability of high inﬂation as a justiﬁcation
for inaction will change people’s beliefs about future policies and convert high inﬂation into
a far more likely outcome.
   It’s not hard to imagine disorderly resolutions that would be far more disruptive to the
economy. The government could levy a surprise tax on capital (or savings), as Italy did
in 1992 [Bassetto (2006)]. A large dollar depreciation would inﬂict capital losses on foreign
owners of U.S. government bonds. Monetary and ﬁscal policies could both be active for
several years, as in ﬁgure 6 and in the analysis of Davig and Leeper (2010a). Fears of these
kinds of outcomes may grow as governments postpone implementing orderly resolutions.
   Orderly resolutions, however, can be insidious for central banks. Figure 11 depicts only
very gradual rises in expected long-term inﬂation rates. These increases could easily be
mistakenly identiﬁed as the types of inﬂation scares that, for example, Goodfriend (1993)


                                                                 41
                   Leeper: Monetary Science, Fiscal Alchemy



         1.4                                                                                        50


                                                                                                    45
         1.2              Mean of 10−year expected inflation
                                     (left scale)
                                                                                                    40
          1
                                  Mean of inflation                                                 35
                                    (left scale)
         0.8
                                                                                                    30


         0.6                                                                                        25
                                                                                  Mean of tail
                                                                                     inflation
                                                                                  (right scale)     20
         0.4

                                                                                                    15
         0.2                                                          Mean of 10−year expected
                                                                            tail inflation          10
                                                                            (right scale)
          0
                                                                                                    5


        −0.2                                                                                        0
          2010   2015   2020    2025     2030         2035     2040      2045    2050      2055   2060




Figure 11: Simulated average paths of inﬂation—solid line—and 10-year-ahead expected
inﬂation—dashed line (left scale); average paths of inﬂation—solid line—and 10-year-ahead
expected inﬂation from 0.5 percent tail of distribution—dashed line (right scale). Based on
10,000 draws.

has examined. But in this case, the inﬂation scare is rooted in ﬁscal behavior that is unable
or unwilling to stabilize debt. Central banks might reasonably react to the scare by pre-
emptively tightening policy, which may slow the economy but will do little to combat the
incipient inﬂation, which is driven by ﬁscal factors outside the central bank’s control.
    It will be important for central bankers who wish to keep inﬂation low and stable to un-
derstand the subtle ways that ﬁscal stress can aﬀect the macro economy. That understanding
will come only through fresh approaches to modeling ﬁscal policy.


VII A Role for Central Bankers?
Although major changes to ﬁscal institutions that would contribute to anchoring ﬁscal ex-
pectations and to making ﬁscal policy scientiﬁc are obviously beyond the purview of central
banks, there is much that central banks and their leaders can do to move ﬁscal policy closer
to the science that it could be.


                                                  42
                    Leeper: Monetary Science, Fiscal Alchemy


   Central banks devote substantial resources to the study of monetary policy. Those re-
sources have played a key role in advancing the science of monetary policy. Central banks
employ large staﬀs of Ph.D. economists who are given the time, the facilities, and the in-
centives to create policy relevant basic research. Central bank economists have been in the
vanguard of researchers who have helped make monetary policy more scientiﬁc.
   Monetary authorities advance research in other ways also. Extensive ties with academic
economists through seminars, conferences (like Jackson Hole), and visiting scholar programs
keep bank economists current at the same time that they inform academics about pressing
policy concerns. Regular interactions of these kinds raise both the quality of policy analysis
at central banks and the usefulness of research conducted outside central banks.
    Central bankers have also learned—often through trial and error—eﬀective ways to com-
municate with the public about complex and subtle aspects of monetary policy. Although
economists have never had the physicists’ penchant for bringing science down to earth for
the layperson, central bankers have been largely successful in this endeavor.
   Finally, there is a long tradition of econometric modeling at central banks, dating back
to the FRB-MIT-PENN venture in the 1960s and 1970s. Much of the progress over the
past decade in connecting dynamic optimizing models to data has occurred in central banks.
Recent extensions of these models to include labor and ﬁnancial market details were fostered
by their relevance for monetary policy.
   None of these things occur with ﬁscal policy. Fiscal authorities and their agencies con-
duct essentially no basic research and they have minimal contact with economists who do.
Obtaining answers to the question, “What do ﬁscal policies do to the macro economy?” does
not seem to be among the priorities of ﬁscal authorities.
   Governments everywhere invest shockingly few resources into understanding ﬁscal pol-
icy’s impacts. Consequently, the current recession caught policymakers—and academic
researchers—embarrassingly ill-prepared to address fundamental questions. Is ﬁscal expan-
sion more or less eﬃcacious during a ﬁnancial crisis? How should the central bank respond
to a sovereign debt crisis in a monetary union? What are the impacts of unusually large
ﬁscal stimuli and what is the desirable composition of such stimuli? Do ﬁscal eﬀects vary
systematically over the business cycle? How quickly should ﬁscal stimulus be withdrawn
from the economy and by what means? How do the eﬀects of ﬁscal policy change when
monetary policy is operating near the zero interest rate bound? There is no shortage of
opinions on these questions—only a dearth of applicable research.
   But what can central banks do about this research void? Well, as they have with other
voids that impede making good policy, central banks can step in and ﬁll the void with good
basic research. There are some promising signs that this is beginning to happen. This


                                             43
                       Leeper: Monetary Science, Fiscal Alchemy


year and next several central banks are sponsoring conferences on the topic of monetary-
ﬁscal policy interactions. And the next round of extensions to models at central banks will
build in ﬁscal details and government debt dynamics; the European Central Bank, Sveriges
Riksbank, and several other central banks are already moving in that direction. Models that
integrate monetary and ﬁscal policies can be used to develop consensus on rules describing
ﬁscal behavior. Which rules ﬁt data best? What class of implementable ﬁscal rules would
allow the central bank to fulﬁll its policy mandates?
    To address the kinds of issues associated with the coming era of ﬁscal stress, though, cen-
tral bank models need to move beyond the linearized local dynamics, certainty equivalence,
and Gaussian error processes that are important to the models’ solution and estimation. This
is what the models underlying ﬁgures 10 and 11 do. For good reasons, central bank models
focus on ﬁtting data at business cycle frequencies—monetary policy’s real eﬀects are thought
to be relatively ephemeral. But ﬁscal eﬀects, particularly those driven by slow-moving demo-
graphics, can also operate at very low frequencies. Whether standard central bank models
adequately capture low-frequency dynamics is an open question. In an environment where
promised government transfers are growing faster than the economy and the possibility of
signiﬁcant changes in possibly distant future policy regimes is surely inﬂuencing expectations
formation, a new class of models needs to be developed and understood.27 Central bank re-
searchers could lead the way in this development. Because many countries will experience
ﬁscal stress simultaneously, a group of central banks could launch a joint eﬀort to develop the
necessary analytical tools to understand these issues. Econometric modeling and inﬂation
dynamics groups at central banks already do this. Fiscal implications of a suite of policy
institution models have been examined in a recent IMF-sponsored venture. Channeling such
resources into understanding the economic implications of prolonged periods of ﬁscal stress
could signiﬁcantly advance ﬁscal science.
   Central banks gather and track survey measures of expected long-term inﬂation and
consumer conﬁdence. To my knowledge, no systematic surveys of expected ﬁscal policies
exist, although some periodic ones do [for example, Page (2010)]. Because the “stance of
ﬁscal policy” is so inadequately captured by current and past ﬁscal variables, measures of
ﬁscal expectations may help central banks get a better handle on how ﬁscal policy is aﬀecting
the economy.
   Central bank leaders also have a role to play. First, they can break away from the taboo
against saying anything substantive about ﬁscal policy. I am not proposing that central
  27
    This should not be taken as a rejection of eﬀorts to construct and estimate optimizing models, as the
“agent-based” modelers advocate [The Economist (2010)]. Instead, we need to handle the non-linearities,
time variation, and stochastic volatility that could be built into optimizing models and appear to be important
for understanding economic phenomena in non-normal times.


                                                      44
                      Leeper: Monetary Science, Fiscal Alchemy


bankers get into the business of prescribing solutions by recommending detailed tax and
spending changes. Every country has an army of policy advisors, in and out of government,
ready to do that. But there is a lot that central bankers could say that falls between the two
extremes of prescribing solutions and reciting platitudes about “unsustainable ﬁscal policy.”
   It would be useful to articulate why ﬁscal stress is a central concern for monetary policy.
How does it make the central bank’s primary objectives more diﬃcult or impossible to
attain? How does the enhanced macroeconomic uncertainty stemming from ﬁscal stress and
unanchored ﬁscal expectations create economy-wide problems?28 What are the alternative
scenarios for how the “unfunded liabilities” problem will play out? How will monetary policy
react in those scenarios? Do some scenarios imply better macroeconomic performance than
others? To arrive at precise and cogent answers to these questions, central banks will need
to have the new class of models at their disposal.
    Central bankers occupy unique positions. They are among the very few credible spokes-
men for sound economic policies. There seems to be no constituency for subtlety and com-
plexity in ﬁscal thinking. Even academic economists tend to be shrill and extreme: for
one prominent economist no ﬁnite amount of ﬁscal stimulus is suﬃcient, while for another
any amount of stimulus is too much. But central bankers have created and educated a
sophisticated audience for monetary policy. Central bankers already have the gravitas and
objectivity needed to be eﬀective communicators about ﬁscal stress. They just need to couple
those characteristics with a deep understanding of the possible consequences of that stress.
   Monetary policy institutions have good reasons to want ﬁscal policy research and practice
to get on a path to science.


VIII Toward Fiscal Science
This paper has argued that, just as monetary policy beneﬁtted from moving toward science,
ﬁscal policy would also improve by becoming more scientiﬁc. This point applies equally
to ﬁscal research and ﬁscal practice. Although I have argued that from a macroeconomic
perspective there are striking parallels between the two macro policies, their political econ-
omy aspects diﬀer markedly: the macro policy dimensions of monetary policy—output and
inﬂation stabilization—have been largely depoliticized; virtually no aspect of ﬁscal policy is
insulated from politics.29
  28
     Eusepi and Preston (2010) emphasize that when individuals must learn about monetary and ﬁscal policy
regime, there are instances in which the nature of the central bank’s communications with the public can
help to restore the ability of monetary policy to control inﬂation. Even with that communication, however,
unanchored ﬁscal expectations can undermine the ability of ”normal” monetary policy rules to stabilize the
economy.
  29
     A conversation with Jon Faust stimulated my thinking on these matters.


                                                   45
                    Leeper: Monetary Science, Fiscal Alchemy


VIII.A Can Parts of Fiscal Policy Be Depoliticized?                    For some of the same
reasons that ﬁscal policy is complex, it is also inherently political. With ﬁnely detailed
tax codes and myriad spending and transfers programs, ﬁscal tools directly aﬀect income
distribution and can beneﬁt some citizens and groups over others. There is no question that
micro decisions like these are and should be taken by the political process. These micro
decisions are an important distinction between ﬁscal policy and aggregate monetary policy.
   Monetary policy’s primary tool—the short-term interest rate—typically has far more
subtle and less obvious distributional implications. As Faust and Henderson (2004) point
out, some consensus on monetary policy was possible because it is widely accepted that in the
long run there is no tradeoﬀ between inﬂation and real activity. This consensus led naturally
to the view that average inﬂation should be low and stable, providing a long-run anchor
for the setting of the policy instrument. Of course, there is still plenty of room for debate
about short-run tradeoﬀs—when inﬂation should be permitted to drift from target and how
rapidly inﬂation should be brought back to target—but the high-frequency disputes do not
diminish the import of reaching agreement on the long-run objective of monetary policy.
   Consensus on ﬁscal policy presently begins and ends with imprecise ruminations on sus-
tainability. Every treasury or ministry of ﬁnance web page lists this as job one. This sets the
bar for ﬁscal policy rather low. A CEO who announced to shareholders that the company’s
goal for the year is to avoid bankruptcy would not be long in the job.
   Perhaps there is a way to separate the various objectives of ﬁscal policy into two groups:
micro ﬁscal decisions that are ground out by the give and take of politics and macro ﬁscal
issues that can be treated as primarily scientiﬁc matters. The overarching macro issues, once
settled, would serve to constrain the politically determined micro questions.
    Sustainability per se does not impose enough restrictions on policy choices to help anchor
ﬁscal expectations and move the practice of ﬁscal policy closer to science. But sustainabil-
ity might provide a pivot point from which consensus on other macro ﬁscal matters may
grow. Answers to questions about achieving and maintaining sustainability—if economists
themselves can reach agreement—may go some way toward helping people form ﬁscal ex-
pectations. These questions include:

  1. Should there be a long-run target for the debt-GDP ratio? What should it be?

  2. Are there circumstances under which deﬁcits (surpluses) should be permitted to per-
     manently raise (lower) the debt-GDP ratio or should debt always be retired back to
     some long-run target?

  3. Should government spending, taxes, and monetary policy be adjusted to stabilize debt?


                                              46
                      Leeper: Monetary Science, Fiscal Alchemy


   4. How rapidly should the debt ratio be retired back to the target ratio?

   5. What are the macroeconomic eﬀects of certain government spending and tax changes
      in well-speciﬁed thought experiments?

   6. What are a country’s ﬁscal limits and how much government debt can it support before
      markets deem the debt to be risky?

   7. What happens as the economy approaches its ﬁscal limit?

   8. What policies can keep the economy well away from its limit?

   9. What are the macroeconomic consequences of alternative policy responses to the era
      of ﬁscal stress?

 10. Should monetary and ﬁscal policy behave in fundamentally diﬀerent ways in an era of
     ﬁscal stress than they do in normal times?

   Some countries are thinking along these lines. A number of countries that lived through
ﬁscal crises in recent decades simultaneously reformed ﬁscal policy when they adopted an
inﬂation targeting regime. Chile and Sweden, for example, established surplus targets for
ﬁscal policy. Sweden also has a nominal spending ceiling. New Zealand aims to maintain
government debt at about 20 percent of GDP.30 Europe’s Stability and Growth Pact, al-
though largely ineﬀectual, is the best-known example of setting bounds on debt-GDP and
deﬁcit-GDP ratios. These reforms are intended primarily to keep their economies well away
from their ﬁscal limits, but it is unclear what role, if any, ﬁscal science played in their design.
   Some readers might argue that the optimal policy literature delivers answers to these
questions, pointing to the work of Barro (1979), Lucas and Stokey (1983), Lucas (1986),
Chari et al. (1994, 1995), Aiyagari and McGrattan (1998), Aiyagari et al. (2002), Benigno
and Woodford (2003), Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2007), and Kirsanova et al. (2009). All
that work presumes the economy is operating in normal times. Some general principles can
be gleaned from that work, but other implications may not hold up in an era of ﬁscal stress.
That stress is being driven by factors not usually considered in optimal policy exercises—
slowly evolving demographics and their associated promised old-age beneﬁts and appropriate
strategies for recovery from worldwide ﬁnancial crisis. And the demographic source carries
with it powerful political constraints that could force the economy toward its ﬁscal limit,
  30
     Sweden and Hungary have independent ﬁscal policy councils that scrutinize the government’s plans.
Holland’s Central Planning Bureau (or Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis), though government run, has
suﬃcient credibility as an independent evaluator that political parties feel compelled to have their ﬁscal
plans vetted by the Bureau.


                                                   47
                       Leeper: Monetary Science, Fiscal Alchemy


another consideration that optimal policy does not examine. A fresh reexamination of ques-
tions like these in light of the coming ﬁscal stress may provide a scientiﬁc foundation for
monetary and ﬁscal policy behavior in the decades ahead.

VIII.B Two Additional Steps Toward Science                          There is a stunning and distress-
ing lack of serious ﬁscal research conducted by ﬁscal authorities around the world. Fiscal
authorities need to get a grasp on the answers to the questions that section VIII.A raises.
To answer those questions, ﬁscal authorities need to invest in research, just as central banks
have for decades. Non-governmental organizations like the Committee for a Responsible
Federal Budget and others have been playing an important role by developing policy scenar-
ios that resolve the U.S. long-term budget imbalance from an accounting perspective. The
next step is to examine those scenarios in forward-looking economic models to obtain the
macroeconomic implications of the policies.
   Truly independent scrutiny of ﬁscal decisions (or indecisions) is another important step
toward bringing systematic analysis to ﬁscal issues. One approach, which works well in
Sweden, is the creation of an independent ﬁscal policy council that is given a public forum:
the chair of the council testiﬁes before Parliament. That council has succeeded in generating
productive public debate about the tradeoﬀ between sustainability and ﬁscal stimulus, which
the Swedish government and most others have been facing.
   The United States has a non-partisan ﬁscal agency, the Congressional Budget Oﬃce,
that in principle, could provide the kinds of analyses and scrutiny that lead to better policy
choices and more secure anchoring of ﬁscal expectations. In practice, though, the CBO
conducts tightly circumscribed studies with little direct criticism of Congressional decisions.31
Congress could direct the CBO to do the ﬁscal science that this paper advocates, even if
the questions posed and the answers delivered are not to the politicians’ liking. Such a
modiﬁcation to the CBO’s mission constitutes a sea change in Congress’ thinking about
ﬁscal analysis.

VIII.C Fears of Deflation                I conclude by mentioning a practical policy issue whose
solution may call for a combination of monetary and ﬁscal science. Some members of the
Federal Open Market Committee have voiced new concerns about the possibility of deﬂation
in the United States [Chan (2010) and Bullard (2010)]. Chairman Bernanke has suggested
that if those worries intensify, the Fed is prepared to take further policy actions [Bernanke
(2010b) and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2010)]. Where is ﬁscal policy
  31
     CBO’s mandate explicitly prevents the agency from making policy recommendations. It is not clear
that this precludes producing studies that contain a variety of policy scenarios for resolving the “unfunded
liabilities” problem and reporting the likely macroeconomic consequences of each scenario.


                                                    48
                       Leeper: Monetary Science, Fiscal Alchemy


in this conversation? This paper has detailed ways in which ﬁscal policy can contribute to
combatting deﬂation, particularly when the central bank’s interest rate instrument has fallen
as far as it can. Those ways entail current ﬁscal expansion that is unassociated with credible
promises of higher future surpluses or news that surpluses will be lower in the future. But
ﬁscal news in the United States lately is all about tentative and unsystematic plans to raise
future surpluses. U.S. ﬁscal policy, like its European counterparts, is too politically confused
and paralyzed to be a player.32
   I am neither forecasting deﬂation nor prescribing a cure. I am simply citing another
example of how our understanding of monetary and ﬁscal policies and their interactions
must accelerate just to keep pace with the world around us.

VIII.D A Final Word               There are those who assert that I overestimate the possibilities
of science in ﬁscal policy. To be sure, there are serious hurdles to overcome. But we are
witnessing what the alternative to science delivers: ﬁscal policy as a source of stress and
instability. Let’s give science a try.


A Appendix: A Formal Model
To streamline the algebra, I assume that there are no real eﬀects from monetary and ﬁscal
actions and abstract from any monetary frictions by assuming that real money balances
are a negligible share of GDP.33 These assumptions make the model a constant endowment
economy that is at the cashless limit.
   The economy consists of a representative household, a monetary authority, and a ﬁscal
authority. The household pays lump-sum taxes, τt , receives lump-sum transfers, zt , and
holds one-period nominal bonds paying gross risk-free nominal interest Rt . Consumption
                                                
and bonds, {ct , Bt }, are chosen to maximize E0 ∞     t
                                                  t=0 β u(ct ) subject to the budget constraint
ct + Bt /Pt + τt = yt + zt + Rt−1 Bt−1 /Pt , with R−1 B−1 > 0 given. Government purchases
are zero in each period so that goods market clearing implies ct = yt = y. In equilibrium
the household’s consumption/saving decision produces the simple Fisher relation that links
the nominal interest rate to the (constant) real interest rate, 1/β, and the expected inﬂation
  32
     Some might point to Japan’s lost decade as evidence that expansionary ﬁscal policies are ineﬀective
against deﬂation. But this is where expectations come in. Japanese ﬁscal policy went in ﬁts and starts,
with expansions followed by retrenchments [Ihori et al. (2003)], so expectations were almost certainly not
anchored on a policy in which future surpluses are unresponsive to the state of government indebtedness.
Fiscal ﬂip-ﬂops of that kind undermine the ability of ﬁscal policy to stimulate aggregate demand and inﬂation.
  33
     More realistic environments have been studied elsewhere [Woodford (1998), Davig and Leeper (2006,
2010b), Sims (2010)].




                                                     49
                    Leeper: Monetary Science, Fiscal Alchemy


rate, Pt /Pt+1                                                   
                                       1                    Pt
                                          = βEt                                        (A.1)
                                       Rt                  Pt+1
where β ∈ (0, 1) is the household’s discount factor.
   Monetary policy adjusts the short-term nominal interest rate to target inﬂation at π ∗
                                                                         
                                                           Pt−1   1
                                Rt−1   =R   ∗−1
                                                  +α            − ∗                    (A.2)
                                                            Pt   π

Fiscal policy attempts to target the real value of government debt at b∗ by adjusting taxes
in response to the state of government debt
                                                                     
                                            ∗          Bt−1
                                  τt = τ + γ                − b∗                       (A.3)
                                                       Pt−1

   Government transfer payments to the household are the sole source of uncertainty in
the model. Additional sources of uncertainty could be introduced, but they would not alter
the basic story of inﬂation determination. We imagine that transfers evolve exogenously
according to a known stochastic process. The growth rate of transfers is permitted to be
positive, but it must be bounded to ensure that transfers do not grow faster than the real
interest rate.
    The government’s ﬂow budget constraint is

                                   Bt             Rt−1 Bt−1
                                      + τt = zt +                                      (A.4)
                                   Pt                Pt

   The household behaves rationally and takes account of the actual policy behavior—rules
(A.2) and (A.3)—and of the evolution of transfers to form rational expectations over future
prices, transfers, and taxes.

A.A Regime M The ﬁrst policy mix is familiar to most macroeconomists and accords well
with how many central bankers perceive their behavior. I label this “Regime M.” Regime M
emerges when the central bank aggressively targets inﬂation by raising the nominal interest
rate sharply in response to incipient inﬂation (α > 1) and ﬁscal policy reacts to higher debt
by raising taxes enough to achieve the debt target (γ > r = 1/β − 1). This combination is
“active” monetary policy and “passive” ﬁscal policy.
   The equilibrium in this regime is obtained by solving the diﬀerence equation in inﬂation
produced by combining the Fisher equation, (A.1), with the monetary policy rule, (A.2), to




                                                  50
                       Leeper: Monetary Science, Fiscal Alchemy


yield                                                            
                                     β             Pt   1                     Pt−1   1
                                       Et             − ∗                 =        − ∗                            (A.5)
                                     α            Pt+1 π                       Pt   π
The solution is that inﬂation always equals its target, as does expected inﬂation.34

                                                         πt = π ∗                                                 (A.6)

       The stabilization of debt by tax policy can be seen from combining the tax rule, (A.3),
with the government’s budget constraint, (A.4), and taking expectations to obtain
                                                                                                         
                               Bt                                                               Bt−1
                    Et−1          − b∗       = Et−1 (zt − z ) + (β    ∗         −1
                                                                                     − γ)            − b∗         (A.7)
                               Pt                                                               Pt−1

Because β −1 − γ < 1, higher debt brings forth the expectation of higher taxes, so (A.7)
describes how debt is expected to return to its target, b∗ , following a shock to transfers, zt .

A.B Regime F           Regime F combines active tax policy, 0 ≤ γ < 1/β − 1, with passive
monetary policy, 0 ≤ α < 1/β.
  We focus on a particular policy mix that yields clean economic interpretations: the
nominal interest rate is set independently of inﬂation, α = 0 and Rt−1 = R∗−1 ≥ 1, and taxes
are set independently of debt, γ = 0 and τt = τ ∗ > 0. These policy speciﬁcations might seem
extreme and special, but the qualitative points that emerge generalize to other speciﬁcations
of passive monetary/active tax policies.
    One result pops out immediately. Applying the pegged nominal interest rate policy to
the Fisher relation, (A.1), yields
                                                            
                                                       Pt                  1     1
                                             Et                  =             = ∗                                (A.8)
                                                      Pt+1                βR ∗  π

so expected inﬂation is anchored on the inﬂation target, an outcome that is perfectly consis-
tent with one aim of inﬂation-targeting central banks. It turns out, however, that another
aim of inﬂation targeters—stabilization of actual inﬂation—which can be achieved by active
monetary/passive ﬁscal policy, is no longer attainable.
  Impose the active tax rule on the intertemporal equilibrium condition, (IEC–2),
                                                                            
                                                                              ∞
                                    Bt             β
                                       =                         τ ∗ − Et            β j zt+j                   (IEC–2)
                                    Pt            1−β                          j=1

  34
    Technically, there are many solutions to (A.5), but all but the solution in (A.6) have inﬂation diverging
from target without bound [see Obstfeld and Rogoﬀ (1983) and Cochrane (2007) for further discussion].


                                                                 51
                       Leeper: Monetary Science, Fiscal Alchemy


and use the government’s ﬂow constraint, (A.4), to solve for the price level
                                                                 
                                                                   ∞
                                R∗ Bt−1          1         ∗
                                        =                 τ − Et         β j zt+j                     (A.9)
                                  Pt            1−β                j=0


At time t, the numerator of this expression is predetermined, representing the nominal value
of household wealth carried into period t. The right side is the expected present value of
primary ﬁscal surpluses from date t on, which is exogenous. So long as R∗ Bt−1 > 0 and the
present value of revenues exceeds the present value of transfers, a condition that must hold
if government debt has positive value, expression (A.9) delivers a unique Pt > 0.35
   Using the solution for the price level in (A.9) to compute expected inﬂation, it is straight-
forward to show that βEt (Pt /Pt+1 ) = 1/R∗ , as required by the Fisher relation and monetary
policy behavior. This observation leads to a sharp dichotomy between the roles of monetary
and ﬁscal policy in price-level determination: monetary policy alone appears to determine
expected inﬂation by choosing the level at which to peg the nominal interest rate, R∗−1 , while
conditional on that choice, ﬁscal variables appear to determine realized inﬂation.




  35
     We have done nothing mystical here, despite what some critics claim [for example, Buiter (2002) or
McCallum (2001)]. In particular, the government is not assumed to behave in a manner that violates its
budget constraint. Unlike competitive households, the government is not required to choose sequences of
control variables that are consistent with its budget constraint for all possible price sequences. Indeed,
for a central bank to target inﬂation, it cannot be choosing its policy instrument to be consistent with any
sequence of the price level; doing so would produce an indeterminate equilibrium. Identical reasoning applies
to the ﬁscal authority: the value of a dollar of debt—1/Pt —depends on expectations about ﬁscal decisions
in the future; expectations, in turn, are determined by the tax rule the ﬁscal authority announces. The ﬁscal
authority credibly commits to its tax rule and, given the process for transfers, this determines the backing
of government debt and, therefore, its market value.

                                                     52
                   Leeper: Monetary Science, Fiscal Alchemy


References
Afonso, A. and D. Furceri (2008, January). Government size, composition, volatility and
  economic growth. ECB Working Paper No. 849.

Aiyagari, R. S. and E. R. McGrattan (1998). The optimum quantity of debt. Journal of
  Monetary Economics 42 (3), 447–469.

Aiyagari, S. R., A. Marcet, T. J. Sargent, and J. Seppala (2002). Optimal taxation without
  state-contingent debt. Journal of Political Economy 110 (6), 1220–1254.

Alesina, A. and S. Ardagna (1998). Fiscal adjustments: Why they can be expansionary.
  Economic Policy 13 (27), 488–545.

Auerbach, A. J., J. Gokhale, and L. J. Kotlikoﬀ (1994). Generational accounting: A mean-
 ingful way to evaluate ﬁscal policy. Journal of Economic Perspectives 8 (1), 73–94.

Auerbach, A. J., J. Gokhale, and L. J. Kotlikoﬀ (1995). Restoring generational balance in
 U.S. ﬁscal policy: What will it take? Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland 31 (1), 3–12.

Australian Treasury (2008). The Treasury: Who We Are and What We Do. Sydney: Aus-
 tralian Government.

Bank of England (2009). Minutes of the monetary policy committee meeting. London, March
  4 and 5.

Barro, R. J. (1979). On the determination of the public debt. Journal of Political Econ-
  omy 87 (5), 940–971.

Bassetto, M. (2006). Fiscal policy and price stability: The case of italy, 1992–98. Chicago
  Fed Letter December (233), 1–4.

Benigno, P. and M. Woodford (2003). Optimal monetary and ﬁscal policy: A linear-quadratic
  approach. In NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2003. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Bernanke, B. S. (2010a, June). Economic and ﬁnancial conditions and the federal budget.
  Testimony before the Committee on the Budget, U.S. House of Representatives, Washing-
  ton, D.C., June 9.

Bernanke, B. S. (2010b, July). Semiannual monetary policy report to the congress. Testimony
  before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Aﬀairs, U.S. Senate, Washington,
  D.C., July 22.

                                            53
                   Leeper: Monetary Science, Fiscal Alchemy


Bertola, G. and A. Drazen (1993). Trigger points and budget cuts: Explaining the eﬀects of
  ﬁscal austerity. American Economic Review 83 (1), 11–26.

Bi, H. (2009, August). Sovereign risk premia, ﬁscal limits and ﬁscal policy. Manuscript,
  Indiana University.

Bi, H. and E. M. Leeper (2010). Sovereign debt risk premia and ﬁscal policy in Sweden.
  Manuscript, Indiana University.

Blanchard, O. J. and R. Perotti (2002). An empirical characterization of the dynamic ef-
  fects of changes in government spending and taxes on output. Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics 117 (4), 1329–1368.

Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2009). Monetary policy report to
  Congress. Washington, D.C., July 21.

Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2010). Statement by the Federal Open
  Market Committee. Washington, D.C., August 10.

Bryant, R. C., P. Hooper, and C. L. Mann (Eds.) (1993). Evaluating Policy Regimes: New
  Research in Empirical Macroeconomics. Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution.

Bryant, R. C. and L. Zhang (1996, June). Alternative speciﬁcations of intertemporal ﬁscal
  policy in a small theoretical model. Manuscript, The Brookings Institution.

Buiter, W. H. (2002). The ﬁscal theory of the price level: A critique. Economic Jour-
  nal 112 (481), 459–480.

Bullard, J. (2010, July). Seven faces of ‘the peril’. Forthcoming in Federal Reserve Bank of
  St. Louis Review.

Caldara, D. and C. Kamps (2010). The analytics of the sign restriction approach to shock
  identiﬁcation. Manuscript, European Central Bank, April.

Calmes, J. (2009). Obama planning to slash deﬁcit, despite stimulus spending. The New
  York Times, February 21, p. A1.

Chan, S. (2010). Fed member’s deﬂation warning hints at policy shift. The New York Times,
  July 29, http://www.nytimes.com/2010/07/30/business/economy/30fed.html.

Chari, V. V., L. J. Christiano, and P. J. Kehoe (1994). Optimal ﬁscal policy in a business
  cycle model. Journal of Political Economy 102 (4), 617–652.

                                            54
                    Leeper: Monetary Science, Fiscal Alchemy


Chari, V. V., L. J. Christiano, and P. J. Kehoe (1995). Policy analysis in business cycle mod-
  els. In T. F. Cooley (Ed.), Frontiers in Business Cycle Research, pp. 357–391. Princeton,
  NJ: Princeton University Press.

Christiano, L. J., M. Eichenbaum, and S. Rebelo (2009, May). When is the government
  spending multiplier large? Manuscript, Northwestern University.

Chung, H., T. Davig, and E. M. Leeper (2007). Monetary and ﬁscal policy switching. Journal
  of Money, Credit and Banking 39 (4), 809–842.

Clarida, R., J. Galı́, and M. Gertler (1999). The science of monetary policy: A new Keynesian
  perspective. Journal of Economic Literature 37 (4), 1661–1707.

Cochrane, J. H. (2001). Long term debt and optimal policy in the ﬁscal theory of the price
  level. Econometrica 69 (1), 69–116.

Cochrane, J. H. (2005). Money as stock. Journal of Monetary Economics 52 (3), 501–528.

Cochrane, J. H. (2007, August). Inﬂation determination with Taylor rules: A critical review.
  Manuscript, University of Chicago.

Cochrane, J. H. (2010, June). Understanding policy in the great recession: Some unpleasant
  ﬁscal arithmetic. Manuscript, University of Chicago.

Coenen, G., C. Erceg, C. Freedman, D. Furceri, M. Kumhof, R. Lalonde, D. Laxton, J. Lindé,
  A. Mourougane, D. Muir, S. Mursula, C. de Resende, J. Roberts, W. Roeger, S. Snudden,
  M. Trabandt, and J. in’t Veld (2010, March). Eﬀects of ﬁscal stimulus in structural models.
  International Monetary Fund WP/10/73.

Cogan, J. F., T. Cwik, J. B. Taylor, and V. Wieland (2009, September). New Keynesian
  versus old Keynesian government spending multipliers. ECB Working Paper No. 1090.

Congressional Budget Oﬃce (2009). The Long-Term Budget Outlook. Washington, D.C.:
  CBO. June.

Congressional Budget Oﬃce (2010a, January). CBO’s Budgetary Treatment of Fannie Mae
  and Freddie Mac. Washington, D.C.: CBO. Background Paper.

Congressional Budget Oﬃce (2010b). Federal Debt and the Risk of a Fiscal Crisis. Wash-
  ington, D.C.: CBO. July 27.

Congressional Budget Oﬃce (2010c). The Long-Term Budget Outlook. Washington, D.C.:
  CBO. June.

                                             55
                   Leeper: Monetary Science, Fiscal Alchemy


Davig, T. and E. M. Leeper (2006). Fluctuating macro policies and the ﬁscal theory. In
  D. Acemoglu, K. Rogoﬀ, and M. Woodford (Eds.), NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2006,
  Volume 21, pp. 247–298. Cambridge: MIT Press.

Davig, T. and E. M. Leeper (2007). Generalizing the Taylor principle. American Economic
  Review 97 (3), 607–635.

Davig, T. and E. M. Leeper (2010a). Modeling ﬁscal limits. Manuscript, Indiana University.

Davig, T. and E. M. Leeper (2010b, May). Monetary-ﬁscal policy interactions and ﬁscal
  stimulus. European Economic Review . in press, 10.1016/j.euroecorev.2010.04.004.

Davig, T., E. M. Leeper, and T. B. Walker (2010a, June). Inﬂation and the ﬁscal limit.
  Forthcoming in European Economic Review.

Davig, T., E. M. Leeper, and T. B. Walker (2010b). ‘Unfunded liabilities’ and uncertain
  ﬁscal ﬁnancing. Journal of Monetary Economics 57 (5), 600–619.

Eggertsson, G. (2009). Great expectations and the end of the depression. American Economic
  Review 98 (4), 1476–1516.

Erceg, C. J. and J. Lindé (2009, December). Is there a ﬁscal free lunch in a liquidity trap?
  Manuscript, Federal Reserve Board.

Eusepi, S. and B. Preston (2010, May). Debt, policy uncertainty and expectations stabiliza-
  tion. Forthcoming in Journal of the European Economic Association.

Faust, J. (2005, March). Is applied monetary policy analysis hard? Manuscript, Federal
  Reserve Board.

Faust, J. and D. W. Henderson (2004). Is inﬂation targeting best-practice monetary policy?
  Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Economic Review 86 (4), 117–143.

Friedman, M. (1948). A monetary and ﬁscal framework for economic stability. American
  Economic Review 38 (2), 245–264.

Friedman, M. (1960). A Program for Monetary Stability. New York: Fordham University
  Press.

Friedman, M. and A. J. Schwartz (1963). A Monetary History of the United States, 1867-
  1960. Princeton: Princeton University Press.



                                             56
                   Leeper: Monetary Science, Fiscal Alchemy


Giavazzi, F. and M. Pagano (1990). Can severe ﬁscal contractions be expantionary? Tales
  of two small European countries. NBER Macroeconomics Annual 5, 75–122.

Gokhale, J. and K. Smetters (2007). Do the markets care about the $2.4 trillion U.S. deﬁcit?
 Financial Analysts Journal 63 (2), 37–47.

Golosov, M., A. Tsyvinski, and I. Werning (2006). New dynamic public ﬁnance: A user’s
 guide. In D. Acemoglu, K. Rogoﬀ, and M. Woodford (Eds.), NBER Macroeconomics
  Annual 2006, Volume 21, pp. 317–363. Cambridge: MIT Press.

González-Páramo, J. M. (2010, February). Monetary and ﬁscal policy interactions during the
 ﬁnancial crisis. Speech at Banco de España Conference “Interactions Between Monetary
 and Fiscal Policies,” Madrid.

Goodfriend, M. (1993). Interest rate policy and the inﬂation scare problem: 1979-1992.
  Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly 79 (Winter), 1–24.

Government Oﬃces of Sweden (2009). Budget Statement and Summary from the Budget Bill
  for 2009. Stockholm: Government Oﬃce of Sweden.

Hilsenrath, J. (2010). Course of economy hinges on ﬁght over stimulus. The Wall Street
  Journal, July 27, A1.

HM Treasury (2009). HM Treasury Group Departmental Strategic Objectives: 2008-2011.
 London: HM Treasury.

Hoenig, T. M. (2010). Knocking on the central bank’s door. Speech to Peterson-Pew Com-
  mission on Budget Reform Policy Forum, February 16.

Ihori, T., T. Nakazato, and M. Kawade (2003). Japan’s ﬁscal policies in the 1990s. The
  World Economy 26 (3), 325–338.

International Monetary Fund (2009a, December). Anchoring expectations for sustainable
  public ﬁnances. Fiscal Aﬀairs Department.

International Monetary Fund (2009b, June). Fiscal implications of the global economic and
  ﬁnancial crisis. IMF Staﬀ Position Note SPN/09/13.

International Monetary Fund European Department (2010, May). Greece: Staﬀ report on
  request for stand-by arrangement. IMF Country Report No. 10/110.

Joines, D. H. (1981). Estimates of eﬀective marginal tax rates on factor incomes. The Journal
  of Business 54 (2), 191–226.

                                             57
                    Leeper: Monetary Science, Fiscal Alchemy


Kirsanova, T., C. Leith, and S. Wren-Lewis (2009). Monetary and ﬁscal policy interaction:
  The current consensus assignment in the light of recent developments. The Economic
  Journal 119 (541), F482–F496.

Kocherlakota, N. R. (2010). The New Dynamic Public Finance. Princeton: Princeton
 University Press.

Kotlikoﬀ, L. J. (1992). Generational Accounting: Knowing Who Pays, and When, for What
  We Spend. New York: The Free Press.

Kotlikoﬀ, L. J. (2006). Is the U.S. bankrupt?      Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Re-
 view 88 (4), 235–249.

Kotlikoﬀ, L. J. and S. Burns (2004). The Coming Generational Storm: What You Need to
 Know About America’s Economic Future. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Kotlikoﬀ, L. J. and J. Gokhale (1994). Passing the generational buck. The Public Inter-
 est 114 (Winter), 73–81.

Leeper, E. M. (1991). Equilibria under ‘active’ and ‘passive’ monetary and ﬁscal policies.
  Journal of Monetary Economics 27 (1), 129–147.

Leeper, E. M. (2009). Anchoring ﬁscal expectations. Reserve Bank of New Zealand Bul-
  letin 72 (3), 7–32.

Leeper, E. M. (2010). Anchors away: How ﬁscal policy can undermine “good” monetary
  policy. In Monetary Policy Under Financial Turbulence, 13th Annual Conference of the
  Central Bank of Chile. Santiago: Banco Central de Chile.

Leeper, E. M., M. Plante, and N. Traum (2010, June). Dynamics of ﬁscal ﬁnancing in the
  United States. Journal of Econometrics 156 (2), 304–321.

Leeper, E. M., T. B. Walker, and S.-C. S. Yang (2009, May). Fiscal foresight and information
  ﬂows. NBER Working Paper No. 14630.

Leeper, E. M., T. B. Walker, and S.-C. S. Yang (2010). Government investment and ﬁscal
  stimulus. Journal of Monetary Economics 57 (8).

Lucas, Jr., R. E. (1986). Principles of ﬁscal and monetary policy. Journal of Monetary
  Economics 17 (1), 117–134.

Lucas, Jr., R. E. and N. L. Stokey (1983). Optimal ﬁscal and monetary policy in an economy
  without capital. Journal of Monetary Economics 12 (1), 55–93.

                                            58
                   Leeper: Monetary Science, Fiscal Alchemy


McCallum, B. T. (2001). Indeterminacy, bubbles, and the ﬁscal theory of price level deter-
  mination. Journal of Monetary Economics 47 (1), 19–30.

Meltzer, A. H. (2003). A History of the Federal Reserve. Volume 1: 1913–1951. Chicago:
  University of Chicago Press.

Monacelli, T. and R. Perotti (2008, December). Fiscal policy, wealth eﬀects, and markups.
 NBER Working Paper No. 14584.

Mountford, A. and H. Uhlig (2009). What are the eﬀects of ﬁscal policy shocks? Journal of
 Applied Econometrics 24 (6), 960–992.

New Zealand Treasury (2003). Objectives, Targets and Instruments for Crown Financial
  Policy. Wellington: New Zealand Treasury.

Novy-Marx, R. and J. D. Rauh (2009). The liabilities and risks of state-sponsored pension
  plans. Journal of Economic Perspectives 23 (4), 191–210.

Obstfeld, M. and K. Rogoﬀ (1983). Speculative hyperinﬂations in maximizing models: Can
  we rule them out? Journal of Political Economy 91 (4), 675–687.

Page, S. (2010). Faith in social security tanking. USA Today, July 20, p. 1A.

Perotti, R. (2007). In search of the transmission mechanism of ﬁscal policy. In D. Acemoglu,
  K. Rogoﬀ, and M. Woodford (Eds.), NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2007, Volume 22, pp.
  169–226. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Ramey, V. A. (2010, June). Identifying government spending shocks: It’s all in the timing.
  Forthcoming in Quarterly Journal of Economics.

Rauh, J. D. (2010). Are state public pensions sustainable? Why the federal government
  should worry about state pension liabilities. National Tax Journal 63 (3).

Romer, C. and J. Bernstein (2009). The Job Impact of the American Recovery and Rein-
  vestment Plan. Washington, D.C.: Obama Transition Team. January 9.

Romer, C. D. and D. H. Romer (2010). The macroeconomic eﬀects of tax changes: Estimates
  based on a new measure of ﬁscal shocks. American Economic Review 100 (3), 763–801.

Rubin, R. E., P. R. Orszag, and A. Sinai (2004, January). Sustained budget deﬁcits: Longer-
 run U.S. economic performance and the risk of ﬁnancial and ﬁscal disarray. Presented at
  the AEA-NAEFA Joint Session, Allied Social Science Associations Annual Meetings.

                                            59
                   Leeper: Monetary Science, Fiscal Alchemy


Sargent, T. J. (2006). Ambiguity in American monetary and ﬁscal policy. Japan & The
  World Economy 18 (3), 324–330.

Sargent, T. J. and N. Wallace (1981). Some unpleasant monetarist arithmetic. Federal
  Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review 5 (Fall), 1–17.

Schmitt-Grohé, S. and M. Uribe (2007). Optimal simple and implementable monetary and
  ﬁscal rules. Journal of Monetary Economics 54 (6), 1702–1725.

Sims, C. A. (1994). A simple model for study of the determination of the price level and the
  interaction of monetary and ﬁscal policy. Economic Theory 4 (3), 381–399.

Sims, C. A. (2010, October). Stepping on a rake: The role of ﬁscal policy in the inﬂation of
  the 1970’s. Forthcoming in European Economic Review.

Stein, H. (1969). The Fiscal Revolution in America. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Taylor, J. B. (1993). Discretion versus policy rules in practice. Carneige-Rochester Confer-
  ence Series on Public Policy 39, 195–214.

The Economist (2010). Economics focus: Agents of change. The Economist, July 24, p. 76.

Tobin, J. (1980). Asset Accumulation and Economic Activity. Chicago: University of Chicago
  Press.

Trabandt, M. and H. Uhlig (2009, September). How far are we from the slippery slope? The
  Laﬀer curve revisited. NBER Working Paper No. 15343.

Traum, N. and S.-C. S. Yang (2009, October). Investigating the crowding out eﬀect of U.S.
  government debt. Manuscript, Indiana University.

Uhlig, H. (2010). Some ﬁscal calculus. American Economic Review: Papers & Proceed-
  ings 100 (2), 30–34.

U.S. Department of the Treasury (1984). The Eﬀects of Deﬁcits on Prices of Financial
  Assets: Theory and Evidence. Washington, D.C.: U.S. GPO.

U.S. Department of the Treasury (2007). Strategic Plan: Fiscal Years 2007-2012. Washing-
  ton, D.C.: The Department of the Treasury.

Wallace, N. (1981). A Modigliani-Miller theorem for open-market operations. American
 Economic Review 71 (3), 267–274.


                                            60
                   Leeper: Monetary Science, Fiscal Alchemy


Woellert, L. and J. Gittelsohn (2010). Fannie-Freddie ﬁx at $160 billion with $1 trillion
  worst case. June 13, http://www.bloomberg.com.

Woodford, M. (1995). Price-level determinacy without control of a monetary aggregate.
  Carneige-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 43, 1–46.

Woodford, M. (1998). Control of the public debt: A requirement for price stability? In
 G. Calvo and M. King (Eds.), The Debt Burden and Its Consequences for Monetary Policy,
  pp. 117–154. New York: St. Martin’s Press.




                                           61
