NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

IS POOR FITNESS CONTAGIOUS? EVIDENCE FROM RANDOMLY ASSIGNED
FRIENDS
Scott E. Carrell
Mark Hoekstra
James E. West
Working Paper 16518
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16518

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2010

The views expressed in this paper reflect those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official
policy or position of the U.S. Air Force, Department of Defense, the U.S. Government, or the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Scott E. Carrell, Mark Hoekstra, and James E. West. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Is Poor Fitness Contagious? Evidence from Randomly Assigned Friends
Scott E. Carrell, Mark Hoekstra, and James E. West
NBER Working Paper No. 16518
November 2010
JEL No. I18,I2,Z13
ABSTRACT
The increase in obesity over the past thirty years has led researchers to investigate the role of social
networks as a contributing factor. However, several challenges make it difficult to demonstrate a causal
link between friends’ physical fitness and own fitness using observational data. To overcome these
problems, we exploit data from a unique setting in which individuals are randomly assigned to peer
groups. We find statistically significant peer effects that are 40 to 70 percent as large as the own effect
of prior fitness scores on current fitness outcomes. Evidence suggests that the effects are caused primarily
by friends who were the least fit, thus supporting the provocative notion that poor physical fitness
spreads on a person-to-person basis.

Scott E. Carrell
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
secarrell@ucdavis.edu
Mark Hoekstra
Department of Economics
University of Pittsburgh
4714 W. W. Posvar Hall
Pittsburgh, PA, 15260
markhoek@pitt.edu

James E. West
Department of Economics and Geosciences
U.S. Air Force Acdemy
2354 Fairchild Dr. #6K100
USAF Academy, CO 80840
Jim.West@usafa.edu

One of the most striking health trends in recent years has been the decline in the
physical fitness of the U.S. population.

Nearly two-thirds of adults are currently

overweight, while more than 30 percent are obese (Hedley, et al., 2004). In response,
researchers have proposed several explanations. While some point to societal factors that
have shifted people toward increased food consumption or decreased exercise (Hill &
Peters 1998; Cutler, Glaeser, & Shapiro, 2003) a provocative recent explanation is that
the effects of social and environmental factors may be amplified by the person-to-person
spread of obesity (Christakis & Fowler, 2007). This explanation has profound
implications, as it suggests that social networks can multiply the effects of otherwise
smaller changes in the determinants of obesity. Conversely, if social networks are an
important determinant of health, policies that increase individual health could
conceivably combat the obesity epidemic through the social multiplier effect.
However, credibly estimating the causal effect of social networks on individual
health outcomes has been difficult.

There are three main empirical challenges to

overcome: self-selection, common environmental factors, and reflection.1 Self-selection
implies that people tend to associate with those similar to them. For example, two
individuals who prefer a sedentary lifestyle may both socialize together and gain weight
over time, making it impossible to distinguish the effect of the (common) lifestyle from
that of the friend. In addition, people within a social network may be subject to common
environmental factors, which confound the social network effects. For example, family
members may both spend a lot of time together and share genetic predispositions toward
weight gain, making it difficult to distinguish the effect of one factor from the other.
1

The medical literature often refers to self-selection as "homophily" (love of the same). Common
environmental factors are often referred to as "correlated effects" or "common shocks" (Manski, 1993).

1

Similarly, people within a neighborhood may share the same proximity to fast food
restaurants and city parks. Finally, it is empirically difficult to overcome what social
science researchers have referred to as the reflection problem (Manski, 1993). That is,
between two friends, each friend affects the other simultaneously.
While understanding whether social network effects exist is an important question
for public health policy, overcoming these identification problems using observational
data is challenging.2 In this study, we address these identification challenges by utilizing
data from the US Air Force Academy in which 3,487 college students were randomly
assigned to (residential) social networks from 2001 to 2005 to examine the role of such
networks in shaping physical fitness outcomes. While this population is unique in that
the students are both younger and considerably more physically fit than the general
population, these data offer us two extraordinary advantages with respect to estimating
fitness peer effects. First, because students were randomly assigned to peer groups with
whom they are required to spend the majority of their time interacting, we can estimate
peer effects free of bias caused by self-selection into the group.3,4 In addition, our data

2

As such, the causality of estimates in the recent social network health literature has been drawn into
question. These concerns have perhaps been best illustrated in Cohen-Cole and Fletcher's (2008a and
2008b) critiques of Christakis and Fowler (2007), who use data from the Framingham Heart Survey to
show that obesity, smoking, and happiness appear to spread through social ties. Cohen-Cole and Fletcher
report that the same methodology also yields social network effects in implausible outcomes such as height
and headaches, and that controlling for confounders reduces the estimates on BMI. Christakis and Fowler
(2008) respond by questioning whether effects on height and headaches are implausible when the outcomes
are self-reported, and report evidence that health peer effects estimates are robust across several
specifications. While we leave the reader to judge the merits of these critiques and their responses, we do
argue that the debate highlights the general difficulty with making causal inferences using observational
data.
3

The only other study we know of that uses a randomized treatment design to study the impact of peer
effects on fitness or obesity is Yakusheva, Kapinos, and Weiss (2010), who examine whether a randomly
assigned roommate’s initial weight affects weight gain during the freshman year of college. They report no
effect for men, and find that women assigned to heavier roommates lose weight. However, the lack of
evidence of positive peer effects among roommates is roughly consistent with the findings of Carrell,
Fullerton, and West (2009), who report only moderate evidence of peer effects in education among

2

contain an individual level pre-treatment measure of fitness, which enables us to estimate
peer effects free of biases due to common environmental factors and reflection.
We evaluate whether being assigned to peers who were less fit during high school
affects college fitness scores as well as the probability of failing the academy’s fitness
requirements. We also examine whether the effects we find are caused primarily by
exposure to the least or most fit friends in one’s own social network. Results indicate
that poor fitness does spread on a person-to-person basis, with the largest effects caused
by friends who were the least physically fit.

Data
The data utilized in our study consist of 13,016 observations on 3,487 freshmen
and sophomore students from 2001 to 2005 at the United States Air Force Academy
(USAFA).5

These data are utilized because of one extraordinary feature of the

environment there: while most individuals have a significant amount of choice over the
group of people with whom they associate, USAFA students are randomly assigned to
squadrons of approximately 30 students with whom they are required to spend the
majority of their time.

Prior to the start of the freshman and sophomore years,

administrators implement a stratified random assignment process in which females are

roommates, though they estimate much larger peer effects when the peer group is defined as the group with
which the students spend the majority of their time (i.e., squadron).
4

A number of recent studies have used randomization at the college roommate and/or college peer group
level to identify peer effects in academic achievement. See Sacerdote (2001), Zimmerman (2003),
Stinebrickner & Stinebrickner (2005), Foster (2006), Lyle (2007), and Carrell, Fullerton & West (2009) for
examples. While most of these papers focus on whether peer academic ability affects achievement, Kremer
& Levy (2008) examine the effect of roommate drinking on college GPA.

5

In total there are three cohorts of students from the graduating classes of 2005-2007, with two years of
semester-by-student level outcome data.

3

first randomly assigned, followed by male ethnic and racial minorities, then nonminority
recruited athletes, then students who attended a military preparatory school, and then all
remaining students. Thus, while by design there is relatively little intergroup variation in
attributes such as race or gender, the assignment of other attributes such as peer fitness is
effectively random. This critical feature of our data set enables us to overcome bias due
to self-selection.
Statistical resampling tests provide evidence that the algorithm that assigns
students to peer groups is consistent with random assignment (Lehmann & Romano,
2005). To implement the test, for each peer group we randomly drew 10,000 groups of
equal size from the relevant cohort of students without replacement. We then computed
empirical p-values for each group, representing the proportion of the simulated peer
groups with higher average pre-treatment fitness scores than that of the observed group.
Under random assignment, any unique p-value is equally likely to be observed; hence the
expected distribution of the empirical p-values is uniform. We tested the uniformity of
the distributions of empirical p-values in each year using the Kolmogorov-Smirnov onesample equality of distribution test. We failed to reject the null hypothesis of random
placement for both the freshman and sophomore peer group assignments, with p-values
of 0.934 and 0.578, respectively.6
Students are required to spend the majority of their time interacting with peers in
their assigned group: they live in adjacent dorm rooms, dine together on meals served

6

We also regressed own peer high school fitness on peer pre-treatment characteristics such as peer high
school fitness score, peer SAT verbal and math scores, peer academic composite score, and peer leadership
score. None of the coefficients are statistically significant at the 10% level, and the p-value from the F-test
of joint significance is 0.652. For further evidence of the randomization of peer groups at the USAFA, see
Carrell, Fullerton, and West (2009).

4

family-style, compete in intramural sports together, and study together. During the
freshman year, students have limited ability to interact with students outside of their
social network.7 However, across peer groups, nearly all other aspects of life and work at
USAFA are similar. Specifically, during both the freshmen and sophomore years, all
students primarily take the same courses in which they are randomly assigned to
professors, are served the same meals in the cafeteria, live on the same campus in the
same dorm buildings, and are subject to the same physical conditioning requirements.
Importantly, students do not take academic or physical fitness courses8 together with
peers from their squadron, but rather are randomly assigned to professors and instructors
along with the other students from their entire cohort. Consequently, there is little scope
for environmental confounders to bias estimates of social network effects.
A second advantage of this study relates to the outcomes examined. While most
existing studies examining physical fitness/obesity use weight-to-height comparisons
such as body mass index (BMI), there is consensus that such measures do not adequately
measure whether an individual is actually physically fit and healthy (Smalley, et al.,
1990; Gallagher, et al., 1996; Burkhauser & Cawley, 2008).9 In contrast, our dataset

7

In their sophomore year, students have more opportunity to interact with students from other groups,
though students within groups still live in adjacent dorm rooms, dine together, compete in intramural sports
together and in general interact together frequently. We note, however, that interaction with students
outside the group would likely bias our estimates toward zero by introducing measurement error in the peer
variable (Carrell, Fullerton, and West, 2009).

8

All students at USAFA are required to take mandatory physical education courses, which are nonacademic in nature. For instance, all freshman students are required to take swimming and boxing (males)
or unarmed combat (females). Scores in these courses are based on the student's athletic performance in
the course such as a timed swimming test and two three-round boxing matches.

9

In response to those same concerns, in 2005, the US Air Force came to its own conclusion that its' weight
management program based on BMI was flawed and instead began using an annual fitness exam that
included a timed 1.5 mile run, sit-ups, push-ups, and pull-ups.

5

from the USAFA provides for two, arguably superior, health outcome measures:10 the
overall physical education score achieved during the semester and whether or not the
individual failed the physical fitness requirements.
The physical education average (PEA) score is measured on a 0.0 - 4.0 scale,
where the average score is 2.61. It consists of a weighted average of scores on the
following tests: 1) a 1.5 mile timed run called the aerobic fitness test (15%), 2) a physical
fitness test consisting of pull-ups, push-ups, sit-ups, standing long-jump and a 600 yard
sprint (50%), and 3) grades in mandatory physical education courses (35%).11 Grades in
the physical fitness courses are based primarily on performance, rather than knowledge or
effort. For example, grades in the boxing class are based on one’s performance against
classmates during three-round fights and grades in swimming are based on distance
swimming times and proficiency performing various swimming strokes.
Failing the fitness requirement occurs when an individual receives a PEA score
lower than 2.0, or when he or she fails to meet certain specified minimum standards on
any of the subcomponents of the PEA score. As shown in Table 1, on average, roughly
nine percent of the students fail to meet these requirements and were thus put on athletic
probation by the USAFA.12

10

Unfortunately, BMI data are not available for the students in our sample, so we are unable to assess
whether peer effects on BMI are different from peer effects on fitness.
11

Approximately 13% of our observations having missing data for the PEA variable (1,695 of 13,016). The
PEA variable is not available for students who are unable to complete all components of the score. To test
whether these missing observations could bias our estimates, we regressed an indicator for missing PEA on
peer pre-treatment characteristics such as peer high school fitness score, peer SAT verbal and math scores,
peer academic composite score, and peer leadership score. None of the coefficients are statistically
significant at the 10% level, and the p-value from the F-test of joint significance is 0.985.
12

The 9-percent failure rate represents the average across all observations. In total, 12.2 percent of students
in our sample (406 of 3,323) failed the fitness requirement at least once.

6

Importantly, we also collected data on individuals’ physical fitness prior to
enrolling at the academy. This score is based on applicants’ performance on pull-ups, situps, push-ups, a 600-yard shuttle run, the standing long jump and a basketball throw.
The test is typically administered and certified by an official from the individual's high
school, such as a physical education teacher.13 Observing fitness prior to enrolling is
critical for making causal inferences for two reasons. First, because we examine whether
friends’ fitness in high school affects an individual's own fitness in college, we can rule
out the possibility that common environmental factors are causing the correlation
between own health and friends’ health. For example, it is difficult to conceive of a
factor that would simultaneously affect own fitness in college as well as a friend’s fitness
in high school, since the two were not yet friends in high school.14 In addition, we can
rule out the possibility of reflection, since it is impossible for one’s own current health to
affect a friend’s health (i.e. high school fitness score) before she or he entered the social
network.
The full set of summary statistics is shown in Table 1. The average combined
SAT score of students at the academy is 1,298, which is similar to other undergraduate
institutions such as UCLA, University of Michigan, University of Virginia, and UNCChapel Hill. Eighteen percent of the sample is female, 5 percent is Black, 6 percent is
Hispanic, and 5 percent is Asian. The average high school health fitness score of peers

13

The high school fitness data were available for 99.5 percent of all students in the sample. We dropped
from our sample the 19 of 3,506 students who were missing the high school fitness score.

14

Students at the USAFA come from every congressional district in the United States; therefore, it is highly
implausible that common environmental factors could affect both the high school and college fitness
exams.

7

randomly assigned to one’s social network is 460, with a standard deviation of 18 points
across groups and a standard deviation of 97 across individuals.

External Validity
While the USAFA data offer distinct advantages with respect to both the
randomization of peers and the availability of an absolute measure of fitness, there is an
open question regarding whether the effects we find generalize to the broader population.
The most significant difference between USAFA students and their peers at other
selective public universities is that USAFA students spend considerably more time
exercising and playing sports. Only 12.5 percent of USAFA students reported spending 5
or fewer hours on sports and exercise per week in their last year of high school, compared
to 48.2 percent of students at other selective public universities (Cooperative Institutional
Research Program (CIRP), 2007). Similarly, 24.6 percent of USAFA students reported
spending more than 20 hours on exercise and sports per week in their last year of high
school, compared to 8 percent of students enrolled at selective public universities (CIRP,
2007).
In addition to differences in incoming fitness levels, students at USAFA are held
to rigorous physical fitness standards throughout their college experience. For example,
one way in which students can fail the fitness requirement is by not meeting the
minimum standards on any of the subcomponents of the physical education score. For
the 1.5-mile timed run, minimum passing times are 11:15 for men and 13:20 for women.
For the physical fitness test, students must score at least 250 points and achieve the
following minimums on each component: 1) pull-ups (7-males, 1-females), 2) long jump

8

(7'00"-males, 5'09"-females, 3) sit-ups (58-males, 58-females), 4) push-ups (35-males,
18-females, and 5) 600 yard run (2:03-males, 2:23-females). However, minimums on
every event result in a total score of 125 points and failure of the test. Although our data
do not contain each individual component of the PEA, anecdotal evidence suggests that
failing the physical fitness test is the most common reason students fail the fitness
requirement. However, we note that these are stringent requirements, and that even
students who fail this requirement are likely more fit than the typical college student.
As a result of these fitness requirements, students at USAFA likely have lower
body fat than typical college students. According to the USAFA Athletics Department,
only about seven percent of students during their freshman and sophomore year fail to
meet body fat standards of 20 percent for males and 28 percent for females.
Since we are not aware of any other studies on fitness peer effects, we are unable
to make direct comparisons of our estimates to those covering other populations.
However, Carrell, Fullerton, and West (2009) report that academic peer effects at the
academy are similar to those at other academic institutions when the peer group is
defined as either roommates, as in Sacerdote (2001) and Zimmerman (2003), or as dorm
halls, as in Foster (2006).15
There are several factors unique to USAFA that could cause the magnitude of
fitness peer effects to be different than in other contexts. Students at USAFA both eat
and exercise with their (randomly assigned) friends, suggesting our estimates may
overstate the effects found in other environments. On the other hand, certain factors may
cause our estimates to understate the effects in other contexts. For example, students at

15

However, Carrell, Fullerton, and West (2009) estimate much larger academic peer effects when the peer
group is defined as the squadron rather than as roommates or dormitory residents.

9

the USAFA face strict upper and lower bounds on the time devoted the physical activity
that are not present for the general population. Similarly, the presence of mandatory,
well-defined physical fitness requirements may reduce the need for peer comparisons,
thus reducing the size of the peer effect estimates at USAFA relative to elsewhere.16 In
addition, all students at USAFA are offered the same family-style meals in the dining
facility, which reduces the extent to which friends can affect the type of foods eaten.
Finally, we note that the effect of other factors, such as living in an environment in which
peers are randomly assigned, is more ambiguous.
For these reasons, we remain agnostic regarding whether effects would be larger
or smaller for other populations in other environments. However, it clear is that
regardless of the population in question, peer effects on outcomes such as fitness or
obesity must occur by affecting own diet, own exercise, or both. Thus, our view is that at
a minimum, the presence of such peer effects in one population increases the likelihood
that peer effects in fitness exist more broadly.

Methods
To determine the effect of friends on own physical fitness, we estimate standard
ordinary least squares regressions17 in which the dependent variables are the overall
physical education average (PEA) score and whether the individual was placed on
athletic probation, respectively. The main explanatory variable of interest is the average
16

If students fail to meet the minimum requirements in a given semester they are placed on athletic
probation and put into a mandatory reconditioning program. Repeated failures lead to expulsion.
17

We use a linear probability model rather than logistic regression when using the binary dependent
variable to allow us to compute two-way clustered standard errors, which computational limitations prevent
us from doing when using a logistic regression model. However, results are qualitatively similar when
using logistic regression rather than OLS.

10

high school fitness score of one’s peers, and in all specifications we include a control for
own high school fitness as well as graduation class fixed effects. To ease interpretation,
own fitness scores are normalized to have mean zero and standard deviation one.
Similarly, the peer high school fitness score variable is normalized by subtracting the
mean and dividing by the individual-level standard deviation. We normalized the peer
variable in this manner to ensure comparability between the coefficients on the own and
peer high school fitness variables. We cluster our standard errors at both the peer group
level and individual level using multi-way clustering to allow for correlation across
individuals within the same network (Cameron, Gelbach, & Miller, 2010).
Although the average high school fitness of peers in one’s network is determined
by random assignment within a graduation class cohort, in some specifications we also
include additional controls to examine the robustness of our results. Specifically, we
include cohort by year by semester fixed effects and state of residence fixed effects. This
allows for changing factors over time that might affect the entire cohort of students in a
given semester, such as differing academic requirements or changes in the dietary menus.
We also include controls for individual-level characteristics that may affect fitness
including math and verbal SAT scores, a high school academic composite (GPA and
class rank) score, a leadership composite score, and indicators for student race, whether
the student was recruited to the academy as an athlete, and whether the student attended a
military preparatory school.
For aid in interpreting the reduced form parameters on our peer effects
coefficient, consider the following linear in means peer effects model:
(1) y ig  1 x ig   2 y g   3 x g   g  ig

11

where x ig is the pre-USAFA fitness score and y ig is the contemporaneous fitness score.

x g and y g are the average scores of the peer group excluding individual i. In Manski's
(1993) framework,  2 represents the endogenous peer effect,  3 is the exogenous peer
effect, g represents common environmental factors, and ig are other individual
unobservables.
Taking averages within group g, one obtains a reduced form equation:
(2) y ig  1 x ig 

 2 (1   3 )
˜  
˜ig
x g  
g
1  2

Hence, the coefficient in a regression of own college fitness on peer high school fitness is
a function of both the endogenous and exogenous structural peer effects. Thus, while our
reduced form estimates cannot distinguish between whether the peer effects we find are
driven by the background characteristics or behavior of the group, we can say that our

˜ig is
estimates are a causal effect of one’s peers. That is, we can be confident that 
uncorrelated with x g because of the random assignment students to peer groups.
Random assignment also ensures that there is no correlation between x g and fixed
components of g (e.g. dorm proximity to the gym or cafeteria). However, it is
theoretically possible that some common environmental factors endogenously adjust to
the average high school fitness level of the group. For example, physical education
teachers could adjust curriculum depending on the fitness level of the class. Fortunately,
students of all squadrons are randomly assigned across courses at USAFA (including PE
courses), ensuring there are no classroom level common shocks biasing our estimates.

12

Additionally, given the rigidity of the academic, athletic, and military curriculum and
standards at USAFA, we expect any such endogenous adjustments to be quite minimal.18

Results
Results are shown in Table 2, which reports the effect of peer high school fitness
on the Physical Education Average (PEA) score. Column 1 controls only for own fitness
in high school and indicators for graduation year. The estimate indicates that peers’
fitness (as measured in high school) has a large and statistically significant effect on own
fitness in college. The marginal effect shows that a one standard deviation increase in the
high school fitness score of all peers in the group results in a statistically significant
0.165 standard deviation increase in college fitness.19 By comparison, a similar sized
improvement in own fitness is associated with a statistically significant 0.434 standard
deviation increase in college fitness. This is striking, as it suggests that the effect of
friends' high school fitness on own current fitness is nearly 40 percent as strong as the
effect of own high school fitness.
To account for individual-level factors that may affect own fitness, in columns (2)
and (3) of Table 2 we sequentially add the individual controls and the fixed effects. The
magnitude of the peer effect decreases slightly, but is statistically indistinguishable from

18

The academic, athletic and military standards are constant across all squadrons at USAFA, with
guidelines set forth in formal Air Force Instructions and Manuals.
19
For ease in interpretation we present all of our results in terms of standard deviations. To get a sense of
how fitness levels translate into standard deviation changes in the PEA score we provide the following
examples for males: 1) A four minute change in the 1.5 mile (12 to 8 minutes), holding PE grades and the
physical fitness test score constant would result in a one-half standard deviation change in the PEA score.
2) From the mean score, adding five pull-ups, 9 inches on the long jump, 14 sit-ups, 15 push-ups, and a 12
second decrease on the 600 meter run would result in roughly a one-standard deviation change in the PEA,
holding the 1.5 mile run time and PE grades constant.

13

the estimate in column (1). These results are expected given that peer groups were
randomly assigned.
While the estimates in columns (1) through (3) imply that the underlying fitness
of friends does have a significant impact on fitness in college, it is also possible that the
effect is caused by other peer factors correlated with fitness. For example, perhaps more
fit peers are also more motivated to achieve success generally. Similarly, it may be that
more fit peers are also more likely to take a leadership role among friends at the academy
and this leadership, rather than the physically fit friends, causes students to become more
fit in college.
To address these possibilities, we include additional peer controls in column (4).
Specifically, we control for the average SAT math and verbal scores, high school
academic composite score, and high school leadership composite of peers in one’s social
network. Results show that the impact of friends’ fitness remains statistically significant
and similar in magnitude. This suggests that the effects we find are likely caused by
friends' fitness and not by general motivation or leadership ability.
Next, we examine whether friends’ fitness affects whether or not an individual
fails the fitness requirement at the academy. Results are shown in Table 3 and indicate
that there is a large and statistically significant effect that is unchanged when adding
controls in columns 2 through 4. For example, the estimates in column 4 indicate that the
effect of peer high school fitness on own college fitness (-0.044) is approximately 70
percent as large as the association between own high school fitness and own college
fitness.

14

Mechanisms and Heterogeneity
Given that friends’ average high school fitness affects own college fitness, it is
natural to wonder how peers matter. While any effect on the outcomes used in this
analysis presumably works through either diet or exercise, we can identify several
potential mechanisms. Peer effects may arise through increased positive knowledge
about how to exercise or train. If so, we would primarily expect the effects to be driven
by peers who are the most fit. In contrast, if the effects operate through the adoption of
poor diet or negative exercise habits, we would expect the effect to be driven by the least
fit members of the group.
Thus, to help assess these potential mechanisms, we examine more closely which
peers appear to be causing the peer effect, and which groups of students are most
affected. We begin by examining how own fitness is affected by the proportion of
randomly assigned friends who were in the bottom and top 20 percent of the high school
fitness score distribution.20 These estimated effects are relative to having peers from the
middle 60 percent of the fitness distribution.
Results are shown in Table 4. Columns (1) and (2) show that it is primarily the

least fit friends who reduce average physical fitness (estimate = 0.360, p<0.01) and
induce students to fail the fitness requirements (estimate = 0.105, p<0.05). The estimates
imply that if half of your friends were to become among the least fit for reasons unrelated
to you,21 your own fitness level would drop by nearly 20 percent of a standard deviation

20

We also examined whether females respond differently to peers than males. We find that while the
coefficients are larger for women, they are not statistically distinguishable from those for men.
21

This is approximately the variation observed across peer groups in the data; the proportion of peers in
one’s squadron ranking below the 20th percentile prior to attending the academy ranges from 0 to 42
percent.

15

and you would be nearly 60 percent more likely to fail the fitness requirements. Put
differently, the effect of the least fit peers on college fitness is 85 percent of the effect of
one’s own high school fitness. Even more strikingly, the effect of the least fit peers on
the probability of failing the fitness exam is larger than the effect of own high school
fitness.22
Next, we examine which students are most affected by their peers. To do so, we
interact average peer high school fitness with indicators for whether the individual's high
school fitness score is above- or below-average. Results are shown in Columns (3) and
(4) of Table 4. The estimates indicate that it is the college students on the lower end of
the fitness distribution who are most affected by their peers.
Finally, we estimate the effects after allowing for interactions between whether
own high school fitness was above- or below-average and exposure to peers from the top
and bottom 20 percent of the high school fitness distribution. Results are shown in
Columns (5) and (6) of Table 4. These results are consistent with results from Columns
(1) through (4): exposure to the least fit peers is what matters, and college students with
the lowest propensity to be fit are the ones who are most affected.
Our results thus yield two notable findings. First, they indicate that the peer
effects in physical fitness we find are primarily driven by the least physically fit friends.
Second, the individuals most at risk from exposure to unfit friends are those who
themselves struggle with fitness. Collectively, this suggests that peer effects in fitness do

22

We also investigated whether variance in peer fitness affects own fitness in college by regressing own
college fitness on the standard deviation of peer high school fitness. We find that increased variance in
peer fitness causes a reduction in own fitness, though the effect goes away once we control for the
proportion of least fit peers, as in Table 4. This suggests that at least in this context, variance matters
primarily because it means you are exposed to more of the least fit peers.

16

not appear to arise due to the spread of knowledge from highly fit to less fit individuals.
Rather the results are more consistent with the notion that people imitate the diet or
exercise habits of their least fit friends, or use those friends’ fitness as a benchmark for
their own.

Conclusion
Understanding the nature of social interactions is important for both diagnosing
the causes of the decline in physical fitness and assessing policy strategies to combat the
decline.

However, because individuals can select their friends based in part on

preferences for diet and exercise and because friends are likely to be subjected to the
same environmental factors, it is difficult to credibly estimate the effect of peers on
fitness and obesity using observational data.
We estimate the impact of friends’ fitness on own physical fitness by exploiting a
unique data set in which college students are randomly assigned to a group of 30 students
with whom they spend the majority of their time. We find strong evidence that friends’
fitness affects own fitness as well as the probability of failing the fitness requirements.
The magnitude of the effect is large, as the effect of peer high school fitness is
approximately 40 to 70 percent as large as the effect of own high school fitness. Thus,
our findings are broadly consistent with the provocative notion that poor physical fitness
spreads on a person-to-person basis.
Our results also indicate that the peer effects work largely through exposure to the
least fit peers, and the students most affected are those at the lower end of the fitness
distribution. This asymmetry in the nature of the peer effects suggests that individuals

17

appear to either compare their own fitness to the least fit among them, or adopt the diet
and exercise of the least fit.

Thus, our results suggest that there is an efficiency

motivation for improving the health habits of the least physically fit individuals, as doing
so may ultimately affect the health of many more individuals by harnessing the effect of
the social multiplier.

18

Bibliography
Burkhauser, Richard V. and John Cawley. 2008. Beyond BMI: The value of more
accurate measures of fatness and obesity in social science research. Journal of
Health Econonomics, 27: 519-529.
Cameron, A. Colin, Jonah B. Gelbach, and Douglas L. Miller. 2010. “Robust Inference
with Multi-Way Clustering”. Forthcoming in the Journal of Business and
Economic Statistics.
Carrell, Scott E., Richard L. Fullerton, and James E. West. 2009. Does Your Cohort
Matter? Estimating Peer Effects in College Achievement, Journal of Labor
Economics, 27, 439-464.
Carrell, Scott E., Frederick V. Malmstrom, and James E. West. 2008. Peer Effects in
Academic Cheating, Journal of Human Resources, Volume XLIII, Number 1,
Winter 2008, 173-207.
Christakis Nicholas and James Fowler. 2007. The spread of obesity in a large social
network over 32 years. New England Journal of Medicine; 357: 370-9.
Christakis Nicholas and James Fowler. 2008. Estimating Peer Effects on Health in Social
Networks," Journal of Health Economics, 27(5): 1386-1391.
Cohen-Cole, Ethan and Jason M. Fletcher. 2008a. Detecting Implausible Social Network
Effects in Acne, Height, and Headaches: Longitudinal Analysis. British Medical
Journal, 337: a2533.
Cohen-Cole, Ethan and Jason M. Fletcher. 2008b. Is Obesity Contagious? Social
Networks vs. Environmental Factors in the Obesity Epidemic. Journal of Health
Economics, 27 (5): 1382-1387.
Cooperative Institutional Research Program. 2007. “The Freshman Survey”, Higher
Education Research Institute at the University of California – Los Angeles.
Cutler, David O., Edward L. Glaeser, and Jesse M. Shapiro. 2003. Why Have Americans
Become So Obese? Journal of Economic Perspectives, 17 (3): 93-118.
Foster, Gigi. 2006. It’s not your peers, and it’s not your friends: some progress towards
understanding educational peer effects, Journal of Public Economics, 90 (8-9):
1455-1475.
Gallagher, Dympna, Marjolein Visser, Dennis Sepulveda, Richard N. Pierson, Tamara
Harris, and Steven B. Heymsfield. 1996. How useful is body mass index for
comparison of body fatness across age, sex, and ethnic groups? American Journal
of Epidemiology, 143 (3): 228–239.

19

Glaeser, Edward L., Bruce L. Sacerdote, and Jose A. Scheinkman. 2003. The Social
Multiplier. Journal of the European Economic Association 1 (2–3): 345–53.
Hedley, Allison. A., Cynthia L. Ogden, Clifford L. Johnson, Margaret D. Carroll, Lester
R. Curtin, and Katherine M. Flegal. 2004. Prevalence of overweight and obesity
among US children, adolescents, and adults, 1999-2002. Journal of the American
Medical Association, 291: 2847-50
Hill, James O. and John C. Peters. 1998. Environmental contributions to the obesity
epidemic. Science, 280: 1371-4.
Kremer, Michael and Dan Levy. 2008. Peer Effects and Alcohol Use Among College
Students. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 23 (3): 189-206.
Lehmann, Erich L. and Joseph P. Romano. 2005. Testing Statistical Hypotheses.
Secaucus, NJ: Springer Texts in Statistics, 3rd ed.
Lyle, David S. 2007. Estimating and Interpreting Peer and Role Model Effects from
Randomly Assigned Social Groups at West Point. Review of Economics and
Statistics 89 (2): 289–99.
Manski, Charles F. 1993. Identification and Endogenous Social Effects: The Reflection
Problem. Review of Economic Studies, 60: 531-542.
Sacerdote, Bruce. 2001. Peer Effects with Random Assignment: Results for Dartmouth
Roommates. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116, 681-704.
Smalley, Karl J., Anita N. Knerr, Zebulon V. Kendrick, Jerry A. Colliver, and Oliver E.
Owen. 1990. Reassessment of body mass indices. American Journal of Clinical
Nutrition, 52, 405–408.
Stinebrickner, Ralph, and Todd R. Stinebrickner. 2006. What Can Be Learned About
Peer Effects Using College Roommates? Evidence From New Survey Data and
Students From Disadvantaged Backgrounds. Journal of Public Economics 90 (8–
9): 1435–54.
Yakusheva, Olga, Kandice Kapinos, and Marianne Weiss. 2010. Peer Effects and the
Freshman 15: Evidence from a Natural Experiment. Working Paper.
Zimmerman, David J. 2003. Peer Effects in Academic Outcomes: Evidence from a
Natural Experiment. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 85 (1): 9–23.

20

Table 1: Summary Statistics
Mean (std. dev)

Variable

Range

Panel A: College Student Performance and Demographics
College Fitness Score

2.61 (0.51)

0.35-4.00

Fail Fitness Test

0.09 (0.28)

0-1

High School Fitness Score

460 (97)

215-745

High School Fitness Score (normalized)

0.00 (1.00)

-2.54-2.94

Black

0.05 (0.22)

0-1

Hispanic

0.06 (0.24)

0-1

Asian

0.05 (0.23)

0-1

Female

0.18 (0.38)

0-1

Panel B: Social Network Performance in High School
Peer High School Fitness Score

460

(18)

405-513

Peer High School Fitness Score (normalized)

0.00 (0.18)

Peer SAT Math

667

(13)

623-709

Peer SAT Verbal

632

(12)

587-671

-0.57-0.55

Peer Academic Composite

1,287 (384)

1,187-1,438

Peer Leadership Composite Score

1,724 (333)

1,603-1,825

Figures come from data on 3,487 students and a total of 216 unique social networks.

21

Table 2: The Effect of Peer Fitness on Own Fitness Score

Dependent Variable: Physical Fitness Score

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Peer High School Fitness Score

0.165**
(0.073)

0.129**
(0.058)

0.131**
(0.057)

0.129**
(0.057)

Own High School Fitness Score

0.434***
(0.014)

0.421***
(0.013)

0.418***
(0.013)

0.418***
(0.013)

Observations

11,321

11,321

11,321

11,321

Includes individual controls?

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Includes year by semester & state of residence fixed effects?

No

No

Yes

Yes

Includes average peer SAT verbal, SAT math, academic
composite and leadership composite scores?

No

No

No

Yes

The dependent variable in each specification is the college fitness exam score. Standard errors multi-way clustered at
the peer group and individual level are in parentheses. Each specification controls for graduate class fixed effects.
Individual-level controls include SAT verbal and math scores, academic and leadership composite scores, and
indicators for Black, Hispanic, Asian, female, recruited athlete, and preparatory school attendance.
** Significant at the 5% level
*** Significant at the 1% level

22

Table 3: The Effect of Peer Fitness on Failing the Fitness Requirements

Dependent Variable: Fail Fitness Requirements

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Peer High School Fitness Score

-0.047**
(0.021)

-0.043**
(0.017)

-0.046***
(0.017)

-0.044**
(0.018)

Own High School Fitness Score

-0.064***
(0.004)

-0.061***
(0.004)

-0.062***
(0.004)

-0.062***
(0.004)

13,016

13,016

13,016

13,016

Includes individual controls?

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Includes year by semester & state of residence fixed effects?

No

No

Yes

Yes

Includes average peer SAT verbal, SAT math, academic
composite and leadership composite scores?

No

No

No

Yes

Observations

The dependent variable in each specification is the probability of failing the semi-annual fitness test or 1.5 mile run.
Standard errors multi-way clustered at the peer group and individual level are in parentheses. Each specification
controls for graduate class fixed effects. Individual-level controls include SAT verbal and math scores, academic and
leadership composite scores, and indicators for Black, Hispanic, Asian, female, recruited athlete, and preparatory
school attendance.
** Significant at the 5% level
*** Significant at the 1% level

23

Table 4: The Effect of the Least and Most Fit Peers on Own Fitness Outcomes
Variable

Physical
Fitness Score
(1)

Fail Fitness
Requirements
(2)

Proportion of Peers in Bottom Quintile of High School Fitness

-0.360***
(0.130)

0.105**
(0.041)

Proportion of Peers in Top Quintile of High School Fitness

0.062
(0.131)

-0.046
(0.038)

Physical
Fitness Score
(3)

Fail Fitness
Requirements
(4)

Peer High School Fitness Score * Below Average High School
Fitness Score

0.266***
(0.078)

-0.087***
(0.028)

Peer High School Fitness Score * Above Average High School
Fitness Score

-0.022
(0.080)

0.005
(0.018)

Physical
Fitness Score
(5)

Fail Fitness
Requirements
(6)

Proportion of Peers in Bottom Quintile of High School Fitness *
Below Average High School Fitness Score

-0.535***
(0.180)

0.176**
(0.069)

Proportion of Peers in Top Quintile of High School Fitness *
Below Average High School Fitness Score

0.256
(0.172)

-0.088
(0.061)

Proportion of Peers in Bottom Quintile of High School Fitness *
Above Average High School Fitness Score

-0.190
(0.193)

0.029
(0.041)

Proportion of Peers in Top Quintile of High School Fitness *
Above Average High School Fitness Score

-0.163
(0.192)

0.005
(0.043)

Own High School Fitness Score

0.418***
(0.013)

-0.062***
(0.004)

0.445***
(0.022)

-0.068***
(0.006)

0.445***
(0.022)

-0.068***
(0.006)

Observations

11,321

13,016

11,321

13,016

11,321

13,016

Includes individual and peer controls?

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Includes year by semester & state of residence fixed effects?

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Standard errors multi-way clustered at the peer group and individual level are in parentheses. Each specification controls for graduate class fixed effects. Individuallevel controls include SAT verbal and math scores, academic and leadership composite scores, and indicators for Black, Hispanic, Asian, female, recruited athlete,
and preparatory school attendance. Peer controls include peer SAT scores, peer high school composite scores, and peer leadership scores.
** Significant at the 5% level
*** Significant at the 1% level

24

