                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 COUNTRY RISK, FOREIGN BORROWING
                 AND THE SOCIAL DISCOUNT RATE IN
                    AN OPEN DEVELOPING ECONOMY



                        Sebastian Edwards



                      Working Paper No. 1651




              NATIONPJJ BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                           June 1985




This paper was presented at the Goldwater Conference, Arizona State
University, March 15—16, 1985. I am indebted to Dale Henderson, AL
Harberger and participants in seminars at Osaka University and the
University of California, Santa Barbara for helpful comments. The
research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in
International Studies and project in Productivity and Industrial
Change in the World Economy. Any opinions expressed are those of
the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
                                                    NBER Working Paper #1651
                                                    June 1985



                     Country Risk, Foreign Borrowing
                     and the Social Discount Rate in
                       an Open Developing Economy

                                    ABST RACT




          Most discussions on the social rate of discount have assumed that the

economy under consideration is isolated from the rest of the world, and that

there are no capital movements. This paper explicitly analyzes the

determination of the social rate of discount in a small open developing

economy. It is shown that under general conditions, the discount rate will be

a weighted average of the marginal return to capital in the private sector

 (n), the rate of time preference (r), and the marginal cost of foreign

indebtedness (it).   It    is also shown that unless the country faces an upward—

sloping supply curve for foreign funds the weights of p and r will be

zero. Finally, it is shown that if the country in question faces a foreign

borrowing constraint imposed from abroad, the social rate of discount becomes

equal to a weighted average of the domestic marginal return to capital and the

rate of time preferences. Data for a group of LDCs is then used to show that

financial markets have indeed attached a default country risk premium to

LDCs. This provides some evidence in favor of the hypothesis that developing

countries face an upward—sloping supply curve of foreign funds, and that, in

general, the social rate of discount should be a weighted average of

 p, r and it.   Finally,   some numerical examples are used to show that ignoring

the open economy aspects can result in a substantial overstatement of the

social rate of discount.




                                                       Sebastian Edwards
                                                       Department of Economics
                                                       U.C.L.A.
                                                       Los Angeles, CA 900214
                                                       (213) 825—lOll
CPDTA/disk SE1 /doc. foreign/14/214/85

         The definition of the "appropriate" social discount rate has been one

of the subjects more frequently discussed in the literature on social project

analysis. 1/ However, most of the competing candidates for "the" social rate

of discount have been derived assuming that the economy in question is in some

sense isolated from the rest of the world, and that there are no international

capital movements. 2/ Under these assumptions, it has been generally argued

that one dollar used in a public project has to come partially from a reduc-

tion in private investment and partially from an increase in private savings

(see, for example, Marglin, 1963b; Harberger, 1969a,b; Baumol, 1968; Dasgupta,

Marglin and Sen, 1972; Sjaastad and Wisecarver, 1977; and Lind, 1982). How-

ever, once the assumption of no international capital movements is relaxed,

there is a third source from which one dollar used in a public sector project

can be obtained: the international capital market. The rapid integration of

the world capital markets during the late 1970s and 1980s indicates that

ignoring this source of funds in the computation of the social rate of

discount can result in misleading decisions regarding public investment. The

policy implications of ignoring the role of foreign borrowing in computing the

social rate of discount can be particularly important in the case of devel-

Oping countries. Although these countries have borrowed significant amounts

from the international capital market in recent years, most computations of

the social rate of discount actually ignore this fact, and assume that there

is no international capital mobility. 3/

         The purpose of this paper is to formally incorporate into the

analysis of the social discount rate the fact that most countries have some

kind of access to the international capital market. In doing this, the
                                        —2—



relation between foreign borrowing, country risk and the social rate of

discount is emphasized. The paper also illustrates, using actual data from

two developing countries, how the traditional neglect of open economy aspects

can result in biased computations of the social discount rate. The plan of

the paper is as follows: Section I presents a brief review of the literature

on the social discount rate. Section II extends the model due to Sjaastad and

Wisecarver (1977) to the case of' an economy that has access to the world

capital market. This section also presents a brief discussion on the concept

of country risk, which is central to the adequate analysis of the social

discount rate in an open economy. In Section III, the determinants of the

country risk premium are empirically analyzed. It is shown, using data for 19

LDCs for years 1979 and 1980, that the country risk premium charged by the

international financial community to developing countries is positively

related to the debt—output ratio in the borrowing countries. In Section IV,

data from Chile and Costa Rica are used to illustrate how the incorporation of

open economy aspects can in practice affect actual computations of the social

discount rate in these countries. Finally, Section V contains some concluding

remarks.



I. The Social Rate of Discount: A Brief Review

           Traditionally, there have been a number of competing candidates for

the social rate of discount. Among the most popular, it is possible to

mention: the private rate of time preferences, the "social" rate of time

preferences, the marginal productivity of capital in the private sector, and a

weighted average of the rate of time preference and the marginal productivity

of capital in the private sector. 14/
                                                  —3—




           1.1       The Rate of Time Preferences (Private and Social)

          Proponents of the rate of time preferences have argued that since

social welfare depends on future streams of consumption, and r is the

intertemporal price of a unit of consumption, flows generated by a public

project should be discounted at the rate of time preferences. However, it has

often been argued —- most notably by Marglin (1963a) and Sen (1967) —-         that
due to the existence of external effects in consumption, there is a difference

between the private rate of time preferences and the "social" rate of time

preferences. If individuals' utility functions don't depend only on their

consumption now, but also on the consumption of their heirs, on the consump-

tion of others now, and on the consumption of others' heirs, the "social" rate

of time preferences (which incorporates these externalities) will be lower

than the private rate of time preferences. This proposition has been given

the name of "the isolation paradox," and was originally set forward by Sen

(1961) and later developed by Marglin (1963a) and Sen (1967). Recently Warr

and   Wright       (1981), however, have argued that even in an economy with

externalities of the kind suggested by the isolation paradox, the appropriate

social rate of discount is the private rate of time preferences.

          Most supporters of the social rate of time preferences have also

recognized that in the presence of distortions like corporate and personal

income taxes further adjustments should be made. In particular, it has been

argued that since investment in a public project displaces private investment

and private consumption, the initial outflow of capital should be valued using

a shadow price of public funds (a). According to this view, a public project

that yields a perpetuity should be undertaken if (see Marglin, 1963a):


               f   B(x,t)eY't   dt -   K(x)   0                                   (1)
                                      —14—




where r is the social rate of time preferences, B(x,t) is the net benefit from

a project of scale x in period t, K(x) is initial investment, and   is the

shadow price of public funds, defined as (see Marglin, 1963b, equation (3);

see also Dasgupta, Marglin and Sen, 1972, ch. 114):

            = o 2- + (1—0)                                                   (2)

where p is the marginal rate of return in the private sector, and 0 is the

fraction of private investment displaced by one dollar used in the public

project. On the other hand, (1—0) is the proportion of private consumption

displaced by one dollar spent in the public project. 5/



         1.2 The Marginal Rate of Return in the Private Sector

        An alternative view postulates that the appropriate social discount

rate should be the marginal rate of return to investment in the private sector

(see for example, Hirshlejfer, DeHaven and Miliman, 1960; Baumol, 1968; and

Nichols, 1969). Proponents of this view have generally argued, based on

efficiency grounds, that since the best alternative use of one dollar invested

in a public project is to invest it in the private sector, the minimum return

that should be required from government projects is the marginal rate of

return in the private sector p. 6/

        Some authors -- most notably Baumol, 1968 -- have recommended the use

of the private rate of return as a way to solve the "unavoidable indeterminacy

in the choice of [the social rate of discount]" (Baumol, 1968, p. 789).

Sjaastad and Wisecarver (1977), however, have argued that in the discussion On

the appropriate social rate of discount, the role of the private rate of

return has been reduced to being one component of different weighted average
                                        —5—




formulations. Recently, however, Stlglitz and Atkinson (1980) have used an

overlapping generations model to derive the social discount rate. In this

model, if "an optimal policy exists, [there are] identical individuals, all

pure profits are taxed away, [and there is] a completely flexible debt

policy        the social rate of discount is the private rate of return"

(Stiglitz and Atkinson, 1980, p. 478). Dasgupta, Marglin and Sen (1972) also

argued that assuming optimal growth, and a two—period model, the social rate

of discount can be approximated by the marginal return to capital in the

private sector.



         1.3 Weighted Average of r and p

         Harberger (1969a,b) and Sandmo and Dreze (1971) have argued that the

appropriate social rate of discount for public projects should be a weighted

average of the rate of time preferences (r) and the marginal rate of return in

the private sector. 7/ The main argument for this proposition is that one

dollar used in a public project displaces both private investment, In a

proportion A with an opportunity cost of p, and private consumption in a

proportion (1-A) with an opportunity cost of r. According to this view, the

required return of the public project should be enough to compensate both for

the displacement of private investment and for the reduction of private

consumption. The social discount rate is then defined as a weighted average

of p and r with weights of A and (1—A) respectively (see Harberger, l969a,b,

and Sandino and Dreze, 1971, for a detailed discussion). 8/

          w = Ap +    (l—A)r                                                 (3)

         If    there are distortions in the form of taxes, p and r will differ.

In particular, if i is the market rate of Interest, t    the rate of the
                                              —6—




corporation income tax arid t the rate of the personal income tax, we can

write:    p =   i/(l—T)   and r =   i(1—t).   It may be seen from equation (3), then,

that if there are no distortions (i.e., r             t =   0),   the. social discount rate

will be equal to the market rate of interest (w =             i   = p   =   r).   It may also be

noted from (3) that depending on the value of the weights A and (1-A), the

weighted average approach yields p and r as special cases (see Harberger,

1969a).

           The main insight of Harberger's and Sandmo and Dreze's analyses is

the interpretation of the weights A and (1-A) in the definition of                        in

equation (3). According to Harberger (1969a), assuming the existence of a

well—functioning capital market, one dollar extracted from this market to

finance a public project will produce a marginal increase in the market rate

of interest (i), generating an increase in both the pre—tax marginal rate of

return of the private sector (p) and on the after—tax rate of return on

private savings Cr). The increases in p and r, in turn, will result in

private investment and private consumption being displaced. Then, the weights

in (3) can be viewed as:


                   -      (I/i)                 —      (S/i)
                       (S/3i)(I/i)'       (1—A) -
                                                    (s/i)-(aI/i)
                                      •
             A =                                                                               14




where I is private investment and S is private savings.

           Sjaastad and Wisecarver (1977) have shown that for the case of

perpetuities, Marglin's approach —— which combines r as the discount rate

with      as the shadow cost of public funds ——        is   equivalent to the weighted

average view () of Harberger, Sandmo and Dreze. They have also shown that in

the case of a finite life project, if it is assumed that the depreciation is

not fully consumed, the weighted average approach w is equivalent to Marglin's

suggestion of using r and c.
                                          —7—




II. Foreign Borrowing and the Social Discount Rate in an Open Economy

           In this section, a simple model to compute the social rate of

discount in an economy that has access to the world capital market and can

borrow from abroad is presented. The model is an extension to the case of an

open economy of the model presented by Sjaastad and Wisecarver (1977). In

order to concentrate on the discussion of the social rate of discount with

foreign borrowing, the model presented in this section abstracts from a number

of other complications.

           Assume the case of a small open economy that has access to the world

capital market. Also, and in order to simplify the analysis, assume that all

shadow prices, except the discount rate, are equal to their market prices. In

this case it is important to make the following distinction between (real)

income (y) and (real) output (q):

           y = q — vD                                                        (5)

where D is the stock of foreign debt, and v is the (average) cost of this

debt. 9/

           Consider   the case of a public sector project that generates a

perpetuity. Assume that the project's initial investment is equal to

where, following the notation in Sjaastad and Wisecarver (1977) the operator

   denotes deviations of a variable from the path it would have followed in

the absence of the public sector project. As a consequence of this public

sector project, the following permanent change in income, and thus in

potential consumption, will result:

              =   1g    +   pI   — irLD
                                                                             (6)
                                                          —8—



where S is the realized rate of return on the public sector project, AI is

the amount of private investment displaced by the public project

(1P < 0), p is the marginal rate of return in the private sector, and it                       is
the expected marginal cost of additional foreign debt. It should be noted

that the (permanent) change in real output is q =                   61g   +


         Assuming, without loss of generality, that                           1; that a fraction

 I (possibly zero) of these funds is obtained at the expense of private

investment (i.e.,               =   —I), that a fraction B (also possibly zero) comes from

an increase in private savings (reduction of private consumption), and that a

fraction (1—I—B) of the investment funds are generated by an increase in

foreign indebtedness (D = 1              —   I   —
                                                     B), equation (6) can be written as:
             = iS — Yp —            (1—Y—8)ir                                                 (7)

         The general decision rule with respect to public sector projects is

that they should be undertaken if the net present value of the (potential)

increase in consumption, discounted at the (social) rate of time preferences

r, is equal to or greater than foregone consumption in the first period B

(see Sjaastad and Wisecarver, 1977, p. 516). Then, in our open economy case,

the project should be undertaken if:


          I [iS
                   -
                       Yp
                            -
                                (l_Y_B)ir]ert         dt        B                             (8)
          0

Since   is the return on the public sector project, the social discount rate

for the case of an open economy that can borrow abroad (u') is found by

solving (8) for the value of iS that assures us that equation (8) holds, at

least, with equality:

                  Yp + Br ÷ (1—Y—B)ir                w'                                       (9)
                                                    —9—




            From (9) it seems that the weighted average approach to the discount

rate, advocated by Harberger (1969a) and Sandmo and Dreze (1971) can be

extended in a straightforward fashion to the case of an open economy. Now,

instead of the social rate of discount being a weighted average of p and r, it

is a weighted average of p, r and it.                     However, in order to fully understand

equation (9), it is necessary to carefully analyze the meanings of weights

 1, B and (1—1—B). If, for example, I and B are equal to zero, as they may

very well be, the social discount rate will be equal to the (marginal) cost of

foreign debt to this particular country (it).                     This   result would have a

considerable impact on public sector investment decisions in most countries.

Typically, LDCs have used (real) social rates of discount around 15%, while

during most of the late 1970s they could obtain foreign funds in the world

capital market at real interest rates between 2% and 3%! On the other hand

it is also possible that 18=1, in which case the marginal cost of foreign

borrowing will play no role in the determination of the social rate of

discount.

            In the closed economy case I and 8, denoted as A and (1—A) in

Section 1.3, were defined in the following way:


                          —   3Ip   3i                        3S 3i

                     1=             3g          ;   8=        3i31
                          ______    —    3I3i              3S3i     —    3I   31



The notion behind these definitions is that in a well—functioning capital

market, the extraction of one dollar to fund a public project would place an

upward pressure on the market interest rate 1, and thus would displace

private investment and induce an increase in private savings (Harberger,

l969a, 1985). That is,
                                     —13—



partially from higher foreign borrowing. The shaded areas in figure 2

represent the welfare cost associated with the extraction of these funds from

the market to be used in the public sector project. The social opportunity

cost of these funds is a weighted average of these welfare areas. The weights

are given by (S1S0)/A, (10—11)/A, and (B1—B0), where A=(S1—S0)+(10—11)+(B1—

B0). It is important to stress that this result depends critically on the

assumption that p>g. If, on the contrary, it is assumed that borrowers and

lenders have the same perception of the probability of default, AC and MC

would be infinitely elastic.

         From figures 1 and 2, it is also clear that if there is credit

rationing from abroad (i.e., the country cannot borrow more than B0 per

period) the new demand for public funds will be met fully by additional

domestic private savings and displaced domestic private investment. Under

these circumstances, of course, the social rate of discount will be a weighted

average of p and r only. On the other hand, if the country in question faces

an infinitely elastic supply of foreign funds, or if the perceived

probabilities of default by borrowers and lenders are the same (i.e., p=g),

the welfare cost of the funds extracted to be used in the public sector

project will be equal to the amount of these funds times the cost of foreign

borrowing. This case Is illustrated in figure 3.

         To sum up, in the case of a small open economy, the social rate of

discount (w') will be different from the world interest rate only if it is

assumed that, due to the presence of a country risk premium, this small

country faces an upward-sloping curve for foreign funds or if borrowers and

lenders have a different perception of the underlying probability of default

or rescheduling.
         U

                  0




     U




             (1
0)




             D
                      (N
                      -x
            3
        0




C...'




 0)
U-




                -_


                C,,
                 C
      C)




C,)
a)

LL




           Cl)
                                     —17—



         The existence of a country risk premium and its relation to the level

of foreign debt is basically an empirical question that will be tackled in

detail in the next section. It should be noted, however, that a number of

researchers have failed to find a positive relation between the risk premium

and the level of indebtedness of borrowing countries. Feder and Just (1977),

for example, found a very low (approximately 0.1) and insignificant

coefficient for the debt—output ratio in their regression analysis. Moreover,

in their "preferred" equation, they simply dropped the debt—output ratio from

the estimation. Sachs (1981), on the other hand, found a nonsignificant

coefficient of 0.0008 for the debt—output ratio in his cross—section analysis

of the country risk premium. 17/



III. Foreign Borrowing and Country Risk: Some Empirical Evidence

         According to the preceding discussion, the weights of p and r in the

social discount rate equation (9) will be different from zero only if an

increase in public investment can affect the equilibrium domestic interest

rate 1. As was discussed, in an open economy with capital mobility, this

requires that:   (a) an increase in public borrowing have a positive effect on

the interest rate at which the country can borrow in the world capital market,

and (b) that lenders have a different (higher) perception of the probability

of default (or rescheduling) than borrowers. From an empirical point of view,

it is extremely difficult to figure out whether borrowers and lenders indeed

have different perceptions about the probabilities of default. For this

reason, the empirical discussion presented in this section deals with the less

ambitious question of whether the interest rates charged to developing

countries when they borrowed from abroad have been positively affected by the
                                              —18—



level of their foreign debt. A positive answer to this query is a necessary

(but not sufficient) condition for establishing that the weight of it —— the

marginal cost of foreign funds -—        in   equation (9) is different from zero. 18/

         In the case of a small economy that cannot affect the world rate of

interest, the cost of foreign funds obtained from abroad is formed by two

elements: (1) "the" (exogenously given) risk—free world interest rate (i*);

and (2) a country—risk premium (s) related to the probability of default

(p). This probability, in turn, is assumed to depend on a number of variables

including the level of indebtedness of the economy (see Sachs, 1983, and

Edwards, l9814a). In this section, the possible relation between the level of

indebtedness in LDCs and the country risk premium is empirically analyzed

using cross—section data for 19 developing countries for the years 1979 and

1980.

         Suppose that the probability of default as perceived by the lender

(p) depends positively on the debt—output ratio D, and on other variables,

like the debt service ratio, which can be summarized by a vector x. In order

to simplify the discussion, consider the case of a one—period loan, where in

case of default the foreign lender will completely lose the interest and

principal. If the world risk—free interest rate is given by i, the

equilibrium condition for a risk—neutral bank will be given by:


          (1—p) [1 +     (i*+s)]   =   (1+i*)                                      (11)



From here, this country's risk premium can be written as:


          S   = [1-2]k                                                             (12)
                                               —19—



where k     (1+1*). 19/ Since the probability of default p depends positively on

the debt-output ratio 0, the country in question will face an upward-sloping

supply curve for foreign funds. Moreover, according to (12), when the

probability of default approaches unity, the country risk premium s will

approach infinity. This means that developing countries will face an upward

sloping supply curve of foreign funds up to a certain point, and that as the

probability of default approaches unity, a credit ceiling will be reached. At

that point, the country in question will be completely excluded from the

world's credit markets. 20/

          In the empirical analysis, it is assumed that the world's risk—free

interest rate i can        be   approximated by the LIBOR rate, and that the risk

premium s is given by the spread over LIBOR charged to different countries on

foreign loans. 21/ Regarding the probability of default, I follow the standard

convention and assume that p has a logistic form:

                     exp
             =
                 i   +   exp                                                        (13)



where the y's are the determinants of the probability of default (including

the level of indebtedness) and the 8's are the corresponding coefficients.

Combining (13) and (12), and adding a random disturbance E,         the following
equation, which can be estimated using conventional methods, is obtained:


           log 5n =      log   k +    y.   +                                        (1I)

where the subindex n refers to the th country.

          A number of studies have suggested a list of possible determinants of

the probability of default. 22/ In the empirical analysis presented in this

paper, the following variables were considered as potential determinants of
                                     —20—




s:   (1) The debt—output ratio. As has been argued above, it is expected that

this variable will have a positive coefficient in the regression analysis.

This variable can be considered to be an indicator of the degree of solvency

of a particular country. The data on the debt—output ratio refers to public

and publicly guaranteed debt and were obtained from the World Bank Tables.

(2) Ratio of international reserves to GNP. This indicator measures the level

of international liquidity held by a country and as suggested in Edwards

(19814a), it is expected that its coefficient will be negative. This variable

was constructed from data obtained from the International Financial

Statistics. (3) Loan duration. This variable is measured in years, and

measures the (weighted) average maturity of loans granted to a particular

country. As has been shown by Feder and Ross (1982), its a priori sign in the

regression analysis is ambiguous. The weighted average was constructed from

data reported in Borrowing in International Capital Markets.   (14) Loan

volume. This variable shows the average value of each loan, and was obtained

from Borrowing in International Capital Markets. Also, a priori, its sign is

ambiguous. (5) Propensity to invest. This variable, measured as the gross

investment to GNP ratio, will tend to capture the country's perspectives for

future growth. As is shown in Sachs and Cohen (1982) and in Edwards (19814),

it should be negatively related to the spread. This indicator was obtained

from data reported in the World Tables and in World Development Report

 (various issues).   (6) Ratio of the current account to GNP. Sachs (1981) has

argued that this variable will be negatively related to the probability of

default. The data on this variable were obtained from World Tables and

 various issues of the World Development Report.
                                       —21 —




         The spread variable was constructed, in each year, as a weighted

average of spreads actually charged for public and publicly guaranteed loans

granted to each particular country, where the weights were given by the value

of each loan. The basic data were obtained from various issues of the World

Bank's Borrowing in International and   Capital   Markets. (See Edwards, 19814a,

for further details.)

         Equation (114) was estimated using two—stages least squares for 1979

and 1980. The reason for using this procedure is that the ratio of reserves

to GNP is an endogenous variable, that will be affected by the behavior of the

domestic interest rate. 23/ The results obtained from the estimation of (114)

are presented in Table 1. As may be seen, these results are quite interest-

ing. First, the most important finding in terms of this paper is that

Contrary to the previous results of Feder and Just (1977) and Sachs (1981), a

significantly positive coefficient for the debt—GNP ratio is found (see also

Edwards, 198'4a). In terms of the discussion in the preceding sections, this

result provides some evidence supporting the idea that LDCs face an upward—

sloping supply of foreign funds and that, consequently, their social rate of

discount will in fact be a weighted average of three terms. The fact that the

estimated semi—elasticity of s with respect to the debt—output ratio is fairly

large suggests that it   might carry a nontrivial weight in the computation of
the social rate of discount in an open economy. Another important implication

of these results is that they provide some evidence in favor of the hypothesis

recently advanced by Harberger (1983) and Edwards (19814b), among others, that

there are externalities In the process of LDCs borrowing. From a policy

perspective, this implies that these externalities could be dealt with by

imposing an optimal tax on foreign borrowing in these countries (see also the

discussion in Hanson, 19714).
                                      —22—




                                     TABLE 1

            The Determinants of Country Risk in Developing Countries:

                                  1979 and 1980

                           (Two Stages Least-Squares)




                                        1979                             1980

Intercept                              —0.116                           0.2214
                                      (—0.2146)                         (0.2314)

Debt/GNP                                0.651                            1.196
                                       (2.298)                          (3.001)

Reserves/GNP                           —0.1146                          —0.192
                                      (—1.953)                      (—1.560)

Loan Duration                           0.036                            0.0142
                                       (0.981)                          (0.486)

Loan Volume                            —0.001                        —0.001
                                      (—1.0145)                     (—0.963)

Irivestment/GNP                        —0.0216                          —0.039
                                      (—2.252)                       (—2.126)

Current Account/GNP                    —0.269                           —0.070
                                      (—0.3214)                      (—0.053)

                                        0.756                            0.690

F                                       3.87                             3.33




Note: The numbers in parentheses are t—statistics.
                                       —23—



        The results presented in Table 1 also indicate that there is a

marginally significant negative relation between the reserves—GNP ratio and

the spread over LIBOR. Also, as has been suggested by Sachs (1981) and

Edwards (198'a), the regression results indicate that there has been a

significantly negative relation between the perceived probability of default

and the average propensity to invest. The other possible determinants of' the

country—risk premium turned out to be insignificant for both years.



IV. The Social Discount Rate in an Open Developing Economy: Some Numerical

     Illustrations

            The purpose of this section is to Illustrate how the incorporation of

open economy considerations can affect the actual computation of the social

rate of discount. The discussion is carried out in general terms, even though

the values of some parameters are taken from actual LDC cases. In particular,

information on Costa Rica and Chile is used to provide some "realism" to the

computations presented in this section.

            Generally, the social rate of discount used for public investment

decisions in LDC5 has been computed using one of the closed economy approaches

reviewed in Section I. It is quite common to find that in the National

Planning Offices it is thought that the social rate of discount is a weighted

average of      and r. However, it is also common to find that a weight of zero

(or approximately zero) is assigned to r, and that in practice some estimated

value of p is used as the relevant rate of discount. This has been the case,

for example, in Costa Rica and Chile, where using a methodology based on

National Accounts data, the following (real) rates of discount have been

computed:       Costa Rica = 16.5% and p Chile = 13%.   2)4/
                                           —2 4 —




            By using these rates of discount, it was implicitly assumed that in

these countries, funds used in a public sector project only displaced private

investment. This, however, has not been the case. During the recent period,

public projects have resulted in an increase in foreign indebtedness in these

countries. Between 1977 and 1980, for example, Costa Rica had ample access to

the world capital market. During this period, Costa Rica's public sector

contracted credits in the Eurocurrency market for more than 600 million U.S.

dollars. The average premiums contracted on these credits were: 1977 =

1.750;    1978 =   1.O5;   1979   1.123; and 1980   1.180. If we use the percentage

change of the U.S. Wholesale Price Index as an indicator of world inflation,

the real cost of foreign borrowing for the years these credits were contracted

would have been: 1.93%, 2.05%, 0.6%, and 5.01%. These rates are

significantly lower than the 16% used as the social rate of discount by the

Costa Rican National Planning Office! The case of Chile is similar. Between

1977 and 1980, almost 2 billion dollars were obtained in Eurocurrency credits

to finance public sector projects. The average terms on these credits were:

1977, 1.984 points over LIBOR; 1978, 1.)452 points over LIBOR, 1979, 0.861

points over LIBOR, and 1980 0.923 points over LIBOR. 25/ Other LDCs have also

had ample access to the Eurocurrency credit market, as is reflected by the

long lists of credits to developing countries reported in the World Bank's

Borrowing in International Capital Markets.

           In order to illustrate how the assumption of access to the world

capital market can actually affect the computation of the social rate of

discount, consider the following case. Assume an elasticity of private
investment          with respect to p of —0.5 and an elasticity of supply of

savings        of 0.2. Also assume that p>g=O and that the elasticity of the
                                          —25—



supply of foreign funds (sf) is 0.5. The weights in the social rate of

discount equation (114) will then be; I = 0.142;      8 =   0.16 and
 (1—1—3) = 0.142.    Further assume that p = 16%, that r =     3%   and that

 it   = 6%. 26/ Then,

               = 0.142   x 16% + 0.16 x 3% + 0.142 x 6% = 9.72%

           This resulting social rate of discount (9.72%) is significantly lower

than the 16% used by the Costa Rica Planning Office. An interesting question

is to compare '     with   the closed economy estimate of a weighted average social

discount rate (w). Given the assumed elasticities, the weights of this closed

economy estimate would be A = 0.71 and (1—A) =      0.29,   and w will be equal to

13.5%. This is still significantly higher than the open economy result of

9.72%. These findings clearly show that ignoring the fact that most

developing countries are open economies that have some kind of access to the

world capital market can result in a computed social rate of discount that is

too high when compared to the correctly computed social discount rate.



V. Concluding Remarks

           In this paper, it has been argued that in an open economy that has

access to the world capital market, the social rate of discount is a weighted

average of the marginal return in the private sector (p), the rate of time

preferences Cr), and the marginal cost of foreign indebtedness (it).           It was
further argued that if a country cannot borrow all it wants at given world

interest rates, and the perceived probabilities of default by lenders and

borrowers differ, the weights of p and r will be zero, and the social rate of

discount will be equal to the cost of borrowing abroad.
                                      —26—




         However, if there is a country risk premium and the perceived

probabilities are different, the country in question will face an upward—

sloping supply curve for foreign funds, and public sector projects will affect

the relevant marginal cost of foreign indebtedness. In this case the social

discount rate is a weighted average of p, r and -it, and will generally be lower

than the closed economy weighted average of p and r.

         The empirical evidence presented in this paper suggests that there

has been a strong positive relationship between interest rate spreads charged

on international loans to developing countries and the level of foreign

indebtedness. This finding provides some support to the proposition that all

three weights in w' are different from zero. This presumption, however,

depends on the hypothesis that lenders have a higher perceived probability of

default than borrowers. Future research in the area, then, should be aimed at

devising ways to find out whether this is a reasonable hypothesis. Finally,

using realistic values for the relevant parameters, it was shown that the bias

in the computation of the social rate of discount when open economy aspects

are ignored can be substantial. In particular, it was shown that the closed

economy computations usually used in LDCs can overstate the social rate of

discount by as much as 65%.
                                     —27—



                                   Footnotes




1/ See, for example, Arrow and Kurz (1971), Baumol (1968), Dasgupta, Marglin

   arid Sen (1972), Ecksteln (1961), Harberger (1969a,b, 1985), Little and

   Mirrlees (19711), Marglln (1963a,b), Sandmo and Dreze (1971), Sen (1967),

   Squire and Van der Tak (1975), Sjaastad and Wisecarver (1977), Somers

    (1971), Warr and Wright (1981), and Lind (1982).

2/ An exception to this is the paper by Sandrno and Dreze (1971). Another

   group of papers, in the tradition of the international trade literature,

   have explicitly assumed the case of an open economy. However, in these

   papers capital is not allowed to move internationally. See, for example,

    Findlay and Wellisz (1976), and Srinivasan and Bhagwatl (1978).

3/ On the increasing use of the international capital market by LDCs see the

   World Bank World Development Report (1981). In the early 1980s, and as a

    consequence of the international debt crisis, L.DCs' access to interna-

    tional financial markets has been reduced. However, it is expected that

    during the foreseeable future, LDCs will still obtain substantial amounts

    of funds from the international financial markets. See, for example, the

    discussion in ClIne (1983).

t/ For a thorough review on the social rate of discount, see Chapter 1 in

    Lind (1982). All the papers in that volume refer to different issues

    related to the computation of the appropriate social rate of discount.

    However, as it has traditionally been the case, in these papers, open

    economy consideration are again ignored when discussing the computation of

    the social rate of discount.
                                    —28—



5/ This formulation assumes that all the net benefits from the project are

   consumed. If it is assumed that only a fraction of these benefit is

   consumed, and the rest is reinvested, the shadow cost of public investment

     ()   should be redefined. See Marglin (1963a) and Dasgupta, Marglin and

   Sen (1972, ch. 14). On the problem of reinvestment and the social rate of

   time preferences see also Mendelsohn (1981).

6/ This proposition, as most of the discussion in this paper, abstracts from

   the problem of risk aversion. On this issue see, for example, Bailey and

   Jensen (1972).

7/ Both Harberger and Sandmo and Dreze (as other authors) are reluctant to

   address the issue of consumption externalities and differences between the

   social and private rates of time preferences. For this reason in the rest

   of this paper no distinction will be made between them.

8/ Usher (1969), in a Comment to Baumol's (1968) article, also found that the

   social rate of discount lies between the rate of time preference and the

   rate of return in the private sector. It should be noticed, however, that

   in a recent paper, Stiglitz (1982) has argued that under certain

   conditions the social rate of discount may lie outside the values given by

   a linear combination of the rate of time preference and the private sector

   marginal rate of return.

9/ There is no a priori reason to assume that the average cost of the foreign

   debt will be equal to its marginal cost. In fact, the divergence between

   marginal and average cost of the foreign debt plays on important role in

   the discussion presented below. Notice that a simplifying assumption in

    (5) is that the same interest rate (v) applies to all foreign debt.

10/ Throughout this paper we will abstract from the problem of exchange risk.
                                          —29—



11/ On country risk see, for example, Eaton and Gersovitz (1981), Sachs and

    Cohen (1982), Sachs (1983) and Edwards (19814a,b).

12/ In a simple rational expectations setting lenders and borrowers will have

    the same perceived probability of default. However, if it is assumed that

    borrowers and lenders have access to a different information set the

    perceived probabilities will differ among them. In reality borrowers and

    lenders have different sets of information on which they condition their

    expectations. This justifies our assumption of different perceived

    probabilities of default.

13/ Assuming that in the case of default, both interest and principal are not

    paid back, in the one-period case, banks will be in equilibrium if

    (1+i*) =   (l+i°)(lp),   where i is the interest rate they charge for the

    loan. The expected average cost for the borrowing country (v), however,

    will depend on its actual cost ic and on the borrower's perceived

    probability of default (g):     (1÷v)        (1+ic)(1_g). By replacing ic in this

    expression, equation (10) is obtained.

—
                                                )[p'
14/ From (10) it can be seen that (where p' and g' are the derivatives of p
    and g with respect to D):      = (1     +                -   g'].    Thus, in rigor,


    a sufficient condition for dv/dDO is that p>g and p'
                                                                        (+j)g'.

    Notice, however, that even assuming that p=g, it is possible to obtain a

    cost of borrowing that depends positively on the level of foreign

    borrowing. This will be the case if only a fraction of the loan is

    expected to be lost in case of default (or rescheduling). If borrowers

    expect that in case of default they will not pay a smaller fraction of the

    loan than what lenders think they will lose, v will still be a positive

    function of 0.
                                          —30—




15/ This is an extension to the open economy case of the diagram in Harberger

    (1969a).

16/ In terms of the diagrammatic representation, it is also possible to start

   the analysis with a rightward shift of I. The final result, of course,

   will be the same.

17/ See, however, Edwards (1981ta).

18/ Of course, the sufficient condition is that the cost of borrowing

    increases with the level of indebtedness and that borrowers and lenders

   have different perceptions.

19/ If, alternatively, it is assumed that if default occurs only a fraction

       of interest and principal is lost, equation (12) will be given by

     s =   [(l—)p/(1   -
                           (l—4)pflk.   This case —— where only a fraction of the

    loan is lost ——    corresponds more closely to the real world cases of debt
    rescheduling. For an alternative way of deriving an equation similar to

    (12) see Feder and Just (1977).

20/ This corresponds to what has generally been assumed in theoretical

    discussions regarding the probability of default and country risk

    premium. See, for example, Eaton and Gersovitz (1981), Sachs and Cohen

    (1982) and Harberger (1983).

21/ The assumption that the spread over LIBOR captures the probability of

    default has some problems, since the cost of a loan also has some

    additional minor elements, like fees and commissions. Unfortunately it

    has not been possible to collect data on these components of the cost.

    Mills and Terrell (19814) have found that front-end fees added an average

    214 basis points to the spread charged to developing countries. An

    alternative way of empirically analyzing the determinants of country risk
                                                  —31—



    premium would be to look at the behavior of yields on developing

    countries' bonds. On this, see Edwards (1985).

22/ See, f or example, Feder and Just (1977), Sachs and Cohen (1982), Sachs

    (1983), Edwards (19814a).

23/ According to the theory of the demand for international reserves, the

    desired quantity of reserves will depend, among other things, on the

    opportunity cost of holding them. This opportunity cost, in turn, will be

    related to the domestic interest rate. See, for example, the discussions

    in Edwards (1983) and Frenke]. (1981). In the estimation of (13), the

    following instruments were used: the average propensity to import, the

    value of exports, the variability of exports and the other exogenous

    variables in the model. The countries included in the sample are:

    Argentina, Brazil, Colombia, Ecuador, Greece, Indonesia, Ivory Coast,

    Korea, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, Panama, Philippines, Portugal, Spain,

    Thailand, Uruguay, Venezuela and Yugoslavia.

24/ See OFIPLAN (1978) and Moran and Wagner (1971!).

25/ After the debt crisis, both of these countries have faced serious

    difficulties for borrowing from abroad. However, the exercise presented

    in this section is still valid, in the sense that it illustrates how the

    social rate is affected in an open economy situation.

26/ From the definition of the weights in equation (13) it is clear that

      =          +
                     Cf.
                           —
                               rfl and      B =   [E/(c    +        — ru)]. Since   11   is    the

   marginal cost of borrowing from abroad, the assumed value 6% is consistent

   with an average (real) cost of borrowing of 2% and the assumed elasticity

   of foreign borrowing           =   0.5    [i.e., 6% =       2%   (1 +       Notice         that an

   average real cost of borrowing of 2% is high for historical standards.
                                —32—



Only in the recent period world real interest rates have increased

significantly. Finally the assumed value of    is consistent with the

semi-elasticity of around 0.6 and 1.2 found in the empirical analysis of

Section .
                                       —33—




                                     References



Arrow, K.J. and M. Kurz. Public Investment, The Rate of Return and Optimal

    Fiscal Policy. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1970.

Baily, M.J. and M. Jensen. "Risk and the Discount Rate for Public Investment"

    in M.C. Jensen (ed.) Studies in the Theory of Capital Markets. New

    York: Praeger, 1972.

Baumol, William J. "On the Social Rate of Discount." American Economic

    Review 58(14), (September 1968), pp. 788—802.

Cline, W. International Debt and the Stability of the World Economy.

    Washington, D.C.: M.I.T. Press for the Institute for International

    Econorics, 1983.

Dasgupta, P., A. Sen and S. Marglin. Guidelines f or Project Evaluation.

    Geneva: UNIDO, 1972.

Eaton, J. and M. Gersovitz. Poor Country Borrowing in Private Financial

    Markets and the Repudiation Issue. Princeton Studies in International

    Finance No. 147 (1981).

Edwards, S. "The Demand for International Reserves and Exchange Rate

    Adjustments: The Case of LDCs 19614—1972." Economica, 50 (August 1983),

    pp. 269—80.

__________     "LDCs' Foreign Borrowing and Default Risk: An Empirical

    Investigation." American Economic Review 714 (September 19814a), pp.

    726—314.


__________     "The Role of International Reserves and Foreign Debt in the

    Process of External Adjustments" in International Monetary Fund (ed.),

    Adjustment Conditionality and International Financing.

    Washington, D.C.: IMF, 19814b.
                                       —314—




__________     "Country Risk and Developing Countries' Foreign Borrowing: An
    Empirical Analysis of the Loans and Bonds Markets." Unpublished

    manuscript, U.C.L.A. (1985).

Feder, G. and R. Just. "An Analysis of Credit Terms in the Eurodollar

    Market." European Economic Review 9 (May 1977), pp. 221—143.

Feder, G. and K. Ross, "Risk Assessments and Risk Premiums in the Eurodollar

    Market," Journal of Finance 37    (June    1982), PP. 679—91.

Findlay, R. and S. Wellisz. "Project Evaluation, Shadow Prices and Trade

    Policy." Journal of Political Economy 814(3), (June 1976), pp. 5143—52.

Frenkel, J. "International Liquidity and Monetary Control" in George

    von Furstenbergen (ed.), International Money and Credit: The Policy

    Roles. Washington, D.C.: IMF, 19814.

Hanson, J.A. "Optimal International Borrowing and Lending." American

    Economic Review 611 (September 19714), pp. 616—30.

Harberger, A.C. "The Social Opportunity Cost of Public Funds" in The Discount

    Rate in Public Investment Evaluation. Denver, Colorado: 1969a.

               "Professor Arrow on the Social Discount Rate" in G.G. Sommers and

    W.D. Woods (eds.) Cost-Benefit Analysis of Manpower Policies. (Industrial

    Relations Center, Queens University 1969b).

__________     "On Country Risk and the Social Cost of Foreign Borrowing by

    Developing Countries." Unpublished manuscript (l976a).

__________     "On the Determinants of Country Risk." Unpublished manuscript

    (1976b).

__________     "Vignettes   on the World Capital Market." American Economic

    Review Proceedings 70 (May 1980), pp. 331—37.
                                        —35—




__________   "Welfare Consequences of Capital Inf lows." Paper presented at

    the Conference on Economic Liberalization: Adjustment during the

    Transition. Washington, D.C.: The World Bank, October 1983.

__________   "Reflections    on Social Project Evaluation" in Pioneers in

    Development (Vol. II), edited by the World Bank, forthcoming 1985.

Hirshielfer, J., J. DeHaven and J. Milliman. Water Supply: Economics,

    Technology and Policy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1960.

Lind, R.C. (ed.). Discounting for Time and Risk in Energy Policy.

    Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1982.

Little, I.M.D. and   J.   Mirrlees. Project Appraisal and Planning for Developing

    Countries. New York: Basic Books, 197LL.

Marglin, S. "The Social Rate of Discount and the Optimal Rate of Savings."

    Quarterly Journal of Economics 77(1), (February 1963a), pp. 95—111.

__________   "The Opportunity Cost of Public Investment," Quarterly Journal of

    Economics 77(2), (May 1963b), pp. 274—89.

Mendelson, R. "The Choice of Discount Rates for Public Projects." American

    Economic Review 71(1), (March 1981), pp. 239—141.

Mills, R.H. and H.S. Terrell. "The Determination of Front—End Fees on

   Syndicated Eurocurrency Credits." International Finance Discussion Papers

    No. 250, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 19814.

Moran, E. and G. Wagner. "Estamacion de la Tasa de Retorno del Capital en

    Chile." Cuadernos de Economia (April 19714), pp. 3957.

Nichols, A. "On the Social Rate of Discount: Comment." American Economic

   Review 59(5), (December 1969), pp. 909—11.

OFIPLAN. "Metodologia Para el Calculo de la Tasa Social de Reformo del

   Capital en Costa Rica." San Jose, Costa Rica: 1978.
                                         —36—




Sachs,   J. "Macroeconomic Adjustment and the Current Account during the

    1970s." Washington, D.C.: Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1981,

    pp. 201—68.

              "Theoretical Issues in International Borrowing." NBER Working

    Paper No. 1189 (August 1983).

Sachs, J. and D. Cohen. "LDCs Borrowing with Default Risk." NBER Working

    Paper No. 925 (July 1982).

Sandmo, A. and J. Dreze. "Discount Rates for Public Investment in Closed and

    Open Economies." Economica 38(152), (November 1971), pp. 395—1412.

Sen, A.K. "On Optimizing the Rate of Savings." Economic Journal 71 (283),

    (September 1961) pp. 1479—96.

__________     "Isolation,   Assurance and the Social Rate of Discount."

    Quarterly Journal of Economics 81 (322), (February 1967) pp. 112—214.

Sjaastad, L. and D. Wisecarver. "The Social Cost of Public Finance," Journal

    of Political Economy 85(3), (June 1977) pp. 513—148.

Somers, H.M. "On the Demise of the Social Discount Rate." Journal of Finance

    26(2), (May 1971), pp. 565—78.

Squire,   L. and H. van der Tak. Economic Analysis of Projects. Baltimore:

    Johns Hopkins University Press, 1979.

Stiglitz, J. "The Rate of Discount for Benefit—Cost Analysis and the Theory

    of the Second Best" in R.C. Lind (ed.) Discounting for Time and Risk in

    Energy Policy. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1982.

Stiglitz, J. and A. Atkinson. Lectures on Public Economics. New York:

    McGraw—Hill (1980).

Usher, D. "On the Social Rate of Discount: Comment." American Economic

    Review 59(5), (December 1969) pp. 925—29.
                                     —37--




Warr, P. and B. Wright. "The Isolation Paradox and the Discount Rate for
    Benefit—Cost Analysis." Quarterly Journal of Economics 96(1), (February

    1981), pp. 129—k16.

The World Bank. World Development Report 1981. New York and Oxford: Oxford

    University Press, 1981.
