                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                 LIQUIDITY TRAPS:
                      AN INTEREST-RATE-BASED EXIT STRATEGY

                                    Stephanie Schmitt-Grohé
                                         Martín Uribe

                                       Working Paper 16514
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w16514


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2010




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Stephanie Schmitt-Grohé and Martín Uribe. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Liquidity Traps: An Interest-Rate-Based Exit Strategy
Stephanie Schmitt-Grohé and Martín Uribe
NBER Working Paper No. 16514
November 2010
JEL No. E31,E52

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper analyzes a potential strategy for escaping liquidity traps. The strategy is based on an augmented
Taylor-type interest-rate feedback rule and differs from usual specifications in that when inflation
falls below a threshold, the central bank temporarily deviates from the traditional Taylor rule by following
a deterministic path for the nominal interest rate. This path reaches the intended target for this policy
instrument in finite time. The policy we study is designed to raise inflationary expectations over time
while at the same time maintaining all of the desirable local properties of the Taylor principle in a
neighborhood of the intended inflation target. Importantly, the effectiveness of the potential exit strategy
studied in this paper does not rely on the existence of an accompanying fiscalist (or non-Ricardian)
fiscal stance.


Stephanie Schmitt-Grohé
Department of Economics
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
stephanie.schmittgrohe@columbia.edu

Martín Uribe
Department of Economics
Columbia University
International Affairs Building
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
martin.uribe@columbia.edu
1    Introduction
The United States is in a liquidity trap. The short-term nominal interest rate has been
virtually zero since December 2008 and the rate of inflation has been falling ever since.
More importantly, expansionary monetary policy whether of the traditional type, limited by
the zero bound on nominal rates, or of the nontraditional type, also known as quantitative
easing, appears to have lost traction. A number of policymakers, academics, and economic
observers, are increasingly concerned about the possibility that the U.S. economy will become
stuck in a deflationary equilibrium like the one observed in Japan over the past two decades.
   The issue of whether deflation is harmful or beneficial to the economy is controversial.
Some argue that deflation is desirable because it minimizes the opportunity cost of holding
money. In turn, this argument goes, higher money holdings are welfare increasing because
they ameliorate the frictions involved in the transaction of goods, services, and financial
assets. The strongest version of this argument is known as Friedman’s rule, and calls for
targeting a long-run level of deflation equal to the long-run level of the real interest rate.
On the other hand, in a world in which downward nominal rigidities, particularly in wages,
are pervasive, deflation has the potential of creating persistent disequilibrium in markets
for goods and factors of production. As a result, deflation leads to high and persistent
unemployment and under utilization of other factors of production. It is our view that the
historical record suggests that the negative effects of deflation outweigh the positive ones.
Therefore, throughout this paper we will take as given that the deflationary equilibrium is
undesirable and that a benevolent central bank should aim at fighting deflationary pressures.
   A counterintuitive aspect of liquidity traps is that many central economic relationships
that both economists and the general public hold as timeless truth cease to be valid and
might indeed reverse sign. One such reversal of sign concerns the relationship between
tightening of interest rates and inflationary expectations in he short run. During normal
times, that is, when the economy is not in or heading toward a liquidity trap, it is reasonable
to expect that, in the short run, the primary effect of an increase in nominal interest rates
is a decline in inflationary expectations via a fall in aggregate demand. Similarly, under
normal circumstances, a reduction of the nominal interest rate tends to boost short-run
inflationary expectations through an elevated level of aggregate spending. In sharp contrast,
in a liquidity trap, the sign is reversed. Low interest rates are not accompanied by high
levels of inflation but rather by falling and even negative inflation. Moreover, because the
economy is already inundated by liquidity, a fall in interest rates has no longer a stimulating
effect on aggregate demand. This part of the reversal of signs is not too controversial. The
experience of Japan in the past two decades as well as the recent economic performance of


                                              1
the United States and other developed countries seems to suggest that zero nominal interest
rates are not doing much to push expected inflation or aggregate demand higher. The central
premise of this paper is that the reversal of sign in the relationship between interest rates
and expected inflation also operates in the upward direction. That is, that in a liquidity
trap, an increase in nominal rates tends to raise inflationary expectations without further
depressing aggregate spending. The reason why this premise may be difficult to digest is
also empirical. Guided by the short-run relationship between nominal rates and inflationary
expectations that prevails during normal times, no central bank dares to raise interest rates
when the economy is in a liquidity trap out of fear of exacerbating the crisis. We believe,
for example, that this factor explains in part why the Bank of Japan has not allowed its
short-term nominal interest rate to rise above fifty basis points in the past fifteen years.
   In summary, the central premise of this paper is that while during normal times the
short-run relationship between interest rates and expected inflation is dominated by the
liquidity effect, during a liquidity trap this relationship is driven by the Fisher effect. Based
on this premise, any policy that is to succeed in raising inflationary expectations must be
associated with a credible increase in nominal rates. This argument is not independent of
the assumed fiscal regime. We are implicitly assuming that the policy regime in place is
Ricardian or non fiscalist. For we believe that this is the case of greatest empirical relevance
around the developed world. Of course, if one is willing to drop the assumption of Ricardian
fiscal policy, then there exist ways to lift the economy out of deflation that may not involve
the raising of the nominal interest rate.
   This paper analyzses a potential strategy for escaping liquidity traps based on an aug-
mented Taylor-type interest-rate feedback rule that differs from usual specifications in that
when inflation falls below a threshold, the central bank temporarily deviates from the tradi-
tional Taylor rule by following a deterministic path for the nominal interest rate that reaches
the intended target for this policy instrument in finite time. We embed this augmented
interest-rate rule in a simple model in which the combination of a Taylor rule, the zero
bound on nominal interest rates and Ricardian fiscal policy opens the door to self-fulfilling
deflations ending in a liquidity trap. This analysis follows closely the work of Benhabib,
Schmitt-Grohé, and Uribe (2001). The interest-rate policy we analyze sets a time-increasing
floor on inflationary expectations while at the same time maintaining all of the desirable
local properties of the Taylor principle in a neighborhood of the intended inflation target.
Section 4 shows that the modified Taylor rule we analyze succeeds in lifting inflationary ex-
pectations to the level consistent with the central bank’s inflation target. Section 5 is central
to our argument. For it puts the interest-rate-based exit strategy we analyze into context
by highlighting the policy goals that can and cannot be attained through its application and


                                               2
stressing the requirements to make it credible.


2     The Model
For simplicity, we develop the central argument of this paper in the context of an endowment
economy with flexible prices. This simplification allows us to focus sharply on the Fisher
effect, which we believe is at the heart of the ongoing deflationary pressures in the U.S.
economy. A downside of the assumption of price flexibility is that it implies that deflations
are costless, which, as argued in the introduction, appears to be highly counterfactual. We
leave for future research the task of enriching the theoretical framework with downward
nominal rigidities.


2.1    Households
Consider an economy populated by a large number of identical households with preferences
described by the lifetime utility function
                                            ∞
                                            X
                                                  β tU(ct ),                                 (1)
                                            t=0


where ct denotes consumption of a single perishable good, and β ∈ (0, 1) denotes the subjec-
tive discount factor. The function U is a period utility index and is assumed to be strictly
increasing and strictly concave. Each period, households receive a constant endowment of
goods denoted y and pay lump-sum taxes in the amount τt measured in real terms. In ad-
dition, they have access to one-period nominal bonds that pay the gross rate of return Rt
when held between periods t and t + 1. The household’s sequential budget constraint is then
given by
                              Pt ct + Bt + Pt τt = Rt−1 Bt−1 + Pt y.                         (2)

Household’s borrowing is limited by the following no-Ponzi-game constraint:

                                            Bt+j
                                      lim Qj−1      ≥ 0.                                     (3)
                                           k=0 Rt+k
                                      j→∞


The household chooses paths {ct , Bt}∞
                                     t=0 for consumption and bond holdings to maximize (1)
subject to (2) and (3). The associated first-order conditions are (2), (3) holding with equality,
and
                                                     Rt 0
                                    U 0 (ct ) = β        U (ct+1 ),                          (4)
                                                    πt+1


                                                    3
where πt ≡ Pt /Pt−1 denotes the gross rate of inflation in period t.


2.2    The Government
The budget constraint of the government is given by

                                    Pt τt + Bt = Rt−1 Bt−1 .

Fiscal policy is assumed to be passive (or Ricardian) in the sense that the government adjusts
lump-sum taxes to ensure fiscal solvency regardless of the path of the price level. A simple
example of such policy, which we adopt in this paper, is one in which τt is set so that Bt = 0
at all times. That is, τ0 = R−1 B−1 /P0 and τt = 0 for all t > 0, where B−1 and R−1 are
exogenously given.
    The paper has two novel elements. First, unlike most of the existing literature on avoiding
liquidity traps, the class of fiscal policies we have specified cannot serve the purpose of
avoiding liquidity traps by promising fiscal irresponsibility to the point of fiscal insolvency
should the economy find itself trapped in a deflationary environment. Second, we assume
that the central bank follows an interest-rate rule that sometimes feeds from current inflation
and sometimes does not. Specifically, the interest-rate policy takes the form
                                      (
                                          RT (πt )      if Ht < Lt
                               Rt =         X
                                                                     .                       (5)
                                          R (Lt )       otherwise

The function RT (πt) represents the standard Taylor-type interest-rate feedback rule. Specifi-
cally, this function is assumed to be continuous, differentiable, nondecreasing, weakly convex,
and greater than or equal to unity. It satisfies the steady-state Fisher equation at the central
bank’s inflation target, which we denote by π H . Formally, we have that

                                                        πH
                                          RT (π H ) =      .
                                                         β

In addition, we assume that it satisfies the Taylor criterion at the inflation target, that is,
                                            0
                                       RT (π H ) H
                                                 π > 1.
                                       RT (π H )

We assume that there is an inflation threshold π L < π H at which the central bank abandons
the traditional Taylor rule in favor of a deterministic path of the interest rate. Under this
exit strategy, the interest rate is governed by the nondecreasing function RX (k) > 1, where


                                                 4
k takes integer values between 0 and tx. In turn, tx is a constant denoting the number of
periods in which the central bank wishes the interest rate to reach its intended target, which
we denote by RH ≡ π H /β. The function RX (k) satisfies Rx (tx ) = RH .
     The variable Ht denotes the number of periods elapsed since the inflation rate was last
observed to be greater than or equal to the inflation target π H . This definition implies that
πt−Ht ≥ π H and that πt−k < π H for any 0 ≤ k < Ht . The law of motion of Ht is given by
                                       (
                                           0               if πt ≥ π H
                                Ht =                                     ,                     (6)
                                           Ht−1 + 1        otherwise

for t ≥ 0, given H−1 ≥ 0. The function Lt denotes the number of periods elapsed since the
rate of inflation was last observed to fall from a value higher than π L to a value lower than
or equal to π L . Thus, we have that πt−Lt ≤ π L < πt−Lt −1 . The law of motion of Lt is given
by                                 (
                                       0            if πt ≤ π L < πt−1
                            Lt =                                             ,                 (7)
                                       Lt−1 + 1     otherwise
for t ≥ 0, given L−1 ≥ 0 and π−1 .


2.3     Equilibrium
In equilibrium, the goods market clears

                                                 ct = y.

This means that consumption is constant over time. Combining this expression with the
consumer’s Euler equation (4), yields

                                               πt+1 = βRt.                                     (8)

    The market clearing condition and the fact that, by the assumed fiscal regime, Bt = 0
for all t imply that both the sequential budget constraint of the household and the no-Ponzi-
game constraint hold with equality at all times.
   A perfect-foresight equilibrium is a set of sequences {Rt , πt, Ht , Lt }∞
                                                                            t=0 satisfying (5)-(8),
given initial conditions L−1 , H−1 ≥ 0 and π−1 .
     Before characterizing equilibrium dynamics under the interest-rate-based exit strategy,
we briefly review the inflation dynamics under a standard Taylor rule.




                                                   5
                            Figure 1: Inflation Dynamics Under a Taylor Rule


                       πH




                     πt+1




                                           45o Line →




                                                                 ← β RT(πt)




                      πLL


                              πLL                           πt                πH




3       Inflation Dynamics Without An Exit Strategy
A perfect foresight equilibrium under the standard Taylor rule is a pair of sequences {Rt , πt}
satisfying (8) and the Taylor-type interest-rate feedback rule

                                               Rt = RT (πt ),                                          (9)

where the function RT (πt) has the properties presented in the previous section.
   Combining equilibrium conditions (8) and (9) yields the following first-order difference
equation governing the equilibrium dynamics of inflation:

                                            πt+1 = βRT (πt ).                                         (10)

Figure 1 displays the graph of this dynamic equation. The assumed form of the function
RT (πt ) guarantees that the intended inflation target π H is a deterministic steady-state solu-
tion to equation (10). That is, πt = π H satisfies equation (10). But, as shown in Benhabib,
Schmitt-Grohé, and Uribe (2001), the existence of a lower bound on the nominal interest
rate gives rise to a second, unintended, steady-state level of inflation, which we denote by
π LL .1 That is, πt = π LL for all t is also a solution to (10). The unintended steady state π LL
    1
    This second steady state emerges not only in flexible-price, cashless, endowment economies like the one
analyzed here, but also in sticky-price, monetary, production environments. See Benhabib, Schmitt-Grohé,
and Uribe (2001) for details.



                                                        6
is lower than its intended counterpart π H and possibly less than unity, implying steady-state
deflation.
    In the vicinity of the intended steady state π H , the equilibrium dynamics of inflation are
described by the linear difference equation

                                       π̂t+1 = αH π̂t ;   αH > 1,

where π̂t ≡ (πt − π H )/π H denotes the proportional deviation of inflation from its intended
                       0
target and αH ≡ RT (π H )π H /RT (π H ). The fact that αH is greater than unity follows from
our assumption that the function RT (πt ) satisfies the Taylor principle at πt = π H . Noting
that πt is a non-predetermined variable, this expression implies that πt = π H is indeed the
unique local equilibrium. For it is the only equilibrium path that remains forever bounded
in a small neighborhood around π H .
       But there are many other, unintended, perfect-foresight equilibria. Of empirical rele-
vance for understanding the current predicament of the U.S. economy are inflation paths
that originate close to but below the intended inflation target π H . As can be seen from
figure 1, these inflation paths are descending and converge to the unintended steady state
π LL . The resulting dynamics contain all of the essential elements of a liquidity trap. For the
central bank finds itself fighting deflation by lowering nominal rates only to fuel the ongoing
deflationary process. The end point of these dynamics is the unintended low inflation rate
π LL . And because π LL represents a steady state of this economy, the inflation rate can
remain at this low unintended level forever.2
   A central policy question is whether an economy whose central bank is committed to
fighting deflation with low nominal interest rates, as is the case in our theoretical example,
in which the monetary authority insists in adhering to a Taylor rule, can lift itself out of the
liquidity trap. The answer is that a spontaneous recovery is highly unlikely in the context
of our model. The reason is that the steady state π LL is dynamically stable. To see this,
note from figure 1 that the graph of the difference equation (10) has a slope less than unity
at π LL. As a result, any inflation path originating above π LL but below π H will spiral down
to π LL.3
   2
    In this model, there are other unintended equilibria in which the economy embarks in a self-fulfilling
hyperinflation. See Loyo (1999) for a study of this case.
  3
    Of course, there is the possibility that the inflation rate jumps unexpectedly exactly to π H .




                                                    7
4     Inflation Dynamics With the Exit Strategy
Under the interest-rate-based exit strategy given in equation (5), the monetary authority
abandons the Taylor rule temporarily once the inflation rate falls below a threshold π L . At
this point it follows a deterministic path for the nominal interest rate for a finite and well
defined period of time ending at the intended interest-rate level RH . At this point, interest-
rate policy switches back to the standard Taylor rule RT (πt ). Perfect-foresight dynamics are
determined by equations (5) and (8).
    We illustrate the dynamics of inflation invoked by the interest-rate-based exit strategy by
means of a numerical example. We parameterize our simple model following Bullard (2010)
who uses a Taylor rule of the form:

                                        a
                            Rat = AeBπt ;       A = 0.005015; B = 2.75,

where πta and Rat are the inflation rate and the nominal interest rate implied by the Taylor
rule both expressed in percentage points at an annual rate. Noting that in our model both
Rt and πt are expressed in gross rates per quarter (so that, for example, an interest rate of 4
percent per year and an inflation rate of 2 percent per year correspond to Rt = 1.0099 and
πt = 1.0050), the Taylor rule used by Bullard corresponds to setting
                                                              1/4
                                 T            A B(πt4 −1)100
                               R (πt ) = 1 +     e                    .
                                             100

We set the parameter β equal to 0.9951/4 , which corresponds to a subjective discount factor
of half a percentage point per year, to match Bullard’s calibration of a long-run real interest
rate of 50 basis points. This parameterization implies an intended steady state in which the
inflation rate, π H , is 2.3 percent per year and the nominal interest rate, RH , is 2.8 percent per
year. In addition, the assumed parameter values and functional forms induce an unintended
steady state characterized by an inflation rate, π LL , slightly above -0.5 percent per year and
a nominal interest rate slightly above zero. We assume that the inflation threshold at which
the central bank switches to the exit strategy, π L, is -0.25 percent per year. In general, the
determination of this threshold should be guided by two considerations. On the one hand,
it should be low enough to allow the Taylor principle to be operative in a sufficiently large
neighborhood around the intended steady state π H . On the other hand, the threshold should
be high enough to avoid too high levels of deflation once the economy slips into a self-fulfilling
liquidity trap. Finally, the deterministic interest-rate rule, RX (k), which the central bank
applies during the exit transition sets the nominal interest rate at 25 basis points per year


                                                   8
       Figure 2: Inflation Dynamics Under The Interest-Rate-Based Exit Strategy
                               2.5

                                             With Exit Strategy
                                             Without Exit Strategy
                                2




                               1.5




                                1
                  Inflation




                               0.5




                                0




                              −0.5




                               −1
                                     0   5                10                15   20   25
                                                                 quarters




for 8 quarters and then increases it by 25 basis points per year every quarter until reaching
the intended interest-rate target of 2.8 percent per year.
   The inflation dynamics implied by our calibrated model are displayed in figure 2. In
period 0, perhaps due to some unanticipated revision in expectations, the inflation rate falls
to 2.2 percent per year, a value slightly below the intended target of 2.3 percent per year. In
response to this decline in πt, the central bank, following the Taylor rule, aggressively lowers
the nominal interest rate, thereby validating people’s expectations of lower future inflation.
In this way, a deflationary trajectory is set in motion. If the central bank insists in adhering
to the Taylor principle, the economy falls into a liquidity trap with negative inflation and a
nil nominal interest rate, as depicted by the broken line in figure 2. In the perfect foresight
equilibrium, the economy remains in this deflationary situation as long as monetary policy
continues to follow the Taylor rule. By contrast, under the exit strategy, shown with a solid
line, once the rate of inflation falls below the threshold of -0.25 percent, the central bank
announces a monetary program whereby it keeps the interest rate at a low level of 0.25
percent for 2 years and then begins to raise it slowly by 0.25 percent each quarter until the
intended level of 2.8 percent is reached. By the Fisher effect, expected inflation mimics the
path of the nominal interest rate. As a result, inflation stays low for two years and then
starts climbing gradually until it reaches its intended target of 2.3 percent after about five
years.
   The next section, which we regard as the one containing the main contribution of this
paper, places the result obtained here in context.


                                                                9
5     Discussion
The results derived thus far raise two fundamental questions: One is what monetary policy
objectives can and cannot be achieved via the interest-rate-based exit strategy we analyze.
The second question has to do with the requirements for the analyzed strategy to be credible.
We tackle these issues in turn.


5.1    Avoiding Self-Fulfilling Deflations
As argued by Benhabib, Schmitt-Grohé, and Uribe (2001), Taylor rules can give rise to
expectations-driven dynamics in which inflation and nominal rates fall to undesirably low
levels. As illustrated in figure 2, the exit strategy analyzed in this paper cannot protect
the economy from such unintended dynamics. For instance, in the economy studied in this
paper, nothing can prevent the inflation rate from falling from the intended steady state
π H to the low level π L . Put differently, the exit strategy we analyze does not eliminate
the inflation indeterminacy inherent in models with a Taylor rule, a zero bound on nominal
rates, and Ricardian fiscal policy. What the interest-rate rule developed in this paper does
ensure, however, is a mechanism to generate a lower bound on inflation expectations, and,
more importantly, to lift these expectations back up to a level consistent with the intended
inflation target.


5.2    Requirements on the Accompanying Fiscal Regime
A significant departure of this paper from the existing literature on avoiding liquidity traps,
notably Benhabib, Schmitt-Grohé, and Uribe (2002), is the assumed fiscal policy. In the
related literature liquidity traps are ruled out by making them fiscally unsustainable. In
general, the mechanism invoked by the related literature works as follows: When the economy
falls into a deflationary spiral, falling nominal prices lead to an increase in the real value
of outstanding nominal government liabilities that is not met by an equivalent increase
in government revenues, because the government is assumed to follow an active, or non-
Ricardian fiscal stance. By contrast, in our formulation the fiscal authority ensures fiscal
solvency at all times and independently of the path of nominal prices. Instead, the central
bank avoids being caught for extended periods of time at the liquidity trap by acting directly
on inflationary expectations via the full exploitation of the Fisher effect.




                                              10
5.3    Absence of Feedback During the Exit Transition
Central to the exit strategy we analyze is that the monetary authority breaks with the
feedback of inflation to interest rates. For it is precisely this feedback that causes the
economy to fall into a self-fulfilling deflation in response to an initial loss of confidence on
the part of the private sector. By stubbornly pursuing a deterministic path for the nominal
interest rate leading to the intended target RH , the central bank acts as a coordinator of
expectations away from the liquidity trap and toward the intended target. A further point
that is deliberately made in figure 2 is that the exit strategy does not require an initial
aggressive tightening for it to work. The central bank may choose to keep interest rates low
for a protracted period of time and only then start raising them gradually toward the target
level. Of course, the speed at which the economy gets out of the liquidity trap depends on
the shape of the interest-rate path during the exit transition. For instance, in figure 2 the
inflation rate remains low, indeed negative, during the first two years of the exit transition
because the central bank’s exit policy features low initial interest rates for the first two years.


5.4    Is the Remedy Worse than the Infirmity?
A natural objection to promising to raise rates in a situation in which the economy is in
the midst of a crisis, possibly involving highly distressed levels of aggregate demand, is
that doing so, even if successful on the inflation expectations front, may exacerbate the
economic crisis. We believe that if the exit policy involves a sufficiently gradual convergence
of interest rates to the intended target, the risk of exacerbation of the real contraction is
negligible. The rationale for this conjecture lies in our belief that the current weakness in
aggregate demand stems primarily from a lack of sufficient lending of financial institutions
to households and firms, in spite of the fact that the financial sector is flooded with liquidity.
The reason for the lack of lending, therefore, is not insufficient liquidity. Rather, it appears
to be high levels of default risk. In the current situation, the typical borrower is more likely
to be unemployed or under-employed, to have foreclosed on his mortgage, fallen behind in
his credit card service, or to own a mortgage that is under water. In this situation, the
nominal interest rate, whether at zero or at 2.5 percent is unlikely to be allocative. On the
other hand, the economic cost of deflation can be large. A number of key nominal variables
in modern economies display remarkable downward rigidity. This is the case particularly
with nominal wages and mortgage payments of households that, because of their precarious
financial situation, are not in a position to refinance. In the presence of these frictions
macroeconomic adjustment to negative shocks involve higher and more persistent levels of
unemployment and more distress in financial markets in the context of deflation than in an


                                                11
environment of mild inflation.


5.5    Credibility of the Exit Strategy
We identify three dimensions along which the credibility of the exit strategy we analyze may
be questioned. One dimension is the required commitment to raise nominal interest rates
in the midst of an economic crisis. We believe that this is not the most problematic aspect
of the exit strategy we analyze . For the central bank can announce a sufficiently gradual
and even delayed path for the nominal interest rate during the exit transition that could be
interpreted by the public as a policy easing rather than a policy tightening. For example,
in the policy experiment presented in figure 2, it is assumed that once the economy falls
below the inflation threshold π L , the central bank keeps the interest rate constant at 25
basis points for 8 quarters and then increases it by 25 basis points every quarter until it
reaches the intended interest rate target of 2.8 percent, at which point it switches back to
the standard Taylor rule. The announcement of such path for the nominal interest rate can
hardly be interpreted as tightening from the point of view of the period in which it is put
into effect.
   Perhaps the most problematic aspect of the analyzed exit strategy in regard to credibility
is the need to communicate to the public that the increase in nominal interest rates is
intended to raise inflationary expectations. The reason why it might be difficult to convey
this idea is that in an economy that has been operating for many decades in the vicinity
of the intended steady state, as is arguable the case in the United States between the end
of World War II and 2007, the monetary authority is likely to be viewed as following a
policy whereby the key role of tightening is to keep short-run inflationary expectations from
rising above some desired target. This logic does not apply in the neighborhood of the
liquidity-trap equilibrium π LL. Near the liquidity trap, zero nominal interest rates, far from
producing high levels of inflation, generate low and possibly negative inflation over time. We
believe that after observing falling inflation in combination with near-zero interest rates for a
sufficiently large number of quarters the public will come to intuitively internalize the notion
that the Fisher effect has become dominant and accept the monetary authority’s argument
of raising interest rates to fight deflationary pressures.
   A third aspect of the exit strategy analyzed in this paper that may affect its credibility
is the required commitment on the part of the central bank to abstain from responding to
incoming news about the state of the business cycle in setting interest rates during the exit
transition, i.e., while Lt < Ht and Rt = RX (Lt ). We believe that in order to minimize the
vulnerability of the exit strategy we analyze in this regard, the central bank must commu-


                                               12
nicate clearly the policy tradeoff that is relevant during a liquidity trap. The benefit from
engaging in an exit strategy like the one analyzed here is to escape a deflationary equilibrium,
which, as the recent Japanese experience painfully documents, may last for over two decades.
The cost is a temporary restriction in the Fed’s ability to ease money-market conditions. It
is not unreasonable to argue that this tradeoff may be resolved in favor of escaping from the
liquidity trap.


5.6    Money-Based Versus Interest-Rate Exit Strategies
An alternative exit strategy often heard in policy and academic circles consists in switching
to a positive money-growth-rate rule. The idea behind this policy alternative is that by
promising to create money at a positive rate for a relatively long period of time, the Fed
creates inflationary expectations. A potential advantage of this alternative is that it avoids
the need on the part of the central bank to explicitly announce an increase in the nominal
interest rate (even if, in order to work, the policy needs to generate higher rates). In our
view this strategy suffers from an important weakness. Namely, such policy requires the
announcement not only of a money growth rate, but also of the initial nominal money
supply. This second requirement is in our view highly problematic. For once the expected
rate of inflation rises, the public will engage in a portfolio switch away from the enormous
quantity of money that it acquired during the time when its opportunity cost was zero, and
toward interest bearing assets that the central bank purchased during this same period. To
fix ideas, let 0 be the period in which the central bank announces the switch to a constant-
money-growth-rate rule. Suppose that in period zero, the government does not engage in
any money market operation, so that the nominal money supply in period zero, denoted
M0 , equals the money supply in period −1, denoted M−1 . Suppose that the announcement
of the new monetary regime increases inflationary expectations and that, as a result, the
public chooses to reduce its demand for real balances by a sizable fraction, say fifty percent.
Such a number is not unreasonable in light of the fact that when the nominal rate was
zero, the central bank had increased the money supply by at least a factor of 2.5. But if the
nominal money supply is fixed at the pre-policy-switch level of M−1, the only way the desired
contraction in the money demand can be brought about is through a doubling of the price
level. Thus, the central bank might be trading deflation for a once-and-for-all doubling of the
price level. In order to avoid this undesirable side effect of a potentially large initial jump in
the price level, the central bank must accompany the policy switch with an appropriate sale
of interest-bearing assets in period zero. The difficulty is that it might be extremely hard for
the government to predict the size of the portfolio switch that takes place in period zero. Put


                                               13
differently, it might be extremely difficult for the central bank to pick the level of M0 so as to
accommodate the decline in real balances through a decline in nominal balances and not via
a jump in the price level. By contrast, an interest-rate-based exit strategy achieves this goal
automatically. For when the central bank controls the nominal interest rate, it must stand
ready to buy or sell any quantity of money as desired by the public. The advantage that an
interest-rate-based exit strategy has over a money-based-exit strategy resembles, in reverse,
the well-studied advantage that an exchange-rate-based inflation stabilization program has
over a money-based stabilization program for stopping high inflation in developing countries
(see Uribe, 1999). In these episodes, the problem of adopting a money-based strategy is to
pick the initial amount of money to allow for reliquefication without creating deflation.


References
Benhabib, Jess, Stephanie Schmitt-Grohé and Martı́n Uribe, “The Perils of Taylor Rules,”
   Journal of Economic Theory 96, January-February 2001, 40-69.
Benhabib, Jess, Stephanie Schmitt-Grohé and Martı́n Uribe, “Avoiding Liquidity Traps,”
   Journal of Political Economy 110, June 2002, 535-563.
Bullard, James, “Seven Faces of ‘The Peril’,” manuscript, Federal Reserve Bank of St.
   Louis, July 2010.
Loyo, Eduardo, “Tight Money Paradox on the Loose: A Fiscalist Hyperinflation,” Harvard
   University, June 1999.
Uribe, Martı́n, “Comparing the Welfare Costs and Initial Dynamics of Alternative Inflation
   Stabilization Policies,” Journal of Development Economics 59, 1999, 295-318.




                                               14
