                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       THE ECONOMICS OF CULTURAL TRANSMISSION AND SOCIALIZATION

                                            Alberto Bisin
                                           Thierry Verdier

                                        Working Paper 16512
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16512


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2010




We have collaborated on the study of cultural transmission for more than a decade, while socializing
our own children. Many have helped and encouraged us over the years, many more than we can thank
here. We owe special thanks however to D. Acemoglu, A. Alesina, G.S. Becker, J. Benhabib, L.L.
Cavalli Sforza, P.A. Chiappori, E. Glaeser, E. Ok, A. Postlewaite, J.A. Scheinkman and to our co-authors
on this topic, J. Olivier, E. Patacchini, M. Thoenig, G. Topa, Y. Zenou. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Alberto Bisin and Thierry Verdier. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
The Economics of Cultural Transmission and Socialization
Alberto Bisin and Thierry Verdier
NBER Working Paper No. 16512
November 2010
JEL No. Z1

                                                 ABSTRACT

Cultural transmission arguably plays an important role in the determination of many fundamental preference
traits (e.g., discounting, risk aversion and altruism) and most cultural traits, social norms, and ideological
tenets ( e.g., attitudes towards family and fertility practices, and attitudes in the job market). It is, however,
the pervasive evidence of the resilience of ethnic and religious traits across generations that motivates
a large fraction of the theoretical and empirical literature on cultural transmission. This article reviews
the main contributions of models of cultural transmission, from theoretical and empirical perspectives.
It presents their implications regarding the long-run population dynamics of cultural traits and cultural
heterogeneity, the world's geographical fragmentation by ethic and religious traits, at any given time.
Finally, the paper reviews the empirical literature which estimates various properties of cultural transmission
mechanisms as well as the population dynamics of specific traits.


Alberto Bisin
Department of Economics
New York University
19 West 4th Street, 5th Floor
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
alberto.bisin@nyu.edu

Thierry Verdier
Paris-Jourdan Sciences Economiques
48 Boulevard Jourdan
75014 Paris FRANCE
verdier@pse.ens.fr
Contents
1 Introduction                                                                             4

2 Theoretical studies                                                                      6
  2.1 Population dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         8
       2.1.1   Cultural heterogeneity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       9
  2.2 Socialization mechanisms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       11
       2.2.1   Geographic spread . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       13
       2.2.2   Homogamous marriages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          15
       2.2.3   Fertility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   17
       2.2.4   Self-segregation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    18
       2.2.5   Identity formation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      18
  2.3 Multidimensional cultural traits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       22
  2.4 Cultural transmission and social interactions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        26
       2.4.1   Cultural transmission and trade . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       29
       2.4.2   Cultural transmission and institutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        30
       2.4.3   Cultural transmission and collective action . . . . . . . . . . . . .       33
  2.5 Cultural transmission of beliefs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       37

3 Empirical studies                                                                        39
  3.1 Cultural heterogeneity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       40
  3.2 Resilience of cultural traits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    43
  3.3 Population dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        47
       3.3.1   Long term persistence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       53
       3.3.2   Immigration and Assimilation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        59
  3.4 Socialization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    63
       3.4.1   Imperfect empathy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       64
       3.4.2   Vertical vs. oblique/horizontal transmission . . . . . . . . . . . .        65
       3.4.3   Marriage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    66
       3.4.4   Neighborhood and school choice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        71
       3.4.5   Collective socialization mechanisms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       71
       3.4.6   Cultural substitution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     72
       3.4.7   Cultural distinction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    78

4 Conclusions                                                                              79


                                            2
5 References       82


  amsmath
  amsmath




               3
1         Introduction
Preferences, beliefs, and norms that govern human behaviour are partly formed as the re-
sult of heritable genetic traits, and partly transmitted through generations and acquired
by learning and other forms of social interaction. As a consequence cultural transmis-
sion is an object of study of several social sciences, such as evolutionary anthropology,
sociology, social psychology, and economics. In this paper we de…ne culture to represent
those components of preferences, social norms, and ideological attitudes which

              depend upon the capacity for learning and transmitting knowledge to
          succeeding generations. Merriam Webster’sonline dictionary.

        Cultural transmission arguably plays an important role in the determination of many
fundamental preference traits, like discounting, risk aversion and altruism.1 It certainly
plays a central role in the formation of cultural traits, social norms, and ideological
tenets, like e.g., attitudes towards family and fertility practices, and attitudes in the job
market. Relatedly, distinct cultural traits determine how individuals interpret and react
to common (e.g., strategic) choice environment.2 It is, however, the pervasive evidence
of the resilience of ethnic and religious traits across generations that motivates a large
fraction of the theoretical and empirical literature on cultural transmission. In the U.S.,
for instance, persistent ethnic and religious di¤erentiation in what social scientists until
the 1960s expected to turn into a ‘melting pot’, are very well documented. In fact,
immigrants all over the world generally strive to maintain various traits of the culture
of the country of origin. Several ethnic and religious communities in the U.S., e.g.,
Orthodox Jews, even observed a cultural renaissance after being declared endangered.
Outside the United States, Basques, Catalans, Corsicans, and Irish Catholics in Europe,
Quebecois in Canada, and Jews of the diaspora have all remained strongly attached to
their languages and cultural traits even through the formation of political states which
    1
        The decomposition of the cultural (or environmental) and genetic e¤ects on cognitive and psycho-
logical traits is the object of a large literature, typically referred to as nature/nurture, which spans from
behavioral genetics to the social sciences. Sacerdote (2010), in this Handbook, surveys this literature.
The role of evolutionary selection in the formation of preferences is surveyed by Robson and Samuelson
(2010) for this Handbook.
   2
     See e.g., Henrich, Boyd, Bowles, Camerer, Fehr, and Gintis (2004) for cooperative behavior in 15
small scale societies; Cameron, Chauduri, Erkal, and Gangadharan (2009) for a corruption game in
Melbourne, Delhi, Jakarta, Singapore. In this Handbook, Fernandez (2010) surveys the does-culture-
matter? literature in detail.


                                                     4
did not recognize ethnic and religious diversity. Similarly, e.g., in Africa, various forms
of tribal distinction persisted and even thrived after the creation of overarching national
institutions. Finally, various measures of social capital display very long-run histeresis,
of the order of hundreds of years: historical events like the constitution of free-city-
state in the Middle Ages, the quality of political institutions in the nineteenth century
Europe, the slave trade in West Africa, Ottoman domination, all have e¤ects which seem
to persist up until the present.
   In this paper we concentrate on intergenerational transmission of culture. We con-
ceptualize cultural transmission as the result of interactions between purposeful social-
ization decisions inside the family (‘direct vertical socialization’) and other socialization
processes like social imitation and learning which govern identity formation (‘oblique and
horizontal socialization’). Cultural traits are then endogenous in this context. But how
to think about agents who choose their children’s and/or their own preferences? Is it
even logically consistent to think of agents choosing their own preferences? Which pref-
erence order applies to this choice? George Stigler and Gary Becker’s famed De gustibus
non est disputandum paper addresses some of this methodological questions. They fa-
vor postulating identical meta-preferences ordering each agent actual preferences. This
methodological standpoint has generated a rich and interesting literature and several im-
portant applications; see Becker (1996) and Becker and Murphy (2000) for book-length
surveys. On the other hand, by restricting the determinants of heterogeous preferences
across agents to di¤erences in the technologies which constrain preference choices, this
class of models is at a loss e.g., to deal with cultural transmission. How to explain, for
instance the widespread observation of purposeful actions by parents to limit their chil-
dren integration into extraneous dominant cultures? In turn, these models can hardly
produce the resilience of ethnic and religious traits we tend to observe.
   Bisin and Verdier, in a series of papers, deviating from identical meta-preferences,
introduce a fundamental friction in parental altruism, imperfect empathy, which is suf-
…cient to sustain a theory of cultural transmission by biasing parents towards their own
cultural traits. More speci…cally, imperfect empathy requires that while parents are al-
truistic with respect to their children, they evaluate their choice using their own (the
parents’ - not the children’s) preferences. For instance, religious parents care about
the social and economic success of their children, but would regret their having to ac-
cept secular norms and attitudes to achieve it. These models of cultural transmission
have implications regarding the determinants of the persistence of cultural traits and


                                             5
more generally regarding the population dynamics of cultural traits. The persistence
of cultural traits or, conversely, the cultural assimilation of minorities, is determined
by the costs and bene…ts of various family decisions pertaining to the socialization of
children in speci…c socio-economic environments, which in turn determine the children’s
opportunities for social imitation and learning.
        This article reviews the main contributions of models of cultural transmission, from
theoretical and empirical perspectives. It presents their implications regarding the long-
run population dynamics of cultural traits, and discusses the links between the economic
and other approaches to cultural evolution in the social sciences as well as in evolutionary
biology. Furthermore, it discusses extending the economic theory of cultural transmission
to the analysis of several important aspects of the dynamics and propagation of beliefs
and values.


2         Theoretical studies
The …rst formal theoretical contributions to modeling of cultural transmission are due to
Cavalli-Sforza and Feldman (1981) and to Boyd and Richerson (1985), who apply models
of evolutionary biology to the transmission of cultural traits. Their analysis contains a
simple elegant stylized model of the cultural transmissionmechanism, together with a
clear terminology, which are extensively adopted by most of the subsequent literature.
        Consider a dichotomous cultural trait in the population, fa; bg. Let the fraction of
individuals with trait i 2 fa; bg be q i . Reproduction is a-sexual and each parent has one
child. Cultural transmission is the result of direct vertical (parental) socialization and
horizontal/oblique socialization in society at large.3 More speci…cally,

i) direct vertical socialization to the parent’s trait, say i, occurs with probability di ;

ii) if a child from a family with trait i is not directly socialized, which occurs with
          probability 1      di , he/she is horizontally/obliquely socialized by picking the trait
          of a role model chosen randomly in the population (i.e., he/she picks trait i with
          probability q i and trait j 6= i with probability q j = 1         q i ).
    3
        Horizontal socialization refers to socialization resulting from interactions between members of the
children population, while vertical socialization is due to interactions between children and members of
their parents’population. This distinction turns out to be relatively unimportant in the literature.




                                                      6
       The cultural transmission mechasnism introduced by Cavalli Sforza and Feldman
(1981) is then summarily represented by the following system of equations for P ij ; the
probability that a child from a family with trait i is socialized to trait j:

                                              P ii = di + (1        di )q i
                                             P ij = (1       di )(1     qi)                                   (1)

       Bisin and Verdier (2000, 2001) introduce parental socialization choice in Cavalli
Sforza and Feldman (1981)’s model. As a consequence, direct socialization probabil-
ities, di ; dj ; are endogenously determined. Parental socialization choice is motivated by
imperfect empathy, that is a form of altruism biased towards the parents’own cultural
traits: parents care about their children’s choices, but they evaluate them using their
own (the parents’- not the children’s) preferences.
       More speci…cally, let X denote an abstract choice set, comprising all choices relevant
to an individual’s economic and social life. Cultural traits are represented by preferences:
each individual (parent or child) chooses x 2 X to maximize ui : X ! <, for cultural
trait i 2 fa; bg. Let V ij denote the utility to a cultural trait i parent of a type j child,
i; j 2 fa; bg. Then
Imperfect Empathy: For all i; j; V ij = ui (xj );                  where xj = argmaxx2X uj (x).4
As long as V ii ; V ij are independent of q i , imperfect empathy implies V ii                       V ij , with >
for generic preferences ui (x); uj (x): More generally, when individuals interact socially,
V ii ; V ij will be a function of q i : This case is studied in Section 2.4.
       When V ii      V ij parents have an incentive to socialize their children to their own cul-
tural trait. But socialization requires parental resources, e.g., time spent with children,
private school tuition, church contribution, and so on. Let C(di ) denote socialization
costs, where di is the probability of direct socialization of parents with trait i to the i
trait. The value of parental socialization choice is then represented by:

             W i (q i ) = max
                          i
                                     C(di ) + P ii V ii (q i ) + P ij V ij (q i );   s. t. 1), and 2) :5
                          d 2[0;1]
                                                                                                2
       Assuming for simplicity quadratic socialization costs, C(di ) = 12 (di ) ; we obtain

                                       di = d(q i ; V i ) = (1          qi) V i;                              (2)

where        V i = V ii    V ij measures the relative value of child with the same cultural trait
as the parents; we refer to            V i as the cultural intolerance of trait i.
   4
       To avoid trivial cases, we assume xa 6= xb :
   5
       The socialization choice of parents is independent of their choice of x 2 X: This is due to preference
separability.

                                                            7
2.1        Population dynamics
Consider …rst Cavalli Sforza and Feldman (1981). The system of equations (1) for P ij ;
the probability that a child from a family with trait i is socialized to trait j, imply the
following dynamics of the fraction of the population with trait i, in the continuous time
limit:
                                        q_i = q i (1   q i ) di   dj :                                  (3)

       Equation (3) is a simple version of the replicator dynamics in evolutionary biology
for a two-trait population dynamic model. Formally, it is a logistic di¤erential equation.
If (di      dj ) > 0 cultural transmission represents a selection mechanism in favor of trait
i, due to its di¤erential vertical socialization. This selective mechanism is all the more
powerful (i.e., the speed of selection is higher) when there is enough variation in the
population, which is captured by the term q i (1                  q i ), re‡ecting the variance of types
in the population. We say that the stationary state of the population dynamics q i is
culturally homogeneous if either q i = 0 or q i = 1: We say instead that q i is culturally
heterogeneous if 0 < q i < 1: Let q i (t; q0i ) denote the solution path of the di¤erential
equation which describes the population dynamics, so that q i (t; q0i ) is the value of q i at
time t when, at time t = 0, q i takes the value q0i :
       A …rst obvious result coming from (3), as in Cavalli Sforza and Feldman (1981), is
the following:
Suppose (di ; dj ) are exogenous and di > dj .6 In this case, the stationary states of
the population dynamics are culturally homogeneous: Moreover, q i (t; q0i ) ! 1, for any
q0i 2 (0; 1]. If instead di = dj ; q i (t; q0i ) = q0i ; for any t        0:
       In other words, the selective mechanism of cultural transmission, as modeled by Cav-
alli Sforza and Feldman (1981), can hardly explain the observed resilience of cultural
traits(except in the knife hedge non-generic case in which di = dj ). Boyd and Richer-
son (1985) extend Cavalli Sforza and Feldman (1981)’s analysis to allow for frequency
dependent direct socialization probabilities:

                                       di = d(q i ); dj = d(1        q i );

generating more interesting and complex population dynamics. But in Boyd-Richerson
(1985), while direct socialization probabilities are frequency dependent, they are nonethe-
less exogenous.7
   6
       Obviously, the case dj > di is symmetric, as i and j are arbitrary.
   7
       There is a lively interesting literature in anthropology and biology which studies cultural transmis-


                                                       8
    Economic models of cultural transmission also predict frequency dependent social-
ization probabilities, but purposeful parental socialization decisions restrict the class of
consistent frequency dependent socialization.The dynamics of the fraction of the popula-
tion with cultural trait i is then determined by equation (3), evaluated at di = d(q i ; V i );
dj = d(1     q i ; V j ) as in (2):
Suppose (di ; dj ) are endogenously determined as in equation (2). The stationary states of
the population dynamics are (0; 1; q i ), where q i is culturally heterogeneous. Moreover,
the culturally heterogeneous stationary state is globally stable, that is, q i (t; q0i ) ! q i , for
any q0i 2 (0; 1).
    The economic model of cultural transmission in Bisin and Verdier (2001) predicts
then cultural heterogeneity and is therefore consistent with the observed resilience of
cultural traits. But how general is this result? What does explain culturally heterogene-
ity?

2.1.1    Cultural heterogeneity

Intuitively, cultural heterogeneity might obtain when parents belonging to a cultural
minority face relatively higher incentives to socialize their children to their own trait.
Formally, this is the case socialization mechanisms satisfy the following property.
Cultural substitution: for any        V i > 0; di (q i ; V i ) is a continuous, strictly decreasing
function in q i , and, moreover, di (1; V i ) = 0.
    Symmetrically, when direct vertical transmission acts as a cultural substitute to
oblique transmission, parents have less incentives to socialize their children the more
widely dominant are their values in the population. In the limit of a perfectly homoge-
nous populations of type i, parents of type i do not directly socialize their children. As
a consequence the socialization pattern moves the system away from full homogeneity:
q i = 0 and q i = 1 are locally unstable stationary states of (3), and the basin of attraction
of the unique steady state associated to heterogeneous population, q i , is the full interval
(0; 1). Bisin and Verdier (2001) show the following:
Cultural heterogeneity obtains generally whenever direct vertical socialization is a sub-
stitute to oblique/horizontal socialization.
    When di (q i ; V i ) is instead increasing in q i ; socialization e¤orts of parents of type
sion as the outcome of exogenous evolutionary rules. While we do not discuss this literature in detail
as it exudes from our purposes, we refer the reader to e.g., Henrich (2001), Gallo, Barra, and Contucci
(2009), and Enquist, Ghirlanda, Eriksson (2010).



                                                   9
i are typically larger the more frequent their trait in the population. Direct vertical
and oblique transmissions are linked in some degree by cultural complementarity in this
case. Strong enough forms of cultural complementarity can drive the dynamics of the
distribution of the traits in the population towards homogeneity.
   We illustrate the role of cultural substitution versus complementarity in the popula-
tion dynamics of cultural traits with two examples of di¤erent socialization mechanisms
from Bisin and Verdier (2001).
Cultural substitution example: It’s the family. Suppose children are exposed simultane-
ously to their parent’s trait, say i, and to the trait of an individual picked at random from
                                                              i
a restricted population, composed of a fraction               2   of agents with trait i (the population
of neighbors, friends, school peers, and teachers). The parent’s direct socialization e¤ort
             i
is denoted   1   2 [0; 1], and controls the children’s internalization of the parent’s trait. If
the two traits match (i.e., if the child internalizes his parent trait, i, and the trait of the
individual in the restricted population is also i), then the child is socialized to trait i.
                                        i i
Otherwise, with probability (1          1 2 ),   the child picks a trait from the population as a
whole. The probability that a child of a type i father is directly socialized (by exposure
to the parent and to the restricted pool) is then:

                                             di =       i i
                                                        1 2

                                                        i                                           i
Suppose both the direct socialization e¤ort,            1   2 [0; 1], and the segregation e¤ort,    2   2
[0; 1], are chosen by parents. If preferences and socialization costs satisfy some regularity
assumptions (see Bisin and Verdier, 2001), direct vertical and oblique transmission are
substitutes for such transmission mechanisms and the long run state of the population
dynamics is culturally heterogeneous.
Cultural complementarity example: It takes a village. Suppose children are …rst exposed
simultaneously to the parent’s trait and to the trait of a role model from the population
with which he/she is matched randomly. If the parent and the role model are culturally
homogeneous, the child is directly socialized to their common trait, otherwise the child
is matched a second time randomly with a role model from the population, and adopts
his/her trait. Vertical and oblique transmission are not cultural substitutes in this
example. With quadratic socialization costs, in this case,

                                d(q i ; V i ) = (q i )2 (1        qi) V i:

This socialization e¤ort is clearly non monotonic in q i and exhibits a range of q i for


                                                   10
Figure 1: Dynamics with cultural substitution in Cavalli Sforza and Feldman (1981): q_i
as a funcion of q i :


which there is cultural complementary8 .
       A simple analysis of the population dynamics implies that

                                 q i (t; q0i ) ! 0; for any q0i 2 [0; q i );
                                 q i (t; q0i ) ! 1; for any q0i 2 (q i ; 1]; for 0 < q i < 1:

and that the stationary state of the population dynamics is culturally homogeneous.
       Summarizing, the economic cultural transmission model in Bisin-Verdier (2000, 2001)
allows for population dynamics of the distribution of cultural traits which converge to
an heterogeneous distribution, which can be therefore providing an explanation of the
observed resilience of e.g., ethnic and religious traits. This is the case, in particular,
when direct and oblique socialization mechanisms are culturally substitutes. Figures
1 and 2 illustrate the starkly di¤erent population dynamics in the leading models in
Cavalli Sforza-Feldman (1981) and in Bisin-Verdier (2000, 2001):


2.2       Socialization mechanisms
The cultural transmission model we described abstracts from many important details
regarding socialization mechanisms. Direct socialization probabilities are the results of
                @d(q i ; V i )
   8
       Indeed       @q i         R 0 as q i Q 32 :


                                                               11
Figure 2: Dynamics with cultural substitution in Bisin and Verdier (2001): q_i as a
funcion of q i :


several di¤erent e¤ort choices of parents, e.g., in terms of time and resources dedicated
to their children. But socialization e¤ort is more e¤ective e.g., when the parents in
the family share the cultural trait to socialize the children to, when teachers in school,
other adults and the children peers all reinforce the socialization e¤ort of parents. So-
cialization is a fundamental family activity and as such it might motivate individuals
to prefer homogamous marriages (along relevant cultural traits) and particular fertility
patterns. It also might motivate families to the consideration of various cultural aspects
when choosing schools for their childern, when choosing the neighborhood where they
reside in, when choosing with civil and social organizations they are member of, and
so on. More generally, parental socialization requires the active participation of the
children themselves, who ultimately form their identities and preferences in the social
environment they interact with. This in turn motivates parents to pro-actively intervene
in shaping their children social environment, once again through the choice of schools,
neighborhood, peers, and so on.
    In this section we survey the theoretical contributions to the cultural transmission
literature whose main focus is to expand the analysis to consider several di¤erent social-
ization mechanisms.




                                           12
Figure 3: Stationary constant traveling wave: Each curve represents the wave at a time
t, with the variable l on the x-axis


2.2.1    Geographic spread

Cultural traits di¤use geographically, e.g., because the population carrying the trait
moves, typically while expanding economically or militarily. Let l denote the distance
(e.g., the radial distance in two dimensions) from an initial location. Let q(l; t) denote
the fraction of agents of type i at location l. Rendine, Piazza, and Cavalli Sforza (1986),
extending the cultural transmission model to geographic di¤usion (in the continuous
time approximation) obtain the following partial di¤erential equation

                         @q i                           @ 2qi
                              = q i (1 q i )(di dj ) + m 2                       (4)
                          @t                            @l
where m is the di¤usion coe¢ cient. This equation, known in evolutionary genetics as
Fisher-Kolmogorov equation, has a constant traveling wave solution

                                   q i (l; t) = wi (l   t)

which is monotonic and satis…es limz!       1   wi (z) = 1 and limz!1 wi (z) = 0: Figure 3
illustrates the dynamics associated to a stationary constant traveling wave, for m = :001
and di   dj equal to :5:
   Furthermore, for any initial condition q i (l; 0) satisfying regularity conditions which




                                              13
appear natural in this context,9 q i (l; t) evolves to a travelling wave with speed                    =
 p
2 (di dj )m:This asymptotic solution can be accurately approximated as
                                                         1
                                             wi (z)         z ;
                                                        1+e
see Murray (1989), p. 283.
      The geographical spread model assumes di¤usion on the part of only population i
and, most importantly, it assumes away any interaction between the two populations.
These extensions are possible, though an analytic characterization of the resulting dy-
namics has yet to be derived.10 Suppose at any location l at time t live two interacting
populations, characterized by their distinct cultural traits, a; b: Let their density be de-
noted, respectively, Qa (l; t) and Qb (l; t) respectively.11 Suppose population Qa di¤uses
geographically, while population Qb does not. Furthermore, assume the populations
interact socially, at any location l. The result of such interactions is the adoption of
trait Qa on the part of individuals of type Qb at an instantaneous rate proportional
to Qa (l; t) Qb (l; t): Finally, suppose that the highest sustainable population density at
any location l and time t are, respectively, P a and P b : Under these assumptions, the
dynamic population equations (in the continuous time approximation) are a version of
the Lotka-Volterra equation for interaction geographically structured populations,12
                             @Qa            a     Qa               @ 2 Qa
                                 =       a Q (1       ) + Qa Qb + m 2                                (LV)
                              @t                  Pa                @l
                             @Qb            b     Qb
                                 =       b Q (1      )    Qa Qb
                              @t                  Pb
      To the best of our knowledge nobody has studied the cultural transmission model
with geographic di¤usion when di dj is a function of q i , as in the economic model. Based
on the analysis of Murray (1989), ch. 11.5 (especially p.304), we conjecture existence and
stability (for appropriate initial conditions) to a monotonic travelling wave wi (z) such
  9
      The condition are the following:
                                                              (
                i                                  i              1 if l   l1
               q (l; 0)   0 and continuous in l; q (l; 0) =                     for some l1 < l2 :
                                                                  0 if l   l2
                                p
 For speed of advance = p56 (di dj )m the solution w(z) can be obtained analytically.
 10
    See Aoki et al. (1996) for numerical solutions.
 11
    Clearly,
                                                  Qi (l; t)
                                 q i (l; t) = a                   ; i = a; b:
                                             Q (l; t) + Qb (l; t)

 12
      For an introduction to these reaction-di¤usion systems, see Murray (1989), ch. 12, 14,15.

                                                       14
that limt!1 wi (z) = q i , 0 < q i < 1: Similarly, nobody has studied the Lotka-Volterra
model with endogeneous              a;    b ; m;    .

2.2.2     Homogamous marriages

Marriages are formed in the marriage market anticipating their role in the direct so-
cialization of children. Bisin and Verdier (2000) study a marriage market in which
homogamous marriages (that is, marriages in which spouses share the same cultural
trait) are valued because they are more e¤ective socialization mechanism. The simplest
model is developed under the extreme assumption that only homogamous marriages
are endowed with a direct socialization technology. In this case, the expected utility of
child of for a type i parent in an heterogamous marriage, not endowed with a direct
socialization technology, is simply

                                     W i;Het (q i ) = q i V ii + (1            q i )V ij :

The corresponding expected utility for a type i parent in an homogamous marriage,

          W i;Hom (q i ) = max i [di + (1                 di )q i ]V ii + (1       di )(1         q i )V ij ]     C(di );

depends on the parent’s socialization choice. As a consequence, the option to socialize
children provided by homogamous marriages is valued by individuals in the marriage
market:


                                         W i;Hom (q i )       W i;Het (q i )        0:

   The marriage market is then modeled to allow each individual to a¤ect the probability
to be married homogamously. Suppose the marriage market contains a restricted pool
in which marriages, if they occur, are homogamous (churches, ethnic clubs, and various
other cultural institutions may serve this purpose). An individual of trait i can enter the
                                                                                             i
restricted pool and marries homogamously with probability                                        ; which is chosen at a cost
H( i ). With probability 1                i
                                              the individual enters instead a common pool, composed
of all individuals who have not been matched in marriage in their own restricted pools,
and is married there with a random match. Let Ai be the fraction of individuals of type
i who are matched in their restricted pool. The probability of homogamous marriage of
an individual of type i is given by

                i                                                                (1 Ai )q i
                    ( i ; Ai ; Aj ; q i ) =    i
                                                   + (1       i
                                                                  )                                                   :     (5)
                                                                      (1   Ai )q i + (1 Aj )(1                  qi)

                                                             15
                                                                     i
An individual with trait i chooses                                       2 [0; 1], for given Ai ; Aj ,q i , to maximize

                                 i
                                     ( i ; Ai ; Aj ; q i ) W i;Hom (q i )                     W i;Het (q i )   H( i ):                            (6)

                                                                                                                             i
The maximization of (6) for each agent of type i provides an optimal                                                             as a function
of Ai ; Aj and q i : Under convexity and regularity assumptions, Bisin and Verdier (2000)
show the existence of a unique symmetric Nash equilibrium of the marriage game, where
                                                                                                                         i           i
all individuals of type i choose the same marital segregation e¤ort                                                              =       (q i ) and
Ai =       i
               (q i ). At equilibrium, the probability of homogamous marriage for agents of type
                 i
i is then            (q i ) =    i
                                     ( i (q i );   i
                                                       (q i );   j
                                                                     (q j ); q i ). The population dynamics, in turn, are:

                                                   q_i = q i (1                q i ) di   i
                                                                                                 dj   j
                                                                                                          ;                                       (7)

evaluated at di = di (q i ) and                            i
                                                                 =        i
                                                                              (q i ): The selective forces for cultural transmis-
sion, therefore, account for the di¤erential "e¤ective" e¤orts of vertical transmission,
di i , which re‡ect the fact that only homogamous marriage can successsfully bias the
transmission of their cultural trait.
       Bisin and Verdier (2000) show that at equilibrium, when homogamous marriages act
as a socialization mechanism, cultural substitution applies to this "e¤ective" vertical
cultural transmission di i :
For any 0 < q i < 1 and for i 2 fa; bg, in equilibrium, i) the probability of matching
                                                                                  i
in the restricted pool for agents of type i,                                          (q i ), and the direct socialization probability
of homogamous families of type i, di (q i ), are strictly positive; ii) the homogamy rate
of the population of type i is greater than the homogamy rate associated with random
                      i
matching,                 (q i ) > q i ; and iii) the probability of successful socialization for a family of
type i is greater than the oblique socialization rate, P ii (q i ) > q i . Furthermore, iv)                                                  i
                                                                                                                                                 (q i )
and di (q i ) are decreasing in the fraction of the population with trait i, q i .
       As a consequence, the population dynamics of the trait distribution, when homoga-
mous marriages act as a socialization mechanism, induce a stationary distribution which
is culturally heterogeneous:
The culturally homogeneous stationary states of the population dynamics, (0; 1), are
locally unstable. There always exists a culturally heterogeneous stationary state, q i ,
which is locally stable, that is, such that q i (t; q0i ) ! q i , for any q0i in an appropriate
neighborhood of q i :13
  13
       If the culturally heterogeneous stationary state q i is unique, q i (t; q0i ) ! q i ; globally, for q0i 2 (0; 1):




                                                                                 16
       In summary, in an environment in which individuals search for homogamous mar-
riages for their bene…ts in terms of socialization, the cultural substitution properties of
socialization mechanisms are preserved.

2.2.3       Fertility

Fertility, as an endogenous choice of parents, also interacts with socialization, if for no
other reason that socialization costs naturally incvrease with the number of children
to socialize. Consider for instance the cultural transmission model, extended to allow
for parental choice of reproductive pattern. Let N i                    0 denote the number of children
                                                     i
chosen by parents with trait i; at cost c(N ): To better illustrate the e¤ects of endogenous
fertility, consider the extreme case in which direct socialization is exogenous. In this case,
parents of type i then choose ni             0 to maximize:

                                       c(N i ) + N i (P ii V ii + P ij V ij );

where P ii V ii + P ij V ij can be interpreted as the expected quality of one child,14 and is
independent of N i . It follows then that the parents of a cultural majority will choose
relatively high fertility rates, since in this case their children are of high expected quality,
that is, they will inherit their trait with high probability. The choice of reproduction
patterns, as a consequence, will tend to introduce cultural complementarity in the so-
cialization mechanism: N i (q i ) will tend to be increasing.
       But more generally, fertility will interact with direct socialization, at least because
total socialization costs increase with the number of children, and hence parents, when
choosing direct children socialization, incur a classic quantity/quality (of children) trade
o¤. Assuming for simplicity socialization costs are linear in N i ; parents of type i choose
di 2 [0; 1], and N i         0 to maximize:

                                 c(N i )   N i C(di ) + N i (P ii V ii + P ij V ij )                (8)

where P ii and P ij are as in (1). The dynamics of the distribution of traits in the
population is then determined by

                                      q_i = q i (1   q i ) di ni    dj nj ;

                   Ni
where ni =      N i +N j
                           and di are determined at equilibrium. Bisin-Verdier (2001) show that,
under some regularity conditions, with endogenous fertility:
  14
       See Becker and Lewis (1973) for this terminology.

                                                         17
The stationary states of the population dynamics are (0; 1; q i ), where q i is culturally
heterogeneous. Moreover, the culturally heterogeneous stationary state is globally stable,
that is, q i (t; q0i ) ! q i , for any q0i 2 (0; 1).
       In other words, the quantity/quality trade-o¤ is su¢ cient to re-establish the dynam-
ics associated to cultural substitution, over-riding the cultural complementarity due to
endogenous fertility.

2.2.4       Self-segregation

The socialization model we introduced interacts direct vertical transmission in the family
with oblique transmission, in society at large: if a child not directly socialized, he/she
picks the trait by random matching in society at large (i.e., trait i with probability q i and
trait j with probability q j = 1         q i ). More generally, however, the cultural composition
of society is at least partly under the control of parents: they in fact choose schools,
neighborhood, peers, and so on. Abstracting from details, the transmission probabilities
could be more generally written as,

                                        P ii = di + (1      di )Qi
                                        P ij = (1      di )(1   Qi );                        (9)

where the composition of the social environment of the child, Qi , could be speci…ed as a
function of the population share q i and a costly parental intervention, say si : Examples of
a model along these lines are Bisin-Verdier (2001; Section 2.2.2, Do not talk to strangers)
and Saez Marti and Sjogren (2008).

2.2.5       Identity formation

While parents directly make various socialization choices to in‡uence the preference for-
mation of their children, vertical socialization is nonetheless in general limited by the
children’s role in forming their own cultural identity. An interesting literature in eco-
nomics is rapidly emerging, stirred by the contribution of Akerlof and Kranton (2000).15
This literature evolved with particular emphasis on the formation of oppositional iden-
tities, namely situations where minority individuals adopt cultural categorizations and
prescriptions de…ned in opposition to the categorizations and prescriptions of the main-
stream group. Akerlof and Kranton (2000) discuss how a student’s primary motivation
  15
       See also Akerlof and Kranton (2010).



                                                       18
is his or her identity and the quality of a school depends on how students …t in a school’s
social setting. Austen-Smith and Fryer (2005) focus on the tension faced by individuals
between signalling their type to the outside labor market and signalling their type to
their peers: signals that induce high wages can be signals that induce peer rejection.
Relatedly, Battu, Mwale and Zenou (2007) show that some ethnic minorities may reject
the majority’s norms of behavior even if this implies a penalty in the labor market.16
       More generally, the study of ethnic identity formation has a long theoretical and
empirical tradition in social sciences with Cross (1991), Phinney (1990), Ferdman (1995)
in developmental psychology, Stryker (1980) in symbolic interactionist sociology, Tajfel
(1981), Tajfel and Turner (1979), Turner et al. (1987) in social psychology, and Brewer
(2001) in political psychology. Abstracting from many speci…c details, two opposing
views characterize the theoretical analysis of identity formation in the social sciences. A
…rst group of social scientists argues that ethnic identity is reduced by assimilation and
contact across cultures.17 Underlying this reasoning is the basic principle that group
identity is driven by a motive for inclusiveness and cultural conformity. The alternative
view considers that ethnic minorities are motivated in keeping their own distinctive
cultural heritage to generate a sense of positive distinctiveness from individuals who are
part of that group.18 According to this view, the group identity formation is motivated
by a cultural distinction mechanism that allows individuals to reduce the psychological
costs associated with cultural di¤erences.19
       When identity formation is characterized by cultural distinction, social interactions
across groups might induce the formation of stronger oppositional identities on the part
of minorities. An interesting example is Darity, Mason and Stewart (2006). They study
a formal model of the relationship between wealth accumulation and racial identity to
evaluate the persistence of racial identity as a social norm. More precisely, they consider
a large population of agents divided into two groups distinct by a racial characteristic
  16
       See also, for instance, Cook and Ludwig (1997), Ferguson (2001), Fryer (2004), Fryer and Torelli
(2005), Patacchini and Zenou (2006).
  17
     Assimilation theories, in political science and sociology (Gordon, 1964; Moghaddam and Solliday
1991), contact theory in social psychology (Allport, 1954) are the prominent theories of this line of
thought.
  18
     These ideas have been expressed by the theories of multiculturalism (Glazer and Moynihan, 1970;
Taylor and Lambert, 1996), and con‡ict (Bobo, 1999).At a broader level, this view is also related to the
social identity theory in social psychology (Tajfel, 1981; Turner, 1982; and Abrams and Hogg, 1988).
  19
     Cultural distinction, as de…ned here, is a property of individual preferences. It is related but distinct
from cultural substitution (see Section 2), which is a property of socialization mechanisms.



                                                     19
(e.g., colour of skin, shape of eyes, etc..) that cannot be changed by deliberate choice.
Individuals however di¤erentiate themselves also along an endogenous dimension, their
racial identity. Individualists attempt to live a race-free life, even though their exogenous
social group characteristic is in fact observable. Racialists, on the other hand, chooses
to identify strongly with their social group. In each time period, individuals are ran-
domly matched in pairs and interact in socio-economic activities. Agents’productivity
in this interaction depends on the mutual compatibility of their identities. Racialists
are altruistic toward members of their own social group, but antagonistic toward mem-
bers of the other group. Individualists, on the other hand, are neither altruistic nor
antagonistic toward any agent they interact with, socially. Within each social group,
the division between individualists and racialists evolves endogenously. The population
frequencies evolve in response to average payo¤s by category, according to a standard
replicator dynamics. The paper provides conditions on intra-group and inter-group in-
teractions, matching parameters, and population initial conditions, such that a racialist
or individualist identity norm dominates in each group.
    The replicator dynamics mechanism of identity formation is exogenously assumed in
Darity, Mason and Steward (2006). Bisin, Patacchini, Verdier, and Zenou (2010) model
instead the economics of identity formation, along the lines of the cultural transmission
literature. Also, they they o¤er an explicit formal de…nition of cultural distinction and
complementarity to develop their di¤erent implications regarding identity formation.
Consider for simplicity the case of a child socialized to a minority cultural trait, i.
Minority individuals have psychological costs C(I i ; q i ) of interacting with the majority
that depend both on identity I i and the fraction q i of individuals of group i in the
neighborhood. These psychological costs can be reduced by identity formation I i :
    More precisely, consider that identity I i can take two possible discrete values (i.e.,
I i 2 f0; 1g). The intensity             i
                                             with which a cultural trait i is adopted by children is
then simply the probability of acquiring the minority identity (after successful parental
                  i
socialization),       = probfI i = 1g; and it is modeled as a choice of the agent. The utility
                                     i          i
cost of developing identity              , J(       ) is increasing and convex, in the same units of the
psychological costs C(I i ; q i ).
    The psychological costs of interactions can only be felt by individuals that do not
acquire a strong ethnic identity (i.e., in the case I = 0). Formally C(I i ; q i ) takes the
simple form:
                                     C(I i ; q i ) = (1        I i )c(1   q i ):


                                                          20
The two polar cases, cultural distinction and cultural conformity, are then simply cap-
tured as follows:
Cultural distinction: c(1               q i ) is increasing in the proportion of the majority 1             qi:
Cultural conformity: c(1                q i ) is decreasing in 1     qi:
          The identity formation choice of an individual has then di¤erent properties in the
two cases. In particular, Bisin, Patacchini, Verdier, and Zenou (2010) show that:
                                                                                            i
The distinctive characteristics of cultural distinction is that identity                        is decreasing in
 i             i
q ; for q large enough.
          Bisin, Patacchini, Verdier and Zenou (2009) extends the theoretical analysis of this
paper by studying explicitely interacting cultural transmission and identity formation.
They also draw the population dynamics implications of the model and show that both
cultural substitution and cultural distinction induce resilience and persistence of minori-
tarian traits. More speci…cally, in Bisin, Patacchini, Verdier and Zenou (2009), after
being socialized to a particular trait (directly or indirectly), the intensity with which
an individual identi…es to that trait (i.e., his cultural identity) is his personal choice,
that is, it is not transmitted by the family. Choosing the intensity of an identity is
conceptualized as a form of cultural distinction. Speci…cally, parents decide how much
to invest in socializing their children to their own ethnic trait anticipating the possible
peer e¤ects favoring assimilation and their children’s future identity choice. Formally,
the optimal parental transmisssion e¤ort di and child identity intensity e¤ort                         i
                                                                                                           are the
solution of the following problem :

             max     P ii (d; q i )(1    i
                                             )c(1   qi)   1    P ii (d; q i ) c(1   qi)   H(d)     J( i )
               ;d


with P ii (d; q i ) given by (1).
          As a result, the identity of an individual turns out to notably depend on the ethnic
composition of the neighborhood in which he is raised and his personal negative expe-
riences related to ethnicity. The prevalence of an oppositional culture in the minority
group can be sustained if and only if there is enough cultural segmentation in terms of
role models, the size of minority group is large enough, the degree of oppositional iden-
tity it implies is high enough, and the socio-economic opportunity cost of the actions it
prescribes is small enough. The model also identi…es su¢ cient conditions on economic
fundamentals such that ethnic identity and socialization e¤ort are more intense in mixed
rather than in segregated neighborhoods.20
     20
          Finally the model also allows for attitudes of the majority group, e.g., racism, which might induce


                                                          21
2.3     Multidimensional cultural traits
The cultural transmission model we described only refers to a single dichotomous cultural
traits, abstracting from several interesting issues related to the cultural space. In fact
cultural traits are often multidimensional. For instance a religious trait is composed
of common ethical values and common preferences along many dimensions, from food
to art. Religious traits also come in di¤erent forms, one for each reference religious
denomination. Furthermore, cultural traits can in general be adopted with di¤erent
intensity along di¤erent dimension. E.g., an individual can share most values of the
Catholic church while feeling unease with the mandate for priests’celibacy.
    While the model of cultural transmission has not been extended to account for several
of these richer cultural spaces, the case of cultural traits taking many di¤erent forms
has been exhaustively studied by Montgomery (2009).21 When the leading model of
economic cultural transmission is extended to a N traits, the population dynamics is
                                                        !
                                             XN
                                q_i = q i di     dj q j
                                                                   j=1

                                                      X
                                                      N
                                             di =           q j V ij ;
                                                      j=1

        PN
where       j=1 qj      = 1 and         V ij = V ii         V ij :22 While Montgomery (2009) studies more
general environments, it is pedagogically convenient to restrict the analysis to the sym-
metric case, where                V ij =    V i k, 8j; k 6= i; and hence traits can be ranked in terms
of their cultural intolerance. Abusing notation, we let then                         V ij   V i and, without
loss of generality, we order traits so that

                                             V1         V2         :::        V N:
its reaction to forms of oppositional identity of the minority. As it turns out, racism by the majority and
minority integration present natural complementarities that may give rise to social multiplier e¤ects
and/or multiple social steady state equilibria.
  21
     See also Bisin-Topa-Verdier (2009); but Montgomery (2009)’s results are stronger.
  22
     In a more recognizable matrix form:

                                             q_ = diag (q) ( q           q0   q) ;
                                    2              3
            "           #
                                   6              7
where q =           i
                            and   =6
                                   4       V ij   7.
                                                  5
                q




                                                              22
Let Fk denote a k-dimensional subsets of f1; : : : ; N g: We say that a stationary distrib-
ution supports Fk ; and we denote it q(Fk ), if it is contained in the appropriate simplex:

                                   q(Fk ) 2 fq 2 S N j q i = 0; for i 62 Fk g:

A cultural group i is not supported by a stationary state if it is not intolerant enough
relatively to the other groups:
A stationary distribution which supports Fk exists i¤

                                             V i > [k       1]GFk ; 8i 2 Fk                              (10)
             1
                    P           1
where       GFk          i2Fk   Vi
                                   .
GFk can be in fact considered a measure of the cultural intolerance of the traits belonging
                                                                      V
to Fk ; e.g., if         Vi =     V for all i 2 Fk , GFk =           k
                                                                          .
       Montgomery (2009), exploiting techniques developed for the replicator dynamics in
evolutionary game theory, proves that culturally heterogeneous stationary distributions
tend to be supported in the N -trait case as well:
Any culturally homogeneous distribution, q(F1 ) is locally unstable. Furthermore, the sta-
tionary distribution q (Fk ), where Fk is the largest subset of cultural groups f1; : : : ; N g
which is supported by a stationary distribution, is globally stable.23
       A simple corollary of this result is that,
       If
                                            XN
                                                1        N 1
                                                  i
                                                    >            ig
                                                                    ;                            (Symmetry)
                                            i=1
                                                V     M in i f V
 there is a unique globally stable stationary state q(FN ):
Note that this condition is stricter for larger N : in the limit, for N ! 1, it requires
symmetric preferences across cultural groups:                        V i independent of i. This corollary then
identi…es symmetry of the parents’preferences for children as a factor which facilitates
the stability of heterogeneous stationary distributions of traits in the population.
       So far only cultural transmission models with a discrete number of traits were pre-
sented. There is however a well established tradition in evolutionary biology and an-
thropology to consider continuous traits models of cultural transmission. These models
postulate a dynamics of cultural traits which is driven by exogenous linear mixing; see
e.g., Cavalli-Sforza (1973), Otto, Christiansen and Feldman (1994). More speci…cally,
let B i (t) denote the value of trait i associated to a representative individual at time t;
and let . Formally, B i (t) is a stochastic process whose dynamics is governed by
  23
       Since      V1 >    V 2 > ::: >   V N , Fk = f1; : : : ; kg:

                                                            23
                                B_ i = (1      di ) B         B i + "i

where "i is an independently and identically distributed random shock with zero mean
and constant variance ; and di is an exogenous parameter which represents the speed of
adjustment of the process to its the mean. More complex and interesting models along
these lines are discussed in Boyd and Richerson (1985).
   Extending the analysis to the case of of endogenous cultural transmission is a non-
trivial exercise. Keeping track of the time evolution of the mean and the variance of
the distribution of continuous traits, a central insight of these approaches is to derive
conditions for the long term persistence of cultural variation in the population. Bisin and
Topa (2003) suggest a model of endogenous transmission in a continuous trait setting
which assumes that the value of the trait of a child of type i, B i is constructed as a
                                                        i
weighted average between a target value B                   and the mean value of the trait in the
population B,
                                B_ i = (1      di ) B        B   i
                                                                     + "i

 As in the discrete trait model, parents could spend e¤ort to isolate the in‡uence of
friends, peers, and society at large on their children’s value of the trait, that is, by
choosing di ; which is then interpreted as the direct vertical socialization choice of par-
                                                              1 i 2
ents and is assumed costly (with cost C (di ) =               2
                                                                (d ) ;    for simplicity ). Socialization
preferences would depend on the context. For instance, suppose agents of type i con-
sider the trait favorably (i.e., parents like their children to possess the trait in the highest
expected value). Parents of type i would then maximize utility by solving

                                      max
                                       i
                                          E Bi                C(di )
                                       d

                              s:t: B_ i = (1       di ) B        B   i
                                                                         + "i

The solution of the problem is di = (B         i
                                                     B); and parental socialization e¤ort satisfy
a form of cultural substitution: it declines with the in‡uence of the social environment
                                                                                                 i
as captured by the mean value of trait in the population, B. The target B                            might
for instance correspond to the maximum possible value of the trait given the family
                                                                                                       i
characteristics of type i: Suppose, by means of illustration, that the target value B                      is
directly related to the cultural trait value of the parent:

                                      B i = aB i ; a > 0:


                                                   24
This could be the case, e.g., if parents had a limited or costly technology to set the
socialization target based on their own cultural trait value, B i .
       Interesting socialization preferences in this context are studied by Pichler (2009),
who lets parents explicitly choose also the socialization target B i .24 As an illustration,
consider the following special case of Pichler (2009)’s model. Assume parents of type i
face a disutility which increases in the distance between the value of the trait of their
children, B i ; and the socialization target they set. Assume also that socialization costs
are higher the larger the distance between the target and the parents’own trait value, and
                                                         1                    2           2
quadratic for simplicity, C (di ; B        i
                                               Bi) =     2
                                                             (B    i
                                                                          B i ) + 21 (di ) : Fixing exogenously
di ; the parental socialization problem is
                                          1                  i 2
                                    max     E Bi     B                 C di ; B   i
                                                                                      Bi
                                    B i   2
                               _i
                         s:t: B = (1      di ) B     B   i
                                                               + "i

            i
and, B          is a weigthed average of B i and B: As a consequence, once again, cultural
substitution obtains. This is the case also when direct socialization di is chosen optimally
by parents.
       In either Bisin and Topa (2003) and Pichler (2010), the dynamics of B i is character-
ized by a non-linear stochastic di¤erent equation with a (global) interaction term, B; of
the form
                                           B_ i = f (B i ; B) + "i ;

for some map f . Conditions for existence and uniqueness of a long - non degenerate er-
godic distribution in cultural traits can be obtained. Results on ergodicity for stochastic
processes in this class, with (local and global) interactions have been obtained, e.g., by
Follmer and Horst (2001) and Horst and Scheinkman (2006).25
       In the simple case of Bisin and Topa (2003), for example, the inter-generational
dynamics of the trait is characterized by the following stochastic non linear dynamic
di¤erence equation:

                               i
                              Bt+1 = (aBti       B t ) aBti            B t + B t + it :

and the study of ergodicity requires tracking the evolution of B t as well as of the variance,
  24
       Along these lines is also the work in progress of Panebianco (2010) and Vaughan (2010).
  25
       More generally, for stochastic stability and ergodicity of non-linear stochastic di¤erence equations,
see the classic treatment in Meyn and Tweedie (2009).



                                                      25
of Bti :26
       The previous models are speci…c in many dimensions. It would be important to ex-
tend this approach to more general structures of cultural traits and processes of cultural
transmission.


2.4        Cultural transmission and social interactions
In the cultural transmission models we described so far, parental socialization depends
on the parents’relative value of child with the same cultural trait as theirs,                     V i ; which
we referred to as the cultural intolerance of trait i. In fact the             V i ’s have been treated
as exogenous preference parameters in the theoretical work we have surveyed up to this
point. In many contexts of interest, however, this is too restrictive an assumption. The
endogeneity of          V i can originate in many di¤erent environments. For instance, when
individuals interact on markets,their indirect utility may depend on economic variables
such as prices and incomes or policy outcomes that depend on the type of society and
therefore the distribution of cultural traits that prevails in such society. Similarly, in
strategic and matching interactions contexts, the payo¤s that an individual may obtain
is likely to be in‡uenced by the distribution of cultural traits in the population. In all
these situations, it reasonable to expect cultural intolerance,              V i ; to be endogenous.
       While the implications of the endogeneity of         V i for socialization and population dy-
namics need be derived case-by-case, a reduced form analysis is however useful, to clarify
what to look for in the examples. Suppose for instance that each individual (parent or
child) chooses x 2 X to maximize ui (x; q i ); for i 2 fa; bg so that, under imperfect empa-
thy, direct parental socialization for types i depends on            V i (q i ) = ui (xi ; q i )   ui (xj ; q i ):
The …rst fundamental implication of the endogeneity of                V i is the following:
When cultural intolerance          V i depends on q i ; imperfect empathy does not necessarily
imply that       V i (q i )   0:
In fact, socialization to the parents’ trait might put the children at a disadvantage in
the child social environment, represented by q i . While imperfect empathy is manifested
as a preference on the part of parents for sharing their cultural traits with their children,
such a preference depends on the economic and social conditions which parents expect for
their children. Di¤erent economic and social conditions could in principle lead parents
  26
       Tahbaz-Salehi and Karahan (2008) study a dynamic process determined by preferences for assorta-
tive marriages along cultural lines and cultural transmission as averaging across parents. Not surprising
melting pot is a possible stationary state in this model.


                                                   26
to socialize their children to a trait di¤erent than their own.
      Furthermore, when cultural intolerance is endogenous, the dynamic system for the
evolution of cultural traits can be written as:

                       q_i = q i (1   q i ) d(q i ; V i (q i ))   d(q j ; V j (q j ))

While cultural substitution is still su¢ cient to guarantee population dynamics which
converge to cultural heterogeneity, an additional assumption on                     V i (q i ) is necessary to
produce direct socialization maps di (q i ) satisfying cultural substitution:
Strategic substitution: The social environment is characterized by strategic substitution
if,
                                            @
                                                V i (q i ) < 0:
                                           @q i
      It is easy to see then that, if direct and oblique socialization mechanisms are culturally
substitutes then:
In a social environment characterized by strategic substitution, the stationary states of
the population dynamics are (0; 1; q i ), where 0 < q i < 1. Moreover, q i (t; q0i ) ! q i ,
globally, for any q0i 2 (0; 1).
      Strategic substitution guarantees that cultural minorities will face relatively larger
gains from socialization, independently of the socialization mechanism. In the case of
strategic complementarity, on the contrary, cultural minorities face smaller (even pos-
sibly negative) socialization gains. Depending on the strength of cultural substitution,
therefore, in this case minorities might or might not assimilate culturally to the majority.
Strategic substitution example: Preferences for status. An example of strategic substi-
tution is the case of preferences for social status studied by Bisin and Verdier (1998).
Suppose the expenditures on conspicuous consumption necessary to achieve a given
level of social status increase with the fraction of individuals in the population who care
about status. In this case the socialization gains to preferences for status are higher
the smaller is the fraction of the population sharing these preferences. In this context
therefore, strategic substitution obtains and hence socialization mechanisms will tend to
satisfy cultural substitution.
Strategic complementarity example: Corruption. An interesting example of strategic
complementarity, albeit only for a subset of parameter values, is represented by Hauk
and Saez Marti (2000)’s study of the cultural transmission of ethical values regarding
corruption. Honest and potentially dishonest agents interact. Each agent is randomly
matched to a principal, who in turn assigns him/her to either a project with a high

                                                     27
payo¤ to the principal if the agent is honest, but more conducive to corrupt behavior, or
to a safe project whose payo¤ is low but independent of corruption. Furthermore, the
principal can, at a cost, acquire a signal on the values of the agent he/she is matched to.
In this environment, a parent’s intolerance towards di¤erent values regarding corruption
will depend on the strategy of principals in the population, e.g., acquiring the signal
and separating project assignments or pooling all agents into the same project. The
strategy of principals, in turn depends on the distribution of values in the population
                     p
of agents. Let           denote the pooling strategy to associate the safe project to all agents
         s
and          the separating strategy of o¤ering the high payo¤ project to all agents who have
been signaled as honest. Let also i denote honest agents. Hauk and Saez Marti (2000)
show that, under particular assumptions about the role of honesty and corruption in
the agents’payo¤s from strategic interactions, each principal’s optimal strategyinvolves
acquiring the signal and separating project assignments when honest agents are a large
enough fraction of the population:
                                                8
                                                >
                                                >          s
                                                                      if q i > q
                                                <
                                     (q i ) =       f s;       p
                                                                   g if q i = q
                                                >
                                                >
                                                :          p
                                                                      if q i < q

       Since honest agents have higher payo¤ on average when principals choose the sep-
arating strategy, the socio-economic interaction in this environment is essentially one
of cultural complementarity, and the population dynamics is biased away from cultural
heterogeneity: under speci…c assumptions, Hauk and Saez Marti’(2000) …nd two locally
stable distributions of the population, one corresponding to low corruption and the other
to high corruption.
       Several papers explore the transmission of various distinct cultural traits along the
lines of this section: developing a model of the speci…c socio-economic interaction of in-
terest, obtaining a reduced form for            V i (q i ); applying the cultural transmission model to
study the population dynamics.27 A non-exhaustive list include: Olcina and Penarrubia
(2004) for other-regarding preferences in hold-up contexts; Escriche, Olcina, and Sánchez
(2004) for family-related preferences and gender labor market discrrimination; Francois
  27
       Some other papers also investigate cultural transmission without the imperfect empathy assumption.
See for instance Lindbeck and Nyberg (2006) for the transmission of work norms and social insurance,
Epstein (2006) for transmission of extremism; Kuran and Sandholm (2008) for cultural hybridization,
Corneo and Jeanne (2009) for a theory of tolerance formation, Dessi (2008) and Adriani.and Sonderegger
(2009) for information-based theory of intergenerational transmission of values.


                                                       28
(2002), Francois and Zabojnik (2005) and Estrella López (2003) for social capital; Saez-
Marti and Zenou (2005) and Senik and Verdier (2007) for work values and ethnic labor
market discrimination; Francois (2006) and Bidner and Francois (2009),for the evolution
of informal institutions; Frot (2008) for cultural transmission through friendship forma-
tion; Hiller (2008a) for preferences for autonomy and work organization; Hiller (2008b)
for pro-social preferences and corporate culture; Baudin (2008) for fertility; Ponthiere
(2008) for lifestyles transmission and longevity; Melindi Ghidi (2009) for political ide-
ology; Correani, Di Dio, and Garofalo (2009) for tolerance; Frot (2009) and Michaud
(2008) for work values and social/unemployment insurance. We cannot discuss them in
any detail, for obvious space limitations. We chose to select instead a few papers which
focus on general important themes regarding the interactions of cultural transmission
with trade, institutions, and collective action mechanisms.

2.4.1    Cultural transmission and trade

An interesting class of models studies strategic substitution in the context of trade
models where standard Walrasian price e¤ects obtain on demand. Theanalysis of these
models is mostly relevant, for instance, in the case of international trade of e.g., ethnic
goods. The following simple 2          2 exchange economy illustrates the argument. Suppose
agents have all the same endowment vector ! = (! l )l=1;2 , di¤ering instead in their
preferences over the two goods: agents of type i = 1 do prefer good 1 (resp. good 2)
more (less) than agents of type i = 2. For instance, assume agents i have well behaved
preferences ui (x1 ; x2 ) such that, 8x1 ; x2 ;

                  @u1 (x1 ; x2 )   @u2 (x1 ; x2 )          @u2 (x1 ; x2 )   @u1 (x1 ; x2 )
                                 >                ;                       >                :
                      @x1              dx1                     @x2              dx2
    Under these assumptions, it is straightforward to show that strategic substitution ob-
tains: the larger the fraction q i of individuals with preference trait i, the larger the total
demand and the market clearing price for good i, the smaller the cultural intolerance of
parents ofg type i:
    The market clearing relative priceof good 1, p, will be determined by the market
clearing condition:

                           z(p) = q 1 x11 (p) + (1         q 1 )x21 (p)   ! 1 = 0;             (11)

where z(p) is the total excess demand for good 1 in the economy and xi1 (p) is the
individual i’s demand function for good 1. From equation (11) it is clear that the

                                                      29
price p is a function p(q 1 ). Indeed, given that individuals of type 1 do prefer good
1, p(q 1 ) will, under general robust conditions, be an increasing function of q 1 . When
preferences of individuals of type 1 (respectively type 2) are su¢ ciently biased towards
good 1(respectively good 2), then one can show that                 V i (q i ) is decreasing in q i and
strategic substitution obtains. Cultural heterogeneity will tend to apply preferences for
ethnic goods in exchange economies. The same results obtaion, a fortiori, in production
economies with increasing marginal costs.
       Olivier, Thoenig, and Verdier (2008), on the other hand, model cultural goods, in
general, as goods that generate a group-identity externality: keeping goods’prices con-
stant, the larger the size of the group sharing the same culture, the larger the utility
bene…t to identify to that cultural group, and the larger also the cultural intolerance
  V i . In this context, the strategic substitution e¤ect on            V i arising from Walrasian
price e¤ects is compensated by strategic complementarities due to the group-identity
externality. As such, this e¤ect promotes cultural homogeneity.
       More generally, strategic complementarities and cultural homogeneity in trade economies
will typically hold, e.g., with increasing returns in production and market power. An
example is provided by Thoenig, Maystre, Olivier and Verdier (2009) who study the
transmission of a preference for a speci…c di¤erentiated good whose varieties are pro-
duced under monopolistic competition. In this context, the larger the size of the group
with a preference for the good, the larger the market size and the entry of …rms produc-
ing di¤erentiated varieties of that good. Increased varieties in turn makes it relatively
more attractive to acquire and transmit preferences for this good, leading once again to
strategic complementarity.

2.4.2       Cultural transmission and institutions

Another interesting class of models studies strategic substitution in socio-economic en-
vironments in which individual randomly matched to interact strategically. Consider
for instance the case of an ethical norm which imposes a psychological cost when an
individual does not play cooperatively in situations like e.g., the Prisoner’s Dilemma
(these are also called norms of pro-sociality).28 If individuals are matched randomly to
interact, the gains to transmit the norm for pro-sociality tend to be higher when many
  28
       Bowles (2001) and Bowles and Gintis (1998, 2002, 2003) develop also cultural evolutionary models
of norms of cooperation but in contexts with exogenous cultural transmission and standard replicator
dynamics.



                                                   30
individuals in the population share the norm,            V i (q i ) is increasing; see Bisin, Topa, and
Verdier (2004).
       Relatedly, Tabellini (2009) studies the cultural transmission of a norm which im-
poses a psychological cost when an individual does not play cooperatively in situations
like e.g., the Prisoner’s Dilemma, but such that the cost declines in some measure of
cultural distance of the opponent (e.g., costs are high only when the opponent is part
of the family or of the tribe; accordingly, these norms have been called norms of limited
morality, and in extreme case, immoral familism).29 More precisely, Tabellini (2009),
following Dixit (2004), considers a continuum of one period lived individuals uniformly
distributed on the circumference of a circle. The density of individuals per unit of arc
length is 1. Each individual is randomly matched with another located at distance y
with probability g(y) > 0. Two matched individuals observe their distance and play a
prisoner’s dilemma game. Besides material payo¤s, each individual enjoys a psychologi-
cal bene…t d that decays with distance at exponential rate                > 0: the pyschological gain
                                                                                         y
of playing cooperation against an opponent located at distance y is de                       : Two types of
player are characterized by di¤erent decay parameters              i   (i = 1; 2) with       2   >   1.   Hence
a general morality player, with i = 1, values cooperation more than a limited morality
player, with i = 2, at any positive distance y.
       For a given fraction q 1 of general morality players, the equilibrium is such that in-
dividuals play cooperatively only with opponents which are close enough in cultural
space (namely individuals of type i play cooperative when matching with individuals at
a distance y         Yi ). Obviously, the distance cut-o¤ is higher for individuals who have
adopted a general morality, as opposed to a limited morality, norm: Y2 < Y1 . Moreover,
the upper threshold Y1 = Y1 (q 1 ) depends positively on the fraction of general morality
players q 1 in the population. This is the case because when playing, individuals do not
observe their opponent type. Hence general morality players bear the risk of cooperat-
ing against cheating opponents, speci…cally when y > Y2 : A larger fraction of general
morality players reduces this risk, inducing conversely a larger range of matches over
which cooperation can be sustained. This element generates therefore a strategic com-
plementarity in the Prisoner’s Dilemma game: individuals are more willing to cooperate
the higher the fraction of general morality individuals in the population.
       Extending Bisin, Topa, and Verdier (2004), Tabellini (2009) embedds this prisoner’s
  29
       The distinction between norms of limited or general morality is due to Ban…eld (1958)’s study of
Lucania, in the South of Italy. See also Platteau (2000).



                                                   31
dilemma structure into a version of the cultural transmission model with imperfect
empathy. A parent’s of type i at time t 1 evaluates his child of type j in the equilibrium
of the matching game as

                                                           ZYj
                                      ij      j        1              iz
                                  V        = u ( j; q ) + d e              g(z)dz
                                                                 0

where uj ( j ; q j ) represents the expected equilibrium material payo¤ of a child of type
j in the prisoner’s dilemma game with random matching when the fraction of general
morality agents is q 1 . The second term is the parent’s evaluation of his child’s expected
psychological bene…ts of cooperating in matches of distance smaller than Yj . Note that
because of imperfect empathy, this term is evaluated with the preference parameter                              i
                                                                                                            1
of the parent. Speci…cally, the cultural intolerance of a general morality parent,                        V ;
can be written as
                                                                     ZY1
                              1       1       1         2        1              1z
                            V = u ( 1; q )             u ( 2; q ) + d e              g(z)dz              (12)
                                                               !
                                                  A                    Y2
                                                                                        !
                                                                                B

The …rst term, A; captures the di¤erence in the expected material payo¤ between a
limited and a general morality child. This term is negative, as general morality induces
more cooperative behavior and is dominated by non-cooperation from a pure material
payo¤ point of view. The second term, B; re‡ects instead the expected bene…t of
extending the scope of the child’s cooperative behavior to a larger range of matches,
evaluated with the parent’s values,               1.    This term is positive, as enlarging the scope
of cooperative behavior increases the direct psychological bene…t as perceived by the
parent. Hence (12) re‡ects the tradeo¤ that a general morality parent faces in terms of
cultural transmission of his values.
       Importantly,     V 1 depends positively on the actual fraction q 1 of general morality
individuals in the generation of the o¤spring. Indeed, a higher anticipated fraction of
general morality agents in the children’s generation makes cooperation less costly in
terms of material payo¤s and more worthwhile in terms of psychological bene…ts. In
this context then, the gains from socialization to a general morality norm are higher in
societies where such norms are prevalent and strategic complementarity obtains.30
  30
       However, Tabellini (2009) shows that in his model         V 1 > 0, namely that the non-economic bene…ts
of cooperation as perceived by general morality parents always outweight the material costs. The model


                                                            32
2.4.3    Cultural transmission and collective action

An important feature of cultural transmission processes, especially in the case of socio-
economic interactions, is that group size e¤ects and parents’ expectations about the
dynamics of these group sizes have strong implications for socialization choices. Issues of
collective action and coordination of expectations within and across cultural groups arise
then naturally and are important determinants of the type of long run social outcomes
that may prevail in society. Collective action mechanisms for cultural transmission and
socialization include, e.g., parties, churches, communities, lobbies, and clubs.
    A few papers consider such collective mechanisms in detail. In a series of papers,
Gradstein and Justman (2002, 2005) consider the role of education in promoting a
common culture within society. In particular, Gradstein and Justman (2002) consider
the implications of the cultural content of education for economic growth. Speci…cally
they show that when di¤erent cultural groups separately determine the social content of
their school curricula, excessive polarization may result which leads to less than optimal
growth. On the other hand, the optimal trajectory involves school curricula converging
towards a middle ground. The authors then investigate how di¤erent modes of political
implementation of centralized schooling through representative democracy can lead to
excessive polarization in some cases and overly rapid homogenization in others.
    Dixit (2009) also considers the role of education in the transmission of values and
norms, though the focus of the paper is on norms of pro-sociality. In this context,
school …nancing is a collective action problem addressed by majority voting. More
precisely, the model considers an economy where …nal output is produced using two
complementary inputs a public good and private individual e¤ort. The public good
comes from contributions of individuals. If individuals have a pro-social component in
their preferences that internalizes the welfare of others to some extent, a larger quantity
of the public good is provided. More speci…cally, consider a society populated by n
individuals, labeled i 2 f1; :::ng. Each individual can exert two types of e¤orts: private
therefore displays positive incentives to transmit the general morality norm across generations and
under speci…c assumptions on the transmission mechanism which bias the process somewhat towards
the general morality trait, the population dynamics converges to a distribution which contains a positive
fraction of individuals sharing the general morality norm, nothwithstanding strategic complementarity.




                                                   33
xi ; and public zi . The income of individual i is given by

                                           y i = (1 + z)xi ; with
                                                 1X i
                                                    n
                                            z=         z
                                                 n i=1

A sel…sh individuals with utility

                                    ui (y i ; xi ; z i ) = y i     h(xi + z i );

for regular convex cost of e¤ort h(xi + z i ); will choose z i = 0 at equilibrium (provided n
is large enough). An individual with pro-social preferences of the form

                                                          X
                                       vi = ui +                 uj ;     >0
                                                          j6=i

might instead more e¢ ciently choose z i > 0; e.g., when                        is large enough.
       Consider a society in which parents are (perfectly) altruistic towards their own chil-
dren, discounting their utility at rate . In this case, parents might collectively choose
to socialize them to pro-social preferences, that is, to a                         > 0; even if socialization is
costly, e.g., because of school contributions. Dixit (2009) discusses di¤erent socialization
outcomes, depending on whether parents have themselves pro-social preferences. When
parents are sel…sh, the preferred level of education                        of any dynastic parent is positive
if parental altruism is strong enough, that is,                         large enough. In this case, if parents
have homogeneous preferences so that any collective choice mechanism induces the same
socialization outcome, children will be socialized by schools to norms of pro-sociality.31
       Several interesting contributions to the literature focus on a speci…c collective ac-
tion mechanism, majority voting, in di¤erent political economy environments. Bisin and
Verdier (2000) considers the cultural transmission of preferences for a good whose pro-
vision is determined by voting, e.g., a public good. For any generation, socialization
preferences depend on the parents’ expectations regarding the political aggregation of
the distribution of preferences in their children’s population, which will vote on public
good provision. On the other hand, the outcome of voting in any period depends on
the present distribution of traits in the population, which in turn is determined by past
  31
       Assuming that parental altruism is increasing in income, the intergenerational transmission of pro-
sociality might remain stuck in a poverty trap where collective action is determined by relatively poor
agents who would rather not invest in schools favoring the transmission of norms of pro-sociality and
hence, in turn, inducing a higher growth of income.


                                                         34
parents’socialization. Under perfect foresight assumptions, the dynamics of the distrib-
ution of preferences, and of political outcomes, depends very much on initial conditions.
For unbalanced initial preference distributions, the dynamics display a tendency to ho-
mogeneity in the long run distribution of preferences, while for relatively balanced initial
distributions, the dynamics display multiple equilibrium paths generated by self-ful…lling
expectations. These paths have very di¤erent long run consequences in terms of both
cultural values and policy outcomes.32
       Tabellini (2009)’s model of cultural transmission of morality norms, discussed before,
also allows for voting on the constitution of external legal enforcement institutions. In
this setting Tabellini (2009) shows how formal enforcement mechanisms may interact dif-
ferentially with local and general morality norms. Under majority rule voting, ine¢ cient
legal institutions may lead to an equilibrium path where such ine¢ ciency reduces the
gains to transmit norms of general morality across generations, which in turn reinforces
the political support for an ine¢ cient legal system.
       Another example regarding the interaction of cultural transmission and voting is
Bisin and Verdier (2005), which investigates the relationship between transmission of
work ethic and redistributive policies. The paper shows how heavily redistributive poli-
cies, like e.g., welfare states policies, limit the gains for transmitting work ethic norms,
which in turn induce political support for the welfare state (and eventually its own
demise, as redistribution is moot as long as work ethic norms disappear in the popula-
tion).
       More precisely, the paper considers preferences for work ethic in a context in which
income redistribution is obtained through simple majority voting. Agents have quasi-
linear preferences over consumption, c, and hours worked, l:

                               ui (c; l) = c + i v(1      l);     with   i   > 0:

for some well behaved preference for leisure map v: Agents di¤er in terms of their prefer-
ences for leisure, parametrized by the marginal rate of substitution of leisure in term of
                    i
consumption,            , for i 2 f1; 2g. Agents of type 1 are characterized by lower preferences
for leisure at the margin,         1   <   2,   that is, by a better work ethic.
       Before-tax income is redistributed in each period, and redistribution decisions are
taken by majority voting of the mature generation under the constraint that the work
  32
       The fact that equilibrium paths are highly dependent on self-ful…lling expectations provides a role
for ideologies as programmatic coordination expectation devices that help to select a particular path of
cultural values and political power structure in society.

                                                        35
ethic parameter    i   is private information of individual agents, that is, it is not observable
in the labor market (see Mirlees, 1973, for the pioneering analysis of redistribution in
economies with adverse selection). Let Ri (qt+1
                                            1
                                                ) and li (qt+1
                                                           1
                                                               ) denote respectively the
after tax income and induced work e¤ort of an individual of type i following the optimal
redistributive scheme voted in period t + 1, which depends on the fraction of agents with
               1
a work ethic, qt+1 :
   When agents of type i represent the majority of the population, they vote for an
income redistribution scheme which is incentive compatible with the work behavior of
private agents and maximizes their representative utility. Bisin and Verdier (2005) show
that in this context, minorities have no socialization incentives:

                                   V i (qt+1
                                         i               i
                                             ) = 0; for qt+1 < 1=2:

On the contrary, the socialization incentives of the majority are strictly positive and
increasing in the fraction of the other (minority) group

                          V i (qt+1
                                i                       i
                                    ) is decreasing in qt+1        i
                                                            , for qt+1 > 1=2

Direct socialization di has the therefore the following form:
                            (
                        i      (1 qti ) V i (qt+1
                                              i         i
                                                  ) if qt+1   1=2
                       d =                              i
                                                                  ;
                               0                    if qt+1 < 1=2

as minority agents have no incentives to spend resources to socialize their children to
their own work ethic norm.
   Bisin and verdier (2005) characterize the path qti of the population dynamics as well as
the equilibrium level of redistribution and taxation starting from an initial fraction q0i of
individuals of type i: They show in particular that, when one preference type is strongly
majoritarian in society, then the politics of redistribution lead to a homogenization
towards that preference. On the contrary, when the initial distribution of preferences
for leisure is su¢ ciently balanced and diversi…ed, then the dynamics of the evolution of
preferences may follow various paths depending on the type of self-ful…lling expectations
individuals coordinate on at equilibrium.
   Very limited is the theoretical research studying cultural transmission and other col-
lective choice mechanisms, like religious organizations, …rms, political parties, armies,
gangs, etc. Interestingly, such institutions might have di¤erent objective functions and
operate by means of di¤erent socialization strategies, including prices, weapons, ideas


                                                 36
and belief-manipulations. An example is provided by Dessi’ (2005) which studies col-
lective memory as the outcome of belief-manipulation on the part of nation-states when
individual have imperfect memory.
       Also, di¤erent modes of socialization, individual versus collective, may compete with
each other. For instance, state propaganda may compete with direct family socialization.
These interactions in turn may a¤ect the policies and social actions undertaken by future
generations, leading in the long run to di¤erent socio-cultural trajectories. Looking at
how such socialization organizations and their di¤erent modes of functioning can be
integrated in cultural transmission models remains an avenue for future research.


2.5        Cultural transmission of beliefs
Cultural transmission relates more generally to the transmission of cultural traits, values,
preferences. In practice, , in the models we surveyed, cultural transmission pertains to
the transmission of preferences: cultural traits and values are projected in the space of
preference traits.
       Parental socialization choice is motivated by imperfect empathy: if the parent and
the child have di¤erent cultural trait, say i and j, respectively, the child chooses the
xj 2 X which maximizes uj (x), and the parent evaluates this choice by ui (xj ):
       In fact, in many instances of interest, we can think of cultural transmission as the
transmission of beliefs, or ideologies. That is, preferences are identical across agents,
but di¤erent cultural types have a di¤erent model of the socio-economic environment.33
Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2008) build a simple model of the transmission of beliefs
about trustworthiness, motivated by the literature we survey in this chapter. It is ped-
agogically convienent however here attempt at a generalization which better highlights
how cultural transmission models can be adapted to study the transmission of beliefs.
We only sketch a model, avoiding details to be …lled in in another venue.
       Let X denote an abstract choice set, comprising all choices relevant to an individual’s
economic and social life. Let             2         denote a parameter unknown to agents. Each
individual has preferences represented by u : X                     ! R. Individuals have distinct
probability distribution over . Let           pit   denote the probability distribution shared by all
individuals (parents and childeren) of type i 2 fa; bg at time t. At time t; children of
  33
       For example, an interesting literature has attributed the support for the welfare state in Europe,
and the lack of support in the U.S., to heterogeneous beliefs about the fairness of social competition and
about what determines income inequality, individual e¤ort or luck; see Alesina and Angeletos (2005).


                                                       37
type i choose x 2 X to maximize
                                                           Z
                                     Ei;t [u(x; )] =            u(x; )dpit :

                                                                          i
They then observe the realization of a signal of ,                                and update to the posterior pit+1
which they enter time t + 1 with.
       Let V ij denote the utility to a type i parent of a type j child, i; j 2 fa; bg. Analo-
gously to imperfect empathy, we require
Imperfect learning: For all i; j 2 fa; bg, V ij = Ei;t [u(xj ; )] ; where                             xj = arg maxx2X Ej;t [u(x; )] :
Learning is imperfect in the sense that agents of type i disregard the information which
has lead individuals of type j to pjt , and viceversa. As long as V ii ; V ij are independent
of q i , imperfect updating implies V ii            V ij , with > for generic utility function u(x; ):
       Applying the economic socialization model to this general environment is now straigh-
forward, and, with quadratic socialization costs,

                                   di = d(q i ; V i ) = (1            qi) V i:

As an illustration, suppose            = f 0;       1g   and, abusing notation, pit is the probability,
according to the posterior of agents of type i, that                          =        0:      The signal   takes value in
                                                                              1
  ; and is distributed so as to assign probability p >                        2
                                                                                   to the true value of , which we
take to be      0   without loss of generality.
       In this simple learning environment, trivially, each type’s posterior converges to the
truth,
                                     pit ! 1; 34 for any i 2 fa; bg;

and as a consequence,
                                                      V i ! 0:

In this environment it is of interest to study the dynamics of the average beliefs in the
population,
                                  b(t; q0i ; pi0 ; pj0 ) = qti pit + (1           qti )pjt :

It follows that
 Average beliefs converge to the truth, b(t; q0i ; pi0 ; pj0 ) ! 1: Direct vertical socialization
slows down convergence.
  34
       Formally, the notion of convergence is convergence in probability, as from the Martingale Conver-
gence Theorem. We choose here an imprecise notation in the advantage of simplicity.




                                                         38
    It should be clear that, as in the case of cultural transmission, endogenous cultural
intolerance,   V i (q i ); could drastically a¤ect the dynamics. In the particular case of the
transmission of beliefs of trustworthiness, as in Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2008),
the untrustworthy type, say type j, does not engage in social interaction and hence
does not receive any signal. As a consequence, type j individual do not learn, pjt = pj .
Furthermore, the trust game is characterized by strategic complementarity (the more
trustworthy individuals in the population, the higher their incentives to socially interact):
                                                          d V i (q i )
                                     V i (q i ); with                  > 0:
                                                            dq i
It is straighforward in this case to construct examples where, by selecting appropriate
initial conditions (q0i ; pi0 ; pj ), we obtain average beliefs which do not converge to the truth
and a population of trustworthy types which tends to vanish,

                          b(t; q0i ; pi0 ; pj ) ! pj ;        q i (t; q0i ; pi0 ; pj ) ! 0:


3       Empirical studies
As we noted in the Introduction, cultural transmission as a …eld of study in the social
sciences is largely motivated by the observation that cultural traits in general, and re-
ligious and ethnic traits in particular, tend to be quite resilient in the population. The
fundamental manifestation of this phenomenon is cultural heterogeneity, the world’s ge-
ographical fragmentation by ethic and religious traits, at any given time. It is then
appropriate to start a survey of empirical studies of cultural transmission by substan-
tiating this observation. We should also stress at the outset, however that cultural
heterogeneity is not a curiousum of culture studies. It is heavily correlated to many
relevant socio-economic phenomena (from the provision of public goods to civil wars),
so much so that the fractionalization index is now a constant feature e.g., of growth
regressions; see Alesina and La Ferrara (2005) for a survey.
    Similarly, the recent debate over the clash of civilization, as spurred by Huntington
(1992), has been informed by the study of ethnic and religious diversity and by di¤erent
measures of ethnic and religious fractionalization. For instance, using genetic distance
as a proxy for ethnic diversity, Spolaore and Wacziarg (2010) obtain the surprising result
that a one standard deviation increase in genetic distance between two populations is
associated to a 23% reduction in the probability of con‡ict between them from 1816 and
2000.

                                                         39
3.1        Cultural heterogeneity
The categorization and analysis of di¤erent cultural traits is the object of study of
cultural anthropology, as a separate discipline. Ethnology, in particular, concerns the
comparison and contrast of di¤erent cultural traits catalogued by ethnographic studies.
Referring to any manual of cultural anthropology like, e.g., Rapport and Overing (2007),
for a more in-depth analysis and for references, it will su¢ ce in this survey to report on
aggregate measures of cultural heterogeneity along the ethnic and religious dimensions.
       Ethnolinguistic diversity is documented by the ethnolinguistic fractionalization in-
dex, as computed from the classi…cations based on the Atlas Narodov Mira, the Ency-
clopedia Britannica, or the Ethnologue database.35 Consider a country j with i = 1; :::N;
ethnolinguistic groups, each representing share sij in the country’s population. The
fractionalization index of country j takes values from 0 to 1 (with 1 corresponding to
maximal fractionalization) and is de…ned as:

                                                       X
                                                       N
                                        ELFj = 1             sij :
                                                       i=1

Figure 4 reports the distribution of the fractionalization index by country according to
the Ethnologue database.
       As an illustration, Chad, with an index close to 1, has 135 languages spoken inside
its borders.
       But even an impressionistic look at the heterogeneity of languages spoken around
the world is striking. See e.g., the case of Asia in Figure 5, where each red dot represents
the geographic center of a distinct language.
       Other fractionalization indexes, e.g., indexes of ethnic, language, and religion frac-
tionalization, display a similar picture, as shown in Table 1. In particular it is notable
that religious fractionalization is higher than ethnolinguistic fractionalization as well as
both etnhic and language fractionalization measured distinctly.
  35
       The Ethnologue database e.g., contains 6,909 language descriptions organized by continent and
country; see Lewis (2009). Of course we are side-stepping here the di¢ cult what-is-a-language issue.
This is perhaps appropriate since we are aiming at an impressionistic look




                                                  40
Figure 4: Cross-Country Distribution of the Ethnolinguistic Fractionalization Index. Source:
Desmet, Ortuno-Ortin, and Wacziarg (2009).




                                             41
                                          of
Asia




   5 :pdf


            Figure 5: Languages spoken in Asia. Source: www.Ethnologue.com




                                         42
       Table 1: Sample Means of Fractionalization Indexes. Source: Alesina, Devleeschauwer,
Easterly, Kurlat, and Wacziarg (2003).

       Even limiting the analysis to the main religions fractionalization is substantial. The
Encyclopedia Britannica World Book 1999’s list of ten major religions, in Figure 6,
contains seven religious denominations (which themselves can be subdivided in several
di¤erent denominations: like e.g., Chirstians in Catholics, Orthodox, Coptic, and others)
and three very heterogeneous aggregations: Chines folk religions, Ethnic religions, New-
religions.36
       Cultural heterogeneity is not only a property of ethnic and religious traits. Tabellini
(2008), for instance, constructs a cross-country index of social values, an aggregate of
trust and respect, speci…cally, obtained from World Value Surveys data (waves 1981,
1990, 1995, 2000). The index is normalized to take values in [0; 1], e.g., almost 0 for
Brazil and 1 for Sweden. This index also show substantial dispersion across the world,
as seen in Figure 7.


3.2        Resilience of cultural traits
As we noted the resilience of cultural traits and cultural heterogeneity are two sides
of the same coin. It is not surprising then that the evidence regarding the resilience
of ethnic and religious traits across generations is quite pervasive and it nicely com-
plements the evidence on cultural heterogeneity. For instance, the fast assimilation of
immigrants into a ‘melting pot’, which many social scientists predicted until the 1960s
(see, for example, Gleason, 1980, for a survey), simply did not materialize. Moreover,
the persistence of ‘ethnic capital’in second- and third-generation immigrants has been
documented by a vast literature on immigration and ethnic capital (see e.g., Borjas,
1992), and recently also by "epidemiological" studies on culture (see e.g., Fernandez and
  36
       The tenth group is Atheism and non-religion.



                                                      43
chart




    7 :pdf


             Figure 6: Major religions. Source: Encyclopedia Britannica.

                                         44
Figure 7: Trust and Respect index by country. Source: Tabellini (2008).




                                  45
Fogli, 2004, and Giuliano, 2006). Orthodox Jewish communities in the United States
constitute another example of the strong resilience of culture (see Mayer, 1979, and the
discussion of a ‘cultural renaissance’overcoming the predicted complete assimilation of
Jewish communities in New York in the 1970s). Outside the United States, Basques,
Catalans, Corsicans, and Irish Catholics in Europe, Quebecois in Canada, and Jews of
the diaspora have all remained strongly attached to their languages and cultural traits
even through the formation of political states which did not recognize their ethnic and
religious diversity. Most recently, several empirical studies have documented that immi-
grants in Europe, and especially so those of Muslim faith, appear to integrate culturally
at very slow pace; see Algan-Bisin-Manning-Verdier (2010) for a comprehensive analysis
of the data. Finally, various measures of social capital display very long-run histeresis,
of the order of hundreds of years: for instance, Guiso, Sapienza and Zingales (2007,
2008) reconduct the contemporary variation of social capital in Italy to the experience
of free-city-state in the Middle Ages, Tabellini (2005, 2008a, 2008b) links cross-country
variation in measures of trust to the quality of political institutions in the nineteenth cen-
tury, Nunn and Wantchekon (2008) link variation in measures of trust in West Africa to
the slave trade, Grosjean (2009) …nds a cross-regional relationship between institutional
corruption in the present and an history of Ottoman domination.
    It is convenient to organize empirical studies of cultural transmission along two main
dimensions. The …rst distinguishes population dynamics studies from socialization stud-
ies; while the second one distinguishes structural and non-structural methodologies.
    Population dynamics studies aim at measuring directly the resilience of cultural
traits, the speed of cultural transmission. Socialization studies aim instead at identify-
ing the most relevant properties of socialization mechanisms, e.g., cultural substitution
vs. complementarity, which the theory suggests are related to the resilience of cultural
traits.
    A large part of the empirical work on cultural transmission adopt a structural method-
ology, linking estimates to the theoretical models we surveyed. Structural population
dynamics studies, for instance, exploit the observation of the population dynamics of
                                                                                     i
                                                                                    qt+1  qti
a trait in history, a time series of qti , to estimate the speed of transmission,       i
                                                                                       qt
                                                                                              ,   as
                                      i    j
well as direct socialization rates (d     d ) from a discrete time version of the popula-
tion dynamics equation (3). The time series of the population dynamics qti is obtained
from archelogical anthropology and/or historical and ethnographic data. Methods from
evolutionary genetics and historical linguistics have also been exploited to produce time


                                               46
series of the population dynamics.
       Structural socialization studies typically exploit instead the observation, at a time
t, of a cross section of population distributions by trait as well as socialization rates
P ii ; P ij ; P ji to estimate the vertical socialization rates di ; dj as well as the deep prefer-
ence parameters of the model,             V i ; V j ; from a version of the cultural transmission
equations, e.g., (1)
       Finally, interesting empirical properties of cultural transmission are also uncovered
by means of non-structural methods, as in the case of historical case-studies of population
dynamics, migration and epidemiological studies.


3.3        Population dynamics
Let t = 0; 1; :::; 1 index discrete time. The population dynamics equation for the leading
cultural transmission model we have discussed, in the discrete time formulation adopted
in empirical studies, is

                                    i
                                   qt+1   qti = qti (1   qti ) di     dj ;

with parental socialization conditions

                                   di = d(qti ; V i ) = (1      qti ) V i :

       Identi…cation of di      dj at time t only requires observing two datapoints from a
sequence of population shares fqti g over time t. A longer sequence will in general allow
the identi…cation of the deep preference parameters of the model,                 V i ; i = a; b:
       Examples of this approach abound,37 though in this literature parental socialization
conditions are typically disregarded and di              dj is assumed constant over time. In this
case, the population dynamics displays logistic growth:
                                                     q(0)
                                 q(t) =                                       :
                                          (1   q(0))e (di    dj )t   + q(0)
Stark (1984, 1997), for instance, adopts this method to estimate the spread of the
Mormon church and of early Christianity in the Roman empire.38 In the case of early
Christianity, population shares from 40 to 350 C:E: (Common Era) are obtained from
  37
       Cite technological adoption studies
  38
       In fact, Stark’s estimates are based on exponential rather than logistic growth. The exponential
equation is a reasonable approximation to the logistic for q i close to 0, as is the case in both his
application.

                                                    47
secondary sources and are imprecisely estimated. The resulting estimates of di                   dj are
:43 per decade for Mormons and :4 for Christians.
       Botticini and Eckstein (2004, 2007) study the cultural transmission of preferences
for education to explain the historical occupational choices of Jews in favor of urban
skilled trades rather than farming. They argue that preferences for education constitute
a component of Judaism since the reform after destruction of the Temple in 70 CE and
as such have been directly transmitted across generations. Botticini and Eckstein (2004)
provide a wealth of historical evidence for the transmission of preferences for education
by Jews from the …rst century to the eight century, when the occupational transition
and urbanization of Jews occurs. Such evidence includes rabbinical discussions and rul-
ings in the Talmud regarding education and teachers, demographic data (e.g., education
levels among Jewish farmers before the 8th century), archeological …ndings on the build-
ing of synagogues in farming villages in Eretz Israel between the 3rd and 5th century.
Furthermore, consistently with cultural substitution, high socialization rates have been
historically supported as Judaism represented a minority in the Diaspora, even more so
after the transition to urban occupations, in which education is an advantage.39 Using
Botticini and Eckstein (2007)’s data on population shares and voluntary conversions of
Jews a small negative di          dj , of the order of    :007; :003 per decade, depending on
the region, can be estimated from the 2nd to 7th century. Such negative net socializa-
tion rates are due, according to Botticini and Eckstein (2007), to the cost of socializing
children to Judaism (which required educating them) in subsistence farming economies.
While socialization rates for the period between the 9th and the 12th century cannot
be estimated for the di¢ culty of taking into account of massacres and forced conver-
sions of Jews, Botticini and Eckstein (2007) provide evidence suggesting institutional
reforms in favor of education, e.g., mandatory primary schooling for boys, and positive
net socialization rates (with no voluntary conversions).
       A related approach, extended to account for geographic di¤usion, has been adopted
in series of pathbreaking papers by L.L. Cavalli Sforza and his coauthors40 to study the
Neolithic transition in Europe.41 Let l =          1; :::; 0; :::; 1 index discrete location xl . In
  39
       Kuznet (1960, 1972) provides an explanation of the occupational history of the Jews which also
relies the economics of minorities (cultural substitution, in our terminology), but where the cultural
trait transmitted is the occupation itself.
  40
     The …rst paper is Ammerman and Cavalli Sforza (1971). An early book length treatment is con-
tained in Ammerman and Cavalli Sforza (1984).
  41
     These studies exploit method and concepts from biology, linguistics, and archelogical anthropology.
A complete survey would require space and competence we do not possess. We feel content with


                                                  48
  Folders/bisin On My Mac/O¢ ce …les/handbook social econ/Cultural Transmission
                                Survey for hanbook/L5I4J404.bmp

Figure 8: The spread of early farming in Europe. Source: Ammerman and Cavalli Sforza
(1984).



this context, population dynamics in the model is governed by the discrete time analogue
of (4):

                 i        i      i         i                           m i
                qt+1;l   qt;l = qt;l (1   qt;l )(di   dj )     i
                                                             mqt;l +                i
                                                                          qt;l 1 + qt;l+1         (13)
                                                                       2
where m is the di¤usion coe¢ cient. Identi…cation of di                dj at time t at location l only
                    i
requires observing qt;l at two points in time t for three locations l. More generally, a
                i
whole sequence qt;l        over both l and t indenti…es separately            V i ; i = a; b; and m: A
longer sequence will in general allow the identi…cation of the deep preference parameters
of the model,   V i ; i = a; b: As we noted in the previous section, however, the dynamics
                                                                      p
of (13) converges to a travelling wave with constant speed = 2 (di dj )m;which is
                                                                                    i
then identi…ed by data on a sequence of dates t at which locations l …rst displays qt;l > 0:
    This is the method adopted by Ammerman and Cavalli Sforza (1971, 1984), exploit-
ing radio carbondating estimates of early farming in 53 archeological sites (from Clarke,
1965). First of all they document that the statistical relationship between the advent of
farming at a site and the distance of the site from the ancient city of Jericho, consid-
ered the the center of di¤usion of farming, is consistent with a constant radial speed of
di¤usion, as assumed by the di¤usion model (13). The radial speed of advance is then
approximately estimated at 25 km per generation (see Figure 8, taken from Ammer-
man and Cavalli Sforza (1984) and based on more extensive later data con…rming this
…nding).42
    Independent estimates of the parameters (di dj ) and m can be obtained from arche-
ological, historical, and anthropological data. Ammerman and Cavalli Sforza (1984)
exploit a range of estimates of the rate of growth of early human establishments in a
geographical location for di          dj and of the mean square distance between the birth
location of spouses in early farmer’s populations for m: Their preferred calibration has
examples which illustrate these methodologies and some of their results.
  42
     Gkiasta, Russell, Shennan, and Steele (2003) re-examine Ammerman and Cavalli Sforza (1971)’s
regression with data on 508 Neolithic sites and 207 Mesolithic sites, prodicing a slightly higher radial
speed estimate of radial speed of 32.5 km per generation.


                                                      49
di    dj = :5 (equivalent to 2:7% population growth per year) and m = :04 (equivalent,
using the di¤usion interpretation, to a mean square distance between the birth location
of spouses of 31 km). A wave of advance moving radially at a a speed of 25 km per
generation is quite in accordance with the model at this calibration.
     Subtle identi…cation problems when …tting the geographical di¤usion model with
data on the advent of farming need be addressed, however, to provide an answer to
some of the more fundamental questions regarding cultural transmission: Which trans-
mission mechanisms are responsible for the spread of Neolithic culture (including e.g.,
sedentary dwellings) and farming technologies? Did the adoption of a dominant tech-
nology, farming, require cultural trasmission in the form of parental socialization? In
other words, a wave of advance of farming could be obtained simply by technological
adoption, without any intermarriage across farmers and hunters and without any move-
ment of people. It becomes then of interest to distinguish adoption through cultural
transmission and intermarriage (what the literature refers to as demic di¤usion) from a
simple technological adoption process.
     To address this identi…cation issue, Rendine,Piazza, and Cavalli Sforza (1986) cali-
brate a discretized version of the geographic spread reaction-di¤usion dynamics in (??).
Let Qil;t be the number of people of type i in location l at time t and Qjl;t be the number
of people of type j in location l at time t. The discrete population dynamics satisfy the
following Lotka-Volterra equations,


                                           Qil;t                          m
         Qil;t+1   Qil;t   =      i
                               i Ql;t (1         ) + Qil;t Qji;t mQil;t +   Qil   1;t   + Qil+1;t
                                           Pi                             2
                                             j
                                           Ql;t
         Qjl;t+1   Qjl;t =        j
                               j Ql;t (1         )   Qil;t Qjl;t :
                                           Pj
The parameter m captures then demic di¤usion, through intermarriage, while                          repre-
sents technological adoption. The identi…cation issue involves then distinguishing the
e¤ects of   and m on the simulated population dynamics and on the geographical spread.
In their simulation Rendine, Piazza, and Cavalli Sforza (1986) pick time units t to rep-
resent a generation (25 years). Thery also set locations l to span a (two dimensional)
map of Europe (hence velocity in the simulation need be intepreted as radial velocity)
so that the distance between two adjacent locations is 156 km. Initial conditions are
set so that t = 0 is 400 generations (10; 000 years) ago, by the advent of farming in
the fertice crescent, l = 0 is the location of the city of Jericho, so that geographical
distance is measured as kilometers from Jericho. At t = 0 Jericho and the adjacent

                                                    50
                                   Figure 9: Evolution of farmers




                                  Figure 10: Evolution of hunters


locations …lled to capacity with farmers, Qil;0 = Pi ; Qjl;0 = 0; l =             1; 0; 1, and the rest of
Europe with hunterer-gatherers Qil;0 =          0; Qjl;0   = Pj ; i > 1 and l <     1: Furthermore, the
calibrated parameters are chosen, as in Ammermann and Cavalli Sforza (1984), from
archeological, historical, and anthropological data. Let i denote farmers and j denote
hunterer-gatherers. Farmer societies are assumed much denser than hunter-gatherers,
Pi = 8 and Pj = :3 (in thousands); and much faster growing,                i   = :5 (equivalent to 2:7%
population growth per year) and           j   = :25. Furthermore the migration rate is m = :04;
as in Ammermann and Cavalli Sforza (1984). We have reproduced here, in Figures 9
and 10, Rendine, Piazza, and Cavalli Sforza (1986)’s simulations.43
       Rendine, Piazza, and Cavalli Sforza (1986) argue convincingly that                and m cannot
  43
       Thanks to Giorgio Topa for help with the simulation of the Lotka-Volterra system.



                                                    51
Figure 11: Comparative statics exercise on the steepness of the wave of advance with
respect to :


be identi…ed with data on the speed the wave of advance. But an interesting property
of di¤usion models is that the faster is the wave the less steep is the wave front (that
is, the shorter is the minimal distance between loci with q i > 0 and loci with q i = 0):
The following simulation, in Figure 11, makes it clear that in fact                  and m could be
identi…ed with more detailed data on the wave, in particular with data on its steepness
at the boundary: keeping the migration rate m constant, a higher                     induces a steeper
wave at the boundary, that is, a assimilation of hunters from their …rst interaction with
farmers at any location.
       Rendine, Piazza, and Cavalli Sforza (1986) pioneer instead a di¤erent methodology
to identify       and m, which exploits theory and data on genetic evolution. Since only
marriage involves genetic admixture, superimposing a genetic evolution model to the
population dynamics of equation (13), allows in principle to identify the relative com-
ponents of di¤usion due to marriage and to technological adoption with data on genetic
heterogeneity by location at any point in time.44 Consider a dyploid gene, that is a
  44
       An important related literature exists on gene-culture coevolution. Its main focus, however, is the
evolution of traits which share genetic and cultural aspects, as in the case of adult lactose absorption
and drinking the milk of domesticated animals; see Aoki, Shida, and Shigesada (1996) for an application
to the spread of agriculture, and Aoki (2001) and Feldman and Laland (1996) for recent surveys. For
some important applications of this literature to the nature-nurture question, see Cavalli Sorza and
Feldman (1973) and Otto, Christialsen, and Feldman (1995).



                                                     52
                                     i;g         j;g
gene with two alleles, g; g 0 : Let ql;t (resp. ql;t ) denote the fraction of individuals in the
i population with allele g at location l at time t (resp. the fraction of individuals in
                                                                      i;g                           i;g0
the j population with allele g at location l at time t ): Naturally, ql;t =1                       ql;t and
 j;g           j;g0
ql;t =1       ql;t : Assume that marriages are necessarily homogamous with respect to each
population i; j: In this context, gene frequences change over time as a consequence of
geographical spread, as long as adjacent location have di¤erent gene frequences. More
precisely, we can express the dynamic gener frequency as follows:
                            "                   Qil;t i;g
                                                                                   #
                                      i                          i j j;g
               i;g      1         l Ql;t (1     Pi
                                                     )ql;t + Ql;t Ql;t ql;t +
              ql;t+1 = i                    i;g              i;g               i;g
                                                                                     :                     (14)
                      Ql;t+1 + Ql 1;t ql 1;t + Qil+1;t ql+1;t
                                m    i
                                                                       mQil;t ql;t
                                          2

                            1
Gene frequences are         2
                                for any gene at t =      N (N not reported) and they are left sub-
ject to drift only, in a population of hunterer-gatherers, up to the advent of farming at
t = 0; when it then follows (14). Simulating the population dynamics jointly to their
genetic evolution produces a geographical gradient in gene frequencies (genetic cline,
in the literature) consistent with the observed geographical gradient, from the Middle
east to Europe, associated to 20 diallelic genetic forms for which data was available
(these inlcude e.g., the Rh as well as the HLA genes). Di¤erent simulations with smaller
di¤usion parameter m; even when compensated by a larger technological adoption para-
meter , apparently generate too ‡at genetic clines. This is interpreted as evidence that
demic di¤usion (and intermarriage), as opposed to technological adoption, has played a
fundamental role in the Neolithic transition.
       More recently, phylogenetic methods from evolutionary biology have been adapted,
along the lines of Rendine, Piazza, Cavalli Sforza (1986), in sophisticated studies of
cultural and physical migration as well as of historical linguistics; see Cavalli Sforza,
Menozzi, and Piazza (1994), Forster and Renfrew (2006), Peregrine, Peiros, and Feldman
(2009). Also, for a more critical overview of this literature, sharing similar methods, see
Rogers and Cashdan (1997) and Borgerho¤ Mulder, Nunn, and Towner (2006).

3.3.1       Long term persistence

An important recent literature has documented the long term persistence and long last-
ing e¤ects of institutions on socio-economic outcomes.45 For instance, Acemoglu, John-
son, and Robinson (2001), following North and Thomas (1973) and North (1990a,b),
  45
       Several fascinating papers explore the role of genetic evolution and especially of genetic diversity in
explaining the variation in populations’economic and demographic success; see Galor and Moav (2002),
Galor (2005), Ashraf and Galor (2010).

                                                      53
study protection of property rights and limitations on the power of the executive, while
La Porta, Lopez de Silanez, Shleifer and Vishny (1999) study legal origin. Others, like
e.g., Tabellini (2007), following Bain…eld (1958), attribute the persistence of institutions
to indicators of individual values and beliefs, such as trust and respect for others. Guiso,
Sapienza, and Zingales (2008), following Putnam (1993), stress instead the long lasting
e¤ects of istitutions, the constitution of free city-states in medieval Italy in their study,
on values and beliefs like trust. Relatedly, Durante (2009) documents the e¤ects of his-
torical institutions favoring cooperation and social insurance on trust in Europe. Other
striking and interesting examples of long term persistence of values and institutions in-
clude the e¤ect of the slave trade on trust ( Nunn and Wantchekon, 2008), of Ottoman
domination on corruption (Grosjean, 2009), of a history of civil con‡ict and violently
play in soccer (Miguel, Saiegh, and Satyanath, 2008), of the Chinese writing system
on the adoption of collective values (Mo, 2007), of medieval family systems on various
indicator of demographic and economic development (Duranton, Rodríguez-Pose, and
Sandall, 2007), of prevalence of herding on a "culture of honor" (Grosjean, 2010), of
pogroms in 1349 in Germany (following the Black Death) on various measures of anti-
Semitism in the 20’s and 30’s (Voigtländer and Voth, 2010), of early historical use of
animal plough agriculture on female labor force participation (Alesina, Giuliano, and
Nunn, 2010).
   The motivation of these papers typically consists in identifying a cause of present day
values and institutions which are conducive to economic growth: Is it institutions? Is it
values? Or, culture? To this end it is not su¢ cient, while nonetheless very interesting,
to document the statistical correlation between past institutions, values, and cultural
traits and present-day socio outcomes. To identify causal e¤ects the various measures of
possible original institutions, values, and cultural traits are instrumented in a regression
of present-day socioeconomic outcomes. For instance, settlers’mortality instruments for
protection of property rights and limitations on the power of the executive in Acemoglu,
Johnson, and Robinson (2001), since in countries with high settler’s mortality colonial
institutions where designed to extract value rather than to induce growth. Tabellini
(2007) instead instruments culture and values in the distant past in Europe with within
country variation in literacy rates at the end of the 18th century and other indicators
of political institutions between the 17th and the 19th century, so as to implicitely con-
trol for political institutions, which do not vary within countries. Guiso, Sapienza, and
Zingales (2008) instrument the constitution of a free city-state in medieval Italy with


                                             54
dummies indicating cities which were the seat of a bishop before the turn of the mil-
lenium (typically, cities which were more independent from the Holy Roman Empire)
and cities with an Etruscan origin (typically, cities enjoying a strategic military defense
position). Finally, Durante (2009) instruments historical institutions favoring cooper-
ation and social insurance with historical year-to-year variability in precipitations and
temperature.
   A di¤erent approach to the long term persistence of institutions, one that, by recog-
nizing the endogeneity and interdependence of institutions, values, and culture, would
exploit more directly the structural implications of cultural transmission models. We
are not aware of any papers which systematically investigate culture and institutions
adopting this approach. For instance Tabellini (2008), while explicitely modeling the
interaction of values and political institutions, as we have seen, does not exploit the
structural restrictions of the model but rather documents the statistical correlation be-
tween a measure of self-reported trust for U.S. citizens (from GSS survey data) and
indicators of political institutions in their ancestor’s country between the 17th and the
19th century. Similarly, Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2008) model explicitly the trans-
mission of beliefs, but document the persistence of trust (from both World Value Survey
data as well as from German Socio Economic Panel data) without linking it structurally
to the medieval political institutions in Italy the e¤ects of which motivate their analysis.
   An exemplary advantage of the adoption of structural methods to the empirical
analysis of long term persistence of values, e.g, in Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2008)’s
data on Italian cities, would consist in exploiting the important aspect that values seem
to persist at the level of geographical units even after centuries of intense migration
patterns, e.g., across cities in Italy. This has, in principle, important un-exploited im-
plications on the nature of the mechanism which governs the transmission of values.
   Bisin and Verdier (2005) also do not attempt at a structural empircal analysis of their
model of the interaction between the cultural transmission of norms of work ethic and the
institutions of the welfare state. However, Ljunge (2010) represents an important step in
this direction, tackling directly the implication of Bisin and Verdier (2005)’s model that,
under initial conditions not unlike the socio-economic environment of northern Europe
in the 70’s, the political support for the welfare state will tend to intensify over time
while work ethic norms will weaken. Using registry data on individual panels over the
period 1974 to 1990 in Sweden, Ljunge (2010) estimates that exposure to the institutions
of the welfare state can account for a large fraction of the younger generations’higher


                                            55
Figure 12: Sick leave participation rate by cohort in Sweden. Source. Source: Ljunge
(2010).


demand for social insurance bene…ts, the discretionary take up of sick leave bene…ts, in
particular; see Figure 12.46
       Another step in the direction of evaluating empirically the structural implications of
cultural transmission in a socio-economic environment where institutions and culture,
values, and beliefs are jointly determined is contained in Doepke and Zilibotti (2007)
and in Fernandez-Villaverde, Greenwood, and Guner (2010).
       Doepke and Zilibotti (2007) propose and provide empirical evidence for a theory of
the success of the middle class during the British Industial Revolution, which relies on
the reinforcement between its cultural traits favoring patience and a work ethic and the
technology and market institution of early capitalism. In their model, altruistic parents
shape their children’s preferences, in partucular with regards to their patience and the
work ethic. Parents’incentives to invest in their children patience increases in the steep-
ness of the children’s future income pro…le. At the same time, a relatively patient child
  46
       For other recent important work along these same lines, see Alesina, Algan, Cahuc, and Giuliano
(2010) on the interactions between family values and regulation of labor market; and Nannicini, Stella,
Tabellini, and Troiano (2010) on the interaction between norms of generalized trust and political ac-
countability in election.



                                                   56
will tend to favor professions characterized by a steep income pro…le. Relatedly, parents
whose children will rely mostly on labor income will tend to socialize them to a strong
work ethic and children with a strong work ethic will work harder and obtain high labor
income. In this context, society will tend to become endogenously strati…ed into social
classes de…ned by occupations and their associated preferences: artisans, craftsmen, and
merchants will tend to be patient and will display a strong work ethic, while the landed
upper class will tend to cultivate tastes for present concumption and leisure. The ad-
vent of the spirit of capitalism, and the new technologies associated with the Industrial
Revolution, is the shock which selects the preferences of artisans, craftsmen, and mer-
chants in Doepke and Zilibotti (2007). The model is shown to be consistent with several
important historical facts regarding i) the predominantly middle class origin of the …rst
industrialists; ii) the lack of involvement of landowners in the …nancing of new enter-
prises; iii) the catching-up of the wealth of non-landed entrepreneurs in manufactoring,
commerce, and …nance, with respect to the landed upper class.
   While Doepke and Zilibotti (2007) informally argue for the consistency of their model
with some statitical regularities pertaining to the Industrial Revolution, Fernandez-
Villaverde, Greenwood, and Guner (2010) take more formally and directly their model
of the Sexual Revolution to data. The Sexual Revolution in the U.S. is manifested by
the fraction of women who have engaged in premarital sex by age 19: such fraction went
from 6% in 1900 to about 75% nowadays. Importantly, the change in sexual behavior
has been accompanied by a corresponding, while lagged, change in values regarding
pre-marital sex: for instance, 15% of women in 1968 had a permissive attitude toward
premarital sex, when 40% of 19 year-old females had experienced it; this attitude spread
to 45% by 1983, when 73% of 19 year olds had had pre-marital sex. Fernandez-Villaverde,
Greenwood, and Guner (2010)’s model interacts parental socialization with the children’s
choices regarding pre-marital sex and a marriage market equilibrium. Pre-marital sex,
in the model, is costly because it possibly induces out-of-wedlock births which a¤ect
negatively marriage prospects. The model is calibrated and, when its reaction to a
technological which drastically improves the contraceptive technology (thereby reducing
the probability of out-of-wedlock births as a consequence of pre-marital sex) is simulated,
it is shown to account for both the sexual revolution as well as for the lagged increase
in permissive attitudes toward pre-marital sex.
   Finally, a series of contibutions study the e¤ect of human genetic diversity between
populations on di¤erent current economic variables of interest. Because genetic mixing


                                            57
Figure 13: Genetic Distance Between 42 Populations. Source: Cavalli Sforza, Menozzi,
and Piazza (1994).



across populations is an e¤ect of heterogamous marriages and di¤usion, as in the analyses
of the Neolithic transition discussed in Section 3.3, genetic distance is appropriately
interpreted as a proxy for cultural distance. This literature exploits data collected by
Cavalli Sforza, Menozzi, and Piazza (1994; see pp. 75-76 and Figure 13 below) on
allele frequencies in di¤erent populations. Genetic distance between two populations is
measured as the probability that two alleles at a given genetic locus selected at random
from the two populations will be di¤erent.47
       In this literature, notably, Guiso, Sapienza and Zingales (2004) use genetic distance
between European populations as an instrument for trust in trade gravity regressions.48
  47
       The genetic loci sampled are chosen to be relatively neutral with respect to evolutionary selec-
tion.This measure of genetic distance can then also be interpreted as a measure of distance from the
most recent common ancestors of the two populations.
 48
    Giuliano, Spilimbergo, and Tonon (2006) however dispute the e¤ect of genetic distance on trade


                                                   58
Desmet, Ortuno-Ortiz, and Wacziarg (2009) document the close relationship between ge-
netic distance and cultural di¤erences as measured by several answers to the World Val-
ues Survey regarding norms, values and cultural characteristics. Spolaore and Wacziarg
(2009) construct worldwide measures of genetic distance between 137 countries and the
U.S., considered to embed the technological frontier in 1995. and correlate them with
income levels. In cross-countru regressions they document then a positive correlation
between genetic distance from the frontier and income levels.

3.3.2    Immigration and Assimilation

The cultural transmission of ethnic and religious traits if often studied, somewhat in-
directly, focusing on the behavior of immigrants. The dynamic pattern of cultural and
socio-economic integration of immigrants to the receiving country contains evidence of
the parental socialization (or lack thereof) to the traits which characterize their origin.
Countless ethnographic studies have been produced about the immigrant experience in
sociology and anthropology, at least since the photographic documentation about How
the other half lives, in New York, by Jacob Riis in 1890.49 Starting in the late 1950s
and 1960s, many of them discredit the view that immigrants naturally assimilate in a
melting pot and focus instead their struggles to socialize children to their ethnic and
religious traits.
    We concentrate in this survey on econometric studies of the integration pattern of
immigrants. A fundamental tool of this analysis are assimilation indexes.50 One such
index has been recently proposed by Vigdor (2008). It measures the residual of the
probability that an individual is an immigrant, appropriately rescaled from 0 to a 100
(maximal assimilation), when the probability is obtained under a linear probit prediction
model. A measure of the speed of assimilation can then be ascertained from the graph in
Figure 14, which reports the index as a function of years in the U.S. at di¤erent period
in time (1900, 1910, 1920, 2006), that is, for di¤erent cohort of immigrants.
volume after controlling for geography.
  49
     See e.g., the following classic studies, with no claims to exhaustivity whatsoever, W. C. Smith’s
Americans in the Making (1939), M. Hansen’s The Immigrant in American History (1941), Whyte’s
Street Corner Society (1943), Handlin’s The Uprooted (1951) and Boston’s Immigrants (1959), J.
Higham’s Strangers in the Land (1955), O. Herberg Protestant-Catholic-Jew (1955), Glazer and Moyni-
han’s Beyond the Melting Pot (1963), Gordon’s Assimilation in American Life (1964), Mayer (1979).
  50
     We generally prefer the word integration to the more charged assimilation. They are e¤ectively
synonyms, however, and we use the latter when so is done in the literature.



                                                 59
              Figure 14: Assimilation by years in the U.S. Source: Vigdor (2008).



       An extensive analysis of Census data from the point of view of Vigdor’s assimilation
index indicates that, for instance, immigrants in the U.S. in the past quarter-century
have assimilated more rapidly than immigrants a century ago, even though Mexicans
appear to assimilate at a slower rate than other immigrant groups before.
       Other measures of integration are obtained by comparing …rst and second genera-
tion immigrants to natives of similar demographic and economic characteristics. Borjas
(1995), for instance, studies residential segregation in Census 1970 and NLSY data. He
documents a large variation in segregation rates across ethnic groups (…rst generation):
e.g., 2.6% for Greeks, 2.2% for Jamaicans, 15.3% for Italians and 22.6% for Mexicans
in the 1970 Census. Similarly, he documents a large variation in …rst-second generation
di¤erences in segregation rates: Italians go from 15.3% to 12.1%, Mexicans from 22.6%
to 18.1%, while Cubans from 21.3% to 4.7%.
       More formally, the integration literature typically relies on waves of cross sectional
data (like e.g., Census data) to construct synthetic cohorts and distinguish integration
from the e¤ects of age at migration and cohort.51 Consider a general trait yi of an
individual i in a …xed country j (the destination country). Let Xi represent individual
speci…c controls and let Ik be a dummy taking value 1 if the individual is an immigrant
  51
       See Borjas (1999) for a discussion of the identi…cation problems arising when cohort e¤ects are not
accurately controlled for.



                                                     60
from country of origin k (and 0 for natives). The regression

             yi =    0   +    1 Xi +
                                                                                                            !
              X               k   +      1;k   age at migration +              2;k   year of migration+
                    Ik                                                                                          + "i
                k                                      +     3;k   length of stay

identi…es the speed of integration of immigrants from country k with                                3;k ;   the coe¢ cient
                             52
of length of stay.                Furthermore, when data to distinguish second and third generation
immigrants are available, let Ik be a …rst generation dummy, that is, 1 if the individual
is a …rst generation immigrant from country of origin k (and 0 for second generation
and natives); and let IIk be a second generation dummy, 1 if the individual is a second
generation immigrant from country of origin k (and 0 otherwise).53 In this case, the
regression is:

             yi =   0    +    1 Xi +
                                                                                                      !
              X          k   +     1;k    age at migration +             2;k    year of migration+
                                                                                                            Ik + "i
               k                                   +   3;k    length of stay
                    X
               +         k IIk
                    k

and      k   identi…es the second generation e¤ect.
       Following some variant of this methodology, measures of economic integration for the
U.S. and Canada have been constructed using earnings, (log) wage rates, skills (see e.g.,
LaLonde and Topel, 1997 and Borjas, 1999, for surveys). Other measures of assimilation,
which focus more on cultural dimensions, have been constructed using intermarriage
rates (Pagnini and Morgan, 1990; Meng and Gregory (2002); Bisin, Patacchini, Verdier,
Zenou, 2008), or English pro…ciency (see Chiswick and Miller, 1992), ethnically-revealing
names (Arai, Besancenot, Huynh, and Skalli, 2009), civic participation (Aleksynska,
2007), ethnic job specialization (Mandor¤, 2005), self-reported measures in survey data
(Dustmann, 1996; Bisin, Patacchini, Verdier, Zenou, 2008; Manning and Roy, 2009).
       A recent empirical literature has studied the behavior of immigrants with a di¤erent
perspective. This literature, which goes by the name of epidemiological approach,54 is
  52
       We abstract here from several measurement issues which are dealt with in di¤erent ways in this
literature, e.g., the de…nition of second generation and of couuntry of origin.
   53
      Panel data are necessary to correct for the survivorship bias due to return migration and cohort
heterogeneity; see e.g., Hu (2000).
  54
     See Fernandez (2007) for a methodological discussion of the approach, as well as Fernandez (2010),
in this Handbook for a more detailed survey.

                                                                    61
motivated as an attempt to isolate cultural traits of the origin countries which a¤ect
the behavior of immigrants (including second generation immigrants) in the destina-
tion countries. In this sense, the literature provides evidence that culture matters (see
Fernandez, 2010, in this Handbook for a survey). In the process of documenting that
culture matters, however, these studies indirectly measure the persistence of ethnic and
religious traits, which immigrants maintain from their original backgrounds.
       Consider a sample of individuals born in country j, including natives and second
generation immigrants from country of origin k. Consider a general trait yi of an indi-
vidual i in country j, and let Yk be measure of the mean value of the trait in the country
of origin. Ideally the mean Yk should be measured at the beginning of the immigration
wave to country j which resulted in the second generation immigrant population in the
sample. In this case Yk is interpreted to instrument from culture. The regression
                                               X
                             yi = 0 + 1 Xi +       k Yk + "ij
                                                            k

identi…es the e¤ects of country k’s culture with                k;   the coe¢ cient of Yk :55
       Data regarding several behavioral traits of interest are have been collected and ana-
lyzed using the epidemiological approach; see Fernandez and Fogli (2006a,b) for female
labor supply and fertility, Giuliano (2007) for living arrangements of 18-30-year-olds,
Tabellini (2005) and Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2006) for social capital, Algan and
Cahuc (2006, 2007) and Tabellini (2008) for trust.
       Statistics like the average speed of integration and the correlation between the speed
of integration and the prevalence of the ethnic group in the country as a whole or in
speci…c geographical areas like e.g., states, could be produced with the data employed in
the epidemiological literature. They would give a better picture of cultural transmission
of ethnic and religious traits.
       While the immigration literature provides much needed empirical evidence on inte-
gration, results cannot be interpreted to indicate the (causal) determinants of the speed
of integration. In particular, properly identifying the determinants of integration would
require identifying cross-cultural variations in attitudes towards integration on the part
of immigrants from the incentives to integration, which depend on the socio-economic
conditions of the destination country.56 Furthermore, this literature cannot address the
important issue of changes in the speed of integration across generations, as little is
  55
       In several instances the e¤ects of culture are restricted to be equal across country of origin,   k   = ,
for any k.
  56
     Meng and Gregory (2002) address this issue for Australia by measuring the earning gap in favor of

                                                       62
known about third generations. Finally, the speed of integration depends on the cul-
tural trait of interest, as for instance language assimilation is much faster than religious
assimilation (Jasso, 2009).


3.4     Socialization
A large empirical literature in sociology and economics concerns socialization mecha-
nisms directly. It addresses a few general questions, like, Are relevant cultural traits and
preferences correlated across generations?           Which socialization mechanisms are more
responsible for cultural transmission?
    The answer to the …rst question tends to be positive for many traits; from spe-
ci…c traits, like use of salt in food, to general preferences and attitudes, like generosity.
Cavalli Sforza Feldman, Chen, and Dornbusch (1982) document high intergenerational
correlations in a pool of Stanford students (and their parents) for many traits, including
religious and political a¢ liation and attitudes, superstitions, and habits (including use
of salt in food). Among the most interesting recent studies, high correlations are found
in risk and discounting preferences (Arrondel, 2009), risk and trust attitudes (Dohmen,
Falk, Hu¤man, and Sunde, 2006, on the 2003 and 2004 waves of the German Socio-
Economic Panel), attitudes towards supporting own parents in old age (Jellal and Wol¤,
2002a), attitudes towards supporting own children (Jellal and Wol¤, 2002b), attitudes
toward work, welfare, and individual responsibility (Baron, Cobb-Clark, and Erkal, 2008,
from Youth in Focus Project data on Australian administrative social security records
between 1993-2005), and generosity (Wilhelm, Brown, Rooney, and Steinberg, 2008).
The relation between parents’ and children’s fertility behaviors is also very well doc-
umented; see e.g., Murphy and Knudsen (2002), Murphy and Wang (2001), Tymicki
(2005) and the references therein. Similarly, a strong intergenerational correlation be-
tween gender role attitudes is also well documented (see Farre’ and Vella, 2007, on a
sample of mother-child pairs from the NLSY79; Fernandez, Fogli, and Olivetti, 2004,
on a sample of mother-son pairs from the GSS). On the other hand, Cipriani, Giuliano,
Jeanne (2007) …nd no correlation in attitudes towards cooperation in an experiments
with young children (and their parents).
intermarried immigrants. Arai and Thoursie (2006) measure, for Sweden, the earning gap obtained by
those immigrants who change their name to a more Swedish-sounding one. Avitabile, Clots-Figueras,
and Masella (2009) relate immigrants’propensity to integrate to a more favorable citizenship legislation
in Germany. See also Hatton and Leigh (2007) for a discussion of these issues.



                                                  63
   With regards to the socialization mechanisms most responsible for cultural trans-
mission, some of the stylized facts include the following: religious and ethnic traits are
usually adopted in the early formative years of children’s psychology, and family, peers
and role models play a crucial role in determining their adoption (Clark and Worthing-
ton 1987, Cornwall 1988, Erickson 1992, Hayes and Pittelkow 1993); children of mixed
religious marriages have weaker religious commitments and are less likely to conform to
any parental religious ideology or practices (Hoge and Petrillo, 1978, Hoge, Petrillo and
Smith, 1982, Heaton 1986, and Ozorak 1989); the e¤ect of homogamy on socialization is
strong, though it vanishes if socialization e¤ort is controlled for (Hayes and Pittelkow,
1993); schools and other collective socialization mechanisms are perceived as e¤ective so-
cialization instruments (O’Brien and Fugita, 1991, for Japanese; Mayer, 1985, for Jews;
Tyack, 1974, for Germans; and, more recently, Glazer, 1997, for African-Americans).
   Of course, intergenerational correlations and revealed preferences for the ethnic com-
position of schools cannot be interpreted directly as measures of successful socialization,
because of several daunting identi…cation problems. In partcular, these include the is-
sues associated to the nature/nurture problem (see Sacerdote, 2010, in this Handbook
for a survey of the literature in economics and in behavioral genetics). Detailed em-
pirical analyses of the properties of socialization mechanisms can nonetheless shed light
on several fundamental questions arising in the study of cultural transmission, How is
cultural heterogeneity explained? What are its determinants?
   The theoretical work on cultural transmission we surveyed identi…es cultural substi-
tution between vertical and oblique/horizontal transmission as a general component of
socialization mechanisms which induce heterogeneity, especially in socio-economic en-
vironments characterized by strategic substitution. Also, cultural distinction in identity
formation mechanism of minorities acts in a related manner. Importantly, however, all
these implications rely on the assumption of imperfect empathy and on the distinction
between vertical and oblique/horizontal transmission.
   Do we observe imperfect empathy, vertical and oblique/horizontal transmission, cul-
tural substitution, strategic substitution, and cultural distinction? We next survey the
empirical literature dedicated to address these speci…c questions.

3.4.1   Imperfect empathy

Evidence for impure altruism (a general form of imperfect empathy) is found in the
empirical analysis of inter vivos transfers (see e.g., Altonji, Hayashi, and Kotliko¤,


                                            64
1997, and Laferrere and Wol¤, 2006). Survey data can also be taken to bear indirect
light on the issue: in the response to NORC’s General Social Survey’s question, ‘Which
three of the qualities listed would you say are the most desirable for a child to have
?’ ‘obedience’is cited on average across the sample more than, (in order) ‘self-control’,
‘success’, ‘studiousness’, ‘cleanliness’, and less often only than ‘honesty.’

3.4.2   Vertical vs. oblique/horizontal transmission

Boothand Kee (2009) estimate count data quantile regression models using the British
Household Panel Survey to distinguish vertical and oblique transmission of fertility rates,
…nding strong evidence for substantial vertical transmission. Branas-Garza and Neuman
(2007) exploit data from the International Social Survey Programme: Religion II (ISSP)
on church attendance and prayer habits of parents in Spain and Italy to study the e¤ect
of a speci…c vertical transmission mechanism - exposure to religiosity - on fertility pref-
erences and practice of children. The major …nding is that such e¤ect are pronounced,
though maternal and paternal e¤ects are di¤erent. Collado, Ortuno-Ortin, and Romeu
(2005) introduce a novel methodlogy to identify vertical transmission in consumption
choices, lacking consumption data for both parents and children. Analyzing the cor-
relation between the geographical distributions of surnames and consumption choices,
they conclude that the data suggest a very signi…cant vertical transmission of prefer-
ences regarding food items and no vertical transmission for non-food goods. Aleksynska
(2007) adopts the synthetic cohort methodology to study the cultural transmission of
immigrants to the European Union with European Social Survey and World Values Sur-
vey data). In particular she is interested in determining whether the observed levels of
immigrants’ civic participation depends relatively more on the levels of natives’ civic
participation in the same countries or in the country of destination. Notwithstanding
selection issues, the evidence in favor of country of destination e¤ect suggests horizon-
tal transmission leading to the solicit internalization of the norms of the host country.
Uslaner (2008) similarly test wheather an individual generalized trust is relatively more
transmitted from parents to children, obtained by ethnic heritage (where their grand-
parents came from), or by horizontal and oblique transmission (the proportion of people
of di¤erent ethnic backgrounds in a state), …nding strong evidence in favor of direct
vertical socialization and ethnic heritage.
   Many empirical studies concern the determinants of female labor force participation,
to identify cultural components. Fernandez and Fogli (2005) show that the variation in


                                              65
the work behavior of second-generation American women can be explained, in part, by
the level of female labor force participation in their parents’country of origin. Moreover,
Fernandez (2007b) shows that the attitudes towards women’s work in the parental coun-
try of origin has important explanatory value for second-generation American women
’s work behavior in the U.S. Fernandez, Fogli, and Olivetti (2004) identify a vertical
transmission mechanism: sons of working mothers seem to diplay a prefererence for
working wives, relatively to sons of non-working mothers. Fernandez (2007a) and Fogli
and Velkamp (2007) …nd evidence for a horizontal transmission and learning in a variety
of data, from calibration to survey and labor market data.

3.4.3       Marriage

Chiswick (2008) studies the determinants of ethnic intermarriage by means of a bino-
mial logistic regression using 1980 US Census data. Interestingly, the paper constructs
measures for the availability ratios for potential spouses and for group size. It then
documents lower intermarriage rates the greater the availability ratio and the larger the
size of the group, a property generally consistent with choice theoretic marriage mar-
kets. Evidence for homogamous marriage as a socialization mechanism can be indirectly
gauged from the fact that most religious denominations include rules favoring homogamy
(Smith 1996) and that most conversions are attributable to the desire of establishing
homogamy (Greeley, 1979; Branas-Garza, Garcia-Munoz, and Neuman, 2007). Further-
more, Becker (2009) provides evidence, from the Preschool Education and Educational
Careers among Migrant Children project on naming patterns of Turkish parents in Ger-
many, that intermarriage strongly decreases the probability of Turkish names.57
       A more detailed non-linear analysis of this dependence is necessary, however, to iden-
tify the properties of marriage as a socialization mechanism. Bisin, Topa, and Verdier
(2004) attempt this endeavor, producing an empirical analysis of the endogenous mar-
riage model in Section 2.2.2. Exploiting the geographic variation in the distribution of
religious traits in the U.S., Bisin, Topa, and Verdier (2004) estimate the model by match-
                                           ij
ing simulated inter-marriage rates              and socialization rates P ij , at a given moment in
  57
       Evidence for marriage as socialization: most religious denominations include rules favoring ho-
mogamy (Smith 1996); most conversions are attributable to the desire of establishing homogamy (Gree-
ley, 1979; Branas-Garza, Garcia-Munoz, and Neuman (2007).). Furthermore, Becker (2009) provides
evidence from the Preschool Education and Educational Careers among Migrant Children project on
naming patterns of Turkish parents in Germany, …nding that intermarriage strongly decreases the prob-
ability of Turkish names.


                                                    66
time, with the corresponding empirical moments. The data are from the General Social
Survey (GSS), 1972-1996, with respect to 4 religious groups: Protestants, Catholics,
Jews, and the residual group, Others (i; j = P; C; J; O). The geographical unit of varia-
tion is a U.S. state (for 23 of them). Information on socialization rates P ij was obtained
from a special module on religion of the GSS. The structural parameters of the model
are the intolerance parameters     V ij , for any i and j, and the parameters of the cost
functions for socialization and entrance in the restricted marriage pool. Furthermore,
they test the model against di¤erent alternatives which restrict the role of marriage
as a socialization mechanism, …nding support for socialization as a major incentive for
religious homogamy in marriage.
   The observed intermarriage rates by religious trait in the U.S. data are a stark
indication of the prevalence of religious homogamy. Figure 15 displays the probabililty
of homogamous marriage, in the data, as a function of the religious shares, by U.S. state,
for the four religious groups analyzed in the study (Protestants, Catholics, Jews, and
Others).
   Similarly, socialization rates are also very high, along the religious dimension; espe-
cially in homogamous marriages; see Table 2.




   Table 2: Socialization rates for selected marriage types. Source: Bisin, Topa, and
Verdier (2004).

   Note that points on the 45o -line in the graph represent the marriage rates which
would be obtained by random matching, by religious share. Datapoints above the 45o -
line are then to be interpreted as raw evidence for the prevalence of homogamy.
   The endogenous marriage model …ts these data quite well, as illustrated by Figure
16 and Table 3 (see the paper for formal statistics).




                                            67
Figure 15: Probability of homogamous marriage as a function of the religious shares, by
U.S. state. a: Protestants; b: Catholics; c: Jews; d: Others. Source: Bisin, Topa, and
Verdier (2004).




                                          68
Figure 16: Fit of the endogenous marriage model: Homogamous marriage probabilities.
a: Protestants; b: Catholics; c: Jews. Source: Bisin, Topa, and Verdier (2004).




                                          69
       Table 3: Fit of the endogenous marriage model: Socialization rates. Source: Bisin,
Topa, and Verdier (2004).

       The signi…cant positive intolerance parameters (with the exception of the parameter
describing attitudes toward Jews of the residual group, Others)58 estimated by Bisin,
Topa, and Verdier (2004) are consistent with homogamous marriage to be perceived
(and chosen) by agents as a socialization mechanism.
       The estimated model of marriage and socialization is based on the behavioral assump-
tion that marriage and socialization are endogenously determined as economic decisions
of agents who have preferences for children with their own religious attitudes. But Bisin,
Topa, and Verdier (2004) also formally assess the relevance of economic behavior to ex-
plain the observed socialization and marriage rates by conducting some statistical test
to compare the performance of the model to several alternative speci…cations that make
di¤erent behavioral assumptions; namely, a …rst speci…cation in which marriage segre-
gation choices are endogenous but socialization is exogenous, a second speci…cation in
which both marriage and socialization are exogenous, and a third speci…cation in which
the value of a homogamous marriage is exogenous and independent of the religious share.
The rankings of the Sargan test of the overidentifying restrictions reported in the paper
suggest that all three alternative models do not …t the data nearly as well as the baseline
  58
       The most striking estimates are those describing the intolerance parameters of Jews, which are
about four times as high as those of any other religious group.

                                                  70
model (p-values vary between :02 and :0017, compared with :11 in the baseline model
estimate).59
       In summary, parameter estimates in Bisin, Topa, and Verdier (2004) are consis-
tent with Protestants, Catholics, and Jews having a strong preference for children who
identify with their own religious beliefs and making costly decisions to in‡uence their
children’s religious beliefs.

3.4.4       Neighborhood and school choice

Ioannides and Zanella (2007) study the determinants of household decisions to change
residence, using geocodes to merge micro data from the PSID with data at the level of
census tracts from the 2000 US Census. They identify parental concerns about children
socialization, within neighborhoods and schools, o¤ of households’revealed preferences
over attributes of neighborhoods. They …nd strong evidence that households with chil-
dren (but not those without) are more likely to move neighborhoods with commonly
perceived characteristics which are more conducive to the transmission of parental cul-
tural traits.
       Relatedly, Kremer and Sarychev (2000) collect data to argue that school choice (as
opposed to a public school system) is correlated with cultural segregation, as parents
choose their children schools as part of their vertical socialization e¤ort.

3.4.5       Collective socialization mechanisms

Evidence about the empirical relevance of collective socialization mechanisms, espe-
cially school, is sparse but not surprisingly clear-cut, at least for some speci…c traits
like language; see e.g., Aspachs-Bracons, A., I. Clots-Figueras, and P. Masella, 2007,
and Aspachs-Bracons, A., I. Clots-Figueras, J. Costa-Font, and P. Masella, 2008, for
the Catalan and the Basque case. Hryshko, Luengo-Prado, and Sorensen (2006) …nd
that, in the Panel Study of Income Dynamics, state-level compulsory schooling laws
that boosted parents’education made children less risk averse through adulthood, sug-
gesting an horizontal transmission mechanism operating through public schooling (for
the parents) and associated to vertical socialization of children.
  59
       A formal statistical test comparing the baseline to the alternative speci…cations requires a procedure
to compare nonnested models. The results of one such test produced in the paper con…rm the Sargan
test rankings.




                                                      71
3.4.6       Cultural substitution

The literature addressing the issue of cultural substitution has typically a more structural
‡avor. Even without time series data the cultural transmission model can in fact be
identi…ed and estimated through cross sectional data on socialization frequencies across
di¤erent populations.
       Identi…cation of cultural intolerances      V i ; requires the observation of socialization
probabilities P ii ; P jj at a point in time for di¤erent populations characterized by di¤erent
population shares q i . Several papers undertook this approach, whose main di¢ culty
however consists in requiring the exogeneity of q i : In fact, in empirically work, the
populations are constituted by the residents of di¤erent geographic units, like counties,
census tracts, or states. As long as individuals choose where to reside and base their
choice on the cultural composition of the geographic unit, the the exogeneity of q i is
called into questions. Various data dependent methods to deal with this issue have been
developed in the literature.
       The …rst paper to structurally estimate an economic model of cultural transmission
is Bisin, Topa, and Verdier (2004), which we discussed in Section 2.2.2. While the aim
of the paper is to test the behavioral assumption that marriage and socialization are
endogenously determined as economic decisions of agents, the structural estimates of
the parameters of the model provide evidence which can distinguish between cultural
substitution and complementarity. In particular, the parameter estimates for the cost of
socialization and marriage segregation reveal a strong dependence religious shares which
could be interpreted as partial evidence for some form of cultural complementarity. In
fact, the estimated direct socialization as a function of the religious share is not negatively
sloped in all the domain, as would be required for cultural substitution; see Figure 17.
       Nonetheless it is clear from the …gure that socialization rates of small religious mi-
norities (with religious shares close to 0) are much higher than what random socialization
in the population would imply (the same is true for marriage homogamy with respect
to random matching, not reported here). To better understand the implications of the
model estimates with respect to religious heterogeneity, Bisin, Topa, and Verdier (2004)
simulate the population dynamics of the distribution by religious group, over time, using
the estimated structural parameters and the empirical religious composition of several
U.S. states as initial conditions.60 Results are reported in Figure 18. Note that two
  60
       The authors caution the reader that

            These simulations are only aimed at illustrating the implications of the estimation


                                                  72
Figure 17: Socialization as a function of the religious share. Source: Bisin, Topa, and
Verdier (2004).




                                          73
Figure 18: Simulated population dynamics. Initial conditions: a, California; b, Illinois;
c, New York; d, Texas. Source: Bisin, Topas, Verdier (2004).



di¤erent stationary distributions of the population by religious trait are attractive for
di¤erent sets of initial conditions: one has a large majority of Protestants (about 90
percent) and a minority of the residual group, Others (about 10 percent); the other is
uniquely composed of Jews.
   The simulations therefore support some cultural heterogeneity at the stationary state
of the population dynamics. In particular, they are in stark contrast to those emerging
from linear extrapolations of current trends: in particular, the triple melting pot (along
the religious dimension) and the vanishing of American Jews hypotheses, suggested,
     results and should not be interpreted as direct forecasts of the future prevalence of the
     di¤erent religious denominations; p. 645




                                                74
respectively by Herberg (1955) and Dershowitz (1997) and often aired in the sociological
literature, are not supported.
   Namoro and Roushdy (2008) also test cultural substitution directly, on data on the
preference for fertility of married Egyptian women. In particular, Namoro and Roushdy
(2008) estimate structurally (1),

                                 P ii = d(q i ) + (1   d(q i ))q i ;

for i = l; h, where l (resp. h) denotes the low (resp. high) fertility preference trait. Given
data on q i and P ii (as well as on a series of covariates) across 26 administrative localities
(Governatorates), d(q i ) is estimated non-parametrically and the resulting negative slope
is evidence for cultural substitution.
   Cohen-Zada (2006) pursues an empirical analysis of U.S. county data (from Reli-
gious Congregations and Membership in the U.S. 2000 and various years of School and
Agency Survey and Private School Survey) on Catholic and private school enrollment to
explicitly test for cultural substitution, that is, to test whether the demand for separate
religious schooling declines with the share of the religious minority. Cultural substitu-
tion is already evident from raw correlations, see Table 4, which displays an inverted
U-shaped relationship between enrollment in Catholic schools and the share of Catholics
in the population, by county.




   Table 4: Enrollment in Catholic schools out of total enrollment. Source: Cohen-Zada
(2006).


                                               75
      Patacchini and Zenou (2004) also speak to the identi…cation of cultural substitution
vs. complementarity. They study the vertical transmission of preferences for education,
under the assumption that both educated and uneducated parents wish to transmit
preferences for education to their children, so as to positively a¤ect their educational
attainment, but educated parents are most e¤ective at doping so, other things equal. An
important property of the data Patacchini and Zenou (2004) exploit, the UK National
Child Development Study (NCDS), is that it allows them to construct a direct measure
of parental socialization e¤ort, based on qualitative information on the parent’s interest
in his/her child’s education. Imputing a measure of neighborhood quality from Census
data on the distribution of education levels by ward, Patacchini and Zenou (2004) can
study the relationship between parental socialization e¤ort and neighborhood quality.
Assuming that residential location is exogenous, Patacchini and Zenou (2004) interpret
their evidence that parents invest more in socializing their children when living in a high
quality neighborhood as evidence for cultural complementarity. If residential location
were endogenous, and parents moved to neighborhoods with desirable characteristics in
terms of socialization, as e.g., documented by Ioannides and Zanella (2008) and Kre-
mer and Sarychev (2000), then Patacchini and Zenou (2004)’s result would instead be
consistent with cultural substitution, as parental e¤ort and neighborhood choice could
both represent distinct direct vertical socialization instruments. An additional interest-
ing result of Patacchini and Zenou (2004) regards the di¤erential socialization e¤ort, on
average, between high and low educated parents. Consistently with imperfect empa-
thy joined with the assumption that educated parents are more e¢ cient in socializing
their children to preferences for education, low-educated parents signi…cantly less time
than their educated counterparts, other things equal, in socializing their o¤spring; in
fact, in this case, only the quality of the neighborhood has a signi…cant impact on their
children’s educational attainment.
      This structural evidence for cultural substitution is also consistent with several em-
pirical studies studying the link between identity and segregation. Using a nationally
representative sample of more than 90,000 students from 175 schools who entered grades
7 through 12 in 1994 in the US (the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health),
Fryer and Torelli (2005) …nd that “acting white” behaviors among blacks (i.e. the
higher is the test score, the less popular a student is) are more developed in racially
mixed schools.61 Munshi and Wilson (2008) combine data from the U.S. census and the
 61
      Anthropologists have also observed that social groups seek to preserve their identity, an activity



                                                   76
Figure 19: Relationship between ethnic fractionalization in 1860 and the probability
that individuals have professional jobs. Source: Munshi and Wilson (2008).



National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979 (NLSY79) to identify a negative relation-
ship across counties in the Midwest of the United States between ethnic fractionalization
in 1860 and the probability that individuals have professional jobs or migrated out of
the county by 2000; see Figure 19.
    Furthermore, Munshi and Wilson (2008) also document a positive correlation be-
tween ethnic (and religious) fractionalization and better functioning religious and parochial
institutions, suggesting an important role of churches in the transmission of ethnic
traits.62
that accelerates when threats to internal cohesion intensify. Thus, groups may try to reinforce their
identity by penalizing members for di¤erentiating themselves from the group. The penalties are likely
to increase whenever the threats to group cohesion intensify; for an early analysis of this issues, see
Whyte (1943).
 62
    Anthropologists have also observed that social groups seek to preserve their identity, an activity
that accelerates when threats to internal cohesion intensify. Thus, groups may try to reinforce their
identity by penalizing members for di¤erentiating themselves from the group. The penalties are likely



                                                  77
3.4.7      Cultural distinction

Bisin, Patacchini, Verdier, and Zenou (2010) study instead identity formation, aiming at
distinguishing cultural conformity from cultural distinction.63 They exploit the Fourth
National Survey of Ethnic Minorities (FNSEM) of the U.K. The dataset oversamples
Caribbean, Indian, Pakistani, African-Asian, Bangladeshi, and Chinese and contains a
direct survey question about respondents’identi…cation with their own ethnic group and
additional (indirect) information about di¤erent dimensions of identity (e.g. attitudes
towards inter-marriage, importance of religion and other aspects of individual’s ethnic
preferences).
    To better address the possible endogeneity of residential decisions Bisin, Patacchini,
Verdier, and Zenou (2010) proceeds in steps, from a non-structural probit analysis of
identity and homogamy in terms of ethnic composition to fully structural models of
ethnic integration. The probit displays a negative relationship between ethnic identity
and the share of the ethnic group in the neighborhood, for those neighborhoods in which
the share is above 20%, a result consistent with cultural distinction, see Figure 20.64
    The structural analysis of identity formation exploits the identity formation choice
model (extended to jointly determine identity and homogamy in marriage) outlined in
                                                                             i
Section 2.2.5. The model produces a map between identity                         and the psychological
costs of interacting with the majority c(q i ): A non-parametric estimate of c(q i ) under
the restrictions of the model is also consistent with ethnic identity being formed as a
cultural distinction mechanism, and so is a structural estimate of the model parame-
trized to formally nest distinction and conformity and to allow individuals to choose the
neighborhood where to resided depending on its ethnic composition.65
    The predicted speed of in integration can be gauged upon from Figures 21 and 22,
to increase whenever the threats to group cohesion intensify; for an early analysis of this issues, see
Whyte (1943).
 63
    Other empirical studies on identity formation include Battu and Zenou (2009), Constant, Gataullina
and Zimmermann (2009), Nekby and Rödin (2009), and Manning and Roy (2009). We do not discuss
them in detail because they take a more descriptive approach.
  64
     The analysis uses a self-reported measure of “importance of religion”as a proxy for ethnic identity.
The use of the other proxies leads to similar results.
 65
    Also, recent studies of the Islamic Revival, the surge in Islamic participation in the world since the
1970s, suggest interpretations which are consistent with cultural defense, inasmuch as the decline of
social mobility and the impoverishment of the middle-class in Islamic countries, relatively to the eco-
nomic success of West, have intensi…ed the religious revival of Islam; see Carvalho (2009) and references
therein.



                                                   78
Figure 20: Non linear e¤ect of neighborhood ethnic composition on identity and ho-
mogamy. Source: Bisin, Patacchini, Verdier, and Zenou (2009).


reporting predicted identity and homogamy, respectively, as a function of time spent in
the U.K . The ethnic homogamy rate, for instance, is predicted to decline less than 10%
between …rst and second immigration immigrants.
    Finally, cultural distinction is also consistent with the literature on participation in
social activities as a function of segregation and fractionalization, as in Alesina and La
Ferrara (2000), Putnam (2007), Letki (2008), and Fumagalli and Fumagalli (2010).


4     Conclusions
This article has reviewed the main contributions of models of cultural transmission, from
theoretical and empirical perspectives. The literature reviewed has developed a set of
workhorse models to study the dynamics of cultural traits, values, and beliefs. These
models have been extended in several dimensions of interest and have been put to data.
    This literature has been successful in providing a better understanding of the cultural
heterogeneity which characterizes the human condition as well as of the cultural resilience
of ethnic and religious traits which has been repeatedly observed in human history.
Furthermore, this literature has advanced our understanding of the patterns of cultural
integration of immigrants and of the properties of various socialization mechanism.


                                            79
Figure 21: Predicted identity as a function of time in the U.K. Source: Bisin, Patacchini,
Verdier, and Zenou (2009).




Figure 22: Predicted homogamy as a function of time in the U.K. Source: Bisin, Patac-
chini, Verdier, and Zenou (2009).




                                           80
   The interaction of cultural traits and institutions along human history and its e¤ect
on present socio-economic condition of populations is a fascinating topic which is now
being explored, both theoretically and empirically along the lines and with the models
surveyed in this paper.




                                          81
5   References
Aboud F.(1987), "The Development of Ethnic Self-identi…cation and Attitudes", in
    J. Phinney &M. Rotheran, eds., Childrens’ Ethnic Socialization: Pluralism and
    Development (pp. 32-55), Newbury Park, CA Sage.

Abrams D. amd M. Hogg (1988), Social Identi…cations: A Social Psychology of Inter-
    group Relations and Group Processes, London, Routledge.

Acemoglu, D., S. Johnson and J.A. Robinson (2001): "The Colonial Origins of Com-
    parative Development: An Empirical Investigation," American Economic Review,
    91, 1369-1401.

Adriani, F. and S. Sonderegger (2009): "Why Do Parents Socialize Their Children to
    Behave Pro-socially? An Information-based Theory," mimeo, University of Bristol.

Ainsworth-Darnell, J.W. and D.B. Downey (1998): "Assessing the Oppositional Cul-
    ture Explanation for Racial/Ethnic Di¤erences in School Performance," American
    Sociological Review, 63, 536-553.

Akerlof, G.A. (1997): "Social Distance and Social Decisions," Econometrica 65, 1005-
    1027.

Akerlof, G.A. and R.E. Kranton (2000): "Economics and Identity," Quarterly Journal
    of Economics, 115, 715-753.

Akerlof, G.A. and R.E. Kranton (2010): Identity Economics: How Identities Shape Our
    Work, Wages, and Well-Being, Princeton, Princeton University Press.

Alba, R.D. (1990): Ethnic Identity: The Transformation of White America, New
    Haven, Yale University Press.

Alba R.D. (2005): "Bright vs. Blurred Boundaries: Second Generation Assimilation
    and Exclusion in France, Germany and the jUnited States," Ethnic and Racial
    Studies, 28(1), 20-59.

Aleksynska, M. (2007): "Civic Participation of Immigrants: Cultural Transmission and
    Assimilation," mimeo, Universita’Bocconi.

Alesina, A., Angeletos G.M., (2005): "Fairness and Redistribution: US versus Europe,"
    American Economic Review, 95(4), 960-980.

                                        82
Alesina, A., A. Devleeschauwer, W. Easterly, S. Kurlat, and R. Wacziarg (2003): "Frac-
    tionalization," Journal of Economic Growth, 8(2), 155-94.

Alesina, A., P. Giuliano, and N. Nunn (2010): "On the Origins of Gender Roles: Women
    and the Plough," work in progress.

Alesina, A., E. Glaeser, B. Sacerdote (2001): "Why Doesn’t the US Have a European-
    Type Welfare State ?," Brooking Papers on Economic Activity, Issue 2, 187-277.

Alesina, A., and E. La Ferrara (2000): "Participation in heterogeneous communities,"
    Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115 (3), 847-904.

Alesina, A. and E. La Ferrara (2005), “Ethnic Diversity and Economic Performance,”
    Journal of Economic Literature 43, 762-800.

Alesina, A., Y. Algan, P. Cahuc, and P. Giuliano (2010): "Family Values and Regula-
    tion of Labor," CEPR Discussion Paper 7688.

Algan, Y., A. Bisin, A. Manning, and T. Verdier, eds., (2010): Immigration and cultural
    integration in Europe, forthcoming, CEPR, Oxford, Oxford University Press.

Al-Johar, D. (2005): "Muslim Marriages in America: Re‡ecting New Identities," The
    Muslim World, 95, 557-574.

Ammerman, A.J. and L.L. Cavalli Sforza (1971): "Measuring the Rate of Spread of
    Early Farming in Europe," Man, 6(4), 674-88.

Ammerman, A.J. and L.L. Cavalli Sforza (1984): The Neolithic Transition and the
    Genetics of Populations in Europe, Princeton, Princeton University Press.

Antunes, G., and G. Gaitz (1975): "Ethicity and participation: a study of Mexican-
    Americans, Blacks and Whites," American Journal of Sociology, 80(5), 1192-211.

Aoki, K. (2001): "Theoretical and Empirical Aspects of Gene-culture Coevolution,"
    Theoretical Population Biology, 59, 253-61.

Aoki, K., M. Shida, and N. Shigesada (1996): "Travelling Wave Solutions for the Spread
    of Farmers into a Region Occupied by Hunter-gatherers," Theoretical Population
    Biology, 50, 1-17.



                                         83
Arai, M., D. Besancenot, K. Huynh, and A. Skalli (2009): "Children’s First Names
    and Immigration Background in France," mimeo, Stockholm University.

Arai, M. and P. Thoursie (2006): "Giving up Foreign Names: An Empirical Investiga-
    tion of Surname Change and Earnings," mimeo, Stockholm University.

Arrondel, L. (2009): "My Father Was Right: The Transmission of Values Between
    Generations," Paris School of Economics Working Paper 2009-12.

Ashraf, Q. and O. Galor (2010): "The “Out of Africa” Hypothesis, Human Genetic
    Diversity, and Comparatibe Economic Development," mimeo, Brown University.

Aspachs-Bracons, A., I. Clots-Figueras, and P. Masella (2007): "Identity and Language
    Policies," mimeo, Universidad Carlos III.

Aspachs-Bracons, A., I. Clots-Figueras, J. Costa-Font, and P. Masella (2008): "Com-
    pulsory Language Educational Policies and Identity Formation," Journal of the
    European Economic Association, 6(2-3), 434-44.

Austen-Smith, D. and R.D. Fryer, Jr (2005), “An Economic Analysis of ‘Acting White’,”
    Quarterly Journal of Economics 120, 551-583.

Avitabile, C., I. Clots-Figueras, and P. Masella (2009): "The E¤ect of Birthright
    Citizenship on Parental Integration Outcomes," mimeo, University of Mannheim.

Ban…eld E. (1958): The Moral Basis of a Backward Society, Glencoe, IL, Free Press.

Bandura, A. and R. Walters, “Social Learning and Personality Development,” Holt,
    Rinchart & Winston, New York, 1965.

Barber, B. (1994): "Cultural, Family, and Persona Contexts of Parent-Adolescent Con-
    ‡ict," Journal of Marriage and the Family, LVI (1994).

Baron, J.D., D.A. Cobb-Clark, and N. Erkal (2008): "Cultural Transmission of Work-
    Welfare Attitudes and the Intergenerational Correlation in Welfare Receipt," mimeo,
    IZA, Bonn.

Barron, Milton, “The Church, the State, and Intermarriage,” in M. Barron, ed., The
    Blending American: Patterns of Intermarriage, Chicago, 1972.



                                        84
Battu, H., McDonald M., and Y. Zenou (2007): "Oppositional Identities and the Labor
    Market," Journal of Population Economics, 20, 643-67.

Baudin, T. (2008): "A Role for Cultural Transmission in Fertility Transitions", mimeo,
    Paris School of Economics University of Paris I Panthéon-Sorbonne.

Baumrind, D. (1967): "Child Care Practices Anteceding Three Pattern of Preschool
    Behavior," Genetic Psychology Monographs 75 (1967), 43-83.

Becker, B. (2009): "Immigrants’Emotional Identi…cation with the Host Society," Eth-
    nicities, 9(2), 200-25.

Becker, G.S. (1970): "Altruism, Egoism, and Genetic Fitness: Economics and Sociobi-
    ology," Journal of Economic Literature, 14, 817-26.

Becker, G.S. (1973): "A Theory of Marriage: Part I," Journal of Political Economy,
    LXXXI, 813-46.

Becker, G.S. (1974): "A Theory of Marriage: Part II," Journal of Political Economy,
    LXXXII, 11-26.

Becker, G.S. (1980): A Treatise on the Family, Cambridge, MA, Harvard University
    Press.

Becker G.S. (1996): Accounting for Taste, Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press.

Becker, G.S., E.M. Landes, and M.R. Robert (1977): "An Economic Analysis of Marital
    Instability," Journal of Political Economy LIIIV, 1141-87.

Becker, G.S. and H.G. Lewis (1973): "On the Interaction Between the Quantity and
    Quality of Children," Journal of Political Economy, 81(2), 279-88.

Becker, G.S. and V. Madrigal (1995): "On cooperation and addiction," mimeo, Uni-
    versity of Chicago.

Becker, G.S. and K.M. Murphy (2000): Social Economics, Cambridge, MA, Harvard
    University Press.

G.S. Becker and C. Mulligan (1993): "The Endogenous Determination of Time Prefer-
    ence, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 3, 729-58.



                                         85
Benabou, R., J. Tirole (2002): "Beliefs in a Just World and Redistributive Politics,"
    mimeo, Princeton University.

Benabou, R., Kramarz, F. and C. Prost (2009): "The French Zones d’Education Priori-
    taire: Much Ado About Nothing?," Economics of Education Review, forthcoming.

Bergstrom, T. (1995): "On the Evolution of Altruistic Ethical Rules for Siblings,"
    American Economic Review, 85, 58-81.

Bernal, M.E. and G.P. Knight (1993): Ethnic Identity: Formation and Transmission
    among Hispanics and Other Minorities, Albany, State University of New York
    Press.

Bernheim, B.D. (1994): "A Theory of Conformity," Journal of Political Economy, 102,
    841-877.

Bidner C. and P.Francois (2009): "Cultivating Trust: Norms, Institutions and the
    Implications of Scale," mimeo, University of British Columbia.

Bisin A., Moro A. and G. Topa (2009): "The Empirical Content of Models with Multiple
    Equilibria," mimeo, New York Universiy.

Bisin, A., Patacchini, E., Verdier, T. and Y. Zenou (2008): "Are Muslims Immigrants
    Di¤erent in terms of Cultural Integration?," Journal of the European Economic
    Association, 6, 445-456.

Bisin, A. and G. Topa (2003): "Empirical Models of Cultural Transmission," Journal
    of the European Economic Association, 1(2), 363-75.

Bisin, A., Topa, G. and Verdier, T. (2004a): "Religious Intermarriage and Socialization
    in the United States," Journal of Political Economy, 112, 615–64.

Bisin, A., Topa, G. and Verdier, T. (2004b): "Cooperation as a Transmitted Cultural
    Trait," Rationality and Society, 16, 477–507.

Bisin, A., Topa, G. and Verdier, T. (2009): "Cultural Transmission, Socialization and
    the Population Dynamics of Multiple State Traits Distributions," International
    Journal of Economic Theory, 5(1), 139-154, issue in honor of Jess Benhabib.

Bisin, A and Verdier, T. (1998): "On the Cultural Transmission of Preferences for
    Social Status," Journal of Public Economics, 70, 75–97.

                                         86
Bisin, A and Verdier, T. (2000): "Beyond the Melting Pot: Cultural Transmission,
    Marriage and the Evolution of Ethnic and Religious Traits," Quarterly Journal of
    Economics, 115, 955–88.

Bisin, A and Verdier, T. (2001a): "The Economics of Cultural Transmission and the
    Dynamics of Preferences," Journal of Economic Theory, 97, 298–319.

Bisin, A and Verdier, T. (2001b): "Agents with Imperfect Empathy Might Survive
    Natural Selection," Economics Letters, 2, 277–85

Bisin, A and Verdier, T. (2005): "Work Ethic and Redistribution: A Cultural Trans-
    mission Model of the Welfare State," mimeo, New York University.

Boas, F. (1928): Anthropology and Modern Life, New York, NY, W. W. Norton and
    Company.

Bobo L.D. (1999): "Prejudice as a Group Position: Microfoundations of a Sociological
    Approach to Racism and Racial Relations," Journal of Social Issues, 55, 445-472.

Bodendorn H., and C. Ruebeck (2003): "The Economics of Identity and the Endogene-
    ity of Race," NBER WP No 9962.

Booth, A.L. and H.J. Kee (2009): "Intergenerational Transmission of Fertility Pat-
    terns," Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, 71(2), 183-208.

Borgerho¤ Mulder, M., C.L. Nunn, and M. Towner (2006): " Cultural Macroevolution
    and the Transmissiopn of Traits," Evolutionary Anthropology, 15, 52-64.

Borjas, G.J. (1992): "Ethnic Capital and Intergenerational Income Mobility’, Quarterly
    Journal of Economics, 57, 123-50.

 Borjas, G.J. (1995): "Ethnicity, Neighborhoods, and Human Capital Externality,"
    American Economic Review, LXXXV (1995), 365-90.

Borjas, G.J. (1999): "The economic analysis of immigration," in O.C. Ashenfelter and
    D. Card, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 3, Part 1, 1697-1760.

Botticini, M. and Z. Eckstein (2005): "Jewish Occupational Selection: Education,
    Restrictions, or Minorities?," Journal of Economic History, 65(4), 922-948.



                                         87
Botticini, M. and Z. Eckstein (2007): "From Farmers to Merchants, Conversions and
    Diaspora: Human Capital and Jewish History," Journal of the European Economic
    Association, 5(5), 885-926.

Boyd, Robert, and Peter Richerson (1985): Culture and the Evolutionary Process,
    Chicago, IL, University of Chicago Press.

Boyd, R. and P.J. Richerson (1989): "The evolution of indirect reciprocity," Social
    Networks, 11, 213-36.

Bowles, S. (1998), "Endogenous preferences: the cultural consequence of markets and
    other economic institutions," Journal of Economic Literature, 36, 75-111.

Bowles, S. (2001): "Individual Interactions, Group Con‡icts and the Evolution of Pref-
    erences," in S. Durlauf and H. P. Young, eds., Social Dynamics, Cambridge MA,
    MIT Press, 155-190.

Bowles, S. and H. Gintis (1998): "The Moral Economy as Community: Structured
    Populations and the Evolution of¨ Prosocial Norms," Evolution & Human Behav-
    ior, 19(1), 3-25.

Bowles, S. and H. Gintis (2002): "Social Capital and Community Governance," Eco-
    nomic Journal, 112, 419-36.

Bowles, S. and H. Gintis (2003): "Origins of Human Cooperation," in P. Hammerstein,
    ed., Genetic and Cultural Evolution of Cooperation, Cambridge, MA, MIT Press.

Branas-Garza, P. and S. Neuman (2007): "Parental Religiosity and Daughters’Fertility:
    THe Case of Catholics in Southers Europe," Review of Economics of the Household,
    5(3), 305-27.

Branas-Garza, T. Garcia-Munoz, P. and S. Neuman (2007): "Unraveling Secularization:
    An International Study," IZA Discussion Paper 3251.

Brubaker, R. (2001): "The Return of Assimilation? Changing Perspectives on Immi-
    gration and its Sequels in France, Germany, and the United States," Ethnic and
    Racial Studies, 24, 531-548.

Cameron, L., A. Chauduri, N. Erkal, L. Gangadharan (2009): "Propensities to Engage
    in and Punish Corrupt Behavior: Experimental Evidence from Australia, India,
    Indonesia, and Singapore," Journal of Public Economics, 93, 843-51.

                                         88
Carvalho, J.P. (2009): "A Theory of the Islamic Revival," mimeo, University of Oxford.

Cavalli Sforza, L.L. and M. Feldman (1973): "Cultural Versus Biological Inheritance:
    Phenotypic Transmission from Parent to Children," American Journal of Human
    Genetics, 25, 618-37.

Cavalli Sforza L.L. and M. Feldman (1981): Cultural Transmission and Evolution: A
    Quantitative Approach, Princeton, NJ, Princeton University Press.

Cavalli Sforza, L.L., M. Feldman, K.H. Chen, and S.M. Dornbusch (1982): "Theory
    and Observation in Cultural Transmission," Science, 1, vol. 218. no. 4567,19 - 27.

Cavalli Sforza, L.L., P. Menozzi, and A. Piazza (1994): The History and Geography of
    Human Genes, Princeton, NJ, Princeton University Press.

Ceci, S. and Williams, W. (1999): The Nature–Nurture Debate: The Essential Readings,
    Oxford, Blackwell.

Chiswick, B.R. (2008): "Ethnic Intermarriage among Immigrants: Human Capital and
    Assortative Mating," IZA Discussion Paper 3740.

Chiswick, B.R. and P.W. Miller (1992): "Language in the Labor Market: The Immi-
    grant Experience in Canada and the United States," in C.U. Chiswick, ed., Im-
    migration, Language and Ethnic Issues: Canada and the United States, American
    Entreprise Institute, Washington D.C., p. 229-96.

Chiswick, C.U. (1999): "The Economics of Jewish Survival," mimeo, presented at the
    International Conference on Economics of Judaism and Jewish Observance.

Chiswick, C.U. (2009): "The Economic Determinants of Ethnic Assimilation," Journal
    of Population Economics, forthcoming.

Cipriani, M., P. Giuliano, O. Jeanne (2007): "Like Mother Like Son? Experimental
    Evidence on the Transmission of Values from Parents to Children," IZA Discussion
    Paper 2768.

Clark, C. A., and A. Worthington (1987): "Family Variables A¤ecting the Transmission
    of Religious Values from Parents to Adolescents: A Review," Family Perspective,
    XXI, 1-21.



                                         89
Cohen-Zada, D. (2006): "Preserving Religious Identity through Education: Economic
    Analysis and Evidence from the US," Journal of Urban Economics, 60.

Collado, M.D., I. Ortuno-Ortin, and A. Romeu (2005): "Vertical Transmission of Con-
    sumption Behavior and the Distribution of Surnames," mimeo, Universidad de
    Alicante.

Coleman, J. (1990):   Foundations of Social Theory, Cambridge, MA, Harvard Uni-
    versity Press.

Coleman, J. (1988): "Social Capital in the Creation of Human Capital," American
    Journal of Sociology, 94, S95–S120.

Constant, A.F., L. Gataullina, and K.F. Zimmermann (2009): "Ethnosizing Immi-
    grants," Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 69, 274-87.

Constant, A.F. and K.F. Zimmermann (2008): "Measuring Ethnic Identity and Its
    Impact on Economic Behavior," Journal of the European Economic Association,
    6, 424-33.

Cook, P.J. and J. Ludwig (1997): "The Burden of Acting White: Do Black Adolescents
    Disparage Academic Achievement," Journal of Policy Analysis and Management.

Corneo G., Jeanne O., (2009): "A theory of tolerance," Journal of public economics,
    93, 691-702

Cornwall, M. (1988): "The In‡uence of Three Agents of Religious Socialization," in
    D. L. Thomas, ed., Religion and Family Connection: Social Science Perspectives,
    Provo, UT, Brigham Young University Press.

Cox, D.R. (1961): "Tests of Separate Families of Hypotheses," in Proceedings of the
    Fourth Berkeley Symposioum in Mathematical Statistics and Probability, Berkeley,
    CA, University of California Press.

Darity, W. Jr., P.L. Mason and J.B. Stewart (2006): "The Economics of Identity: The
    Origin and Persistence of Racial Identity Norms," Journal of Economic Behavior
    and Organization, 60, 283-305.

Dawkins, R. (1976): The Sel…sh Gene, Oxford, Oxford University Press, Oxford.



                                          90
Delpit, L. (1995), Other People’s Children: Cultural Con‡ict in the Classroom, New
    York: The Free Press.

Desmet, K., I. Ortuno-Ortin, and R. Wacziarg (2009): "The Political Economy of
    Ethnolinguistic Cleavages," NBER Working Paper 15360.

Dessi R. (2008): "Collective Memory, Cultural Transmission and Investments," Amer-
    ican Economic Review, 98(1), 534-560.

DeVaus, D. A. (1983): "The Relative Importance of Parents and Peers for Adolescent
    Religious Orientation: An Australian Study," Adolescence, LXIX, 147-58.

Dixit, A. (2009): "Socializing Education and Pro-Sicial Preferences," mimeo, Princeton
    University.

Doepke M. and F. Zilibotti (2006): "Occupational Choice and the Spirit of Capitalism,"
    Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(2), 747-793.

Dohmen, T., A. Falk, D. Hu¤man, and U. Sunde (2006): "The Intergenerational Trans-
    mission of Risk and Trust Attitudes," IZA Discussion Paper 2380.

Duesenberry, J. (1949): Income, Saving and the Theory of Consumer Behavior, Cam-
    bridge, MA, Harvard University Press.

Duncan, B. and S.J. Trejo (2009): "Intermarriage and the Intergenerational Transmis-
    sion of Ethnic Identity and Human Capital for Mexican Americans," forthcoming,
    Journal of Labor Economics.

Durante, R. (2009): "Risk, Cooperation and the Economic Origins of Social Trust: An
    Empirical Investigation," mimeo, Brown University.

Duranton, G., A. Rodriguez-Pose, and R. Sandall (2007): "Family Types and the Per-
    sistence of Regional Disparities in Europe," Bruges European Economic Research
    Papers 10.

Dustmann, C. (1996): “The Social Assimilation of Immigrants”, Journal of Population
    Economics, 9, 37-54.

Eaton C., M. Eswaran and R. Oxoby (2009): "Us and Then: The Origin of Identity,
    and its Economic Implications," mimeo.


                                         91
Enquist M., S. Ghirlanda, and K. Eriksson (2010): "Modeling the Evolution and Di-
    versity of Cumulative Culture," forthcoming in Philosophical Transactions of the
    Royal Society B.

Epstein G., (2006): "Extremism within the Family" , IZA Discussion Paper No. 2199 .

Erickson, Joseph A. (1992): "Adolescent Religious Development and Commitment: A
    Structural Equation Model of the Role of Family, Peer Group, and Educational
    In‡uences,’Journal for the Scienti…c Studies of Religion, XXXI, 131-52.


Escriche, L.; Olcina, G,; Sánchez, R., (2004): "Gender Discrimination and Intergener-
    ational Transmission of Preferences," Oxford Economic Papers, 56 (3), 485-511

Estrella López O. (2003): "Social Capital and Government in the Production of Public
    Goods," mimeo, Universidad Autónoma de Barcelona.

I. Eshel, L. Samuelson and A. Shaked (1998): "Altruists, Egoists, and Hooligans in a
    Local Interaction Model," American Economic Review, 88, 157-79.

Fallaci, O. (2006): The Force of Reason, New York, Rizzoli.

Fang H., and G. Loury (2005): "Dysfunctional Identities Can be Rational," American
    Economic Review, 95, 104-111.

Farre’, L. and F. Vella (2007): "The Intergenerational Transmission of Gender Role At-
    titudes and Itas Implications for Female Labor Force Participation, IZA Discussion
    Paper 2802.

Feldman, M.W. and K.N. Laland (1996): "Gene-culture Coevolution Theory," Trends
    in Ecology & Evolution, 11(11), 453-7.

Ferdman, B.M. (1995): "Cultural Identity and Diversity in Organizations: Bridging the
    Gap between Group Di¤erences and Individual Uniqueness," in M.M. Chemers, S.
    Oskamp, and M. A. Costanzo, eds., Diversity in Organizations: New Perspectives
    for a Changing Workplace, Thousand Oaks, CA, Sage, p. 37-61.

Fernandez, R., (2007a): "Culture as Learning: The Evolution of Female Labor Force
    Participation over a Century," mimeo, NYU.



                                         92
Fernandez, R., (2007b): "Women, Work, and Culture," Journal of the European Eco-
    nomic Association.

Fernandez, R. (2010): "Does Culture Matter?," in this Handbook, chapter ??

Fernandez, R. and Fogli, A. (2005): "Culture: An Empirical Investigation of Beliefs,
    Work, and Fertility," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 1(1), 146-77.

Fernandez, R., Fogli, A. and Olivetti, C. (2004): "Mothers and Sons: Preference For-
    mation and Female Labor Force Dynamics," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119,
    1249–99.

C. Fershtman and Y. Weiss (1998): "Social rewards, externalities and stable prefer-
    ences," Journal of Public Economics, 70, 53-74.

Follmer, H. and U. Horst (2001): "Convergence of locally and globally interacting
    Markov chains," Stochastic Processes and Applications, 96 (1), 99-121.

Fordham, S. and J. Ogbu (1986): "Blacks Students’School Successes: Coping with the
    Burden of ‘Acting White’," The Urban Review, 18, 176-206.

Ferguson (2001),

Fernández-Villaverde, J., J. Greenwood, and N. Guner (2010): "From Shame to Game
    in One Hundred Years: Economic Model of the Rise in Premarital Sex and its
    De-Stigmatization, IZA DP No. 4708.

Forster, P. and C. Renfrew, (2006): Phylogenetic Methods and the Prehistory of Lan-
    guages, McDonald Institute for Archeological Research, Cambrdige, Cambridge
    University Press.

François, P (2002): Social Capital and Economic Development, London, Routledge.

Francois P. and J. Zabojnik, (2005): "Trust Social Capital and the Process of Economic
    Development," Journal of the European Economics Association, 3(1) 51-94.

Fogli, A. and L. Veldkamp (2007): "Nature or Nurture? Learning and Female Labor
    Force Dynamics," mimeo, NYU.

Francois (2006): "Norms and the Dynamics of Institution Formation,"
    mimeo, University of British Columbia.

                                         93
R. Frank (1987): "If Homo Economicus Could Choose its Own Utility Function Would
    He Want One with a Conscience?, American Economic Review, 77, 593-604.

Frot E. (2008): "Cultural Transmission through Friendship Formation," mimeo, Stock-
    holm Institute of Transition Economics.

Frot (2009): "The Rise and Fall of Social Insurance," mimeo, available at SSRN:
    http://ssrn.com/abstract=1517343

Fryer (2004): "An Economic Approach to Cultural Capital," mimeo, Harvard.

Fryer, R.G. Jr. and P. Torelli (2005): "An Empirical Analysis of ‘Acting White’,"
    NBER Working Paper No. 11334.

Fumagalli, E., and L. Fumagalli (2010): "Like oil and water or chocolate and peanut
    butter? Ethnic diversity and social participation of young people in England,
    mimeo, University of Essex.

Gallis, P., Coordinator, (2005): "Muslims in Europe: Integration Policies in Selected
    Countries," CRS Report for Congress, Congressional Research Service, The Li-
    brary of Congress.

Gallo, I., A. Barra, and P. Contucci (2009): "Parameter Evaluation of a Simple Mean-
    Field Model of Social Interaction," Mathematical Models and Methods in Applied
    Sciences, 19, 1427-39.

Galor, O. (2005): "The Demographic Transition and the Emergence of Sustained Eco-
    nomic Growth," Journal of the European Economic Association, 3(2-3), pages 494-
    504.

Galor, O. and O. Moav (2002): "Natural Selection And The Origin Of Economic
    Growth," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117(4), 1133-1191.

Gintis, H. (2003a): "Solving the Puzzle of Prosociality," Rationality and Society, 15,
    155–87.

Gintis, H. (2003b): "The Hitchhikers Guide to Altruism: Genes, Culture and the
    Internalization of Norms," Journal of Theoretical Biology, 220, 407–18.

Giuliano, P. (2006): "Living Arrangements in Western Europe: Does Cultural Origin
    Matter?," Journal of the European Economic Association, 4.

                                         94
Gkiasta, M., T. Russell, S. Shennan, and J. Steele (2003): "Neolithic transition in
    Europe: The radiocarbon record revisited," mimeo.

Glazer N. and D.P. Moynihan (1970): Beyond the Melting Pot: The Neogroes, Puerto
    Ricans, Jews, Italians and Irish of New York City, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Glazer, N. (1997): We Are All Multiculturalists Now, Cambridge, MA, Harvard Uni-
    versity Press.

Gleason, P. (1980): "American identity and Americanization," in T. Stephan, O. Ann,
    and H. Oscar, eds., Harvard Encyclopedia of American Ethnic Groups, Cambridge,
    MA, Harvard University Press.

Gordon Milton M. (1964): Human Nature, Class, and Ethnicity, New York, Oxford
    University Press.

Gradstein M. and M. Justman. Education (2002): "Social Cohesion and Growth,"
    American Economic Review, 92, 1192-1204.

Gradstein M. and M. Justman, (2005): "The Melting Pot and School Choice," Journal
    of Public Economics, 89(5-6), 871-896.

Grosjean, P. (2009): "The Role of History and Spatial Proximity in Cultural Integra-
    tion: A Gravity Approach," mimeo, University of California, Berkeley.

Grosjean, P. (2010): "A History of Violence: Testing the ‘Culture of Honor’Hypothesis
    in the US South," mimeo, University of San Francisco.

Guiso, L. P. Sapienza, and L. Zingales (2007): "Long-Term Persistence," NBER Work-
    ing Paper.

Guiso, L. P. Sapienza, and L. Zingales (2008): "Social Capital and Good Culture,"
    Marshall Lecture, Journal of the European Economic Association, 6(2-3), 295-320.

Guiso, L., P. Sapienza, and L. Zingales (2009): "Cultural Biases in Economic Ex-
    change," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(3), 1095-1131.

Guttman, J. (2003): "Repeated Interaction and the Evolution of Preferences for Reci-
    procity. Economic Journal, 113, 631–56.



                                        95
W. D. Hamilton (1964): "The genetic theory of social behavior," Journal of Theoretical
    Biology, 7, 1-32.

Hauk, E. and Sáez-Martí, M. (2002): "On the Cultural Transmission of Corruption,"
    Journal of Economic Theory, 107, 311–35.

Hayes, B. and Pittelkow, Y. (1993): "Religious Belief, Transmission, and the Family:
    An Australian Study," Journal of Marriage and the Family, 55, 755–66.

Heaton, T. (1964): "Religious Homogamy and Marital Satisfaction Reconsidered,"
    Journal for the Scienti…c Study of Religion, XXV, 248-58.


Heaton, T. (1986): "How Does Religion In‡uence Fertility ? The Case of Mormons,"
    Journal for the Scienti…c Study of Religion, 28, 283–99.

Henrich, J., R. Boyd, S. Bowles, C. Camerer, E. Fehr and H. Gintis, eds. (1984):
    Foundations of Human Sociality, Oxford University Press, Oxford 2004

Herberg, W. (1955): Protestant-Catholic-Jew, New York, NY, Doubleday, 1955.

Heer, D.M. (1980): "Intermarriage," in S. Thernstrom, A. Orlov and O. Handlin,
    eds., Harvard Encyclopedia of American Ethnic Groups,”Cambridge, MA, Harvard
    University Press.

Hatton, T.J. and A. Leigh (2007): "Immigrants Assimilate as Communities, Not just
    as Individuals," mimeo, University of Essex.

Heer, David M., and Charles A. Hubay, Jr. (1975): "The Trend of Interfaith Marriages
    in Canada, 1922 to 1972," in S. Parvez Wakil, ed, Marriage, Family and Society:
    Canadian Perspectives, Toronto.

Henrich, J. (2001): "Cultural Transmission and the Di¤usion of Innovations: Adoption
    Dynamics Indicate That Biased Cultural Transmission Is the Predominate Force
    in Behavioral Change," American Anthropologist, 103(4), 992-1013.

Henrich, J., R. Boyd, S. Bowles, C. Camerer, E. Fehr, H. Gintis, and R. McElreath
    (2001): "In Search of Homo Economicus: Behavioral Experiments in 15 Small-scale
    Societies," American Economic Review, 91(2), 73-8.



                                         96
Hiller V. (2008a): "Work organization and preferences dynamics," mimeo, Paris School
    of Economics-Université Paris I - Panthéon Sorbonne.

Hiller V. (2008b): "Corporate Culture, Labor Contracts and the Evolution of Cooper-
    ation," mimeo, Paris School of Economics-Université Paris I - Panthéon Sorbonne.

Hirshleifer, J. (1977): "Economics from a Biological Point of View," Journal of Law
    and Economics, 20, 1-52.

Hirshleifer, J. (1978): "Competition, Cooperation and Con‡ict in Economics and Bi-
    ology," American Economic Review, 68, 238-43.

Hoge, D.R., and G. H. Petrillo (1978): "Determinants of Church Participation and
    Attitudes among High School Youth," Journal for the Scienti…c Study of Religion,
    XVII, 359-79.

Hoge, D.R., G. H. Petrillo, and E.I. Smith (1982): "Transmission of Religious and
    Social Values from Parents to Teenage Children,” Journal of Marriage and the
    Family, XLIV, 569-80.

Horst, U. and J.A. Scheinkman (2006): "A limit theorem for systems of social interac-
    tions," forthcoming in Journal of Mathematical Economics.

Hryshko, D., M.J. Luengo-Prado, and B.E. Sorensen (2006): "Childhood Determinants
    of Risk Aversion: The Long Shadow of Compulsory Education," mimeo, University
    of Alberta.

Huntington, S.P. (1992): "The Clash of Civilizations," Foreign A¤airs, 72, 22-49.

Iannaccone L. (1990): "Religious Practice: A Human Capital Approach," Journal for
    the Scienti…c Study of Religion, 29, 297-314.

Inglehart, R. (1990): Culture Shift in Advanced Industrialized Society, Princeton, NJ,
    Princeton University Press.

Inglehart, R. (1997): Modernization and Postmodernization: Cultural, Economic and
    Political Change in 43 Societies, Princeton, NJ, Princeton University Press.

Ioannides, Y. and G. Zanella (2007): "Searching for the Best Neighborhood: Mobility
    and Social Interactions," mimeo, Tufts University.


                                         97
Jacoby, T. (1998): Someone Else’s House: America’s Un…nished Struggle for Integra-
    tion, New York, NY, Free Press.

Jasso, G. (2009): "Ethnicity and Immigration of Highly Skilled Workers in the United
    States," IZA Discussion Paper 3950.

Jellal, M. and. Wol¤, F. (2002a): "Cultural Evolutionary Altruism: Theory and Evi-
    dence," European Journal of Political Economy, 18, 241–62.

Jellal, M. and. Wol¤, F. (2002b): "Altruistic Bequests with Inherited Tastes," Inter-
    national Journal of Business and Economics, 1(2), 95-113.

Kapteyn, A., T. Wansbeek and J. Buyze (1980): "The Dynamics of Preference Forma-
    tion, Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 1, 123-57.

Kennedy, R.J. (1952): "Single or Triple Melting Pot ? Intermarriage Trends in New
    Haven," American Journal of Sociology, 49, 331-39.

Koçkesen, L., E. Ok and R. Sethi (2000): "The strategic advantage of negatively inter-
    dependent preferences," Journal of Economic Theory.

Kremer, M. and A. Sarychev (2000): "Why Do Governments Operate Schools?,"
    mimeo, Harvard University.

Kuznets, S. (1960): "Economic Structure and Life of the Jews," in The Jews: Their
    History, Culture, and Religion, L. Finkelstein, ed. 1597— 1666, Philadelphia: Jew-
    ish Publication Society of America.

Kuznets, S. (1972): Economic Structure of U.S. Jewry: Recent Trends, Jerusalem,
    Institute of Contemporary Jewry, Hebrew University of Jerusalem.

LaLonde, R.J. and R.H. Topel (1997): "Economic Impact of International Migration
    and the Economic Performance of Migrants," in G.J. Borjas and R.B. Freeman,
    eds., Immigration and the Workforce: Economic Consequences for the United
    States and Source Areas, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, p. 67-92.

Landis, J. (1949): "Marriages of Mixed and Non-Mixed Religious Faith,” American
    Sociological Review, 14, 401-07.

La Porta, R., F. Lopez de Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R.W. Vishny (1997): "Trust in
    Large Organizations," American Economic Review, 87(2), 333–338.

                                          98
Lehrer, E. and C.U. Chiswick (1993): "The Religious Composition of Unions: Its Role
    as a Determinant of Marital Instability," Demography, XXX, 385-404.

H. Leibenstein (1950): "Bandwagon, Snob and Veblen E¤ects in the Theory of Con-
    sumers’Demand," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 64, 183-207.

Letki, N. (2008): "Does Diversity Erode Social Cohesion? Social Capital and Race in
    British Neighbourhoods," Political Studies, 56, 99-126.

Lewis, M.P., ed., (2009): Ethnologue: Languages of the World, SIL International, New
    York, 16th Edition.

Lindbeck A. (1995): "Hazardous Welfare State Dynamics," American Economic Re-
    view, 4, 9-15.

Lindbeck, A. and S. Nyberg (2006): "Raising Children to Work Hard: Altruism, Work
    Norms, and Social Insurance," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121 (4), 1473-
    1503.

Lichter D., J.B. Brown, Z. Qian and J. H. Carmalt (2007): "Marital Assimilation
    Among Hispanics: Evidence of Declining Cultural and Economic Incorporation?,"
    Social Science Quarterly, 88, 745-765.

Lindbeck A., S. Nyberg and J. Weibull (1999): "Social Norms and Economic Incentives
    in the Welfare State," Quarterly Journal of Economics.

Ljunge, M. (2010): "Sick of the Welfare State? Lagged Stigma and Demand for Social
    Insurance," mimeo, University of Copenhagen and SITE.

Kuran, T. and W. Sandholm (2008): "Cultural Integration and Its Discontents," Review
    of Economic Studies, 75, 201-228.

Kuznets, S. (1960): “Economic Structure and Life of the Jews,” in L. Finkelstein,
    ed., The Jews: Their History,Culture, and Religion, Jewish Publication Society of
    America.

Kuznets, S. (1972): “Economic Structure of U.S. Jewry: Recent Trends.” Working
    paper, Institute of Contemporary Jewry, Hebrew University of Jerusalem.

Mandor¤, M. (2005): "Ethnic Specialization," Ph. D. Dissertation, University of
    Chicago.

                                        99
Manning A. and S. Roy (2009): "Culture Clash or Culture Club? The Identity and
    Attitudes of Immigrants in Britain," Economic Journal, forthcoming.

Mayer, E. (1979): From Suburb to Shetl: The Jews of Boro Park, Philadelphia, PA,
    Temple University Press.

Melindi Ghidi, P. (2009): "A Model of Ideological Transmission with Endogenous Pa-
    ternalism," Universite’Catholique de Louvain Discussion Paper 2009-43.

Meng, X. and R.G. Gregory (2005): "Intermarriage and the Economic Assimilation of
    Immigrants," Journal of Labor Economics 23, 135-176.

Meyn S. and R.L. Tweedie (2009): Markov Chains and Stochastic Stability, second
    edition, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.

Michaud J.B. (2008): " Unemployment Insurance and Cultural Transmission:Theory
    & Application to European Unemployment," mimeo, Centre for Economic Perfor-
    mance, London School of Economics.

Miguel, E., S.M. Saiegh, and S. Satyanath (2008): "National Cultural Norms and
    Soccer Violence," NBER Working Paper 13968.

Mo, P.H. (2007): "The Nature of Chinese Collective Values: Formation and Evolution,"
    International Journal of Chinese Culture and Management, 1(1), 108-25.

Modood, T., R. Berthoud, J. Lakey, J. Nazroo, P. Smith, S. Virdee, S. Beishon (1997):
    Ethnic Minorities in Britain: Diversity and Disadvantage, London, Policy Studies
    Institute.

Moghaddam F.M and E.A. Solliday (1991): "Balanced Multiculturalism and the Chal-
    lenge of Peaceful Coexistence inPluralistic Societies," Psychology and Developing
    Societies, 3, 51-71.

Mokbel, M. (2005): "Second Generation Arab Canadian Women: Issues of Accultur-
    ation and Identity in the Greater Toronto Area," mimeo, paper presented at the
    annual meeting of the American Sociological Association.

Montgomery, J.D. (2009): "Intergenerational Cultural Transmission as an Evolutionary
    Game," mimeo, University of Winsconsin.



                                        100
Munshi, K. and N. Wilson (2007): "Identity, Parochial Institutions, and Occupational
    Choice: Linking the Past to the Present in the American Midwest," NBER Work-
    ing Paper 13717.

Murphy, M. and L. B. Knudsen (2002): "The Intergenerational Transmission of Fertility
    in Contemporary Denmark: The E¤ects of Number of Siblings (Full and Half),
    Birth Order, and Whether Male or Female," Population Studies, 56, 235-248.

Murphy, M. and D.Wang (2001): "Family-level Continuities in Childbearing in Low-
    Fertility Societies," European Journal of Population, 17, 7596.

Murray, J.D. (1989): Mathematical biology, Berlin, Springer Verlag.

Namoro, S.D. and R. Roushdy (2008): "Intergenerational Transmission of Fertility
    Preferences: A Test of the Cultural Substitution Assumption," mimeo, University
    of Pittsburgh.

Nannicini, T., A. Stella, G. Tabellini, and U. Troiano (2010): "Social Capital and
    Political Accountability," mimeo, Universita’Bocconi.

Nekby, L. and M. Rödin (2009): "Acculturation Identity and Employment among
    Second and Middle Generation Immigrants," Journal of Economic Psychology,
    forthcoming.

North, D.C., (1990a): Institutions, Institutional Change, and Economic Performance,
    New York, NY, Cambridge University Press.

North, D.C., (1990b): "A Transactions Cost Theory of Politics," Journal of Theoretical
    Politics, 2(4), 355-67.

North, D.C., and R.P. Thomas (1973): The Rise of the Western World: A New Eco-
    nomic History, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Nunn, N. and L. Wantchekon (2009): "The Slave Trade and the Origins of Mistrust in
    Africa," NBER Working Paper 14783.

Ogbu, J.U. (1997): "Beyond Language: Ebonics, Proper English and Identity in a
    Black American Speech Community," mimeo, University of California, Berkeley,
    Department of Anthropology.



                                        101
Olcina, G. and Penarrubia, C. (2004): "Hold-up and Intergenerational Transmission of
    Preferences," Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 54, 111–32.

Olivier, J., Thoenig, M. and Verdier, T. (2008): "Globalization and the Dynamics of
    Cultural Identity," Journal of International Economics, 76, 356-70.

Otto S.P, Christiansen, F. B., and Feldman, M. W. (1994): "Genetic and Cultural
    Inheritance of Continuous Traits," Morrison Institute for Population and Resource
    Studies, Working Paper 0064, Stanford University.

Ozorak, E. (1989): "Social and Cognitive In‡uences on the Development of Religious
    Beliefs and Commitment in Adolescence," Journal for the Scienti…c Study of Re-
    ligion, 28, 448–63.

Pagnini, D.L. and S.P. Morgan (1990): "Intermarriage and Social Distance among U.S.
    Immigrants at the Turn of the Century," American Journal of Sociology, 96(2),
    405-32.

Panebianco, F. (2010): "Driving While Black: A Theory of Interethnic Integration and
    Evolution of Prejudice," Eurodiv Paper 70.2010.

Patacchini, E. and Zenou, Y. (2004): "Intergenerational Education Transmission: Neigh-
    borhood Quality and/or Parents’Involvement?," Stockholm Research Institute of
    Industrial Economics, Working Paper 631.

Peregrine, P.N., I. Peiros, and M. Feldman (2009): Ancient Human Migrations: A
    Multidisciplinary Approach, Salt Lake City, UT, University of Utah Press.

Pichler M., (2010): "The Economics of Cultural Formation of Preferences," Institute
    of Mathematical Economics, Bielefeld University Working Paper 431.

Phinney, J.S. (1990): "Ethnic Identity in Adolescents and Adults: Review of Research,"
    Psychological Bulletin, 108, 499-514.

Platteau, J.P. (2000): Institutions, Social Norms, and Economic Development, London,
    Routledge.

R. Pollak (1976): "Habit Formation and Long Run Utility Functions," Journal of
    Economic Theory, 13, 272-97.



                                        102
Ponthiere G. (2008): "Unequal Longevities and Lifestyles Transmission," mimeo, Paris
    School of Economics.

Putnam R. (2007): "E Pluribus Unum: Diversity and Community in the Twenty First
    Century; The 2006 Johan Skytte Prize Lecture," Scandinavian Political Studies,
    30, 137-174.

Qian, Z. (1999): "Who Intermarries? Education, Nativity Region, and Interracial
    Marriage 1980 and 1990," Journal of Comparative Family Studies, 30, 579-597.

Rapport, N. and J. Overing (2007): Social and Cultural Anthropology: The Key Con-
    cepts, Routledge, London, second edition.

Rendine, S., A. Piazza, and L.L. Cavalli Sforza (1986): "Simulation and Separation by
    Principal Components of Multiple Demic Expansions in Europe," The American
    Naturalist, 128(5), 681-706.

Riesman, Paul, and David L. Szanton (1992): First Find Your Child a Good Mother:
    The Construction of the Self in Two African Communities, Rutgers University
    Press.

Riis, J. (1890): How the Other half Lives: Studies among the Tenements of New York,
    New York, NY, Charles Scribner’s Sons.

Rindfuss, R.R., and A. Van den Heuvel (1990): "Cohabitation: A Precursor to Marriage
    or an Alternative to Being Single ?," Population and Development Review, XVI,
    703-26.

Robson, A. and L. Samuelson (2010): "Evolutionary Selection of Preferences," this
    Handbook, chapter ??

A. Rogers (1988): "Does Biology Constrain Culture?," American Anthropologist, 90,
    819-31.

Rogers A.R., and E. Cashdan (1997): "The Phylogenetic Approach to Comparing
    Human Populations," Evolution of Human Behavior, 18, 353–358.

Rubin, P. and C. Paul (1979): "An Evolutionary Model of Taste for Risk’, Economic
    Inquiry, 17, 585-96.



                                        103
Sacerdote, B. (2010): "Nature/nurture," this Handbook, chapter ??

Saez-Marti, M. and A. Sjögren (2006): "Peers and Culture," mimeo, Stockholm, Re-
    search Institute of Industrial Economics.

Sáez-Martí, M. and Zenou, Y. (2005): "Cultural Transmission and Discrimination,"
    mimeo, Stockholm, Research Institute of Industrial Economics.

Sander, W. (1993): "Catholicism and Intermarriage in the United States," Journal of
    Marriage and the Family, LV, 1037-41.

Schoen, R., and R.M. Weinick (1993): "Partner Choice in Marriages and Cohabita-
    tions," Journal of Marriage and the Family, LV, 408-14.

Senik C. and T. Verdier (2007): "Segregation, Entrepreneurship and Work Values: The
    case of France", PSE Working Paper 2007-37.

Sheikh C. (2005): "The E¤ect of Religiosity on Ethnic Identity Among Second-Generation
    Muslim Americans," mimeo, paper presented at the annual meeting of the Ameri-
    can Sociological Association Philadelphia http://www.allacademic.com/meta/p21451_index.htm

Smith, R.C. (1996): Two Cultures One Marriage, Berrien Springs, MI, Andrews Uni-
    versity Press, 1996.

Spolaore, E. and R. Wacziarg (2009): "The Di¤usion of Development," Quarterly Jour-
    nal of Economics, 124(2), 469-529.

Spolaore, E. and R. Wacziarg (2010): "War and Relatedness," mimeo, UCLA.

O. Stark (1995): Altruism and Beyond, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.

Stark, R. (1984): "The rise of a new world faith," Review of Religious Research, 26,
    18-27.

Stark, R. (1997): The rise of Christianity, San Francisco, HarperCollins.

Stigler, G.J. and G.S. Becker (1977): "De Gustibus Non Est Disputandum," American
    Economic Review, 67(2), 76-90.

Tabellini, G. (2005): "Culture and Institutions: Economic Development in the Regions
    of Europe," IGIER Working Paper.


                                         104
Tabellini, G. (2008a): "Institutions and Culture," Presidental address, Journal of the
    European Economic Association, 6(2-3), 255-94.

Tabellini, G. (2008b): "The Scope of Cooperation: Normes and Incentives," Quarterly
    Journal of Economics, 123(3), 905-950.

Tahbaz-Salehi, A. and F. Karahan (2008): "Marriage, Intergenerational Cultural Trans-
    mission, and the Evolution of Ethnic and Religious Traits, mimeo, University of
    Pennsylvania.

Tajfel H.(1981): Human Groups and Social Categories: Studies in Social Psychology,
    Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.

Tajfel H. and J.C.Turner (1979): "An Intergrative Theory of Intergroup Con‡ict," in
    W.G. Austin and S. Worchel, eds., The Social Psychology of Intergroup Relations,
    Monterey, CA Brooks/Cole, p. 33-47.

Taylor D.M.and W.E.Lambert (1996): "The Meaning of Multiculturalism in a Cultur-
    ally Diverse Urban American Area," Journal of Social Psychology, 136, 727-740.

Taylor D.M. and F.M. Moghaddam (1987): Theories of Intergroup Relations: Interna-
    tional Social Psychological Perspectives, New York, NY, Praeger.

Thernstrom A. and S. Thernstrom (2002): Beyond the Color Line: New Perspectives
    on Race and Ethnicity in America, New York, Hoover Press and the Manhattan
    Institute.

Thomas. John L. (1951): "The Factor of Religion in the Selection of Marriage Mates,"
    American Sociological Review, 16, 487-91.

Tucker, M. B. and C. Mitchell-Kernan (1990): "New Trends in Black American In-
    terracial Marriage: The Social Structural Context," Journal of Marriage and the
    Family, 52, 209-218.

Turner J.C. (1982): "Towards a Cognitive Rede…nition of the Social Group," in H.
    Tajfel, ed., Social Identity and Intergroup Relations, Cambridge, Cambridge Uni-
    versity Press, p. 15-44.

Turner J.C., M.A. Hogg, P.J. Oakes, S.D Reicher and M.S. Wethrell (1987): Rediscov-
    ering the Social Group: A Self-categorization Theory, Oxford, Blackwell.

                                        105
Tymicki, K. (2005): "Intergenerational Transmission of Fertility: Review of Up to
    Date Research and Some New Evidence from Bejsce Parish Register Reconstitution
    Study, 18th 20th centuries, Poland," mimeo, accessible online at http://paa2006.princeton.edu/do

Uslaner, E.M. (2008): "Where You Stand Depends Upon Where Your Grandparents
    Sat: THe Inheritability of Generalized Trust," Public Opinion Quarterly, 72(4),
    725-40.

Vandenberg, S. (1972): "Assortative Mating, or Who Marries Whom," Behavior Ge-
    netics, II, 127-157.

Vaughan, D. (2010): "Conformity and Cultural Transmission: The Assimilation of
    Hispanic Americans in the United States," NYU, in progress.

Vigdor, J. (2008): "Measuring Immigrant Assimilation in the United States," Duke
    University, Civic Report 53.

Voigtländer, N. and J. Voth (2010): "Persecution Perpetuated: The Medieval Origins
    of German Anti-Semitism in the 1920s and 1930s," work in progress.

Wilhelm, M.O., E. Brown, P.M. Rooney, R. Steinberg (2008): "The Intergenerational
    Transmission of Generosity," Journal of Public Economics, 92, 2146-56.

Whyte, W.F. (1943): Street Corner Society, Chicago, IL, University of Chicago Press.

Zhou M.. (1997): "Segmented Assimilation: Issues, Controversies and Recent Research
    on the new Second Generation," International Migration Review, 4, 975-1008.




                                        106
