                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   ANIMAL SPIRITS, PERSISTENT UNEMPLOYMENT AND THE BELIEF FUNCTION

                                         Roger E.A. Farmer

                                        Working Paper 16522
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16522


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2010




This paper was prepared for the “Microfoundations for Modern Macroeconomics Conference” hosted
by Columbia University’s Center on Capitalism and Society, November 19th - 20th, 2010 in New
York City. I wish to thank Ned Phelps and Roman Frydman for inviting me to write the paper and
Olivier Blanchard, Guillermo Calvo and Ned Phelps for their comments on my presentation. Thanks
also to Leigh Caldwell, Larry Christiano, Eric Leeper, Dmitry Plotnikov, Harald Uhlig, Frank Smets,
Yi Wen and seminar participants at the Paris School of Economics, Duke University, GREQAM and
the European Summer Symposium on Macroeconomics. The National Science Foundation funded
this research in part through grant #0720839. The views expressed herein are those of the author and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Roger E.A. Farmer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Animal Spirits, Persistent Unemployment and the Belief Function
Roger E.A. Farmer
NBER Working Paper No. 16522
November 2010
JEL No. E24,E3,E31,E4

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper presents a theory of the monetary transmission mechanism in a monetary version of Farmer’s
(2009) model in which there are multiple equilibrium unemployment rates. The model has two equations
in common with the new-Keynesian model; the optimizing IS curve and the policy rule. It differs from
the new-Keynesian model by replacing the Phillips curve with a belief function to determine expectations
of nominal income growth. I estimate both models using U.S. data and I show that the Farmer monetary
model fits the data better than its new-Keynesian competitor.


Roger E.A. Farmer
UCLA
Department of Economics
Box 951477
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
and NBER
rfarmer@econ.ucla.edu
1       Introduction
This chapter provides an interpretation of persistence in the unemployment
rate that draws from two central ideas in Keynes’ General Theory (1936).
The first is that any unemployment rate can persist as an equilibrium. The
second is that the unemployment rate that prevails is determined by animal
spirits.
    Existing non-classical approaches to economic policy are grounded in new-
Keynesian economics, an approach based on the idea that there are frictions
that prevent prices from quickly adjusting to their Walrasian levels. In this
chapter I present a three equation monetary model that provides an alter-
native to the new-Keynesian representation of the monetary transmission
mechanism. Unlike the new-Keynesian representation, this alternative is not
based on the assumption of sticky prices. My alternative model adds money
to a theory of the real economy that I developed in Farmer (2009): I refer to
it as the Farmer monetary model.1
    The Farmer monetary model discards the new-Keynesian Phillips curve
and replaces it with a belief function that describes how agents form expec-
tations of future nominal income. I showed in Farmer (2008a,b, 2009, 2010b)
that any unemployment rate is consistent with a zero profit labor-market
equilibrium by providing a microfounded theory of aggregate supply, based
on costly search and recruiting. The Farmer monetary model shares this
property and, in addition, any inflation rate is consistent with any unem-
ployment rate in a steady state equilibrium.
    This chapter builds and estimates the Farmer monetary model using U.S.
data for the period from 1952:Q1 to 2007:Q4. I compare the Farmer mone-
    1
     In the working paper version of this essay, (Farmer, 2010a), I refer to my work as an
old-Keynesian model. I have dropped that nomenclature in the published version since it
is too easily confused with the textbook IS-LM version of Keynes’ General Theory. The
model developed in Farmer (2009, 2010b), on which this chapter is based, is distinct from
the IS-LM model. The main diﬀerence is that my work provides a theory of labor market
failure in which any unemployment rate may persist as a long-run steady state equilibrium.



                                            1
tary model to a new-Keynesian model by computing the posterior odds ratio.
I find that the posterior odds favor the Farmer monetary model and I discuss
the implications of this finding for fiscal and monetary policy.


2    The Genesis of the Natural Rate Hypoth-
     esis
In 1970 the “Phelps Volume” (Phelps, 1970a) launched an exciting new ap-
proach to the microeconomics of employment and inflation theory that was,
in the words of Edmund Phelps, “an economics of disequilibrium”. That
volume collected together a set of papers that provided an intellectual foun-
dation for the expectations augmented Phillips curve; the idea that there is a
short run trade-oﬀ between inflation and unemployment but in the long-run
that trade-oﬀ disappears and the Phillips curve is vertical.
    The Phelps volume helped to solidify an interpretation of Keynesian eco-
nomics that began with Alvin Hansen (1936) and John Hicks (1937) and was
introduced to generations of undergraduates with the third edition of Paul
Samuelson’s introductory textbook, (Samuelson, 1955). Under this interpre-
tation, unemployment may fall and GDP may increase following a monetary
shock because prices are ‘sticky’. In the long-run, GDP returns to its trend
growth path and unemployment returns to its natural rate.
    The papers in the Phelps volume aimed to provide a microfoundation
to these characteristics of the monetary transmission mechanism. Armen
Alchian (1970) talked of information costs, Charles Holt (1970) discussed
the role of unions in wage setting and Edmund Phelps (1970b) explored a
model of staggered wage setting. These papers, and all of the others in this
remarkable collection, provided an intellectual foundation that evolved into
new-Keynesian economics in the 1980s.
    The idea that demand management polices cannot influence unemploy-
ment in the long run became known as the natural rate hypothesis (NRH).

                                      2
The papers by Edmund Phelps (1968) and Milton Friedman (1968), which
formulated that hypothesis, were bold, innovative steps that challenged the
1960s Keynesian orthodoxy of an exploitable trade-oﬀ between inflation and
unemployment.
    But although the natural rate hypothesis is intellectually appealing, it
soon became apparent that the simple form of the NRH is inconsistent with
an unemployment rate that has highly persistent long-run movements. Ed-
mund Phelps himself has addressed this problem in his book on structural
slumps (Phelps, 1994) where he argues that many of the determinants of
the natural rate of unemployment can be influenced by economic policy. In
this paper I present an alternative explanation of persistent unemployment
based on the two central ideas from Keynes’ General Theory that I alluded
to in the introduction to this paper. Any unemployment rate can persist as
an equilibrium and the unemployment rate that prevails is determined by
animal spirits.


3       New-Keynesian Economics
There is a widely held view amongst economic policy makers that monetary
policy can influence real economic activity in the short-run but in the long
run all changes in the quantity of money are reflected in prices. This view
was nicely summarized in David Hume’s (1777) essay Of Money.
    In a large and growing literature, researchers have distilled Hume’s view
into a theory that has become known as new-Keynesian economics.2 In this
paper I will frequently refer to the canonical new-Keynesian model By this, I
mean a three equation monetary model, based on dynamic stochastic general
    2
    As I argue in Farmer (2010c, page 78), new-Keynesian economics has much more in
common with the quantity theory of money than it does with the economics of Keynes’
General Theory. Since the misnomer is by now well established I will continue to use the
term new-Keynesian economics in this chapter in the same way that it is used elsewhere
in the literature.



                                           3
equilibrium theory, that encapsulates the main insights of David Hume’s
essay.
    The new-Keynesian model is described by equations (1) — (3).

                    =  [+1 ] −  +  [ +1 ] +  +               (1)

                                 =  +  +                              (2)

                            =  [ +1 ] +  ( −  )                   (3)

Here,  is the log of GDP,   is inflation,  is the interest rate and   and
 are demand and supply shocks.  [·] is the expectations operator and
I assume that expectations are rational and hence expectations are taken
with respect to an equilibrium probability measure.  is the intertemporal
elasticity of substitution,  is the rate of time preference,   and  are
policy parameters and  and  are parameters of the Phillips curve.
    Equation (1) is an optimizing IS curve that is derived from a representa-
tive agent’s Euler equation. Equation (2) is the Taylor rule (Taylor, 1999),
a description of central bank policy that John Taylor has argued is a good
description of how the Fed behaves in practice and Equation (3) is the new-
Keynesian Phillips curve. Derivations of the new-Keynesian Phillips curve,
based on Guillermo Calvo’s (1983) elegant model of sticky prices, can be
found in the books by Galí (2008) or Woodford (2003) and in the survey
paper by Clarida, Galí, and Gertler (1999).
    As long as policy is active in the sense that the central bank responds
to inflation by raising the expected real interest rate, (Leeper, 1991), the
new-Keynesian model has a unique rational expectations equilibrium given
by equations (4)—(6),
                            =  +   +                            (4)

                              =  +   +                         (5)

                              =  +   +                         (6)


                                           4
where the coeﬃcients  are functions of the structural parameters. These
equations are derived by imposing the assumption that a rational expecta-
tions equilibrium is a stationary probability measure that describes how
endogenous variables respond to the state variables and to random shocks
and by using the stationarity assumption, and the assumption that shocks
are bounded, to eliminate the influence of unstable roots from equations (1)
— (3).


4         A Preview of an Alternative Approach
In a model of the real economy that I developed in Farmer (2009), I showed
that the absence of a complete set of markets in a labor search model leads to
a steady state indeterminacy in the labor market: Any unemployment rate
can be a steady state equilibrium. Indeterminacy arises because I retain the
assumption that firms and workers are price takers and I drop the assumption
of Nash bargaining over the wage. That leads to a model with fewer steady
state equations than unknowns.
    To resolve the indeterminacy of equilibrium, I assume that output is
determined by aggregate demand which, in turn, depends on the value of
aggregate wealth. I showed, in my earlier work, that for every belief about
the real value of wealth, there is a self-fulfilling equilibrium. The current
chapter extends that idea to a monetary economy.
    My work is related to the fundamental contributions of Shell (1977),
Azariadis (1981), and Cass and Shell (1983) who showed that, in the presence
of market failures, equilibria may exist in which “sunspots”, non fundamen-
tal shocks to beliefs, can influence economic outcomes. That work inspired
Benhabib and Farmer (1994), Farmer and Guo (1994) and many others3 to
construct models in which there are many paths leading to a unique steady
state. By randomizing over the paths that lead back to the steady state, that
    3
        See the survey by Benhabib and Farmer (1999).


                                             5
literature showed that there may exist business cycles models that replicate
the features of a real business cycle economy but in which the movements
in economic activity are caused, not by fundamental shocks to productivity,
but by non-fundamental shocks to beliefs. In a series of books and papers,
(Farmer, 2008a,b, 2009, 2010d,b), I have taken this agenda one step further
by constructing models in which there is not just an indeterminacy of paths:
there is also an indeterminacy of the steady state.
    When a general equilibrium model has multiple equilibria, the theory
must be supplemented by an additional equation that resolves the indetermi-
nacy by explaining how people in the model would behave. In the model that
I developed in Farmer (2009), there are not enough equations to determine
a unique labor market equilibrium. Standard search models are closed with
the Nash bargaining assumption. My model is closed, instead, by a theory
of beliefs. I view the function that determines beliefs as an additional funda-
mental with the same methodological status as preferences endowments and
technologies. Since the belief function replaces the Nash bargaining equation
and is itself fundamental I am able to retain the assumption that expecta-
tions are rational in the sense that one step ahead forecast errors have zero
mean.4
   4
     As Frydman and Goldberg point out in their book (Frydman and Goldberg, 2011)
and in a chapter appearing in this volume (Frydman and Goldberg, 2012), the rational
expectations assumption imposes an unrealistic burden on agents who cannot be expected
to act rationally in a world in which future events are unforecastable. However, in a model,
like the one I consider here, in which almost any path for future prices is consistent with
equilibrium, it is no longer clear that there is much diﬀerence between rational expectations
equilibria and non-rational expectations equilibria. Any sample path could conceivably be
rationalized as the outcome of some non-stationary sequence of beliefs.




                                             6
5     Five Problems with New-Keynesian Eco-
      nomics
In this section I am going to raise five objections to the canonical new-
Keynesian model. 1) It assumes that prices are implausibly sticky: 2) It
cannot explain inflation persistence in data: 3) There is no unemployment in
the model: 4) The welfare costs of business cycles are trivial: 5) The model
cannot explain bubbles and crashes.


5.1    Prices are implausibly sticky
The core of new-Keynesian economics is the new-Keynesian Phillips curve,
Equation (3). There are two main ways that this equation has been derived
in the literature: Both involve variants of a cost of changing nominal prices.
Rotemberg (1982) assumes a quadratic cost of price adjustment and Tak Yun
(1996), drawing on work by Guillermo Calvo (1983), assumes that a fixed
fraction of agents reset their prices in each period.
    Studies of price change in large micro data sets have been used to evaluate
the new-Keynesian assumption that prices are sticky. The evidence from this
literature suggests that price stickiness at the micro level is not large enough
to explain the degree of price stickiness needed for the new-Keynesian model
to explain the aggregate data. In their Handbook survey, Klenow and Malin
(2010) conclude that

          Prices change quite frequently, although much of this flexi-
      bility is associated with price movements that are temporary in
      nature. Even if all short-lived prices are excluded, however, the
      resulting nominal stickiness, by itself, appears insuﬃcient to ac-
      count for the sluggish movement of aggregate prices.

    Klenow and Malin suggest that a coordination failure may cause agents to
act in ways that make aggregate prices more sluggish than individual prices.

                                       7
That is a possible explanation of the disparity between the micro and macro
evidence: but it is not an assumption of the canonical new-Keynesian model.5


5.2     Inflation is persistent
Macroeconomic evidence from vector autoregressions suggests that prices
move less than one would expect based on the Walrasian market clearing
model. In addition, inflation is highly persistent in U.S. data. In vector
autoregressions using data from the period from 1950 through 1980, lagged
inflation is the only significant predictor of current inflation. For that period,
inflation is well described by a random walk. In the period after 1980 inflation
is less persistent but there is still a significant role for lagged inflation in
reduced form representations of the data.
    The new-Keynesian model can explain sticky prices but it cannot explain
persistence in the inflation rate. It is possible to modify the model by adding
habit persistence to preferences and a lagged interest rate to the policy rule.
These modifications imply that the lagged interest rate and lagged GDP
should be included in the reduced form of the model as state variables and
they help explain persistence in GDP and the interest rate. It is much harder
to find a plausible modification to the new-Keynesian model that gives a role
to lagged inflation whilst maintaining the core assumption of rational agents.
    Fuhrer and Moore (1995) write down a contracting model that can lead
to inflation persistence. While the Fuhrer-Moore modification can produce a
role for lagged inflation in the Phillips curve, it is not clear why the contracts
they consider would be signed by rational agents, a point first made by
Robert Barro (1977) in his critique of the first generation of contracting
papers (Fischer, 1977).
   5
    Some progress has been made on models of rational inattention (Sims, 2010), and the
related concept of sticky information (Mankiw and Reis, 2002), but neither of these ideas
has yet been fully incorporated into new-Keynesian theory.




                                           8
5.3     There is no unemployment
Since the new-Keynesian model has a classical core, the canonical model does
not explain unemployment. The new-Keynesians accepted the arguments of
Robert Lucas and Leonard Rapping (1970) that the labor market should be
modeled as an equilibrium in the classical sense where the supply of labor is
equal to the demand for labor at the observed wage.
    Gertler and Trigari (2009) have added unemployment to the new-Keynesian
model and Gertler, Sala, and Trigari (2008) find that the model augmented
in this way can explain the data about as well as similar new-Keynesian mod-
els. The version of the new-Keynesian model that they develop is similar to
the theory I describe in Section 6. Their model is closed with a wage equa-
tion based on long-term contracts. Because this equation leads to a unique
unemployment rate in the long run, their model preserves the natural rate
hypothesis. My own work drops the wage equation and replaces it with a
model of self-fulfilling beliefs.


5.4     Welfare costs of business cycles are small
According to the new-Keynesian model, business cycles are caused by de-
mand and supply shocks that generate autocorrelated movements of output
and GDP around a social planning optimum.6 The equations of the model
are derived from an equilibrium business cycle model with added frictions
such as money in the utility function or the Calvo (1983) pricing rule. These
frictions prevent the equilibrium of the model from adjusting quickly to the
social planning optimum.
    But although frictions could potentially explain large welfare losses, cal-
ibrated models fail to deliver on this promise. When the model is calibrated
   6
    This position is sometimes modified to recognize that the steady state of the model
may deviate from the social planning optimum because of tax distortions or monopolistic
competition. These modifications do not alter the fact that the welfare costs of business
cycles in this model are trivial.



                                           9
to realistic parameter values, Galí, Gertler, and Salido (2007) have shown
that the magnitude of the distortions caused by new-Keynesian frictions is
comparable to the numbers found by Robert Lucas (1987) in his study of
equilibrium business cycle models. These distortions can be responsible for
at most one tenth of one percent of steady state consumption.
    The fact that a model based on the equilibrium assumption cannot gen-
erate large welfare losses would not have surprised James Tobin. Around the
time that Ned Phelps and Milton Friedman formulated the natural rate hy-
pothesis, Tobin quipped that: “it takes a lot of Harberger triangles to fill an
Okun gap”. In other words, the distortions caused by what today we would
refer to as wedges (Chari, Kehoe, and McGrattan, 2007) are small relative
to large movements in the unemployment rate during major recessions.


5.5    The model cannot explain bubbles and crashes
In The General Theory, Keynes stressed the importance of animal spirits as
an independent driving force in the economy. In his view, the stock market
crash of 1929 caused the Great Depression. In my own work (Farmer, 2011b)
I have argued that the stock market crash of 2008 caused the Great reces-
sion. New-Keynesian economics does not have room for that idea. The 2008
financial crisis is widely thought to have been triggered by the bursting of
a bubble; a large inflation in asset prices that was not associated with fun-
damentals. The new-Keynesian model cannot explain an asset price bubble
because equilibria in the model are driven by fundamentals.
    The fact that Keynes asserted that non-fundamental market movements
caused the Great Depression is not evidence for or against that proposition.
And the fact that many economists assert that the 2008 crash was caused
by the collapse of a bubble does not make it so. To compare the bubble
hypothesis with alternative explanations, we need a theory of bubbles that
is consistent with microeconomic principles in which the bubble theory can
be consistently articulated and compared with the alternatives.

                                      10
    What is needed to advance our understanding, is a model of markets
that preserves no-arbitrage pricing but allows for independent movements in
asset prices. In Farmer (2011a) I have shown that Farmer’s (2009) model can
explain asset price bubbles. The model admits equilibria in which beliefs are
driven by an independent fundamental shock and asset values can take on
many diﬀerent values, including explosive bubbles. In this environment, the
collapse of an asset bubble is fully consistent with rational behavior on the
part of forward looking agents and that collapse can have devastating eﬀects
on unemployment and on economic welfare.


5.6    Should my objections to the new-Keynesian model
       be taken seriously?
A defender of the new-Keynesian approach will object that I am setting up
a straw man and they will claim that all of the problems that I mention are
well known and have been addressed in the literature. Although there is a
sense in which that is correct, the defenses that are necessary to support
the theory against my five objections are, in my view, a sign of what Imre
Lakatos (1978) referred to as a degenerative research program.
    In 1543, Copernicus introduced the sun centered theory of the solar
system. Ptolemy’s theory, which preceded Copernicus, placed the earth at
the center of the universe and that theory was initially better at explaining
the motion of the planets than that of Copernicus. But Ptolemy’s theory
was successful only through repeatedly more improbable modifications to
the concentric circles that described the orbits of the planets (Kuhn, 1957).
    The modifications that allow new-Keynesian economics to explain the
data are similar to the addition of concentric circles used to allow Ptolemy’s
theory to explain new data. When new evidence contradicts a pillar of the
new-Keynesian theory, a piece is tacked on to account for the anomaly . A
subset of irrational agents accounts for bubbles as in Kyle (1985). A concern
for relative wages accounts for inflation persistence as in Fuhrer and Moore

                                     11
(1995). Wage contracting accounts for persistent unemployment as in Gertler
and Trigari (2009). These modifications have been relatively successful at
explaining data from the 1980s and 1990s. The 2008 financial crisis presents
a major new challenge.
    The new-Keynesian model is not a convincing theory of major reces-
sions. During the Great Depression unemployment remained above 10% for
a decade and in the 2008 financial crisis it has remained above 8% for twenty
months in a row with no sign of a return to more normal levels as of No-
vember of 2010. We need a more radical departure from classical economics
that can explain persistently high unemployment. My model can explain
why high unemployment persists and, as I will demonstrate below, it can
also account for variations in output and inflation in more normal times.


6         Keynesian Economics Without Sticky Prices:
          A Monetary Version of Farmer’s 2009 Model


Keynes’ General Theory (1936) argued that persistent unemployment is a
pervasive feature of market economies. In modern language we would de-
scribe that idea as a possibility for the economy to display a continuum of
steady state unemployment rates. That idea was replaced by post-war in-
terpreters of Keynes who appended the Phillips curve to the IS-LM model
and created a synthesis of Keynesian and classical ideas that evolved into
the current mainstream new-Keynesian paradigm. In new-Keynesian eco-
nomics there is a unique steady state unemployment rate: the natural rate
of unemployment.
    This section describes an alternative theory of aggregate employment
based on Farmer’s 2009 model.7 There, I introduced the idea that high un-
    7
        The theory is explained in more depth in Farmer (2008a,b, 2009, 2010b) where I re-


                                             12
employment can persist as a steady state equilibrium and I selected a specific
equilibrium by introducing beliefs as an independent driving variable. The
theory of employment that I developed was based on the economics of costly
search that first appeared with papers by Armen Alchian (1970) and Dale
Mortensen (1970) in the Phelps Volume published forty years ago. Here I
will sketch the main properties of that theory and, in Section 7, I will use
it to present an alternative to the new-Keynesian theory of the monetary
transmission mechanism.


6.1     Technology in Farmer’s model
Farmer’s 2009 model explains unemployment as an equilibrium in an economy
in which there are two diﬀerent technologies. A production technology for
producing goods from labor and capital and a search technology for moving
workers between leisure and productive activity.
   Aggregate output is produced from the production technology

                                    ̄ = ̄ ̄1−                               (7)

where ̄ is output, ̄ is labor used in production, ̄ is capital, and a bar
over a variable denotes the economy wide average.
   Workers are moved from home to work using a search technology. This
takes the form
                                      12 ¡     ¢12
                              ̄ = ̄    Γ̄                            (8)

where Γ is a parameter, ̄ is the number of workers assigned to the task of
recruiting and ̄ is the measure of workers searching for a job. ̄  ̄ and
ferred to it as old-Keynesian economics. The closest precedent to old-Keynesian economics
is the hysteresis theory of Blanchard and Summers (1986, 1987) in which the unemploy-
ment rate is path dependent because of insider-outsider behavior in wage bargaining.




                                           13
̄ are constrained by the identity

                                         ̄ ≡ ̄ + ̄                   (9)

   These assumptions are relatively standard in search theory. The main
diﬀerence from more mainstream approaches is my assumption that firms
take the wage and the price as given. Howitt and McAfee (1987) pointed
out that this assumption leads to a continuum of unemployment rates in a
model with costly search and recruiting. I will exploit this observation to
construct a general equilibrium model with many steady state equilibrium
unemployment rates.


6.2    Profit maximization
The production technology is operated by a large number of competitive
firms, each of which solves the problem

                         max             Π =   −   −         (10)
                        


                                          ≤  1−                   (11)

                                            =                       (12)

                                          =  +                      (13)

Here, Π is profit,  is the price of commodities,  is the money wage and
 is the rental rate for capital. Firms take      and  as given where
 is the number of workers that can be hired by one worker assigned to the
recruiting department.
    At the beginning of time, a measure one of workers look for jobs. Firms
put together plans that allocate a fraction   workers to the recruiting
department and the remaining   workers to production. To keep the
dynamics as close as possible to those of the standard model I assume that


                                                14
the entire workforce is fired at the end of every period and next period, the
process begins again.8
   Substituting (11)—(13) into (10) and defining
                                        µ       ¶
                                             1
                                    Θ ≡ 1 −                                     (14)
                                             

leads to the reduced form problem

                    max Π =   (Θ  )1− −   −                   (15)
                     


which has the same first-order conditions as a standard competitive model.
These are represented by (16) and (17),

                                 (1 − )   =                            (16)

                                       =                               (17)


6.3     Search theory without the Nash bargain
In a classical model, firms and households take prices and wages as given. In
Farmer’s model they also take the externality Θ as given. For every value
of Θ there is a profit maximizing labor demand decision in which the firm
equates the marginal product of labor to the real wage. When output is
produced from a Cobb-Douglas technology by competitive firms this leads to
Equation (16), the first order condition for choice of labor by firms.
    In a standard search model, one appends an additional equation to the
   8
    This implies that workers are allowed to recruit themselves. This improbable as-
sumption is a convenient way of reducing the dynamics of the model and it considerably
simplifies the exposition of the theory. More generally, employment should appear as a
state variable governed by the equation

                             ̄+1 = (1 −   ) ̄ +  1−

where     and  are parameters and  is the unemployment rate.


                                             15
model to determine the wage. Typically this is the Nash bargaining as-
sumption. When a firm and a worker meet, there is a surplus to be split.
The firm would be willing to pay any wage up to and including the worker’s
marginal product. The worker would accept any wage greater than or equal
to his reservation wage. Mortensen and Pissarides (1994) assume that the
wage is determined by bargaining over the surplus which is split according
to a bargaining weight  This is a free parameter which is often chosen to
match employment in the search model with the level that maximizes worker
utility.
    In my model I do not use the Nash bargaining equation. I assume instead
that the externality Θ is a variable to be determined by the assumption that
the corporate sector produces enough goods to meet aggregate demand. Once
Θ is determined, the real wage, unemployment and GDP are determined
from profit maximizing behavior by firms. In my previous work I showed
how to determine Θ from the self-fulfilling beliefs of households about the
value of wealth. Farmer’s model, closed in that way, provides an explanation
of aggregate variables in which beliefs are a driving force of business cycles.


7    Animal Spirits and the Belief Function
The new-Keynesian model is popular because it provides a tractable expla-
nation of the data, summarized in the three equation model described in
Section (3). In this section I develop a counterpart to that model grounded
in a search theory of unemployment. The main diﬀerence between the two
approaches is that my work gives a central role to the idea that ‘animal spir-
its’ matter. In the new-Keynesian approach, in contrast, expectations are
determined by market fundamentals.
    In my model, confidence is an independent driving force that selects the
long-run steady state unemployment rate. In my previous work (Farmer,
2009) I modeled that idea by assuming that households beliefs about asset


                                      16
prices are determined by market psychology. Here I model the evolution of
beliefs about nominal GDP by introducing a new fundamental equation; the
belief function.
    Models of self-fulfilling beliefs are often criticized as incomplete theories
because they are based on general equilibrium models in which equilibrium
is indeterminate. I have argued elsewhere (Farmer, 1993) that this is a mis-
taken criticism. When a general equilibrium model has multiple equilibria,
the theory must be supplemented by an additional equation that resolves the
indeterminacy by explaining how people in the model would behave. Stan-
dard search models are closed with the Nash bargaining assumption. I close
my model with a theory of beliefs.

                    =  [+1 ] −  +  [ +1 ] +  +             (18)

                                  =  +  +                           (19)

               [ +1 ] + ( [+1 ] −  ) =   + ( − −1 ) +     (20)

   Equations (18)—(20) represent a three equation model that is implied by
the Farmer monetary theory of aggregate supply. Equations (18) and (19) are
identical with equations (1) and (2) of the new-Keynesian model. Equation
(20) provides a theory of how agents forecast the future. I call this equation
the belief function.
   If we let  be the log of the price level then

                                     =  +                              (21)

is the log of nominal GDP. The belief function is equivalent to the assumption
that
                            [∆+1 ] = ∆ +                        (22)

where ∆ is the diﬀerence operator and  is a fundamental random variable
that represents shocks to beliefs. In words, agents believe that the growth


                                           17
rate of nominal GDP follows a random walk.9
   The belief function is not an alternative to the rational expectations as-
sumption. It is an addition to it. I still assume that

                                  − −1 [ ] =                                 (23)

and
                                  − −1 [  ] =                                (24)

where  and  are endogenously determined random variables with con-
ditional mean zero.
    Agents in the model developed here, form expectations of nominal GDP
growth based on their observation of current nominal GDP growth. The
belief function provides an anchor to their expectations. Given the belief
function, represented by Equation (20), the IS curve, represented by Equa-
tion (18), interacts with the policy rule, Equation (19), to determine the
realization of inflation and output growth in period .


8       Long-Run Properties of the Two Models
If one identifies the long-run with the non-stochastic steady state of a model,
the steady values of inflation, the interest rate and the deviation of output
from trend for the new-Keynesian model are given by the expressions

                          ( − )                                         (1 − )
            ̄ =                                 ̄ =  + ̄   ̄ = ̄              (25)
                    ( − 1) +  (1 − )                                      
    9
    Since I have defined  as the log deviation of GDP from trend, the drift component
of the random walk has been removed in the detrending operation.




                                             18
When  = 1, these equations simplify to give the approximate steady state
solution10
                              −
                        ̄ =        ̄ =  + ̄ ̄ = 0                  (26)
                              −1
     These expressions demonstrate that, in the new-Keynesian model, the
central bank can influence inflation through it’s choice of ; but the steady
state deviation of GDP from trend is equal to zero. This implies that demand
management policy cannot aﬀect real economic activity in the long-run and
it is a direct corollary of the natural rate hypothesis, stated in terms of the
output gap, .
     The expressions for steady state variables given in (25) are found by
solving the steady state versions of equations (1) — (3). In contrast, the
Farmer monetary model has only two steady state equations to determine
three steady state variables since ̄, ̄ and ̄ all cancel from Equation (20).
This leaves the expressions

                                    ̄ −  + ̄ = 0                                (27)

                                  ̄ =  + ̄ + ̄                               (28)

to determine ̄ ̄ and ̄.


8.1     Why the Farmer monetary model is a good de-
        scription of the data
The reduced form of the Farmer monetary model is a cointegrated vector au-
toregression. In the three dimensional space spanned by inflation, the output
gap and the interest rate, the model pins down a one dimensional manifold
that the data lines up around. Fed policy can decide how movements in
nominal GDP are divided between movements in real output and inflation,
  10
    This is a good approximation since  represents the discount rate which is close to 1
in practice.


                                           19
but it cannot stabilize all three variables at the same time. This predicted
theoretical behavior describes the data well. The interest rate, inflation and
the deviation of GDP from trend are all highly autocorrelated and one can-
not reject the hypothesis that each series is individually non-stationary but
the series are connected by two cointegrating vectors.11


8.2     Why the new-Keynesian model does not support
        policy activism
In the new-Keynesian model, the variable  represents the time varying value
of potential output. A crude form of the natural rate hypothesis would assert
that  is white noise. If this were true, the deviation of GDP from trend
would be quickly mean reverting, a property that is strongly contradicted in
the data. For the new-Keynesian model to fit the facts,  must be highly
autocorrelated. This implies that persistent unemployment is a consequence
of permanent shifts in supply side factors such as population demographics
or industrial composition. In other words, new-Keynesian economics implies
that there is nothing that demand management policy can do to alleviate the
very high unemployment that often follows a major recession like the 2008
financial crisis.


9     Data Used in this Study
How well do the two models explain the data? To address this question I
used full information Bayesian methods to estimate both models on U.S. time
series data from 1952:Q1 through 2007:Q4.
  11
      represents the deviation of GDP from a linear trend and although this variable does
not have a systematic drift component it is has a root close to or equal to 1. The current
paper draws heavily on joint work with Andreas Beyer, (Beyer and Farmer, 2007). They
show that the behavior of inflation, the interest rate and unemployment are well described
by a cointegrated VAR.



                                            20
                 20


                 15


                 10


                  5


                  0


                 -5


                -10
                      55    60   65    70    75    80   85   90   95      00   05

                                      Treasury Bill Rate
                                      CPI Inflation
                                      Deviations of Real GDP from Trend



                           Figure 1: Data Used in the Study



    I excluded data from the 2008 financial crisis since the interest rate, for
that period, was constrained by the zero lower bound.12 I used the treasury
bill rate, the CPI inflation rate and a measure of the percentage deviation of
real GDP from a linear time trend. These data are graphed in Figure 1.
    For comparison with earlier studies, (Lubik and Schorfheide, 2004), I
allowed for autocorrelated demand and supply shocks in the new-Keynesian
model and I allowed for slow adjustment of the policy rule by including the
  12
     In 1979:Q3, Paul Volcker took over as Chairman of the Fed and for the period from
1979:Q3 through 1982:Q4, the Fed is known to have used an operating procedure in which
it targeted the rate of growth of the money supply. To check for robustness of my estimates
I estimated the two models over the full sample and over two separate sub-periods. The
first sub-period was from 1952:Q1 through 1979:Q3 and the second from 1983:Q1 through
2007:Q4. The estimates for the sub-periods gave similar results to the full sample results
reported here.

                                                  21
lagged interest rate in this equation. I also added an autocorrelated policy
disturbance. This specification of the new-Keynesian model leaves residuals
that are approximately white-noise.13 For each model I replaced the policy
rule, Equations (2) and (19) by

                      =  + (1 − ) (  +  ) + −1 +                    (29)

                                    =  −1
                                             
                                                 +                               (30)

    In practice, I found that the constant  in the policy rule was insignifi-
cantly diﬀerent from zero in both specifications. For both models, I allowed
 and  to follow the autocorrelated processes

                                    =  −1
                                             
                                                 +                               (31)

                                    =  −1
                                             
                                                 +                               (32)

and the innovations    and  were allowed to be correlated. For the
Farmer monetary model the parameter  in the policy rule and the autocor-
relation parameter  was insignificant and I set those parameters to zero
and left them out of the results reported below.


10      Empirical Results
To estimate the two models I computed the likelihood function from the
Kalman filter and used Markov-Chain Monte Carlo simulations to draw from
the posterior. In Table 1 I report the log data density and the posterior odds
ratio for the two models.
  13
    I use the word ‘approximately’ loosely. The correlogram of each series displays little
or no autocorrelation but there is fairly strong evidence of heteroskedasticity. The means
of each series are zero by construction.




                                            22
       Table 1: Model Comparison of NK and OK Models
       Sample 1952.1:2007.4               Log Data Density
       New-Keynesian Model         232410
       Farmer monetary Model       232925
       Posterior Odds Ratio of new 00058
       versus old Keynesian Model
                                          Results from 105 draws, MCMC

    The posterior odds ratio for these models is equal to 00058. This is a
number that can vary between 0 and ∞ where 0 means that the data over-
whelmingly supports the Farmer monetary model over the new-Keynesian
model and ∞ means that it overwhelmingly rejects it. The reported value of
00058 is evidence in favor of my interpretation of the facts.
    The estimates of the smoothed residuals from the Kalman filter,   
and  are graphed in Figure 2. Because  enters the old-Keyensian and
Farmer monetary models with a diﬀerent sign, I have graphed the negative
of  for the Farmer monetary model. The model assumes that these shocks
are normal random variables with constant variance. The constant variance
assumption appears to be violated for the period from 1979Q3 to 1982Q4,
when the Fed is known to have followed a diﬀerent operating procedure. The
demand shocks and the policy shocks for this period are much larger than at
the beginning and end of the sample.14
  14
     Histograms of the smoothed residuals are reported in the working paper version of
this chapter (Farmer, 2010a).




                                         23
              0.05

                                    Demand
                                    shocks



                0




             −0.05
                     1955   1960    1965     1970   1975    1980   1985   1990   1995    2000    2005




              0.05
                                   Supply                                        New−Keynesian Model
                                   Shocks                                        Old−Keynsian Model



                0




             −0.05
                     1955   1960    1965     1970   1975    1980   1985   1990   1995    2000    2005




              0.05

                                   Policy
                                   Shocks



                0




             −0.05
                     1955   1960    1965     1970   1975    1980   1985   1990   1995    2000    2005




            Figure 2: Estimated Residuals from the Two Models



    Graphs of the prior and posterior parameter distributions are reported in
Figures A1—A4 of Appendix A. The figures suggest that the parameters , 
and  are not identified in the new-Keynesian model.  is the policy response
to inflation,  is the response to GDP and  is the autocorrelation of the
demand shock. Lack of identification is reflected in the fact that the posterior
distributions for these parameters are equal to the priors. In contrast, the

                                                           24
parameters of the Farmer monetary model are all strongly identified.15


11         The Implications of these Results for Eco-
           nomic Policy
What should one take away from these results? I do not want to overstate
the evidence in favor of my approach since one should not read too much
into estimates based on a single data set. As Sims (1980) pointed out, iden-
tification in rational expectations models is fragile.16 An example of just
how fragile is provided by Beyer and Farmer (2008), who show that there is
an equivalence between new-Keynesian rational expectations models with a
unique determinate equilibrium and indeterminate monetary models of the
kind studied by Benhabib and Farmer (2000), that are driven by self-fulfilling
beliefs.17


11.1        How the new-Keynesian model explains persis-
            tent unemployment
Suppose the reader has a strong prior that the new-Keynesian model is cor-
rect and that the unemployment rate and the output gap really are reverting
to unique fundamental values. Suppose further that the Phillips curve is the
  15
       I also tested the random walk assumption by modifying Equation (22) as

                                  [∆+1 ] = ∆ +                           (33)

and by allowing  to be autocorrelated. The data strongly favored the restriction  = 1
and  = 0 and I imposed those restrictions in the reported estimates.
  16
     I am certain that a perseverant new-Keynesian would be able to find a variant of the
new-Keynesian model that reverses the conclusion I have presented in this chapter.
  17
     One way to tell two models apart is to experiment by changing the policy rule. Beyer
and Farmer (2003) suggest that evidence can be accumulated by comparing periods over
which policy rules changed but, to date, there have not been good examples of conclusive
policy experiments of this kind.



                                            25
right way to close a three equation model, as opposed to the Farmer mone-
tary model’s belief function. How does that influence one’s beliefs about the
role of active policy to combat a recession?
    In order to explain the data, the new-Keynesian model must attribute
much of the persistence in the unemployment rate to movements in the nat-
ural rate of unemployment. In that model, the output gap is persistent
because the supply disturbance   has a root  that is close to 1. The me-
dian of the posterior of  is 0985 and 95% of its probability mass is above
097.
    The fact that  has close to a unit root is a problem for new-Keynesians
who favor policy activism.  does not represent demand disturbances that
cause the unemployment rate to be away from its natural rate because prices
are sticky. It represents movements of the natural rate itself. A new-
Keynesian can explain persistence in the unemployment rate only by arguing
that the new higher unemployment rate following a financial crisis is due to
a structural change. It is a short step to arguing that the natural unem-
ployment rate is eﬃcient and that the market should be left to recover on its
own. When  is 0985 as my estimates suggest, the mean time for the rate
of unemployment rate to return to its natural rate is 17 years.


11.2     How the Farmer monetary model explains persis-
         tent unemployment
In contrast, if the Farmer monetary model is true, the output gap, inflation
and the interest rate are random walks with drift. The unit root in the data
arises from drift in the money value of GDP caused by self-fulfilling shifts
in expectations of future aggregate demand. The Fed can decide how much
of the drift in nominal GDP causes an increase in inflation and how much
causes an increase in the output gap. But it cannot independently stabilize
both variables.
    The Farmer monetary model is eclectic in its implications for fiscal policy.

                                      26
In the three-equation version of the Farmer monetary model that I presented
here, fiscal policy appears as a component of the demand shock  . It is
consistent with the results presented here for  to be independent of fiscal
policy. It is also possible that  has a non-zero mean that is influenced
by tax and expenditure policies. I did not allow for that possibility in
this study since the mean of  and the rate of time preference  cannot
be separately identified. What is certain is that if fiscal policy is eﬀective
then my model provides support for its use in times of high unemployment
to increase aggregate demand.
    But although fiscal policy might be eﬀective, I am skeptical that it is the
best solution to the current crisis. Farmer and Plotnikov (2010) have shown
that a real version of the model developed here can be a correct description
of what goes wrong in a financial crisis, but that need not lead one to support
fiscal policy as a remedy for ineﬃciently high unemployment. That depends
on the determinants of aggregate demand. If one believes, as I do, that
consumption depends on wealth and not on income then fiscal policy may
not be the panacea that its proponents claim. Instead, a variant of monetary
policy in which the Fed directly stabilizes a stock market index could provide
a more eﬀective way of restoring confidence in the markets and moving the
economy back towards a full employment equilibrium.


12     Conclusion
Forty years ago the Phelps volume gave us a new way of thinking about the
relationship between inflation and unemployment. That collection contained
the seeds of several important research programs that followed. Lucas and
Rapping (1970) provided the genesis of new-classical economics by showing
how to model employment as an equilibrium phenomenon. Armen Alchian
(1970) and Dale Mortensen (1970) laid the foundation for a search theory
of unemployment that was rewarded with Nobel prizes for search theory in


                                      27
2010 to Peter Diamond, Dale Mortensen and Chris Pissarides. In the same
volume Edmund Phelps (1970b) gave us the natural rate hypothesis.
    In this paper I hope to have persuaded economists to think about un-
employment and inflation in a new way. The relationship we have observed
in data between these two variables does not arise from sticky prices adjust-
ing to disequilibrium. It arises from the interaction of demand and supply
shocks in a world where the forecasts made by households and firms have real
consequences for what happens in the marketplace. Confidence is the new
fundamental and the role of confidence is captured by the belief function; a
replacement for the Phillips curve.
    My ideas have been hugely influenced by the papers in the Phelps volume.
But they have also been hugely influenced by current national and global
events. The dominant empirical fact of the 1970s was the emergence of
stagflation. Arguably, it was that fact that led Milton Friedman and Edmund
Phelps to argue that there is no long-run trade-oﬀ between inflation and
unemployment. The theory sketched here preserves the idea that there is no
long-run trade-oﬀ between inflation and unemployment. But the absence
of a Phillips curve does not imply that unemployment is eﬃcient; nor does
it imply that we must accept persistently high unemployment as the cost of
living in a market economy.




                                     28
Appendix A: Parameter Estimates
Figures A1—A4 present prior and posterior distributions for the two models.
In each case I used Markov-Chain Monte-Carlo methods to draw 200,000
times from the posterior and I discarded the first 100,000 draws. The dashed
line in each case is the maximum likelihood estimate. The dark curve is the
posterior parameter estimate and the light curve is the prior.
                           sigma d                                          sigma s                                   sigma i

                                                       150
      600                                                                                             200
                                                       100
      400
                                                                                                      100
      200                                               50

        0                                                0                                              0
             6         8             10           12                 0.01           0.02       0.03         0.005 0.01 0.015 0.02 0.025
                                                  −3
                                          x 10
                       sigma id                                             sigma is                                  sigma ds
                                                         4
        8                                                                                               6

        6                                                3
                                                                                                        4
        4                                                2
                                                                                                        2
        2                                                1

        0                                                0                                              0
                 0.6           0.8            1              0              0.5            1                0   0.2   0.4     0.6   0.8

                               a                                              rho                                       lam
        2                                                                                             1.5
                                                        60
       1.5
                                                                                                        1
                                                        40
        1
                                                        20                                            0.5
       0.5

        0                                                0                                              0
             0             1              2                      0     0.02         0.04   0.06                 1       1.5         2




Figure A1: Parameter Estimates from the New-Keynesian Model




                                                                             29
                              mu                                                    nu                                                   lamd
                                                                 10
       3
                                                                                                                     40

       2                                                                                                             30
                                                                  5
                                                                                                                     20
       1
                                                                                                                     10
       0                                                          0                                                   0
               0             0.5                 1                      0   0.2     0.4        0.6       0.8              0.9 0.92 0.94 0.96 0.98

                             lams                                                   lami                                                  bet
                                                                 40                                                   4
      40                                                         30                                                   3
                                                                 20                                                   2
      20
                                                                 10                                                   1
       0                                                          0                                                   0
               0.96         0.98             1                    0.9             0.95               1                0.4         0.6     0.8          1

                              phi

       8
       6
       4
       2
       0
                0            0.1              0.2




Figure A2: Parameter Estimates from the New-Keynesian Model
                              sigma d                                               sigma s                                               sigma i
       800
                                                                 800
       600                                                                                                           400
                                                                 600
       400                                                       400
                                                                                                                     200
       200                                                       200
           0                                                          0                                                    0
                      6                  8                  10              8                  10               12        0.005            0.01                  0.015
                                                         −3                                                    −3
                                                     x 10                                                x 10
                             sigma id                                               sigma is                                             sigma ds
                                                                      8                                                   8

                                                                      6                                                   6
        10
                                                                      4                                                   4
           5
                                                                      2                                                   2

           0                                                          0                                                   0
                      0.6               0.8                 1               0            0.2         0.4                      −0.6       −0.4         −0.2        0

                                    a                                                    rho                                                lam
                                                                  60
           3                                                                                                              3
                                                                  40
           2                                                                                                              2

           1                                                      20
                                                                                                                          1

           0                                                          0                                                   0
                       1           1.5               2                      0      0.02 0.04 0.06                                    1          1.5          2




Figure A3: Parameter Estimates from the Farmer Monetary Model




                                                                                                    30
                       mu                           lamd                lami
                                         30
       4.5                                                      45

        4                                25                     40

       3.5                                                      35
                                         20                     30
        3
       2.5                                                      25
                                         15
        2                                                       20

       1.5                               10                     15

        1                                                       10
                                          5
       0.5                                                       5

        0                                 0                      0
             0   0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8        0.9   0.95    1    0.9   0.95    1




Figure A4: Parameter Estimates from the Farmer Monetary Model




                                                       31
References
Alchian, A. A. (1970): “Information Costs, Pricing, and Resource Unem-
 ployment,” in Microeconomic Foundations of Employment and Inflation
 Theory, ed. by E. S. Phelps. Norton, New York.

Azariadis, C. (1981): “Self-fulfilling Prophecies,” Journal of Economic
 Theory, 25(3), 380—396.

Barro, R. J. (1977): “Long-Term Contracting, Sticky Prices and Monetary
 Policy,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 3, 5—31.

Benhabib, J., and R. E. A. Farmer (1994): “Indeterminacy and Increas-
 ing Returns,” Journal of Economic Theory, 63, 19—46.

        (1999): “Indeterminacy and Sunspots in Macroeconomics,” in Hand-
  book of Macroeconomics, ed. by J. B. Taylor, and M. Woodford. North-
  Holland.

        (2000): “The Monetary Transmission Mechanism,” Review of Eco-
  nomic Dynamics, 3(3), 523—550.

Beyer, A., and R. E. A. Farmer (2003): “Identifying the Monetary
 Transmission Mechanism Using Structural Breaks,” European Central
 Bank Working Paper Series, No. 275.

        (2007): “Natural Rate Doubts,” Journal of Economic Dynamics
  and Control, 31(121), 797—825.

         (2008): “What We Don’t Know About the Monetary Transmis-
  sion Mechanism and Why We Don’t Know It,” Macroeconomic Dynamics,
  12(S1), 60—74.

Blanchard, O. J., and L. H. Summers (1986): “Hysterisis and the Euro-
 pean Unemployment Problem,” in NBER Macroeconomics Annual, vol. 1,
 pp. 15—90. National Bureau of Economic Research.

                                  32
        (1987): “Hysterisis in Unemployment,” European Economic Review,
  31, 288—295.

Calvo, G. A. (1983): “Staggered Prices in a Utility Maxmimizing Model,”
 Journal of Monetary Economics, 12(November), 383—398.

Cass, D., and K. Shell (1983): “Do Sunspots Matter?,” Journal of Polit-
 ical Economy, 91, 193—227.

Chari, V. V., P. Kehoe, and E. McGrattan (2007): “Business Cycle
 Accounting,” Econometrica, 75(3), 781—836.

Clarida, R., J. Galí, and M. Gertler (1999): “The Science of Monetary
 Policy: A New Keynesian Perspective,” Journal of Economic Literature,
 37(December), 1661—1707.

Farmer, R. E. A. (1993): The Macroeconomics of Self-Fulfilling Prophecies.
  (1999) MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, second edn.

         (2008a): “Aggregate Demand and Supply,” International Journal
  of Economic Theory, 4(1), 77—94.

         (2008b): “Old Keynesian Economics,” in Macroeconomics in the
  Small and the Large, ed. by R. E. A. Farmer, chap. 2, pp. 23—43. Edward
  Elgar, Cheltenham, UK.

        (2009): “Confidence, Crashes and Animal Spirits,” NBER WP no.
  14846, Economic Journal (forthcoming).

        (2010a): “Animal Spirits, Persistent Unemployment and the Belief
  Function,” NBER Working Paper no. 16522 and CEPR Discussion Paper
  no. 8100., forthcoming in Frydman and Phelps (2012).

         (2010b): Expectations, Employment and Prices. Oxford University
  Press, New York.

                                   33
           (2010c): How the Economy Works: Confidence, Crashes and Self-
  fulfilling Prophecies. Oxford University Press, New York.

         (2010d): “How to Reduce Unemployment: A New Policy Proposal„”
  Journal of Monetary Economics: Carnegie Rochester Conference Issue,
  57(5), 557—572.

        (2011a): “Animal Spirits, Rational Bubbles and Unemployment in
  an Old-Keynesian Model,” CEPR Discussion Paper, 8439.

         (2011b): “The Stock Market Creash of 2008 Caused the Great
  Recession: Theory and Evidence,” NBER Working paper No. 17479.

Farmer, R. E. A., and J. T. Guo (1994): “Real Business Cycles and the
  Animal Spirits Hypothesis,” Journal of Economic Theory, 63, 42—73.

Farmer, R. E. A., and D. Plotnikov (2010): “Does Fiscal Policy Mat-
  ter? Blinder and Solow Revisited,” NBER Working Paper number 16644.

Fischer, Stanley, S. (1977): “Long-term contracts, rational expectations
  and the optimal money supply rule,” Journal of Political Economy, 85,
  191—205.

Friedman, M. (1968): “The Role of Monetary Policy,” American Economic
 Review, 58(March), 1—17.

Frydman, R., and M. Goldberg (2012): “Foundations for a Macroeco-
  nomics of the Modern Economy,” forthcoming in Frydman and Phelps
  (2012).

Frydman, R., and M. D. Goldberg (2011): Beyond Mechanical Markets.
  Princeton University Press.

Frydman, R., and E. Phelps (2012): Foundations for a Macroeconomics
  of the Modern Economy. Princeton University Press, Princeton N.J.

                                  34
Fuhrer, J. C., and G. R. Moore (1995): “Inflation Persistence,” Quar-
 terly Journal of Economics, 440, 127—159.

Galí, J. (2008): Monetary Policy, Inflation and the Business Cycle. Prince-
 ton University Press, New Jersey.

Galí, J., M. Gertler, and D. L. Salido (2007): “Markups, Gaps and the
 Welfare Costs of Business Cycle Fluctuations,” The Review of Economics
 and Statistics, 89(1), 44—59.

Gertler, M., L. Sala, and A. Trigari (2008): “An Estimated DSGE
 Model with Unemployment and Staggered Wage Bargaining,” Journal of
 Money Credit and Banking, 40(8), 1713—1764.

Gertler, M., and A. Trigari (2009): “Unemployent Fluctuations with
 Staggered Nash Wage Bargaining,” Journal of Political Economy, 117(1),
 38—86.

Hansen, A. (1936): “Mr. Keynes on Underemployment Equilibrium,” Jour-
 nal of Political Economy, 44(5), 667—686.

Hicks, J. R. (1937): “Mr. Keynes and the Classics: A Suggested Interpre-
  tation,” Econometrica, 5(2), 147—159.

Holt, C. (1970): “Job Search, Phillips’ Wage Relation, and Union Influence:
 Theory and Evidence,” in Microeconomic Foundations of Employment and
 Inflation Theory, ed. by E. S. Phelps. W. W. Norton, New York.

Howitt, P., and R. P. McAfee (1987): “Costly Search and Recruiting,”
 International Economic Review, 28(1), 89—107.

Hume, D. (1777): “Of Money,” in Essays, Moral, Political and Literary,
 based on the 1777 edition originally published as vol 1. of Essays and
 treatisies on several subjects. Liberty Fund, Indianapolis.


                                    35
Keynes, J. M. (1936): The General Theory of Employment, Interest and
 Money. MacMillan and Co., London and Basingstoke.

Klenow, P. J., and B. A. Malin (2010): “Microeconomic Evidence on
 Price Setting,” Prepared for the Handbook of Monetary Economics.

Kuhn, T. S. (1957): The Copernican Revolution. Harvard University Press,
 Harvard, Mass.

Kyle, A. S. (1985): “Contnuous Auctions and Insider Trading,” Economet-
 rica, 53, 1315—1335.

Lakatos, I. (1978): The Methodology of Scientific Research Programmes:.
  Cambridge University Press.

Leeper, E. M. (1991): “Equilibria under ‘Active’ and ‘Passive’ Monetary
  and Fiscal Policies,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 27, 129—147.

Lubik, T. A., and F. Schorfheide (2004): “Testing for Indeterminacy:
  An Application to U.S. Monetary Policy,” The American Economic Re-
  view, 94(1), 190—219.

Lucas Jr., R. E. (1987): Models of Business Cycles. Basil Blackwell, Ox-
  ford, UK.

Lucas Jr., R. E., and L. Rapping (1970): “Real Wages, Employment and
  Inflation,” in Microeconomic Foundations of Employmsnt and Inflation
  Theory, ed. by E. S. Phelps. W. W. Norton, New York.

Mankiw, N. G., and R. Reis (2002): “Sticky Information Versus Sticky
 Prices: A Proposal to Replace the New Keynesian Phillips Curve,” QJE,
 117(4), 1295—1328.

Mortensen, D. T. (1970): “A Theory of Wage and Employment Dynam-
 ics,” in Microeconomic Foundations of Employment and Inflation Theory,
 ed. by E. S. Phelps. W. W. Norton, New York.

                                  36
Mortensen, D. T., and C. Pissarides (1994): “Job Creation and Job De-
 struction in the Theory of Unemployment,” Review of Economic Studies,
 61, 397—415.

Phelps, E. S. (1968): “Money Wage Dynamics and Labor Market Equilib-
 rium,” Journal of Political Economy, 76, 678—711.

        (1970a): Microeconomic Foundations of Employment and Inflation
  Theory. Norton, New York.

        (1970b): “Money Wage Dynamics and Labor Market Equilibrium,”
  in Microeconomics of Employment and Inflation Theory, ed. by E. S.
  Phelps. W. W. Norton, New York.

          (1994): Structural Slumps. Harvard University Press, Cambridge,
  Mass.

Rotemberg, J. J. (1982): “Sticky Prices in the United States,” Journal of
 Political Economy, 90(December), 1187—1211.

Samuelson, P. A. (1955): Economics: An Introductory Analysis (3rd Ed.).
  McGraw Hill.

Shell, K. (1977): “Monnaie et Allocation Intertemporelle,” Mimeo: Mal-
  invaud Seminar, CNRS Paris.

Sims, C. A. (1980): “Macroeconomics and Reality,” Econometrica, 48(Jan-
  uary), 1—48.

        (2010): “Rational Inattention and Monetary Economics,” Forth-
  coming in the Handbook of Monetary Economics.

Taylor, J. B. (1999): Monetary Policy Rules. University of Chicago Press,
  Chicago.



                                   37
Woodford, M. (2003): Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of
 Monetary Policy. Princeton University Press, Princeton, N.J.

Yun, T. (1996): “Nominal Price Rigidity, Money Supply Endogeneity, and
 Business Cycles,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 37(April), 345—370.




                                 38
