NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE EFFECTS OF GOVERNMENT-SPONSORED VENTURE CAPITAL:
INTERNATIONAL EVIDENCE
James A. Brander
Qianqian Du
Thomas F. Hellmann
Working Paper 16521
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16521

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2010

We thank David Hsu, Josh Lerner, Anuradha Gurung, and seminar participants at the Entrepreneurial
Finance & Innovation Conference, Boston, June 15, 2010 for very helpful comments. We thank Brad
MacLean for generously providing access to the Asian Venture Capital Journal (AVCJ) database.
We also thank our research assistants, Lynn Chang, Lingxiang Gao, Florian Guhr, Joel Jaffe, Armin
Navabi, and Yan Li for their valuable contributions. Financial support from the World Economic Forum
(WEF) and the SSHRC is gratefully acknowledged. This paper builds on an earlier working paper
called “Governments as Venture Capitalists: Striking the Right Balance” which appeared in a World
Economic Forum Working Paper Series entitled "Globalization of Alternative Investments, Working
Papers Volume 3: The Global Economic Impact of Private Equity Report 2010, World Economic Forum".
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by James A. Brander, Qianqian Du, and Thomas F. Hellmann. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Effects of Government-Sponsored Venture Capital: International Evidence
James A. Brander, Qianqian Du, and Thomas F. Hellmann
NBER Working Paper No. 16521
November 2010
JEL No. G24,H44,H81,O38
ABSTRACT
This paper examines the impact of government-sponsored venture capitalists (GVCs) on the success
of enterprises. Using international enterprise-level data, we identify a surprising non-monotonicity
in the effect of GVC on the likelihood of exit via initial public offerings (IPOs) or third party acquisitions.
Enterprises that receive funding from both private venture capitalists (PVCs) and GVCs outperform
benchmark enterprises financed purely by private venture capitalists if only a moderate fraction of
funding comes from GVCs. However, enterprises underperform if a large fraction of funding comes
from GVCs. Instrumental variable regressions suggest that endogeneity in the form of unobservable
selection effects cannot account for these effects of GVC financing. The underperformance result appears
to be largely driven by investments made in times when private venture capital is abundant. The outperformance
result applies only to venture capital firms that are supported but not owned outright by governments.

James A. Brander
University of British Columbia
Faculty of Commerce
2053 Main Mall
Vancouver, B.C. V6T 1Z2 CANADA
brander@sauder.ubc.ca
Qianqian Du
Shanghai Advanced Institute of Finance
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Zhong Yuan Building, Room 313
1954 Huashan Road, Shanghai
P.R.China, 200030
qianqian.du@sauder.ubc.ca

Thomas F. Hellmann
Sauder School of Business
University of British Columbia
2053 Main Mall
Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z2
Canada
and NBER
hellmann@sauder.ubc.ca

1. INTRODUCTION
Governments around the world have taken a strong interest in venture capital. This interest
stems in part from the fact that some of the world’s most influential enterprises, such as
Google, Intel or Apple were financed by venture capitalists. In addition, rapidly growing
entrepreneurial enterprises are widely thought to be important sources of innovation,
employment, and productivity growth. It is therefore not surprising that many governments
have sponsored the provision of finance to entrepreneurial ventures.1 The overall public sector
commitment to venture capital in the world as a whole is substantial, including forgone taxes,
outright subsidies, preferential regulation, and public provision of investment capital.
Our main objective in this paper is to assess the record of government support for venture
capital. Our performance measure is whether an enterprise allowed for successful exit of early
investors through an initial public offering (IPO) or a third party acquisition. We seek to
assess the impact of investment from government supported venture capitalists (GVCs) on an
enterprise’s likelihood of such a successful exit. Our main finding is a non-monotonic
relationship between GVC investment and exit performance: compared to a benchmark of
enterprises financed by private venture capitalists, a small amount of GVC investment
appears to be a good thing, but larger amounts of GVC decrease the likelihood of successful
exit.
We combine data from Thomson One (f.k.a. VentureXpert) and the Asian Venture Capital
Journal to assemble a sample of 21852 enterprises based in 25 countries that received venture
capital funding in the 2000–2008 period. Just under half of these enterprises were based in the
United States but the data set also contains substantial representation from various European
and East Asian economies, along with Australia, Brazil, Canada, India and Israel. The
enterprises cover a wide range of industries but have strong representation in technologyintensive sectors. Our unit of analysis is the individual enterprise, although we make use of
data concerning multiple rounds of financing from multiple investors for a single enterprise.
Our main dependent variable is whether an enterprise achieved an exit. Our main independent
variable is the dollar-weighted share of GVC financing received by an enterprise. We also
control for a variety of enterprise and other investor characteristics.
To establish the fundamental non-monotonicity result we use two specifications. The first
specification estimates higher-order polynomials of the GVC share. We find that a third order
polynomial fits the data best, resulting in a wave-like GVC effect as depicted in Figure 1. Our
second specification confirms this pattern using a set of categorical (dummy) variables: one
for enterprises that receive some of their funding from GVCs but less than 50% (“minority”
GVCs); one for enterprises that receive at least 50% but less than 100% of their funding from
GVCs (“majority” GVCs); and one for enterprises that receive all of their funding from GVCs
(“pure” GVCs). The base category is enterprises financed only by PVCs.
We are primarily interested in how government support affects enterprise success – a
treatment effect. We wish to distinguish this treatment effect from any selection effects –
GVCs self-select into financing enterprises that would be successful anyway. We consider
two distinct selection effects: dynamic selection and unobservable selection. Dynamic
1

Our working characterization of venture capitalists is that they are financial intermediaries that seek out and
invest in high-potential entrepreneurial ventures, predominantly in high- technology sectors, and that often provide
managerial assistance to enterprises that they invest in. See Sahlman (1990) for a more detailed discussion.
1

selection concerns the possibility that more successful enterprises raise more money,
eventually also attracting some GVC funding. Under this hypothesis GVCs would invest
mostly in later round when enterprises are already further along the path of success. Our
empirical analysis does not support the dynamic selection hypothesis: most GVC financing is
provided to enterprises that already receive some GVC financing in the first round of VC
financing. Furthermore, the non-monotonic GVC effect holds even if we calculate GVC
shares based only on the first venture capital round.
Unobservable selection effects arise if GVCs self-select into supporting successful enterprises
for reasons that we do not observe. If so, then the GVC identifier is endogenous in that it is
affected by success, the dependent variable. The ability to select successful enterprises is in
itself of interest, but is distinct from the treatment effect that we wish to identify. To account
for the endogeneity associated with unobservable selection effects we use an instrumental
variable approach based on local market conditions, similar to Berger et al. (2005).
Specifically, for each country and each year we measure the availability of GVC financing.
This availability measure is exogenous from the enterprise’s perspective, but correlates with
the potentially endogenous choice of GVCs. We find that even after instrumentation the GVC
effect persists, and retains its non-monotonic character. We are thus unable to reject the
hypothesis that the GVC effect is causal, i.e., our evidence favours a non-monotonic effect of
GVC finance on enterprise performance.
To further understand the origins of the GVC effect, we break out our sample into different
subsamples. We first ask whether the GVC effect is driven by peculiarities of any one
country. Almost half the enterprises are in the US, but they do not drive the GVC effect, nor
does any other one country.
We then ask whether differences in investment timing account for the GVC effect. Private
venture capitalists are known to invest pro-cyclically, so perhaps governments try to
counterbalance this pattern by investing counter-cyclically? We establish that the GVC
market share decreases in ‘hot markets’, defined as years when the total supply of venture
capital in a particular country is high. Interestingly, the underperformance of majority GVC
can then be traced primarily to investments made in such hot markets. Our interpretation is
that, especially in times where private venture capital is abundant, GVCs are ill-suited to
make investments without substantial inputs from PVCs.
Once a government decides to sponsor venture capital activity, it has to make an important
structural decision to either own the venture capital firm itself, or else to support privately
owned venture capital firms with policies such as tax credits or matching funds. We examine
whether there is a difference between government-owned and government-supported venture
capitalists. The main insight here is that the superior performance of minority GVCs applies
only to government-supported but not to government-owned venture capital firms. Again we
interpret this finding as suggesting that having some market discipline helps make
government promotion of venture capital more effective.
Section 2 motivates the analysis from the perspective of the prior literature. Section 3 is
devoted to a description of the data. Section 4 contains the main empirical analysis. Section 5
examines model extensions. The conclusion provides some additional discussion.

2

2. MOTIVATION FROM PRIOR LITERATURE
Early work on venture capital, including Sahlman (1990), and Amit, Glosten, and Muller
(1990) emphasizes the importance of both adverse selection and agency problems in venture
capital finance and, by inference, in entrepreneurial finance more broadly. The more recent
literature explores how VCs with highly relevant technical background experience devote
significant effort to obtaining information about particular enterprises and technologies, and
then help to add value to these enterprises. See, for example, Amit, Brander and Zott (1998),
Hellmann and Puri (2002), Kaplan and Strömberg (2004), Bottazzi, Da Rin and Hellmann
(2008), Chemmanur, Krishnan and Nandy (2008), or Fulghieri and Sevilir (2009a). However,
the efforts by venture capitalists might not fully offset the market failure arising from
asymmetric information in entrepreneurial finance. We might still expect informational
asymmetries to imply undersupply of entrepreneurial finance. Therefore, in the presence of
asymmetric information of this type it is possible that government intervention might be
helpful in partially offsetting the resulting market failure problems. Our research objective in
this paper is based in large part on the fundamental question of whether government
intervention can improve upon the response of private sector venture capitalists to information
problems.
A second type of problem or market failure that is relevant to government intervention in
venture capital is the externality associated with R&D and innovation, leading to an
underprovision of innovation. One firm’s innovation often provides benefits to other firms
that can copy or learn from such innovation. These are positive externalities or spillovers.
Because the original innovating firm cannot capture these external benefits it might undertake
less innovative activity than would be best from a public policy point of view.2Much effort
has gone into estimating the extent of such externalities. One classic study of this type is
Bresnahan (1986). See also Griliches (1992) and Jaffe (1996) for empirical evidence
concerning the extent of R&D spillovers. Moreover, a recent literature suggests that venture
capital promotes such innovation. See in particular Kortum and Lerner (2000), Gans and
Stern (2000) Hellmann and Puri (2000), Hsu (2006) and Ozmel, Robinson and Stuart (2007).
In addition, a small literature recognizes that organizational structure among venture capital
firms matters. See Hellmann (2002), Fulghieri and Sevilir (2009b), Hellmann, Lindsey and
Puri (2008) or Masulis and Nahata (2009). This literature has focussed mostly on comparing
corporate venture capital with private independent venture capital, ignoring government
venture capital. It is possible that government support for venture capital might boost
innovation towards the efficient level by partially offsetting the market failure associated with
insufficient innovation.
Only a handful of papers directly address the effects of government intervention on venture
capital. Keuschnigg and Nielsen (2003, 2004) theoretically examine the effect of tax policies
for venture capital, and Da Rin, Nicodano and Sembenelli (2006) empirically estimate the
effect of R&D policies on venture capital. Leleux and Surlemont (2003) and Cumming and
MacIntosh (2006) consider ‘crowding out’ of private venture capital by government
sponsored venture capitalists. Lerner (1999, 2002) provides some evidence of success for the
US Small Business Investment Research (SBIR) program. The most closely related work to
2

There is an extensive literature on this subject, a valuable textbook treatment of which is provided by Tirole
(1988, Ch. 10).
3

the current paper is Brander, Egan and Hellmann (2010), which addresses the performance of
GVCs and PVCs in Canada. Our paper is also closely related to Lerner (2009), which
provides a general critique of government efforts to promote venture capital finance, along
with valuable suggestions for improvement. In this book, Lerner notes the need for more
systematic research on the role of government in venture capital. This paper is an effort to
make a step in that direction.

3. DATA DESCRIPTION
We have two sources of venture capital data. The larger source, which has been widely used
by researchers, is the Thomson One (T1) database of venture capital investments (formerly
known as VentureXpert) provided by Thomson Reuters. From this database, we use all
recorded enterprises that received their first venture capital funding between 2000 and 2008.
The sample period was chosen to account for the fact that T1 has only limited international
coverage prior to 2000. After 2000, T1 has good coverage for the US and significant coverage
for Canada and Europe, along with some but limited coverage for Asia. We were able to
augment the T1 data with data from Asian Venture Capital Journal (AVCJ), which has good
coverage for Asia. The combined dataset contains 21,852 enterprises, of which 2,026 are a net
addition due to the AVCJ database. There are 6,307 distinct venture capitalists represented in
the data.3
It is sometimes difficult to distinguish between true investments in venture capital and
investments in other types of private equity, such as investments in large, well-established
privately held enterprises. In order to do so, as a first step, we use the categorization provided
by T1and AVCJ. We also do some additional checks and eliminate enterprises with more than
U$1 billion in sales or that receive more than U$1 billion of investments (as venture capital
investments are typically much less).
All variables are defined in Table 1. The primary unit of observation is the enterprise that
receives venture capital. Our main dependent variable is EXIT, which is an indicator variable
that takes the value 1 if the enterprise went public or was acquired. T1 tends to underreport
the exit events, so we also matched the VC-backed enterprises with the Global New Issuance
and Mergers and Acquisitions databases in Thomson Reuters. Because we intend exit as a
measure of success, we set exit equal to zero if we observe the exit value and find that it is
below the total amount of investments. Ideally we would have liked to measure the success of
venture capital investments with returns data. Short of that, it is sometime possible to use exit
values or exit multiples as a measure of success (Brander, Egan and Hellmann, 2010). This
dataset, however, does not offer any such opportunities. As it contains no return data and
contains exit values in only 23% of all exits. We note, however, that using exits as a measure
of success is standard in the venture capital literature (Gompers and Lerner, 2000; Brander,
Amit, and Antweiler, 2002). Importantly, Phalippou and Gottschalk (2009) actually
demonstrate a high positive correlation between exit and returns to venture capitalists,

3

The VC deals identified from T1 and AVCJ were made in 56 countries but with highly skewed distribution across
countries. Our analysis focuses on the top 25 countries, which capture 96% of the VC deals among 56 countries.
The main results are not affected by the exclusion of the additional 31 countries. The main reason for dropping
them is that the instrumental variable approach in Section 4.3 requires each country to have a sufficient number of
investments each year.
4

suggesting that exits are a reasonable measure of success. 4 Finally, it is likely that other
aspects of the performance of enterprises such as employment or innovation are also
correlated with exit performance.
Our main independent variables relate to the presence of government sponsored venture
capitalists. In identifying which venture capitalists are government sponsored venture
capitalists (GVCs) there is an issue of definition – what should count as a GVC? We focus on
two main channels of activity that serve to identify GVCs. One channel is the direct provision
of venture capital through government-owned venture capital funds. The other channel
includes all other forms of government support, such as government investments in
independently managed venture capital funds that also rely on private investors, tax
concessions to venture capitalists, and subsidies to venture capitalists or to supported
enterprises. See Brander, Du and Hellmann (2010) for details.
Our dataset includes enterprises from all major regions in the global economy. Table 2 shows
the number of enterprises supported by venture capital on a country-specific basis. It indicates
that the US accounts for 10,876 enterprises supported by VCs, 49.8% of the total. There is
large variation in the frequency of GVC activity by country. In Canada, over 50% of the
enterprises had GVC support, whereas in the US the rate of GVC support was only about onetenth as much – on the order of 5%. China, France and Germany all have relatively high
levels of GVC involvement.
Table 3 provides the main descriptive statistics, while Table 4 shows the correlations between
the most important variables. Table 3 includes a comparison of enterprises financed entirely
by PVCs with those financed in part by GVCs. The last column of Table 3 reports the p-value
for the t-test of the difference of means between PVCs and GVCs. We note that 19,934
enterprises (91% of enterprises) in the data set -- received only PVC funding, while the
remaining 1,918 enterprises (9% of enterprises) received some GVC support. The variable
“Exit” is an indicator variable showing whether a successful exit (IPO or acquisition)
occurred. We note that 15.26% of the enterprises with pure PVC finance had successful exits,
while 18.93% of the enterprises with some GVC finance had successful exits, with the
difference being significant at the 1% level.

4. THE EFFECT OF GVCS ON EXIT
4.1 Empirical results
Our main objective is to assess whether government-sponsored venture capitalists (GVCs) are
associated with better or worse enterprise performance than private venture capitalists
(PVCs). As described in the previous section, the unit of observation is the enterprise and the
primary measure of performance is whether or not the enterprise experiences a successful exit
event – either an IPO or a third party acquisition. We use the Probit regression model. If the
probability of exit is Y and GVC is a measure of the share of government venture capital, then
we are interested in a regression that has the form Y = f(GVC, X, ε), where X is a vector of
control variables and ε is the random error.

4

We track exits through 2009. Enterprises that were first financed in 2008 or 2007 are clearly less likely to have an
exit. Our econometric analysis includes year fixed effects that correct for the enterprises’ different time horizons.
5

We pay particular attention to the functional form of the GVC measure to account for possible
non-monotonicity. Our base measure is the share of the enterprise’s VC funding that comes
from GVCs. For enterprises that are fully funded by PVCs, this variable is zero. At the other
extreme, enterprises that receive all of their venture capital finance from GVCs have a value
of 1 for this GVC share variable. For all other enterprises, the GVC variable is strictly
between 0 and 1. We explore two possible methods for capturing non-monotonicities, one
based on higher-order polynomials and the other on partitioning the interval [0,1] for the
GVC share using a set of categorical indicator variables.
We seek to explain performance on the basis of the extent of GVC activity after taking
account of other factors. We use a complete set of enterprise country fixed effects to control,
at least in part, for the many institutional differences across countries. They also control for
country-to-country variations in data collection methods. We account for vintage effects by
using calendar year fixed effects showing the year in which the enterprise received its first
VC investment. These fixed effects are important to account for the mechanical fact that older
firms have more time to exit. They also reflect the possibility that investment made in certain
years generate better investments than in others, due to the business cycle and other related
factors. We also include a set of dummy variables for industry. The data is categorized into
the following industries: Biotechnology, Communications and Media, Computer Related,
Medical/Heath/Life Science, Semiconductors/Other Electronics, and Non-High-technology.
To ensure that the main GVC effects are not driven by other investor characteristics, we also
control for average investor experience and for the presence of a foreign investor.5
In Panel A of Table 5 we show the results of using various polynomial functions of the GVC
share. We denote the GVC share itself by GVC-Share – the linear term in any polynomial,
GVC-Share-2– the square of the GVC share, GVC-Share-3– the cubic power, and GVCShare-4, the fourth power. Column (1) shows that if we simply use a linear form—regressing
exit on the GVC share, there is no apparent significance of government venture capital. Even
a quadratic form has no significant explanatory power, as shown in column (2). However, the
cubic functional form shown in column (3) provides significant explanatory power. Each
power of the GVC share is highly significant in itself and the three coefficients are therefore
jointly significant.
Figure 1 shows the cubic polynomial that can be traced out using the estimated coefficients of
column (3). As can be seen from the figure, the cubic regression implies the striking result
that a modest amount of GVC support is a good thing, but high levels are associated with
lower exit performance. Column (4) shows that adding higher order polynomials adds
essentially no explanatory power. We conclude that the cubic form yields the best fit with the
data.
The pattern shown in Figure 1 is quite striking and calls for some interpretation. The basic
message is that a little GVC support is associated with good outcomes but that higher levels
of GVC support are counterproductive. (We address the issue of causality and possible
endogeneity of explanatory variables in section 4.3) It is as if GVC support acts like a
complementary productive factor at low levels but becomes a problem once GVCs approach
having a dominant position in the financing mix. This finding suggests that there are
5

In unreported regressions, we also added a dummy variable to capture whether the enterprise had any VC from
the U.S., or even a set of dummy variables for investors from all countries in the sample, but found that our main
results were not affected by this.
6

decreasing marginal benefits of GVC finance, with a positive marginal benefit at low levels
and a negative marginal benefit at high levels of GVC.
In the appendix we provide a formal derivation of this intuition using a simple production
function where PVCs and GVCs can have complementarities. The most interesting insight
from the appendix is that such a production function predicts that the relationship between
GVC and performance should be characterized by a third-order polynomial, which is in line
with our empirical finding.
Our second approach measures the non-monotonicity using categorical variables. The results
are reported in Panel B of Table 5. The simplest categorical approach is to divide the sample
of enterprises into just two categories: those that received some GVC finance and those that
did not. Over 90% of all enterprises are funded purely by PVCs. We therefore use this as our
omitted or base category. Column (1) shows the results of a regression using only the GVC
indicator as an explanatory variable, along with the standard control variables. The GVC
indicator is statistically significant at the 5% level, suggesting that there is a positive
association between GVC finance and exit performance. However, the polynomial analysis
above suggests that we should use a finer partition of the GVC share to identify possible nonmonotonicities.
Approximately 3% of the enterprises are fully funded by GVCs, and we can treat these
enterprises as a distinct category. For the values of GVC strictly between zero and one, where
there is mixed financing we can partition the interval (0,1) in different ways. In column (2),
GVC-Minor refers to enterprises with mixed funding that get less than 50% of their funding
from GVCs while GVC-Major refers to enterprises with mixed funding that get 50% or more
(but less than 100%) of their funding from GVCs. While the first column shows that overall
GVC has a small positive effect, the second column reveals a strong non-monotonic effect.
Enterprises receiving a minority share of their VC funding from GVCs have significantly
better exit performance than the base category of no GVC funding. However, enterprises with
the majority of their venture capital funding (but less than 100%) coming from GVCs have
significantly worse exit performance than enterprises with pure PVC funding (and therefore
have much worse performance than those with a minority GVC share). Those enterprises with
pure GVC funding have exit performance that is very similar to the pure PVC enterprises.
The third result column provides yet another representation of the data. GVC-1st tercile refers
to enterprises with mixed funding that get less than one third of their funding from GVCs,
GVC-2nd tercile to those that get between one and two thirds from GVCs, and GVC-3rd tercile
that get more than two thirds (but less than 100%) of their funding from GVCs. Enterprises
with a positive but low GVC share – less than a third – have very good exit performance with
the effect being highly significant in both statistical and economic terms. Enterprises in the
intermediate category – with between 1/3 and 2/3 of their funding from GVCs – have exit
performance that is not significantly different from and very similar to the base category of
pure PVC enterprises. Enterprises with a high GVC share, but less than 100% have worse exit
performance than the base category. Finally, enterprises with only GVC funding are similar to
the base category.
This categorical characterization closely matches the result from the cubic polynomial in
Figure 1. We also tried finer partitions of the data with, for example, four interior categories
or five interior categories, but no additional structure becomes apparent. We conclude that the
7

results from Panel B of Table 5 confirm the results from Panel A. For the subsequent analysis
we will focus on the specifications of column (3) of Panel A and column (2) in Panel B of
Table 5, as these provide a succinct characterization of the main non-monotonic effect that
lends itself to further analysis.
While we believe that exits are a better performance measure than IPOs (which only occur in
less than 5% of all enterprises), in unreported regressions we examined whether the effects of
GVC continue to apply when using IPOs as the dependent variable. We find that the overall
pattern is preserved, although fewer coefficients reach standard levels of statistical
significance.6

4.2 Fundraising and dynamic selection
Do the effects of GVC in Table 5 arise simply because of the amount of funding provided? To
examine this we first need to establish the relationship between GVC and funding amounts.
Table 3 indicates that there are no significant differences in the amount of funds raised by
GVC-backed enterprises, but that enterprises with minority GVC raise significantly more
funding, while enterprises with majority or pure GVC raise significantly less.7 Controlling for
the amount of funding may thus be important. Panel A of Table 6 reports the results when
adding a control for the amount of funding. Column (1) reports the preferred categorical
specification and column (2) the preferred polynomial specification. We find that all the GVC
coefficients retain their signs and significance levels, suggesting that the results are not driven
by investment amounts.
A related concern is that enterprises with large funding needs eventually add GVC financing.
Could the GVC effect due to some ‘window dressing’ effect where GVCs add a little money
to larger deals at a later stage? We note that of the 1918 enterprises with GVC financing, 1560
(i.e., 81.3%) already receive some GVC financing in their first round. We then separate early
from later stage investments. In unreported regressions we find that enterprises that received
minority GVC investment as part of their first round were more likely to have follow-up
rounds, and also raised larger amounts. This suggests that enterprises with minority-GVC
funding behave differently from the start. Panel B of Table 6 shows exit regressions using
only first-round GVC measures, i.e., assigning enterprises to different investor classes based
only on their initial round. We also control for the amount of funding in the first round.8 We
find similar results as before, except that the coefficient on GVC-Major, although still
negative, is no longer significant at conventional significance levels. The polynomial
specification continues to be significant and retains a shape similar to that of Figure 1.

4.3 Unobservable selection
While the analysis of Section 4.2 addresses one type of selection effect – the possibility of
investing at a later stage – we also need to be concerned about other selection effects, in
6

Details are available upon request.
In unreported regression we verified that these correlations continue to hold in a regression framework with our
usual enterprises and investor controls.
8
Using the total investment amount instead of the first round investment amount does not affect any of our results.
8
7

particular selection based on variables known by GVCs but unobservable to us. More
specifically, it is possible that both successful exit and the presence of GVC finance are
affected by an omitted factor – enterprise potential – making the GVC explanatory variable
endogenous.
A standard approach to dealing with potential endogeneity of this type is to use instrumental
variables. We need instruments that are themselves exogenous in the sense that they are not
affected by the exit performance of the specific enterprise (the so-called “exclusion”
restriction). However, the instruments do need to be related to the GVC share of the
enterprise: they need to be variables that would identify exogenous variations in the GVC
share. For the instrument we suggest that, other things equal, GVC shares would tend to be
higher when the general availability of government supported venture capital is high. That is,
we expect a given enterprise to have more GVC investment, other things equal, if that
enterprise is seeking funding in a time and place when GVC funding is in plentiful supply. In
the corporate finance literature, this approach of using local financing availability as
instruments, specifically using local market aggregates, goes back to the seminal work by
Berger et al. (2005).
In our case, we can use the availability of GVC in a given country in a given year as the basis
for constructing instruments. We thus consider each country-year as a separate local market.
For each such market we calculate the fractions of enterprises that receive a financing round
where GVCs provide a minority, majority, or all of the funding. Because a firm may be
fundraising at different points in time, we then weight each fundraising event by the fraction
of dollars raised in that round relative to the total amount of funds raised by the enterprise.
Thus, in effect, we construct an instrument representing the overall availability of GVC
funding, broken down by each type of GVC financing. These instruments are continuous
variables and can readily be used in both the categorical and polynomial regression models.
We also construct analogous instruments for the first-round GVC variables.
In the unreported first stage regressions we find that the instruments are statistically highly
significant in terms of predicting the variables of interest.9 Moreover, the F-test for their joint
significance for all IV regressions in Table 7 is significant at the 1% level, suggesting that all
instruments are significantly correlated with the endogenous variables. Table 7 then shows the
(second stage) instrumented regressions. The main insight is that all coefficients that were
significant in Table 6 remain significant, although their level of significance varies to some
extent. The Wald statistics rejects the hypothesis of exogeneity. This suggests that there may
be some endogenous self-selection, which justifies the use of instruments.10 However, once
the endogenous selection effects are purged using instrumental variables, it appears that a
treatment effect remains. Put differently, the by now familiar non-monotonic effect on exit
performance remains present even after controlling for unobservable selection effects.
While the results of Table 7 suggest that our effects ‘survive’ endogeneity tests, we also want
to add a word of caution. We believe that our instruments are reasonable, and the best
available, but they also have limitations. One obvious limitation is the absence of any true
9

Specifically, the IV for GVC-Minor is significant at 1% for GVC-Minor. The same pattern applies with IV for
GVC-Major and GVC-Major, as well as for the IV of GVC-Full and GVC-Full. In the first stage of the polynomial
specification, at least two of the three instrument variables are significant at 1% for each of the variables GVCShare-1/2/3. In unreported regressions we also considered higher order polynomials of market aggregates but
found them to be weak instruments.
10
Since we have three variables and three instruments no test of overidentification is possible.
9

natural experiment, something that would be particularly hard to come by in our cross-country
setting. Another limitation is that while our instrumental variable approach can account for
unobservable selection patterns within markets, it cannot (and doesn’t claim to) capture a
higher level of endogeneity between market conditions and the availability of government
GVC support, i.e., the possibility that governments deliberately choose to be more active in
certain markets than others. This doesn’t pose a problem for the estimation of Table 7 which
is concerned with endogeneity at the enterprise level, but it does raise an interesting question
of whether market circumstances - and in particular whether governments are more or less
active - affect the relationship between GVC and exit performance. The next section will turn
to this issue.

5. BREAKING OUT THE GVC EFFECT
The analysis of Section 4 identifies a non-monotonic effect of GVC and suggests that reverse
causality does not seem to be the driving force behind this finding. In this section we seek to
deepen our understanding of why such an effect might arise. For this we break out the data
into subsamples, to identify under which circumstances the GVC effect is most prevalent.

5.1Is the effect program specific?
A natural question to ask is whether the effect is driven by the peculiarities of one country.
Almost half of the enterprises in our sample are US enterprises, so the main concern here is
that the GVC effect stems from specifics of the US government’s approach to venture capital.
To examine this we divide our sample into two subsamples, one for US enterprises and the
other for non-US enterprises. The first two columns of Table 8 compare the financing mix for
U.S. versus non-U.S. enterprises. We find that enterprises outside the US are almost three
times as likely to receive some GVC funding (12.98% outside the US versus 4.53% in the
US). Moreover, GVC-Major and GVC-Pure account for less than 1% (less than 100
enterprises) in the US. This shows that GVCs play a relatively minor role in the US venture
capital market.11
To examine whether the GVC effect is driven by the US, we rerun the exit regression within
the two subsamples. Throughout this section we limit our attention to the categorical
regression model with all rounds (Column 1 of Table 6).12 The first pair of columns in Table 9
reports the results of separating the US and non-US samples. For enterprises outside the US
we observe the familiar pattern that GVC-Minor is positive and significant while GVC-Major
has a significant negative effect. For US enterprises we observe the same signs, but the
coefficients are smaller and statistically insignificant. This suggests that the US is not
responsible for the non-monotonic GVC effect. In unreported regressions we also verified that

11

Another way of putting the point is that the private venture capital market in the U.S. is so large that it swamps
the segment of the market supported by governments. In absolute terms, however, total GVC support in the U.S. is
substantial. Indeed, the total number of enterprises with GVC support in the U.S. substantially exceeds that of any
other country.
12
This specification is the easiest to interpret. It also has the larger number of GVC investments, which helps in
the subsamples.
10

the results continue to hold if we eliminate any other country from the sample. We thus
conclude that the main GVC effect is not specific to any one country.

5.2Timing of investments
It is well known that venture capital markets are highly cyclical (Gompers and Lerner, 2001).
One of the possible roles of government in venture capital markets is to ensure a more steady
supply of funds, possibly overcoming market herding effects. If GVCs are relatively stable or
steady investors compared with PVCs, does this explain some of the performance
differences?
To examine the importance of pro- vs. counter-cyclical timing, we develop a simple measure
of hot vs. cold markets. We define a market as ‘hot’ if the aggregate amount of funds raised
by enterprises in a particular country and a particular year is above the average amount of
funds raised in that country. To be able to uniquely classify enterprises into hot versus cold
cycles, we only focus on their first venture capital round.13 The second pair of columns in
Table 8 shows how the market shares of the various types of GVCs differ by hot vs. cold
markets. We find a striking result that GVCs have indeed a much higher market share in cold
markets (11.24%) than in hot markets (7.35%). Moreover, this pattern holds true (and is
statistically significant at the 1% level) across all three types of GVC financing (minority,
majority and pure GVC). Interestingly, enterprises initially financed in cold markets have a
higher rate of successful exit (16.98% vs. 14.77%).
To ask whether the counter-cyclical timing of GVC investment helps to explain the
performance of enterprises supported by GVCs we rerun the exit regressions within the hot
vs. cold market subsamples. The second pair of columns in Table 9 shows that minority
GVCs have a superior performance in both hot and cold markets, although the coefficient is
larger and more significant for hot markets. Moreover, the GVC-Major coefficient is
insignificant for cold markets but much more negative and highly significant for hot markets.
This suggests that timing does matter. The most important finding is that the
underperformance of majority GVC investment occurs only in hot markets. Our interpretation
is that in times where private venture capital is abundant, GVCs are less likely to succeed if
they dominate the investment in a particular enterprise. However, in times where private
venture capital is sparse, this is less of a problem.

5.3 Types of government intervention
Once a government is convinced of the need for intervention, a key question becomes the
mechanism of intervention. There is a long-standing debate in the field of public economics
regarding the benefits of government ownership versus regulation (De Alessi, 1974). La
Porta, Lopez-De-Silanes and Shleifer (2002), for example, examine the benefits of
government ownership versus regulation of banks. In the context of venture capital, the main
trade-off is between the government owning and operating a venture capital fund versus the
government using a variety of support mechanisms for otherwise privately owned venture
13

An alternative would be to classify enterprises into hot markets if more than half of their entire funding was
raised in hot markets. This alternative definition generates very similar results.
11

capital funds. Examples of government-owned venture capital funds include Singapore’s
EDBI, Canada’s Business Development Bank, or In-Q-Tel, the CIA’s own venture capital
fund in the US. Examples of government-supported venture capital funds include the US
SBICs which receive matching funds from the government, Canada’s Labor-sponsored
venture capital corporations, which benefit from tax credits, or the UK’s Innovation
Investment Fund, which acts as a fund of funds.
We thus break out GVCs into two subcategories: government-owned (GOVCs) and
government-supported (GSVCs). We classify an enterprise as GOVC-backed whenever at
least one of its investors is a GOVC. The third pair of columns in Table 8 focuses on GVCbacked enterprises and shows the distribution of enterprises receiving GOVC vs. GSVC.
GOVC-backed enterprises account for just under 30% of all GVC-backed enterprises.
GOVCs are more likely to be majority or full investors, whereas GSVCs are more likely to be
minority investors.
The third pair of columns in Table 9 compares the performance of GOVCs vs. GSVCs.
Unlike the previous two models of Table 9, we cannot just create separate subsamples, since
the distinction between GOVCs vs. GSVCs has no equivalent among PVCs. We therefore
estimate the model in the full sample, but breaking out the GVC effects into two subgroups.
The main result is that the superior performance of minority GVCs can be attributed to
GSVCs. Minority GOVCs don’t have a significant effect on exits whereas the coefficient for
Minority GSVC is large and highly significant. For majority GVCs the effect is slightly more
negative for GOVCs than for GSVCs, although both coefficients have similar significance
levels with P-values of 10.9% for GOVCs and 11.6% for GSVCs.
Our interpretation of this result is that government ownership poses an obstacle to effective
cooperation between GVCs and PVCs. GOVCs are less likely to take minority positions, and
if the do, they are less successful. Instead they focus on taking majority stakes (including pure
GVC financing) resulting in weaker performance. A likely reason for this lower level of
cooperation with private market investors is that GOVCs are likely to have multiple
objectives that may interfere with the pure profit orientation of PVCs.

6. CONCLUDING REMARKS
This paper compares the exit performance of enterprises that obtained at least part of their
funding from government sponsored venture capitalists (GVCs) with those that received
funding from just private venture capitalists. Our most striking result is something we have
not seen mentioned in previous work: GVC activity seems to have a non-monotonic
relationship with successful exits (IPOs and acquisitions). A modest amount of GVC finance
seems to improve the performance of entrepreneurial ventures relative to ventures supported
purely by private venture capitalists (PVCs). However, high levels of support from GVCs are
associated with weaker performance. Thus, a little bit of government support appears to be a
good thing but too much government support has the opposite effect.
Our dataset has the advantage of being a large sample with broad international coverage of
venture capital investment. However, it does not allow us to go very far in looking ‘inside the
black box’ by assessing what these venture capitalists do for their client enterprises, aside
from providing funds. Prior work of Hellmann and Puri (2000, 2002) and Bottazzi, Da Rin
12

and Hellmann (2006) uses survey-based data to identify the sources of venture capitalists’
value-added, while Chemmanur et al. (2008) use census data to examine total factor
productivity. The evidence in this paper suggests that GVCs may be helpful in providing
certain kinds of support, including financial support, but may become less useful when they
have actual control over business decisions. If they lack control then the usual concerns about
governments subverting sound economic objectives to achieve alternative objectives are less
likely to arise. Put differently, the results of this paper suggest that GVC finance may be at its
most effective when it remains disciplined by private venture capital. Future research might
look at exploring the precise channels through which this market discipline works.
This paper focuses on one important summary performance measure: successful exits. While
this measure is correlated with other performance measures, such as investor returns,
employment and innovation, future research investigating such measures in greater detail
would be a valuable complement to this paper.
Our analysis shows that there are significant differences between government ownership and
government support of venture capital firms, broadly suggesting that support outperforms
ownership. However, there are a variety of support mechanisms that governments use,
including matching funds, tax credits, fund of funds, along with other policies. A question for
future research is which of these approaches is most effective, both from a government fiscal
perspective, as well as from a broader social policy perspective.

13

References:
Amit, R., Brander, J. and Zott, C. (1998) Why do Venture Capital Firms Exist? Theory and
Canadian Evidence. In Journal of Business Venturing 13, 441-466.
Amit, R., Glosten, L. and Muller, E. (1990) Entrepreneurial Ability, Venture Investments and
Risk Sharing. In Management Science 36, 1232-1245.
Berger, A., N. Miller, M. Petersen, R. Rajan and J. Stein, 2005, Does Function Follow
Organizational Form? Evidence from the Lending Practices of Large and Small Banks,
Journal of Financial Economics, May, 76, 237-269.
Brander, J., R. Amit, and W. Antweiler (2002), “Venture capital syndication: Improved
venture selection versus the value-added hypothesis”, Journal of Economics and Management
Strategy, Vol. 11, pp. 423-452
Brander, James, Qianqian Du and Thomas Hellmann, (2010) Governments as Venture
Capitalists: Striking the Right Balance In Globalization of Alternative Investments, Working
Papers Volume 3: The Global Economic Impact of Private Equity Report 2010, World
Economic Forum, pp 25-52.
James Brander, Edward Egan and Thomas F. Hellmann (2010), "Government Sponsored
versus Private Venture Capital: Canadian Evidence" in International Differences in
Entrepreneurship, edited by J Lerner and A. Schoar, National Bureau of Economic Research,
pp 275-320, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL, US.
Bresnahan, T. (1986) Measuring the Spillovers from Technical Advance: Mainframe
Computers in Financial Services. In American Economic Review 76, No. 4 (September), 742755.
Bottazzi, Laura, Marco Da Rin, and Thomas Hellmann, 2008. Who are the active investors?:
Evidence from venture capital. Journal of Financial Economics 89, (3) (9): 488-512.
Chemmanur, Thomas, Karthik Krishnan and Debarshi Nandy, 2008, "How does Venture
Capital Financing Improve Efficiency in Private Firms? A Look Beneath the Surface" Center
for Economic Studies, U.S. Census Bureau, Working Papers
Cumming, D. and MacIntosh, J. (2006) Crowding Out Private Equity: Canadian Evidence. In
Journal of Business Venturing 21, 569-609.
Da Rin, Marco, Giovanna Nicodano, and Alessandro Sembenelli. 2006. Public policy and the
creation of active venture capital markets. Journal of Public Economics, 90 (8-9) (9): 1699723.
De Alessi, Louis (1974) An economic analysis of government ownership and regulation,
Public Choice 19, Issue 1, pp. 1-42.
Fulghieri, Paolo, and Merih Sevilir. 2009a. Size and focus of a venture capitalist's portfolio.
Review of Financial Studies 22, (11) (11): 4643-80.

14

Fulghieri, Paolo, and Merih Sevilir. 2009b. Organization and financing of innovation, and the
choice between corporate and independent venture capital. Journal of Financial &
Quantitative Analysis 44, (6) (12): 1291-321.
Gans, J. and Stern, S. (2000) When Does Funding Research by Smaller Firms Bear Fruit?:
Evidence from the SBIR Program. NBER Working Paper No. 7877, [September, 2000].
Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Gompers, P., Lerner, J. (2000) Can corporate venture capital succeed? Organizational
structure, complementarities, and success. In: Morck, R. (Ed.), Concentrated Ownership.
University of Chicago Press, Chicago, pp. 17–50.
Gompers, P., Lerner, J. (2001) The Money of Invention, Harvard Business School Press,
Cambridge, MA, US.
Griliches, Z. (1992) The Search for R&D Spillovers. In Scandinavian Journal of Economics
94, 29-47.
Hellmann, T. (2002). A theory of strategic venture investing. Journal of Financial Economics
64, (2) (5): 285-314.
Hellmann, T. and Puri, M. (2000). The Interaction between Product Market and Financing
Strategy: The Role of Venture Capital. In Review of Financial Studies 13, No. 4, 959-984.
Hellmann, T. and Puri, M.. (2002) Venture Capital and the Professionalization of Start-Up
Firms: Empirical Evidence. In Journal of Finance 57, 169-197.
Hellmann, Thomas, Laura Lindsey, and Manju Puri. 2008. Building relationships early:
Banks in venture capital. Review of Financial Studies 21, (2) (03): 513-41.
Hsu, David H. 2006. Venture capitalists and cooperative start-up commercialization strategy.
Management Science 52, (2) (02): 204-19.
Jaffe, A. (1996) Economic Analysis of Research Spillovers: Implications for the Advanced
Technology Program. Washington, DC: Advanced Technology Program, National Institute of
Standards and Technology, US Department of Commerce.
Kaplan, Steven N., and Per Strömberg, 2004. Characteristics, contracts, and actions: Evidence
from venture capitalist analyses. The Journal of Finance 59, (5) (10/27): 2177-210.
Keuschnigg, Christian, and Soren Bo Nielsen. 2003. Tax policy, venture capital, and
entrepreneurship. Journal of Public Economics 87 (1) (01): 175.
Keuschnigg, Christian, and Soren Bo Nielsen. 2004. Start-ups, venture capitalists, and the
capital gains tax. Journal of Public Economics, 88 (5) (4): 1011-42.
Kortum, S. and Lerner, J. (2000) Assessing the Contribution of Venture Capital to Innovation.
In RAND Journal of Economics 31, No. 4 (Winter), 674-692.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-De-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer (2002). Government
Ownership of Banks, The Journal of Finance 57(1), 265–301.

15

Leleux, B. and Surlemont, B. (2003) Public Versus Private Venture Capital: Seeding or
Crowding Out?: A Pan-European Analysis. In Journal of Business Venturing 18, 81-104.
Lerner, J. (1999) The Government as a Venture Capitalist: The Long-Run Impact of the SBIR
Program. In Journal of Business 72, No. 3 ( July), 285-318.
Lerner, J. (2002) When Bureaucrats Meet Entrepreneurs: The Design of Effective 'Public
Venture Capital' Programmes. In The Economic Journal 112 (February), 73-84.
Lerner, J. (2009) Boulevard of Broken Dreams: Why Public Efforts to Boost Entrepreneurship
and Venture Capital Have Failed – and What to Do About It. Princeton, New Jersey:
Princeton University Press.
Masulis, Ronald W., and Rajarishi Nahata. 2009. Financial contracting with strategic
investors: Evidence from corporate venture capital backed IPOs. Journal of Financial
Intermediation 18, (4) (10): 599-631.
Ozmel, Umit, David Robinson, and Toby Stuart. 2007. Strategic alliances, venture capital,
and the going public decision. Mimeo, Duke University
Phalippou, L. and Gottschalg, T., (2009) The performance of private equity funds, Review of
Financial Studies 22(4):1747-1776
Sahlman, W. (1990) The Structure and Governance of the Venture Capital Organizations. In
Journal of Financial Economics 27, 473-521.
Tirole, J. (1988) The Theory of Industrial Organization. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

16

Table 1: List of Variables
Variable Name
Exit

Definition
Dummy variable, equal to 1 if the enterprise provides successful exits for its
investors through IPO or acquisition. Exit is set to 0 if exit value is known to
lie below the total amount of investments received by the enterprise.

GVC-Share

Total amount of funding provided by GVCs divided by total amount of
funding provided by all investors; funding is calculated over all financing
rounds. If in any round no information is available on the relative amounts
provided by the different investors, it is assumed that all investors provided
equal amounts.

GVC-Share-2/3/4

The second, third and fourth order polynomial of GVC-Share.

GVC Indicator

Dummy variable, equal to 1 if there is at least one GVC that investing in the
enterprise; otherwise equal to 0.

GVC-Minor

Dummy variable, equal to 1 if GVC-Share is greater than 0 and strictly less
than 0.5.

GVC-Major

Dummy variable, equal to 1 if GVC-Share is greater or equal than 0.5 and
strictly less than 1.

GVC-Pure

Dummy variable, equal to 1 if GVC-Share is equal to 1.

FRGVC-(...)

Same as above GVC measures, except that the funding shares are based solely
on the enterprise’s first round of funding.

Total Investment

The natural logarithm of the total amount of funding received by the
enterprise.

FR Investment

The natural logarithm of the amount of funding received by the enterprise in
the first financing round.

Country fixed effects

A set of dummy variables for each country, that takes the value 1 if the
enterprise is from that country; 0 otherwise

Industry fixed effects

A set of dummy variables for the following industries: Biotechnology,
Communications and Media, Computer Related, Medical/Heath/Life Science,
Semiconductors/Other Electronics, and Non-High-technology. Each dummy
takes the value 1 if the enterprise is from that industry; 0 otherwise

Year fixed effects

A set of dummy variables for each year between 2000 and 2008, that takes the
value 1 if the enterprise received its first venture capital round in that year; 0
otherwise

Investor Experience

The enterprise’s average investor experience is the dollar-weighted average of
its investors’ experiences, which is calculated as the number of enterprises
financed in the past five years prior to the current financing round.

Foreign VCs

The fraction of financing provided by foreign VCs.

17

Table 2: Venture Capital Activities
This table presents VC activities in25 countries between 2000 and 2008. All variables are defined in
Table 1. The unit of observation is the individual enterprise. Number of Enterprises reports number of
enterprises financed by VCs. Enterprises with GVC finance (%) reports percentage of enterprises
financed by at least one GVCs. Enterprises with an exit (%) and Enterprises with an IPO (%) report
percentage of enterprises that provide VCs with successful exits or IPOs, respectively.

Country name

Number of
Enterprises

Enterprises with
GVC finance (%)

Enterprises with
an exit (%)

Enterprises with
an IPO (%)

United States

10876

4.53

17.41

1.56

United Kingdom

1515

3.37

12.94

3.96

South Korea

1393

4.09

13.21

13.93

China

1309

21.08

15.66

13.29

India

857

17.74

14.94

7.23

France

816

24.88

12.38

4.04

Japan

772

1.17

14.64

8.29

Australia

660

4.09

18.18

8.79

Germany

492

34.76

10.57

3.66

Canada

427

51.99

21.78

6.09

Israel

358

13.97

13.41

4.47

Sweden

313

2.88

12.14

2.56

Spain

251

1.99

7.57

1.59

Finland

205

8.29

9.76

0.98

Brazil

179

27.37

12.29

6.15

Denmark

174

4.02

8.62

2.30

Singapore

165

5.45

18.18

7.88

Netherlands

163

1.23

6.13

2.45

Ireland

158

9.49

9.49

0.63

Belgium

150

25.33

8.00

3.33

Italy

147

7.48

9.52

4.08

Hong Kong

130

11.54

20.00

16.92

New Zealand

120

4.17

10.83

3.33

Switzerland

118

20.34

15.25

1.69

Norway

104

0.96

19.23

11.54

18

Table 3: Descriptive Statistics
This table describes the sample in which the unit of observation is the individual enterprise. Mean and
Standard Deviation of variables are reported for the entire sample, the PVC sample, and the GVC
sample. The last column report P-values of differences in means between the PVC sample and the
GVC sample, based on the two-sample T Test (two-sided) assuming unequal variance. All variables are
defined in Table 1.
Entire Sample

PVC

Variable

Obs.

Mean

S.D.

Mean

EXIT

21852

0.1558

0.3627

0.1526

IPO

21852

0.0445

0.2063

GVC-Indicator

21852

0.0878

GVC-Minor

21852

GVC-Major

GVC
Mean

S.D.

0.3596

0.1893

0.3918

0.0001***

0.0419

0.2003

0.0719

0.2585

0.0000***

0.2830

0.0000

0.0000

1.0000

0.0000

0.0422

0.2010

0.0000

0.0000

0.4807

0.4998

21852

0.0206

0.1420

0.0000

0.0000

0.2346

0.4239

GVC-Pure

21852

0.0250

0.1561

0.0000

0.0000

0.2847

0.4514

FRGVC-Minor

21852

0.0209

0.1429

0.0000

0.0000

0.2377

0.4258

FRGVC-Major

21852

0.0203

0.1409

0.0000

0.0000

0.2310

0.4216

FRGVC-Pure

21852

0.0302

0.1713

0.0000

0.0000

0.3446

0.4754

Total Investment

21852

24.539

57.528

24.434

58.1972

25.6319

50.042

0.3240

FR Investment

21852

9.1146

19.818

9.0978

19.9754

9.2895

18.113

0.6609

21852

27.4418

44.549

28.258

46.0142

18.9578

22.947

Foreign VCs

21852

0.1565

0.3186

0.1537

0.3208

0.1856

0.2925

Non-High-Tech

5479

25.07

25.08

24.97

0.9163

Biotechnology

1346

6.16

5.97

8.08

0.0011***

2971

13.6

13.6

13.56

8541

39.09

39.49

34.93

1866

8.54

8.52

8.71

1649

7.55

7.33

9.75

2000

6120

28.01

28.19

26.12

0.0497**

2001

2704

12.37

12.04

15.8

0.0000***

2002

1513

6.92

6.66

9.7

0.0000***

2003

1403

6.42

6.16

9.18

0.0000***

2004

1577

7.22

7.15

7.87

0.2625

2005

1851

8.47

8.53

7.82

0.2689

2006

2233

10.22

10.36

8.76

0.0188**

2007

2360

10.8

11.12

7.46

0.0000***

2008

2091

9.57

9.79

7.3

0.0001***

No. of Enterprises

21852

19934

1918

Investor
Experience

Communications
and Media
Computer Related
Medical/Health/
Life Science
Semiconductors/
Other Electronics

S.D.

PVC-GVC

0.0000***

0.0000***

0.9571

0.0001***
0.7849

0.0006***

19

Table 4
The matrix is based on the sample of 21,852enterprises. All variables are defined in Table 1. We use ***, **, and * to denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level,
respectively.

ID

Variable Name

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

1

Exit

1

2

GVC-Indicator

0.0286***

1

3

GVC-Minor

0.0529***

0.6766***

1

4

GVC-Major

-0.0152*

0.4675***

-0.0304***

1

5

GVC-Pure

-0.0025

0.5161***

-0.0336***

-0.0232***

1

6

Total Investment

7

Investor Experience

0.0532***
0.0213***

0.0059
-0.0591***

0.0681***
-0.0176***

-0.0311***
-0.0337***

-0.0488***
-0.0538***

1
0.1071***

1

8

Foreign VCs

0.0295***

0.0259***

0.0636***

-0.0048

-0.0262***

0.0159**

0.1239***

8

1

20

Table 5: Effects of GVC on Exit

Panel A: GVC on Exit – Polynomials
The unit of observation in these Probit regressions is the individual enterprise. All variables are defined
in Table 1. All FE stands for All Fixed Effects, meaning country industry and year fixed effects. Robust
and clustered standard errors at the enterprise’s country level are reported in parentheses, where ***,
**, and * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels (two-sided), respectively.
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

VARIABLES

Exit

Exit

Exit

Exit

GVC-Share

0.0367

0.377

3.555***

4.686***

(0.0905)

(0.332)

(0.637)

(1.443)

-0.389

-11.50***

-18.96**

(0.347)

(1.719)

(8.655)

8.011***

22.02

(1.156)

(15.43)

GVC-Share-2

GVC-Share-3

GVC-Share-4

-7.690
(8.205)

Investor Experience

0.0003

0.0003

0.0003

0.0003

(0.0005)

(0.0005)

(0.0005)

(0.0004)

0.185**

0.183**

0.176**

0.175**

(0.0818)

(0.0836)

(0.0829)

(0.0823)

All FE

YES

YES

YES

YES

Constant

-0.814***

-0.817***

-0.822***

-0.825***

Pseudo R-squared

0.0857

0.0859

0.0875

0.0876

No. of Obs.

21852

21852

21852

21852

Foreign VCs

21

Table 5 (continued)
Panel B: GVC on Exit - Categorical variables
The unit of observation in these Probit regressions is the individual enterprise. All variables are defined
in Table 1, except for GVC-1st Tercile, which is a dummy variable, equal to 1 if GVC-Share is strictly
greater than 0 and strictly less than 1/3, GVC-2nd Tercile, which is a dummy variable, equal to 1 if
GVC-Share is greater or equal than 1/3 and strictly less than 2/3, and GVC-3rd Tercile, which is a
dummy variable, equal to 1 if GVC-Share is greater or equal than 2/3 and strictly less than 1. All FE
stands for All Fixed Effects, meaning country industry and year fixed effects. Robust and clustered
standard errors at the enterprise’s country level are reported in parentheses, where ***, **, and *
denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels (two-sided), respectively.

(1)

(2)

(3)

VARIABLES

Exit

Exit

Exit

GVC-Indicator

0.127**
(0.0523)

GVC-Minor

0.245***
(0.0710)

GVC-Major

-0.162**
(0.0720)

GVC-1st Tercile

0.288***
(0.0711)

GVC-2nd Tercile

0.0014
(0.106)

GVC-3rd Tercile

-0.321*
(0.194)

GVC-Pure

0.0733

0.0725

(0.0960)

(0.0959)

0.0003

0.0002

0.0002

(0.0004)

(0.0004)

(0.0004)

0.176**

0.163**

0.163**

(0.0866)

(0.0815)

(0.0820)

All FE

YES

YES

YES

Constant

-0.835***

-0.830***

-0.828***

Pseudo R-squared

0.0863

0.0873

0.0873

No. of Obs.

21852

21852

21852

Investor Experience

Foreign VCs

22

Table 6: Effects of GVC on Exit: Controlling for Total Investment

Panel A: Base model
The unit of observation in these Probit regressions is the individual enterprise. All variables are defined
in Table 1. All FE stands for All Fixed Effects, meaning country industry and year fixed effects. Robust
and clustered standard errors at the enterprise’s country level are reported in parentheses, where ***,
**, and * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels (two-sided), respectively.

(1)

(2)

VARIABLES

Exit

Exit

GVC-Minor

0.172***
(0.0587)

GVC-Major

-0.171**
(0.0808)

GVC-Pure

0.118
(0.0855)

GVC-Share

2.931***
(0.538)

GVC-Share-2

-9.866***
(1.498)

GVC-Share-3

7.045***
(1.042)

Total Investment

0.0712***

0.0716***

(0.0134)

(0.0138)

Investor Controls

YES

YES

ALL FE

YES

YES

Constant

-0.929***

-0.925***

Pseudo R-squared

0.0933

0.0936

No. of Obs.

21852

21852

23

Table 6 (continued)

Panel B: First rounds model

(1)

(2)

VARIABLES

Exit

Exit

FRGVC-Minor

0.206***
(0.0734)

FRGVC-Major

-0.0882
(0.0894)

FRGVC-Pure

0.0360
(0.0903)

FRGVC-Share

2.591***
(0.780)

FRGVC-Share-2

-8.096***
(2.383)

FRGVC-Share-3

5.549***
(1.686)

FR Investment

0.106***

0.106***

(0.0130)

(0.0131)

Investor Controls

YES

YES

ALL FE

YES

YES

Constant

-0.917***

-0.607***

Pseudo R-squared

0.0959

0.0959

No. of Obs.

21852

21852

24

Table 7: Exit Regressions with Instrumental Variables
This table reports results of second stage instrumental variable Probit regressions. The unit of
observation is each individual enterprise. All variables are defined in Table 1. All FE stands for All
Fixed Effects, meaning country industry and year fixed effects. The instruments are based on local
markets, defined as country – year pairs. For each financing round we calculate the fraction of
enterprises that received funding in that market under the GVC-minor, GVC-major and GVC-Pure
categories. For each enterprise we then calculate the dollar-weighted average of these market fractions.
Due to non-convergence of the maximum likelihood estimators, the Heckman two-step procedure was
followed. Standard errors at the enterprise’s country level are reported in parentheses, where ***, **,
and * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels (two-sided), respectively.

Panel A: Base model
(1)

(2)

VARIABLES

Exit

Exit

GVC-Minor

1.269**
(0.630)

GVC-Major

-3.358***
(1.076)

GVC-Pure

0.442
(0.487)

GVC-Share

31.46***
(9.812)

GVC-Share-2

-[]109.7***
(32.37)

GVC-Share-3

78.72***
(22.95)

Total Investment

0.0594***

0.0565***

(0.0126)

(0.0116)

Investor Controls

YES

YES

ALL FE

YES

YES

Constant

-0.883***

-0.881***

No. of Obs.

21852

21852

25

Table 7 (continued)

Panel B: First rounds model

(1)

(2)

VARIABLES

Exit

Exit

FRGVC-Minor

3.415***
(1.189)

FRGVC-Major

-0.836
(1.041)

FRGVC-Pure

0.0095
(0.404)

FRGVC-Share

48.35***
(17.14)

FRGVC-Share-2

-144.3***
(53.33)

FRGVC-Share-3

96.10***
(36.46)

FR Investments

0.0833***

0.0823***

(0.0131)

(0.0132)

Investor Controls

YES

YES

ALL FE

YES

YES

Constant

-0.592***

-0.586***

No. of Obs.

21852

21852

26

Table 8: Breakout for investments
This table tabulates the means of GVC measures and EXIT by whether or not the enterprise is located in the U.S., whether or not the enterprise was first financed in a hot
market, and whether or not the enterprise receives any funding from VCs fully owned by the government. While the location and investment timing are constructed based on
the entire sample, full government ownership is constructed based on a sub-sample where the enterprises receive funding from at least one GVC. We performed a t-test for
the difference across the two subsamples, and use ***, **, and * to denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels (two-sided), respectively.

Enterprise is located

GVC Indicator
GVC-Minor
GVC-Major
GVC-Pure
EXIT
No. of obs.

Enterprise was first financed in

GVC is

in US

outside US

hot market

cold market

government-owned

governmentsupported

0.0453***
0.0323***
0.0084***
0.0047***
0.1741***
10876

0.1298
0.052
0.0327
0.0451
0.1378
10976

0.0735***
0.0368***
0.0167***
0.0403***
0.1477***
13855

0.1124
0.0515
0.0272
0.0692
0.1698
7997

NA
0.3876***
0.2743**
0.3381***
0.1487***
565

NA
0.5196
0.2180
0.2624
0.2062
1353

27

Table 9: Breakout of exit regressions
The unit of observation in these Probit regressions is the individual enterprise. The first two columns report regression results based on two sub-samples in which the enterprise are located in or
outside of U.S. Columns (3) and (4) report regression results based on two sub-samples in which the enterprises were first financed in the hot market or cold market. Regressions in Columns (5)
and (6) are based on one Probit regression where the three GVC variables are interacted with an indicator variable of whether any of the GVCs was government-owned. All variables are defined
in Table 1. ‘All other controls’ includes Total Investment, Investor Experience, Foreign VCs, Country, Industry, Year dummies. Robust and clustered standard errors at the enterprise’s country
level (except for the within US subsample) are reported in parentheses, where ***, **, and * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels (two-sided), respectively.

Enterprise is located

Enterprise was first financed in

GVC is

in US

outside US

hot market

cold market

government-owned

government-supported

0.119

0.212**

0.210***

0.116**

0.0294

0.207***

(0.0760)

(0.100)

(0.0789)

(0.0564)

(0.189)

(0.0659)

-0.0054

-0.207*

-0.260***

-0.0867

-0.246

-0.143

(0.167)

(0.108)

(0.0890)

(0.0989)

(0.156)

(0.0892)

0.203

0.107

0.194

0.0554

0.215

0.0696

(0.220)

0.212**

(0.138)

(0.115)

(0.180)

(0.0902)

All other controls

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Pseudo R-Square

0.1276

0.0706

0.1107

0.0835

0.0935

No. of Obs.

10876

10976

13855

7997

21852

GVC-Minor

GVC-Major

GVC-Pure

Yes

28

Figure 1: The effect of GVC share on exit
This graph shows the shape of the third order polynomial that is implied by the coefficients of the
regression in Column 3 of Table 5. Specifically, it shows the equation

Y = 3.555*GVC – 11.500*GVC2 + 8.011*GVC3.
Note that the vertical y-axis does not measure a probability, it only shows the coefficient values for the
(non-linear) Probit model. Moreover, note that the equation above has no intercept, implying that y= 0
represents that case of no GVC funding.

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
‐0.1
‐0.2
‐0.3
‐0.4
‐0.5

29

APPENDIX:
Theoretical interpretation of decreasing complementarities
To interpret the fundamental non-monotonicity of Table 5 it is useful to briefly consider a
mathematical representation of the interaction between GVC finance and PVC finance in generating
successful exit events. This is far from a full-fledged economic theory, but helps to clarify our
interpretation of the main results from Table 5. Let us think of exit as the output of a production
function, where we focus on the investor mix as the key input, and where all other inputs X enter
separately into the production function. We use the following simple functional form:
Y = a*PVC + b*GVC + c*PVC*g(GVC) + h(X)
where g(GVC) = d*GVC – e*GVC2, a,b,c,d,e> 0, and where h(X) is a general production function for
all the other inputs X.
The interesting part of this production function is that instead of assuming standard linear
complementarities (c*PVC*GVC) we allow for diminishing marginal complementarity between GVC
and PVC finance. Formally, we capture this by allowing the GVC share to have a non-linear effect on
the complementarities term. For simplicity we use the quadratic function g(GVC) = d*GVC – e*GVC2,
so that the marginal complementarity benefit is given by g' = d – 2e*GVC, which is a decreasing
function of GVC. This term turns negative for GVC > d/2e. Using PVC = 1 – GVC we obtain the
following expression for Y.
Y = (b – a + c*d)*GVC – (c*e + d)*GVC2 + e*GVC3 + a + h(X)
The effect of GVC can thus be expressed as a third order polynomial where the coefficient on the linear
term is positive (provided (b + c*d) > a). The coefficient on the squared term is negative and the
coefficient on the cubic term is positive. This prediction matches the empirical results from Panel A of
Table 5. This clarifies why we interpret the fundamental non-monotonicity as the result of decreasing
marginal complementarity of GVC with PVC.

30

