                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 ARE HOUSEHOLD SURVEYS LIKE TAX FORMS:
       EVIDENCE FROM INCOME UNDERREPORTING OF THE SELF EMPLOYED

                                            Erik Hurst
                                             Geng Li
                                         Benjamin Pugsley

                                       Working Paper 16527
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w16527


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2010




We would like to thank the following for their helpful comments and discussions: Kerwin Charles,
Raj Chetty, Steve Davis, Joshua Gottlieb, Bruce Meyer, Matt Notowidingo, Jesse Shapiro, and Bob
Willis. We would also like to thank seminar participants at Boston College, Chicago, Harvard Business
School, and Stanford. The views presented in this paper are those of the authors and do not represent
those of the Federal Reserve Board, its staff, or the National Bureau of Economic Research. Hurst
and Pugsley gratefully acknowledge the financial support provided by the George J. Stigler Center
for the Study of Economy and the State. Additionally, Hurst thanks the financial support provided
by the University of Chicago's Booth School of Business.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Erik Hurst, Geng Li, and Benjamin Pugsley. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Are Household Surveys Like Tax Forms: Evidence from Income Underreporting of the Self
Employed
Erik Hurst, Geng Li, and Benjamin Pugsley
NBER Working Paper No. 16527
November 2010
JEL No. C8,E21,H26,J3

                                             ABSTRACT

There is a large literature showing that the self employed underreport their income to tax authorities.
In this paper, we quantify the extent to which the self employed systematically underreport their income
to U.S. household surveys. To do so, we use the Engel curve describing the relationship between income
and expenditures of wage and salary workers to infer the actual income, and thus the reporting gap,
of the self employed based on their reported expenditures. We find that the self employed underreport
their income by about 30 percent. This result is remarkably robust across data sources and alternative
model specifications. Aside from transportation expenditures, we find little evidence that the self
employed misreport their expenditures to household surveys. We show that failing to account for such
income underreporting leads to biased conclusions when comparing the earnings and saving behavior
between the self employed and other workers as well as biased estimates of the importance of precautionary
savings, the shape of lifecycle earnings profiles, and the magnitude of earnings differences across
MSAs. Finally, our results show that it is naive for researcher to take it for granted that individuals
will provide unbiased information to household surveys when they are simultaneously providing distorted
information to other administrative sources.


Erik Hurst                                          Benjamin Pugsley
Booth School of Business                            Department of Economics
University of Chicago                               University of Chicago
Harper Center                                       Chicago, IL 60637
Chicago, IL 60637                                   benjamin.pugsley@gmail.com
and NBER
erik.hurst@chicagobooth.edu

Geng Li
Federal Reserve Board
MS 93
Washington, DC 20551
geng.li@frb.gov
1.       Introduction

         There is an abundance of evidence that finds that some individuals systematically underreport

their incomes to tax authorities.1 Likewise, there is a sizeable literature showing that some participants in

experiments will distort their behavior as a reaction to being studied.2 There is also evidence that some

other types of administrative data, including Vital Statistics data, are not immune from potential problems

of misreporting. 3 Collectively, these literatures show that individuals tend to misreport their actual

behavior to data collectors and administrative agencies when the incentives to do so are sufficiently large

(e.g., to avoid tax payments) and/or the cost of doing so is small (e.g., changing their behavior in

experimental settings).

         An implicit assumption made in nearly all empirical work using household survey data, however,

is that the data within the household surveys are immune to such systematic errors. 4 In doing so,

researchers are assuming that the problems that plague tax data, experimental data, and other types of

administrative data do not plague household survey data. In this paper, we set out to address whether

such an assumption is valid. Specifically, we address whether the self employed, who have been shown

to have misreported their income to tax authorities, have also misreported their income to household

surveys. We ask whether household surveys are akin to other types of data sources where systematic

measurement errors can undermine data quality.

         A natural question that arises is why would any individual purposefully misreport their earnings

to household surveys? On the one hand, there is very little direct benefit for an individual to underreport

their income to household surveys. Unlike when reporting to tax authorities, misreporting income to

1
   See, for example, Clotfelter (1983), Slemrod (1985), Feinstein (1991), Andreoni et al. (1998), Slemrod (2007),
and Feldman and Slemrod (2007).
2
    This phenomenon is sometimes referred to as the Hawthorne Effect, named for a series of studies at the
Hawthorne Works factory where workers’ productivity initially improved while under observation but declined soon
after. There is a large literature within the social sciences on the Hawthorne Effect. See Levitt and List (2009) for a
recent discussion.
3
   For example, Blank et al. (2009) compares administrative data from Vital Statistic records to data from the U.S.
Census to show that in states where minimum age of marriage laws were binding, younger individuals appeared to
have lied about their age to government officials when applying for their marriage license.
4
  There is an important literature examining measurement error in household surveys. We briefly discuss some of
this literature below. When doing so, we discuss how our results contribute to this literature.

                                                          1
household surveys does not lessen the individual's tax burden. On the other hand, there is also essentially

no penalty associated with misreporting income to household surveys.

        However, individuals, particularly the self employed, may have other indirect net benefits

associated with underreporting their income to household surveys. First, households may feel compelled

to provide consistent measures of their income to household surveys if they believe that their reports to

the household survey may not be completely confidential. Given that the self employed already have

strong incentives to misreport their income to tax authorities and given that they face no penalty for

misreporting to household surveys, even a small probability of self-incrimination may be enough to

distort their survey responses. Second, unlike wage and salary employees who receive W-2 forms, the self

employed have to expend effort to accurately account for their true income. If the self employed have

already supplied a falsified report to tax authorities, it may simply be easier to reuse this report when

responding to household surveys as opposed to computing an accurate one. With no penalty compelling

an accurate response and potential net benefits from providing a distorted one, economic theory predicts

that households, particularly those who already underreport their income to a tax authority, have

incentives to also underreport their income to household surveys. The extent of underreporting of income

to household surveys, therefore, becomes an empirical question.

        We focus our attention on the self employed for two reasons. First, as noted above, there is a

large literature showing that this group consistently and substantially underreports their income to the tax

authorities. For example, for tax years 1985, 1988, and 1992, IRS random audits suggest that roughly 30-

35 percent of nonfarm proprietor income was underreported.5 The degree of underreporting was even

higher in recent years when the IRS estimated that 57 percent of nonfarm proprietor income was

underreported in tax year 2001.6 Second, the self employed are a non-trivial fraction of household survey

participants. They comprise between 10 and 14 percent of a sample of prime age working males, and


5
  Source: “Individual Income Tax Gap Estimates for 1985, 1988, and 1992” which can be found at
http://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-soi/p141596.pdf.
6
  Source: “Reducing the Federal Tax Gap: A Report on Improving Voluntary Compliance” which can be found at
http://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-news/tax_gap_report_final_080207_linked.pdf.

                                                     2
some surveys even over-sample the self employed.7 Furthermore, self employment propensities differ

markedly over the lifecycle, across gender and race, and across geographic areas. Consequently, as we

show below, the extent to which the self employed underreport their income has quantitatively important

effects on many different types of questions addressed in empirical economics using household survey

data.

        Our goals in this paper are threefold.          First, we will infer the extent to which income is

underreported by the self employed within U.S. household surveys. As far as we know, this is the first

paper that attempts to do so. To estimate the extent of underreporting, we follow a procedure similar to

the one set forth in Pissarides and Weber (1989). This procedure estimates the relationship between

expenditures and income for wage and salary workers and uses the estimated coefficients from this

relationship to predict the income of the self employed based on their reported level of expenditures.

Using data from the Consumer Expenditure Survey and the Panel Study of Income Dynamics, we find

that the self employed underreport their income to household surveys by about 30 percent. These

magnitudes are nearly identical across both surveys for similarly defined specifications.

        The above procedure makes a few key assumptions.                     First, it assumes no differential

underreporting of expenditures by the self employed relative to wage and salary workers. Second, it

assumes that the conceptual measures of income in household surveys are similar between wage and

salary workers and the self employed.          Finally, it assumes that the underlying relationship between

income and expenditures, absent any underreporting, is similar between wage and salary workers and the

self employed. We discuss the validity of all of these assumptions, as well as provide a variety of

additional robustness specifications, in later sections.

        The second goal of the paper is to assess whether the extent of the underreporting of income

correlates with observable economic or demographic characteristics. Research using data from actual tax

returns finds that individuals are more likely to underreport their income when marginal tax rates are

higher (Clotfelter, 1983) and that the self employed in professional industries are less likely to

7
  For example, the share of households surveyed in the Survey of Consumer Finances that are self employed is
significantly higher than the nation average, partly due to the survey's oversampling of the high-income households.
                                                         
                                                               ϯ
underreport their income relative to those in non-professional industries (Andreoni et al., 1998).

Additionally, understanding both the extent of underreporting and whether the underreporting is

correlated with observables is important for gauging when and how ignoring the underreporting could

potentially bias different analyses. We do find greater estimated underreporting of income in the early

part of our sample (prior to 1986) when marginal tax rates were higher relative to later parts of the

sample. We also find evidence that the self employed with advanced degrees tend to underreport their

income to household surveys to a much less extent.

        The third and final goal of the paper is to show several examples of how ignoring the

underreporting of income by the self employed can bias many different types of empirical analyses. Not

surprisingly, we show that studies that focus on earnings or savings differences between the self

employed and wage and salary workers are severely biased if the underreporting of income by the self

employed is not accounted for.     For example, Hamilton (2000) finds that the earnings of the self

employed are 35 percent lower than that of otherwise similar wage and salary workers. From this finding,

he concludes that there are substantial non pecuniary benefits to self employment. However, accounting

for the underreporting of income by the self employed dramatically reduces the earnings gaps estimated

by Hamilton. Additionally, we show that adjusting for the misreporting of income by the self employed

reduces the wealth gaps (conditional on earnings and demographics) between the self employed and wage

and salary workers by roughly one third.

        Moreover, we show that not accounting for the underreporting of income by the self employed

can lead to quantitatively different results in a variety of other settings. For example, we show that

estimated results on the importance of precautionary savings are 13 percent lower when we account the

extent to which the self employed underreport their income. Similarly, given that self employment

propensities differ over the lifecycle and across space, measures of lifecycle and spatial differences in

earnings are sensitive to the extent of underreporting of income by the self employed. For example, we

find that roughly between 5 and 10 percent of the decline in earnings between the ages of 45 and 65 in the



                                                     4
Consumer Expenditure Survey and the Panel Study of Income Dynamics can be explained by the

underreporting of income by the self employed.

        Our work in this paper complements two different literatures. First, there is an important existing

literature that looks at reporting errors within household surveys.8 For example, Bound et al. (1994)

explore the extent to which classical measurement error is important for reported wage and earnings data

in household surveys. Fitzgerald et al. (1998) examines the nature of survey attrition from household

survey panels. Haider and Solon (2006) show that deviations between current and permanent income

change over the lifecycle. Meyer et al. (2009) documents the extent to which transfer income is

underreported in household surveys. Aguiar and Bils (2010) looks at differences in the underreporting of

expenditures by different groups within household surveys and shows that these differences have been

changing over time. Deaton (1997) outlines many potential data problems that could arise when using

household surveys for empirical analysis. Our work adds to this literature by identifying another channel

for reporting errors. We find that a large group of individuals, the self employed, systematically

underreport their income to household surveys. Additionally, we show that the same misreporting issues

that appear in non-survey settings may also pass through to household survey responses.

        Second, our work complements the large existing literature that estimates the extent of

underreporting of income by the self employed using data on actual tax returns. Much of the work on the

underreporting of income to tax authorities comes from the Taxpayer Compliance Measurement Program

(TCMP) and the recent National Research Program (NRP). The TCMP and NRP are a stratified random

sample of U.S. individual federal income tax returns that are subject to thorough examination by

experienced IRS tax examiners. 9 A separate strand of research uses data from actual tax returns (as

opposed to random audits) to assess the amount of underreporting of income. For example, Feldman and

Slemrod (2007) uses tax return data from 1999 to estimate the relationship between charitable giving and


8
  Bound et al. (2001) surveys nearly fifty years of research examining the extent to which household survey data is
measured with error.
9
  There is much work using the TCMP and NRP data to assess the underreporting of income on U.S. tax returns.
For a summary of this literature, see the recent surveys by Andreoni et al. (1998) and Slemrod (2007).

                                                        5
income for those with only wage and salary income. Again, our study differs from theirs in that we

analyze the underreporting of income by the self employed to household surveys as opposed to tax

authorities.10

        Collectively, our work shows that it is naive for researchers to assume that individuals who are

willing to misconstrue their behavior to other types of data sources would automatically provide accurate

responses when participating in household surveys. While it is likely true that the benefits of providing

distorted information to household surveys are small, it is also likely that the benefits of providing

accurate information are also small. Such potential biases need to be accounted for when interpreting

data from household surveys.



2.      Data Description: CE, PSID and CPS

        We use two nationwide representative household surveys, the Consumer Expenditure Survey

(CE) and the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID), for the majority of our empirical analysis. To

explore the quality of income data within both surveys, we also supplement our analysis with data from

the Current Population Survey (CPS). In this section, we describe all three of the surveys and discuss our

sample selection criteria. The Data Appendix provides background information on all three data sources.



2A.     The CE Sample

        To construct our sample, we start with the NBER CE extracts which pool together all the waves

between 1980 and 2003.11 We restrict the sample to households who report expenditures in all four

quarters of the survey and sum the four quarterly responses to calculate an annual expenditure measure.


10
   Several authors have examined the underreporting of income by the self employed within household surveys from
other countries. For example, Pissarides and Weber (1989) uses their expenditure based method to detect the
underreporting of income by the self employed within Britain’s 1982 Family Expenditure Survey. They find that
the self employed underreported their income by roughly 35 percent within Britain in 1982. Using a similar
methodology, Johansson (2005) finds that the self employed underreport their income by 16-40 percent in Finland,
Schuetze (2002) finds 17 percent underreporting in Canada, and Gibson, Kim, and Chung (2009) find roughly 40
and 50 percent underreporting in Korea and Russian, respectively. Gorodnichenko et al (2009) uses household
expenditure data and changes in national tax policy to examine the extent to which taxes are evaded in Russia.
11
   See http://www.nber.org/data/ces_cbo.html for details on the NBER CE extracts.

                                                       6
We further restrict the sample to include only the households that have a male head between the ages of

25 and 55 (inclusive), and where the head reports currently working at least 30 hours in an average week

and has worked at least 40 weeks during the previous year.12 These latter restrictions ensure that we focus

on prime age individuals who are working full time.               To avoid some ambiguities in classifying

households, we further exclude any households where the male head is a wage and salary worker but the

spouse (if present) was self employed.13 We also restrict the sample by excluding any household who

reported a positive amount of farm income. We exclude farmers because the relationship between income

and food expenditures may differ for individuals who grow some of their own food. Finally, we exclude

households with zero or negative reported measures of household income or zero reported measures of

household expenditures.14

        In the work below, we explore how the relationship between income and expenditures for wage

and salary workers compares to the relationship between income and expenditures for the self employed.

We define three measures of expenditures and two measures of income using the CE data. The three

expenditure measures we explore are: total food expenditures, total nondurable expenditures, and total

expenditures. Total food expenditure includes expenditures on food consumed at home as well as

expenditures on food consumed away from home. Following Aguiar and Hurst (2009), we define

nondurable expenditures to include spending on food, alcoholic beverages, tobacco, clothing and personal

care, housing services, utilities, domestic care services, nondurable transportation, nondurable

entertainment, and “other” nondurable expenditures. For a full definition of each of these categories, see




12
   Male heads are indentified as those male individuals who self report themselves as being a head or, to be
consistent with the PSID, those males who are married to someone who reports themselves as being a head.
13
   Within the CE, there are only 859 households where the male household head is working full time but is not self
employed but the spouse within the household was self employed after satisfying all other sample restrictions. This
constitutes 3.1 percent of the CE sample. Our results are not sensitive to whether or not we include such households
within our self employed or wage and salary worker sample. For the results below, we simply exclude from our
analysis all households where the wife is self employed (conditional on a wife being in the household) and the
husband is not.
14
   This last restriction is not overly binding. Given the other sample restrictions, only about 0.5 percent of our
sample had missing income measures. All remaining households had positive expenditures measures.

                                                         7
Aguiar and Hurst (2009).15 Our total expenditure measure is the CE's measure of total household outlays

including spending on nondurables, durables, education, health care, and other household outlays.

         Throughout the paper, we use two different measures of household income. For our first measure

of household income, we include the sum of all labor earnings from wage and salary employment plus all

earnings generated by one's business. For business earnings, we include both the return to labor and the

return to capital.16 When creating this income measure, we include both the earnings of the male heads

and their spouses (if a spouse was present). Our second measure of household income is total family

income, which includes all earnings, asset income, and transfer income received by the household. This

latter measure is the total amount of pre-tax resources that flow into the household during a given year

that can be allocated to consumption.

         There are pros and cons for each of the income measures. According to standard theories of

consumption, household expenditures are determined by the present value of household resources earned

over their lifetime. In this sense, it is appropriate to account for the returns accrued to both labor and

capital. Accounting for asset income is potentially even more important in our analysis given that it is

well documented that the self employed have much higher levels of assets than wage and salary workers

that can be used to fund current expenditures.17 However, asset levels, and consequently asset income,

are in part determined by household preferences, the same preferences that determine household

consumption behavior. We show below that these potential endogeneity concerns have only a limited

effect on our results. Indeed, our estimates of the underreporting of income by the self employed are

quantitatively similar regardless of the measure of income we use.




15
    Following Aguiar and Hurst (2009), we do not include health and education expenditures in our nondurable
goods expenditure measure.
16
   The fact that both the return to business labor and the return to business capital is combined together in our base
measure of earnings is done out of necessity. The CE does not separately distinguish between the two components
of business income. A similar decision is made with respect to the PSID data (described below). While the PSID
does attempt to distinguish business labor income from business capital income, such a distinction is imputed for
most households.
17
   See Hurst and Lusardi (2004) and the references cited within.

                                                          8
          Finally, within the CE, all workers are asked to classify their employment type as either working

for someone else in the private sector, working for the government, or being self employed. We define a

self employed household as one where the male head reports their primary employment type as being self

employed. We refer to all remaining households with a working male heads as being wage and salary

workers. Our final sample includes 27,219 households, of which 2,508 are self employed.


2B.       The PSID Sample

          Compared with the CE, the PSID only collects limited information on household expenditures.

Over the period of our analysis, the only expenditure category that is measured with any consistency is

food expenditures. When computing PSID food expenditures, we sum together expenditures on food

consumed at home with food consumed away from home. We define our two measures of household

income in a way similar to how they are defined within the CE.

          We use the PSID data only from 1980 to 1997 except the 1988 and 1989 waves, during which

food expenditures were not collected. We do not use the PSID data after 1997 because the PSID started

collecting data biannually after 1997. Prior to 1997, we can match food expenditures and income more

closely. The way the PSID is set up, during a given survey year, households are asked to report their

current weekly or monthly food expenditures and they are asked to provide extensive information about

the income earned during the previous calendar year. As a result, we match the income reported by the

household during survey year t+1 with the food expenditures reported by the household during survey

year t, which is the standard approach in the literature.18

          Similar to the CE sample construction discussed above, we restrict the PSID sample to those

households with positive food expenditure during a given year, whose heads are male between the ages of

25 and 55 (inclusive), report working for pay, report working at least 30 hours in an average week, and




18
     See, for example, Zeldes (1989).

                                                       9
report having worked at least 40 weeks during the year in which food expenditures are measured.19 As

with the CE data, we also exclude households with zero or negative measures of household income.

Lastly, we exclude all households where the head is a wage and salary worker but the spouse (if present)

was self employed.20

        Within the PSID, individuals are asked to report whether on their main job they “are self

employed” or “employed by someone else.” Individuals can report being only employed by someone

else, only self employed, or both employed by someone else and self employed. We define self employed

households as being a household where the male head reports being self employed only. Wage and salary

households are defined as ones where the male head reports only working for someone else. Again, for

simplicity, we exclude households who report being both self employed and working for someone else

from our analysis. None of our results are sensitive to whether these households are included or excluded

from the analysis. Finally, after applying these restrictions, our sample has 33,339 households, 4,140 of

which are self employed.


2C.     The CPS Sample

        To assess the quality of the income data within the CE and PSID, we supplement our analysis

with data from the March Annual Supplement to the Current Population Survey (CPS). The CPS is a

monthly survey of about 50,000 households conducted jointly by the U.S. Census Bureau and the U.S.

Bureau of Labor Statistics. It is the primary source of labor force characteristics of the U.S. population.

For our analysis, we use data from the March Annual Supplement to the CPS for the years 1980-2003.

Participating households in March answer additional detailed questions about their annual income and




19
   Because the PSID is a longitudinal survey, we are able to restrict the sample to those whose head had worked at
least 40 weeks in the year during which the expenditure occurred. In contrast, in the CE sample, the annual working
week restriction refers to the number of weeks in the year prior to expenditure.
20
   After making the other sample restrictions, there are only about 3 percent of households where the male was not
self employed but the wife was self employed. As with the CE results, our results are not sensitive to how we
classify such households. For simplicity, we exclude them from our analysis.

                                                        10
employment in the previous calendar year. We define the CPS sample to match the PSID and CE

samples.21



3.         Income and Expenditure Differences between Wage Workers and the Self Employed

           In this section, we present descriptive results on how the income and expenditure of the self

employed compare with those of the wage and salary workers. These data will form the basis of our

formal empirical tests in the subsequent sections. We find that, conditional on demographics, the self

employed tend to have lower levels of income while simultaneously having greater expenditures. In what

follows, we first convert all income and expenditure measures to year 2000 dollars using the Consumer

Price Index and express them in log levels. We compute all estimates using the sampling weights of the

respective surveys.

           Table 1 shows descriptive statistics separately for wage and salary workers and the self employed

within the CE, PSID, and CPS samples. The table is divided into three panels. In panels A and B,

respectively, we show statistics of the log real household income and expenditure measures. The PSID

only has limited expenditure information and the CPS has no information on expenditure. In panel C, we

show other descriptive statistics. The table shows that the differences in the unconditional averages

between wage and salary workers and the self employed are mostly consistent across surveys.

Noticeably, on average, the self employed have a somewhat higher level of total family income relative to

wage and salary workers, but even greater differences across each measure of expenditures. Across all

surveys, the self employed are older, more likely to be married, better educated, and on average work 11

to 12 percent more annual hours. The difference in hours worked is notable and we will return to it when

we address whether the expenditure differences could be driven by varying tastes for leisure or difference

in home production needs for the self employed. On balance, these demographic characteristics are

strikingly similar across surveys. As we show below, the demographic composition identified in each of

the samples explains much of the higher income of the self employed.

21
     The data appendix details the exact sample selection criteria.

                                                            11
        Next, we partial out all of the differences explained by the different demographic characteristics

and examine the conditional differences in measures of income and expenditures. To find these

conditional differences we approximate the conditional expectations of income and expenditures by

estimating the regression models

                              log yit   0y  1y Dit   y ' X it  ty  ity                     (1)

and

                              log cit   0c  1c Dit   c ' X it  tc  itc ,                   (2)

where yit and cit indicate real measures of income and expenditure of household i in year t , Dit is a

dummy variable indicating whether or not i is self employed in year t , X it is a vector of demographic

controls, µt is a time fixed effect, and the  it terms are orthogonal prediction errors. The vector of

household controls include: a series of five-year age dummies, four dummies indicating the education of

the household head (exactly high school, some college, exactly college, and more than college; less than

high school was omitted), a dummy if the household head was black, a dummy if the household head was

married, and a series of family size dummies.

        The conditional differences in income and expenditure line up rather closely across the three

surveys.   Tables 2 and 3 show the estimated conditional differences in income and expenditure

respectively across each survey. As seen from Table 2, conditional on demographic differences, the self

employed typically have lower income than wage and salary workers. Controlling for the compositional

differences between the groups makes the results closer across surveys than the unconditional differences

shown in Table 1. For example, for labor earnings plus business income, the self employed earn 10

percent and 11 percent less than their wage and salary worker counterparts with the same demographic

characteristics, respectively, within the CE and CPS samples.22 The gaps are largely similar for total


22
   The results in Table 2 show differences in earnings between the self employed and wage and salary workers. As
shown in Table 1, the self employed also work more than wage and salary workers. Given this, the difference in the
average log hourly wage rate between the self employed and wage and salary workers is much lower than what is

                                                           12
family income in that the self employed earn 8 percent less and 7 percent less, respectively, within the CE

and the CPS. However, total family income of the self employed is on average 7 percent higher than the

wage and salary workers in the PSID sample.

        In Table 3, we show the estimates from equation (2). While the self employed, all else equal,

generally reported earning less income than wage and salary workers, they also reported spending

substantially more than wage and salary workers. Specifically, within the CE, the conditional differences

show that the self employed reported spending roughly 12 percent more on food, 13 percent more on

nondurable expenditures, and 16 percent more on total expenditure.              The conditional expenditure

differences are nearly identical between the PSID and CE.

        These purely descriptive measures of income and expenditure reveal an inconsistency. Across

alternative household surveys, the self employed simultaneously earn less and consume more than their

wage and salary counterparts. To determine whether underreporting in income by the self employed can

account for the inconsistency we further examine the relationship between income and expenditure in

both groups.


4.      Detecting the Underreporting of Income of the Self Employed

        In this section, we first examine, assuming income reports are accurate, how the conditional

relationship between income and expenditures differs across the self employed and wage and salary

workers. Previewing our results, we find a similar relationship for both the self employed and wage and

salary workers except for a gap in levels of predicted expenditures. Income underreporting is one

straightforward explanation of the gap. By relaxing the accurate reporting assumption, we propose a

method closely related to Pissarides and Weber (1989) to use the vertical distances in the Engel curves to

infer whether, and by how much, the self employed underreport their income relative to wage and salary

workers. We use this method in Section 5 to quantify the extent of underreporting by the self employed.



shown in Table 2. Controlling for hours increases the differences in earnings between the self employed and wage
and salary workers in all of our specifications.

                                                      13
Later, in Section 6 we show that the method is robust to a number of alternative model specifications that

take into account other possible explanations for the expenditure gap.

        Our central theme in understanding the conditional structural relationship between income and

expenditure is the log-linear Engel curve. Our first goal is to understand whether the self employed and

wage and salary workers have a substantially different relationship between income and expenditures.

For each group, k , where k indicates either self employed ( k  S ) or wage and salary ( k  W ), we

separately estimate log-linear Engel curves using alternative measures of income and expenditures. Here

we assume that each household i has preferences that, when conditioned on our set of controls, are such

that the intertemporal optimization, at least to a first order approximation, generates Engel curves of the

following form:

                             ln cikt   k   k ln yiktp   k ' X ikt   kt   ikt                 (3)

where  k is the income elasticity, X ikt is our previously defined vector of controls less any education

dummies, and  ikt represents the cumulative effects of other unobserved determinants of the household’s

consumption. Here, we assume that households are able to borrow and lend in asset markets so that it is

the permanent component of income, yiktp , that determines the household’s consumption, as is standard

in modern theories of consumption.23

        Estimating (3) directly is of course problematic because even if the household’s annual income

reported to the CE and PSID were completely accurate it would only by chance coincide with yiktp .24 The



23
   We do not require that markets are complete, only that the household is able to save and borrow in some form
sufficient to support a lifetime budget constraint in expected value. In section 6, we explore whether differential
liquidity constraints between the two groups can explain the patterns we see in the data.
24
   Given the nature of the PSID data, we could have exploited the panel nature of the PSID to construct a multi-year
average income measure. In a prior draft of this paper, we did just that. We made a 3-year average income and
expenditure PSID sample. Using that sample, we regressed log three year average food expenditure on three year
average income, our vector of controls X, and the time dummies. The results from the three year average PSID
sample and the instrumented version of (5) below using the one year PSID sample were nearly identical. As a
result, to save space, we only show here the results using the one year PSID samples. However, if one is interested
in the three year average results, they are available upon request from the authors.

                                                             14
household’s annual income represents both yiktp and a transitory component.                  Here we label the

household’s income report yikt and assume for the moment that all households accurately report their

current income, yikt , which we model as yikt  yiktp exp   k ' X ikt   ikt  so that:

                                    ln yikt  ln yitp   k ' X ikt   ikt ,                       (4)

where k ' X ikt and  ikt represent respectively the predictable and unpredictable components of

transitory income. We assume that the unpredictable component,  ikt , is orthogonal to both the controls

X ikt and any unobserved determinants of the household’s consumption  ikt (i.e., E[ X ikt ikt ]  0 and

E[ ikt  ikt ]  0). Rewriting (3) in terms of (4) implies:

                               ln cikt   k   k ln yikt   k ' X ikt   ikt ,                  (5)

where  k   k   k  k and ikt   ikt   k ikt .       Even with accurate income reports, the transitory

income introduces attenuation bias in our estimation of  k from (5) since, by construction,

E[ln yikt ikt ]  0 . To mitigate the effects of measurement error in our estimation of equation (5), we

instrument for yikt using educational attainment dummies. As is the usual case, the education dummies

are highly predictive of household reported annual income in the first stage regressions.

          Figures 1, 2 and 3 plot simple income-expenditure Engel curves estimated separately for the two

groups.    Figure 1 shows the results using CE data where nondurable expenditure is used as the

expenditure measure. Figure 2 shows the results using CE data where food expenditure is the expenditure

measure. Figure 3 shows the results using PSID data. In all three of these figures, the measure of income

is household total family income. To facilitate comparison, for each figure, we show the predictive

relationship between income and expenditure estimated by OLS and by 2SLS instrumenting for ln yikt .




                                                            15
        A few things are of note of the estimated Engel curves shown in Figures 1-3.25 First, for all

specifications, the Engel curve for the self employed lies strictly above the Engel curve for the wage and

salary workers over essentially the entire support of the data. In other words, for a given amount of

income, the self employed spend more on both food and total nondurable expenditures than the wage and

salary workers. These are consistent with the descriptive results in Tables 1-3.

        Second, for the IV specifications, the slopes of the Engel curves for the wage and salary workers

are roughly similar to the slopes for the self employed. For example, for food expenditures in the CE, the

estimated income elasticities for the self employed and for the wage and salary workers are 0.38 and 0.40,

respectively (Figure 2). The comparable income elasticities using food expenditures in the PSID were

0.31 and 0.32, respectively (Figure 3).      The differences in income elasticities were somewhat bigger

using CE nondurable expenditure data (0.51 and 0.61, respectively). When we constrain the effect of

covariates to be the same across groups, we find these slopes to be statistically indistinguishable across

groups. Although we only show the figures using total family income as our income measure, the results

are nearly identical if we use labor plus business income as our income measure.

        Collectively, the above descriptive results suggest that if income reports in the surveys are

accurate, the self employed consume substantially more than wage and salary workers. We now outline a

very simple model that relaxes the assumption of accurate reporting of income and allows us to estimate

the magnitude of underreporting by the self employed.

        We begin with the same household preferences and market arrangements that generate the log-

linear Engel curve described by (3). However, now we relax our earlier assumption of accurate income

reporting to allow for the possibility of misreporting of income by the self employed. For households of

each type, we now assume their income reports to the household surveys are determined by

                                ln yiWt  ln yiWt
                                               p
                                                   W ' X iWt   iWt                          (6)

                              ln yiSt  ln  S  ln yiStp   S X iSt   iSt                   (7)

25
  To plot the Engel curves, we evaluate our estimate of (5) using means of pooled self employed and wage and
salary workers for each sample.

                                                         16
For each group, we assume that the observed income in any time period, yikt , is a noisy proxy of

permanent income, where  ikt includes both any classical measurement error in the income report and

the unpredictable component of transient variation around permanent income. As before, we assume that

ν has mean zero and is orthogonal to the unobserved determinants of log expenditure, ε.

           Equations (6) and (7) embed two additional assumptions. First, we assume that self employed

households (k = S) systematically misreport their earnings by a factor,  S . Although we do not impose

that  S  1 , our empirical estimates below reveal that, in fact,  S  1 . For now, we assume that κS is

constant across self employed households. 26 Second, we assume that the wage and salary workers

provide a systematically unbiased report of their income to household surveys i.e., W  1 . This

assumption is not overly restrictive. If wage and salary household also systematically mis-report their

income to household surveys, κS would be an estimate of the differential systematic underreporting by the

self employed.

           The goal of this section is to provide a method to estimate  S . In order to do so, we also assume

that the estimated parameters of the two Engel curves are constant between the self employed and the

wage and salary workers.           This amounts to imposing that W   S , W   S , W   S ,                 and

W   S . As seen in Figures 1-3, the slopes of the income-expenditure Engel curves do not differ

dramatically between the two groups so this assumption is not at odds with the underlying data.27 Lastly,

we assume that household expenditures are not differentially misreported between the two groups. This

amounts to assuming that if the self employed under or over report their expenditures systematically, the

wage and salary workers under or over report their expenditures systematically by the same amount. We

provide evidence for this assumption in Section 6.




26
     Later in the paper, we explore how κ varies across different demographic groups and across different tax regimes.
27
     Moreover, we cannot reject equality of the coefficients on the vector of controls between the two groups.

                                                           17
         Given these assumptions, we can estimate of  S via the following expression formed from

combining (5) with (6) and (7)

                         ln cikt     log yikt   Dit   X ikt  t   ikt ,               (8)

where D is again a dummy variable indicating whether the household head is self employed. As before

     '  and the unobserved determinants are expressed as ikt   ikt   ikt . The fraction of

income reported by the self employed,  S , is identified as exp( /  ) , and we form the estimate ˆS as

exp( ˆ / ˆ ) using the estimated coefficients from equation (8). We will often express our results in

terms of the amount that the self employed underreport their income to household surveys which can be

defined as 1- ˆS .

         When estimating (8) using the pooled sample, we again instrument for reported ln yikt using the

set of education dummies. Estimating (8) with OLS would underestimate the income elasticity of

consumption β and hence overestimate  .

         To summarize, our main identifying assumptions are: 1) household’s preferences are such that log

household expenditures can be expressed as a linear function of log household permanent income

conditional on our control set, 2) self employed households underreport their true income by an unknown

factor,  S , to household surveys relative to wage and salary workers, 3) expenditures are not

differentially over or underreported between the two groups, 4) the underlying relationship between

income and expenditures—absent the underreporting of income by the self employed—is similar between

wage and salary workers and the self employed and 6) a set of education dummies is a valid instrument

for the permanent component of household income.

         In section 6, we assess in greater detail two of the above assumptions. First, we provide evidence

in support of the assumption that there are no systematic differences in the measurement of expenditures

between the two groups within household surveys. Second, aside from underreporting, we discuss and

rule out several alternative explanations for the excessive expenditures of the self employed.

                                                        18
5.      Estimating the Missing Income using Expenditures

        In this section, we show the base results from estimating (8). Table 4 shows our estimates of both

β and γ from equation (8) using different measures of expenditures separately for the CE and PSID

samples. For comparison, we show both the OLS and IV results. Also, we separately show the results

where we use total family income and household labor plus business income as our measure of household

income. Remember that β estimates the slope of the income-expenditure log-linear Engel curves pooled

across the two groups while γ estimates the average intercept gap between the log-linear Engel curves of

the self employed relative to the wage and salary workers. A positive value of γ implies that, conditional

on a given amount of reported income, expenditures for the self employed are higher than the

expenditures of the wage and salary workers.

        As seen from Table 4, across all expenditure measures and across both surveys, estimates of γ are

positive and statistically different from zero (shown in panel B). For example, using the CE sample and

using the nondurable expenditure measure, we estimate that the self employed spend 18 percent more

than wage and salary workers with similar reported income. The estimates of γ are roughly similar

whether or not we instrument for annual income. Moreover, the estimates are similar regardless of

whether we use total family income or labor plus business income as our income measure. Finally, the

estimates of γ for food expenditures are similar between the PSID and CE samples. For example, using

the IV specification and focusing on labor plus business income, the estimate of γ in the CE sample was

0.15 (standard error = 0.01) while the estimate of γ in the PSID was 0.11 (standard error = 0.01).

        The estimates of β from (8) are shown in Panel A of Table 4 and are similar to those shown in

Figures 1-3. Not surprisingly, given the existence of transitory variation around permanent income, in

addition to measurement error in annual income, the estimates of β are sensitive to whether we estimate

(7) via OLS or IV. The fact that current reported income is a noisy proxy of permanent income attenuates

the estimated expenditure income elasticities. In all cases, the IV estimates of β are higher than the OLS

estimates of β. Furthermore, the difference between the OLS and IV estimates is larger in the CE

specifications relative to the PSID specifications. This is consistent with the fact that income within the

                                                    19
CE is measured with more error than in the PSID. The IV estimates of the income elasticities for food

expenditures range from 0.31 to 0.40 across the various samples and specifications. The IV estimates of

the income elasticities for total nondurables and total expenditures are much higher. These results are

consistent with many empirical studies which find that food is a relative necessity compared to other

consumption categories.28

           Table 5 is the central result of the paper, quantifying the self employed’s missing income. In this

table, we uses the estimates of β and γ shown in Table 4 to construct estimates of (1-κs)—the estimated

underreporting of income by the self employed relative to wage and salary workers. We estimate this

                                           ˆ 
reporting gap as (1  ˆs )  1  exp           and compute standard errors using standard asymptotic
                                           ˆ 

approximations. In this table, we only show the results from the IV regressions, which are the appropriate

way to estimate (8) given the measurement error in income.

           The results of Table 5 are striking. The estimated amount of underreporting is similar across the

two surveys and are very similar regardless of the measures of income and expenditures used in the

estimation. For example, the estimated underreporting using total family income and food expenditures

are 31.7 percent in the CE and 30.1 percent in the PSID. Using labor plus business income and food

expenditures yields estimates of 33.5 and 34.9 percent, respectively, in the CE and PSID. The estimated

underreporting is slightly smaller using broader measures of consumption. For example, the estimated

underreporting ranges from 25-28 percent using nondurable expenditures and total expenditures, across

the various specifications.

           The results in this section, given the estimating assumptions, suggest that household surveys are

like tax forms in that households with an incentive to misreport their income to the tax authorities also

misreport their income to household surveys. The results also suggest more broadly that household

surveys are not immune to the potential problems of mis-measurement that plague other types of data.



28
     See, for example, Aguiar and Hurst (2009).

                                                       20
6.         Examining the Validity of Key Identification Assumptions

           In this section, we address the plausibility of our identifying assumptions, placing particular

emphasis on underreporting as the first order source of differences in predicted expenditure. First, our

model imposes, conditional on our controls, a log linear Engel curve. Previous studies, Pissarides and

Weber (1989) included, have found this to be a reasonable approximation. Besides analytic convenience,

we fail to reject models incorporating higher order terms for all of our income and expenditure

measures.29 Second, we constrain the effect of controls and the income elasticity to be identical across

groups. In all samples, as noted above, we fail to reject equality of the covariate coefficient vector. We do

find some weak evidence that the income elasticity of the self employed is lower than wage and salary

households, however it is inconsistent across samples and small in magnitude.30 Three, we rely on a set

of educational attainment dummies to instrument for permanent income. While the dummies are highly

predictive of income, their exogeneity is certainly an open question. Lacking a compelling alternative,

and given the improvement in the estimated elasticities, we proceed under their assumed exogeneity.

           Notwithstanding the preceding assumptions, underreporting remains the residual explanation for

a difference in predicted expenditure across groups. It is useful to think about the separate Engel curves

plotted in Figures 1—3. The measure of underreporting follows from converting the expenditure gap

between the Engel curves into an income gap. The crucial identifying assumption of our model is

attributing these expenditure gaps to income underreporting. However, there are other potential

explanations for this expenditure gap even if income were accurately reported. In the remainder of this




29
     These specifications and all of the other robustness exercises are detailed in our online robustness appendix.
 We do this by estimating (8) and allowing  to vary across the two groups by additionally interacting ln y with
30

D . This evidence is not robust across samples and alternative measures of income and expenditure. In both the
PSID and CE, and using food expenditures and either measure of income, the data fail to reject equality of the
income elasticities. More importantly, even when the differences are statistically significant, the estimated
differences in income elasticities are economically small. We interpret this evidence as suggesting that, if anything,
our underreporting results may be a lower bound on the actual level. In each sample, whether significant or not, the
income elasticity of the self employed is less than the workers. If this is true, then smaller values of β would imply
our estimates of 1-κ are biased downwards.


                                                            21
section we address several alternative explanations and show that our estimates are robust to

specifications that take the alternatives into account.

6A.     Potential Systematic Differences in the Reporting of Expenditures

        The fact that some business expenditures can substitute for personal expenditures may undermine

the validity of the assumption of no differential mis-reporting of household expenditures between the two

groups. For example, the self employed sometimes purchase vehicles for their business. In doing so,

they may treat gasoline and maintenance associated with the vehicle as business expenses. Yet, if the self

employed also use that vehicle for personal use, it is possible that some of the expenses they attribute to

the business actually should instead be recorded as household expenditures. The story could also hold in

reverse. The self employed could conceivably report all outlays on vehicle expenses as being personal

consumption even though some of the expenses are for their business. Given this, the self employed

could be underreporting or overreporting their personal expenditures to household surveys.

        To test for the importance of this, we perform two separate exercises. First, using the CE sample,

we re-estimate the amount of underreporting of income using a variety of expenditure subcategories in

order to explore the robustness of the results across the subcategories. Then, we can verify whether

expenditure subcategories that are likely not to be subject to the confounding of business and personal use

yield different estimated underreporting gaps than categories where the potential substitution for business

and personal use are larger. For example, while vehicle expenditures may be easily attributed to the

business even if they were for personal use, it is less likely that an individual would attribute the spending

on home utilities as being a business expense. To implement this procedure, we re-estimate (7) using the

log of spending on different expenditure sub-categories as the dependent variable using the CE data.

Focusing on utilities as a measure of expenditures yields an underreporting of income by the self

employed of roughly 30 percent, nearly identical to the food expenditure, nondurable expenditure, and

total expenditure results.

        Across all the subcategories we explored, nearly all of them yielded an estimated underreporting

gap in the 20 to 30 percent range.        One notable exception, however, is nondurable transportation

                                                      22
expenditures (which includes spending on vehicle gasoline, car maintenance, parking fees, tolls, etc.).

Using this subcategory, we estimate underreporting of income by the self employed close to zero. This is

consistent with anecdotes that the self employed frequently classify a large amount of their vehicle

expenditures associated with personal use as business expenses. Overall, however, we find no evidence

that the results across any of the other expenditure categories differ in any substantive way from our main

results even though the substitutability with business expenditures differs markedly across the categories.

        The results above, however, beg a different question. Is it possible that the self employed

underreport both income and expenditures by uniformly misreport their spending on all categories (aside

from evidence on nondurable transportation expenditures)? It is hard to tell a story that would generate

this result. However, it is possible for us to test this potential hypothesis directly. To do so, we estimate

the following relationship based on Deaton and Muellbauer's (1982) Almost Ideal Demand System such

that:

                          jikt    t   j log Cikt*   ' X ikt   ikt ,                        (9)

where  jikt is the share of expenditures allocated to category j , C *ikt represents the actual total

expenditures of household i in period t and X ikt is our maintained vector of controls. βj, in this case,

represents how the share of spending on a given category changes as total expenditures increase. βj less

than 1 (and greater than zero) reflect categories that are relative necessities while βj greater than 1 reflect

categories that are relative luxuries.       There is a large variation in estimated βj's across different

consumption categories (see Banks et al (1997), Aguiar and Hurst (2009) and Aguiar and Bils (2010)).

        We can modify (9) to allow for systematic misreporting of total expenditure by the self employed

(by a constant fraction across all categories) such that: Cikt   k Cikt exp( ikt ) where C equals reported
                                                                    C *




total expenditures,  WC equals 1 for wage and salary workers (k = W), and  SC different from 1 for the self

employed (k = S). Assuming the parameters of (9) are otherwise similar between the self employed and

wage and salary workers we can identify  SC from:


                                                          23
                              jikt    t   j log Cikt*   DS   ' X ikt   ikt                      (10)


where  S  exp(  /  j ) . Underreporting all expenditures by a constant fraction  C of course leaves
        C




the share  jikt unchanged. The identification relies on the decreasing and increasing budget shares of

various necessity and luxury good categories. This is similar to the idea underlying the procedure Aguiar

and Bils (2010) uses to identify differential measurement error in expenditure reporting between the rich

and poor using the CE data. Using this procedure, and aggregating the results across a large number of

consumption categories, we find no evidence that the self employed systematically underreport their

expenditures relative to wage and salary workers.31

           The combined results of our two robustness exercises make us confident that any misreporting of

expenditures is not biasing our results in any meaningful way.

6B.        Potential Other Reasons That Could Cause Systematic Differences in the Income-
           Expenditure Relationships.

           In this subsection, we assess whether differences in the income-expenditure relationships between

wage and salary workers and the self employed are driven by factors other than the systematic

underreporting of income by the self employed. In particular, we examine 1) differences in desired

expenditures due to differences in hours worked, 2) differences in desired saving propensities between the

two groups, and 3) differences in the potential conceptual measures of income between the two groups.


Difference in Expenditures Due To Differences in Hours Worked

           As documented in section 2, the self employed do systematically work more hours than wage and

salary workers, even within the restricted sample of individuals is working full time. Depending on the

sample, these differences in work hours average between 10 and 15 percent. Theory suggests that

individuals who work more may engage in less home production compared to individuals who work less

(Becker (1965) and Ghez and Becker (1975)), or that increased work hours may raise the marginal utility



31
     The complete estimation results can be found in the online robustness appendix that accompanies this paper.

                                                            24
of consumption.32 Empirically, Aguiar and Hurst (2005, 2007, and 2009) show that a given consumption

bundle produced with more market inputs, as opposed to time inputs, is indeed more expensive. To the

extent that the self employed engage in less home production, because they are allocating more hours to

market work, expenditures may be higher simply because they are spending more for an equivalent

consumption bundle.

        To control for this potential difference in the market cost of the consumption bundle, we follow

the procedure similar to that of Blundell, Browning, and Meghir (1994) and add log work hours as a

control variable in our estimation of (8). The results of including work hours directly into our regressions

are shown in columns (1) and (2) of Table 6. Column (1) of Table 6 re-estimates (8) with the work hour

controls using total family income as the income measure. Column (2) re-estimates (8) with the work

hour controls using labor plus business income as the income measure. As seen from the results in

columns (1) and (2), controlling for work hours does not change our conclusions in any way significant.


Differences in Saving Propensities

        A potentially more significant problem is the extent to which the self employed have different

saving preferences relative to wage and salary workers. If the self employed face more income risk, they

may want to accumulate more wealth to insure themselves against potential shocks. Likewise, if the self

employed face more binding liquidity constraints, they may accumulate more wealth to overcome such

constraints. Finally, if the self employed receive fewer fringe benefits, they may have to save more for

health shocks and for retirement. All of these factors will shift the income-expenditure relationship

downward (as a result of the higher saving propensities), causing us to under-estimate the extent to which

the self employed underreport their income.

        However, the self employed may also have a higher tolerence for risk (Barsky et al., 1997). As a

result, for a given amount of risk, the self employed may have a lower desire to accumulate precautionary

32
   Aguiar and Hurst (2009) show that non separable preferences between consumption and leisure are isomorphic to
separable preferences between consumption and leisure with a home production sector that combines expenditures
and time to produce the consumption good.

                                                      25
savings. The differences in risk preferences could result in less desired saving by the self employed and,

as a result, cause us to overstate the extent to which the self employed underreport their income. A

similar result would occur if the self employed systematically expected higher income in the future.

         We can assess whether such possibilities affect the expenditure gap by segmenting the sample by

age. In particular, high expected future income, binding liquidity constraints, and the existence of labor

income risk are much more important for young households relative to older households (Gourinchas and

Parker, 2000). In columns (3) and (4) of Table 6 we re-estimate (8) on a sample of young and older

households, respectively. We define younger households as households between the ages of 25 and 40

and define older households as households between the ages of 40 and 55. As seen from the table, the

results with respect to the estimated amount of underreporting are very similar between old and young

households. These results suggest that differences in future income expectations, differences in binding

liquidity constraints, and differences in precautionary motives are likely not the primary driver of our

results.33

         As an additional robustness exercise, we examined the extent of underreporting by the level of

household wealth. To do this, we augmented (8) to include dummies for whether the household was in

the second wealth quartile, the third wealth quartile or the top wealth quartile along with our

entrepreneurship dummy interacted separately with all of the wealth quartiles. The goals of this

specification are twofold. First, we ask the general question as to whether differences in household

wealth (which could result from past savings behavior) could explain the estimated underreporting by the

self employed. Second, the specification allows us to assess whether the extent to which households

underreport differs by wealth quartiles. The specification, available in the robustness appendix, shows

that controlling for initial wealth does not undo the estimates of the underreporting nor do the estimates

differ in any significant way across the wealth quartiles.




33
  Our results are not sensitive to the age cutoff. Even looking at 45-55 year olds or 50-55 year olds, we see little
change in our estimates of the amount of underreporting.

                                                        26
Different Conceptual Measures of Income

        Finally, we assess whether the above underreporting results could be driven by differences in the

conceptual measures of income between the two types of individuals. We usually define income (net of

taxes and transfers) as the economic resources that can be allocated to either consumption or savings. For

wage and salary workers, the distinction is usually straight forward. Any dollar earned is given to the

household and then the household decides how much to allocate to consumption and savings.34 For the

self employed, however, this distinction may be more complex. The self employed usually make a

decision of how much of the return of the business to reinvest in the business (in the form of retained

earnings) jointly with the decision of how much money they should withdrawal from the business in the

form of self employed business income. The true income measure of the self employed should be any

resources that they remove from their business to fund consumption and other types of saving as well as

any retained earnings. Unfortunately in the CE and PSID we cannot observe any retained earnings.35 To

the extent that some of the desired saving of the self employed is done via retained earnings, the self

employed could have a higher propensity to consume out of the income they draw out of the business.

This could explain the differential income-expenditure patterns documented above.

        To test for the importance of the conceptual difference in income as an explanation of our results,

we examine the underreporting behavior of the self employed with zero reported business wealth relative

to the underreporting behavior of the self employed with non-zero business wealth. The assumption is

that if the self employed are reinvesting a substantial amount of their income into the business, it should

show up in the value of their business. Such an identification is made possible given the fact that a

substantial fraction of the self employed do not own business or own business with little value (see Hurst

and Lusardi 2004). This is consistent with the facts documented in Hurst and Pugsley (2010) showing


34
   Fringe benefits such as pension contributions are an exception.
35
  Some household surveys, such as the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP), include repeated
observations on business capital that can be used to estimate retained earnings. Hamilton (2000), which measures
self employed earnings from the SIPP, includes both the draw and an adjustment to account for retained earnings in
the income measure. The SIPP however, does not include any information on expenditures.

                                                       27
that many of the self employed are in industries where very little physical capital is needed (skilled

craftsmen, real estate agents, lawyers, etc.).

        To test for the importance of potentially omitting retained earnings from our income measure, we

re-estimate (8) including separate dummies for whether the business owner has business wealth equal to

zero and whether the business owner has wealth above $10,000. We can only do this for the PSID

specification because the CE does not have a measure of business wealth. The PSID data includes

measures of business wealth (and all wealth components) in survey years 1984, 1989, and 1994. As a

result, we restrict our analysis to only the data from 1984 and 1994 given that the 1989 survey does not

collect information on food expenditures. During these time periods, roughly one-third of the self

employed had zero reported business wealth and fifty percent had business wealth more than $10,000.

The remaining had business wealth between $0 and $10,000.             Although we estimate statistically

significant difference in the estimated gaps between the two groups of self employed, the sizes of the gaps

are limited (36 percent for the high business wealth group vs. 26 percent for the zero business wealth

group). Furthermore, the estimated underreporting gap is still substantial for those self employed with

zero business wealth. These finding suggest that the differences in the conceptual measures of income

between the self employed and the wage and salary workers is not the primary driver of the

underreporting of income we documented above.


7.      Differences in Underreporting Across Different Groups and Tax Regimes

        To bolster our case that households underreport their income to household surveys in a way

similar to how they underreport their income to tax authorities, we explore whether factors that predict

underreporting in the tax data are also found to predict underreporting within the household surveys. In

particular, the literature exploring underreporting of income by the self employed to tax authorities has

found that underreporting is higher when marginal tax rates are higher (Clotfelter, 1983) and that there is

some variation in the extent of underreporting across the self employed in different industries. For

example, Andreoni et al. (1998) finds that the self employed in professional industries underreport their

                                                    28
income the least while those who are shopkeepers and restaurateurs underestimate their income the most.

We find suggestive evidence of similar patterns within the household surveys.

        To get a better sense of the changing nature of the underreporting over time, we look at the

estimated underreporting separately for each year. To do this, we re-estimate (8) but instead of putting in

the self employment dummy alone we include the self employment dummy interacted with individual

year dummies. In Figure 4, we show the results using non durable expenditure as our measure of

expenditure and using total family income as our measure of income.               As seen from the figure,

underreporting was high during the early 1980s (prior to 1986), fell between the late 1980s and mid 1990s

and then started increasing during the late 1990s and early 2000.

        Does the year-to-year variation in the extent to which the self employed underreport their income

correlate with prevailing tax regime within the U.S.?         To explore this, we start by correlating the

estimated coefficients of year dummies with measures of the aggregate tax regime. For our tax measure,

we use the annual average marginal tax rate within the U.S. (inclusive of federal and state taxes) made

available by the National Bureau of Economic Research.36 For reference, we plot this series in Appendix

Figure A1. It is well known that the average marginal tax rate was high during the early 1980s, fell by

roughly 15 percent (roughly 5 percentage points) through the mid 1980s due to the 1981 and 1986 tax

reductions, increased gradually during the 1990s, and then fell again with the tax reductions in the early

2000s. A simple correlation of the estimated underreporting by the self employed by year (as shown in

Figure 4) with the average marginal tax rates within the U.S. (as shown in Figure A1) yields a correlation

coefficient of 0.37 which is statistically significant. Most of this is driven by the high amount of

underreporting prior to 1986, the sharp decline in underreporting between 1986 and the early 1990s, and

the relative stability of the underreporting rate throughout most of the 1990s (aside from 1993 and 1994).

        In Table 7, we explore this relationship more extensively.            In this table, we show how

underreporting is related to the average marginal tax rate within the U.S. along with various other


36
   See http://www.nber.org/~taxsim/ally/. The series was computed by Daniel Feenberg and is based on micro data
file provide by the Statistics of Income Division of the IRS.

                                                      29
demographic controls. As above, we do this using nondurable expenditure from the CE (column 1), food

expenditure from the CE (column 2), and food expenditure from the PSID (column 3). All specifications

use log total family income as the income measure. To estimate these coefficients, we follow the same

procedure discussed above for estimating the year dummies. In particular, we estimate (8) but add

interactions between the self employment dummy and the relevant demographic variables. We then use

the estimated coefficients on the interactions to compute the gap of underreporting, 1   . Again,

asymptotic standard errors are reported in parentheses.

        As seen from Table 7, very few variables enter significantly. Moreover, the standard errors are

large in all the specifications, making it hard to rule out either large negative or large positive effects with

most of the control variables. A few patterns, however, do emerge. First, even conditional on control

variables, the average marginal tax rate is still a significant predictor of the extent of underreporting.

Most of this identification comes from the fact that underreporting was much higher in pre-1986 when

average marginal tax rates were higher. After 1986, the variation between the average marginal tax rate

and the extent of income underreporting by the self employed was essentially zero. Given the power

issues, the results are only suggestive. But, the results do show that underreporting was markedly higher

prior to 1986 when average marginal tax rates were higher. This evidence is broadly consistent with the

results using actual tax return data.

        The only additional significant result that emerges from Table 7 is that those with advanced

educational degrees are less likely to underreport their income. We do not have enough power to look at

individual industries in isolation. However, most of the self employed individuals with advanced degrees

are professionals such as doctors, dentists, lawyers, and accountants. In all of these professions, the self

employed may find it more difficult to hide their income given that there is usually a detailed paper trail

on the other side of the transaction. This is particularly true for doctors, dentists, and other medical

professions given that they often bill insurance companies for their services rendered. The point estimates

from columns 1 and 3 suggest that those with professional degrees only underreport their income by 12

percent and 23 percent, respectively, which represents a significant reduction relative to households with

                                                      30
a high school degree or less. Again, the evidence is broadly consistent with the literature using tax filings

that find professionals are less likely to underreport their income.


8.       The Importance of Income Underreporting By the Self Employed

         In this section, we show how not accounting for the systematic underreporting of income by the

self employed can lead to biased conclusions in a variety of settings. To do so, we re-examine several

empirical examples where variation from the self employed plays a prominent role. For the most part, we

restrict the scope to results that can be explored using our existing PSID and CE samples. But, for some

analyses, we must slightly change the sample criteria.37 Below, we only give a brief overview of the

procedures. Collectively, the results in this section underscore our central point that taking a household

survey at face value without thinking about the incentives the households have to report correctly could

undermine a wide range of empirical analyses.


8A.      Differences in Earnings between the Self Employed and Wage and Salary Workers

         The most straightforward implication of our findings pertains to papers that estimate earnings

differentials between wage and salary workers and the self employed. In a recent example, Hamilton

(2000) estimates the returns to job tenure and experience in both self employment and wage employment.

Using data from the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP), he carefully constructs lifecycle

wage profiles separately for wage and salary workers and for the self employed under several alternative

measures of self employed income.38 He finds the median self employed individual’s wages, cumulating

over 10 years, are 35 percent lower than a comparable wage and salary worker. He assigns a prominent

role to non pecuniary returns to self employment over alternative explanations.39



37
   A full discussion, including details on specifications and sample restrictions can be found in the online robustness
that accompanies this paper.
38
   His favored measure adjusts the draw from the business to account for retained earnings.
39
   Using the panel dimension of the SIPP Hamilton (2000) also supplies convincing evidence that the gap cannot be
explained by selection, finding that the self employed earned higher than average wages before transitioning to self
employment.

                                                          31
        Throughout his analysis, Hamilton did not adjust his estimates for the fact that the earnings data

of the self employed could be substantially underreported. In this subsection, we do not attempt to

replicate formally the analysis of Hamilton using the SIPP data. The reason for this is that it is obvious

that not accounting for the underreporting of income by the self employed will severely bias these results.

As we show above, the self employed earnings are underreported by roughly 25 to 30 percent. This

difference is only mitigated slightly once we control for differences in work hours between the two

groups. As a result, it is likely that a substantial amount of the earnings gap estimated by Hamilton is

simply due to the measurement error in household surveys with respect to self employment income. 40


8B.     Difference in Wealth Holdings Between the Self Employed and Wage and Salary Workers

        There is a separate literature that focuses on differences in wealth between the self employed and

wage and salary workers. Most of this work looks to examine the importance of financial frictions facing

the self employed. The argument goes that because the self employed face binding liquidity constraints

they must accumulate additional wealth to self finance their entrepreneurial projects. For example, both

Gentry and Hubbard (2004) and Cagetti and De Nardi (2006) document that the self employed hold a

disproportionate amount of the aggregate wealth within the U.S.. Gentry and Hubbard (2004) goes

further and shows that even conditional on income, the self employed hold higher wealth than wage and

salary workers. Cagetti and De Nardi (2006) uses such relationships to calibrate a model of financial

constraints facing business owners to explain the skewed wealth distribution within the U.S..

        The differential relationship between wealth conditional on income between the self employed

and wage and salary workers depends on the extent to which the self employed income is reported

without error. To the extent that the self employed underreport their income, the conditional wealth

holdings of the self employed relative to wage and salary workers will be overstated.




40
  We want to stress that we are not saying that non pecuniary benefits are not important for the self employed.
Moskowitz and Vissing-Jorgensen (2002) do account for the fact that the self employed do underreport their income.
Even with this adjustment, they still conclude that non pecuniary benefits of self employment could be very large.

                                                       32
        To illustrate this point, we use data from the 1984, 1989, and 1994 PSID. Our sample is

otherwise the same as we used above. Using this data, we regress log total wealth (inclusive of home

equity) on a self employment dummy, current household income, and the demographic variables included

above when estimating equations (1) and (2). With this specification, we exclude those households with

zero or negative wealth. Similar to the results documented by others in the literature, we find that the net

worth of the self employed is 93 log points higher than wage and salary workers (a coefficient on the self

employment dummy of 0.93 with a standard error of 0.05). If, however, we adjust for the potential

misreporting of income by the self employed, the estimated wealth differences fall dramatically. To do

this, we simply add 30 percent to the current income reports of the self employed and then re-estimate the

above wealth equation. Modifying the income of the self employed reduced the estimated wealth gap to

63 log points (standard error = 5 log points). As a result, roughly one third of the estimated wealth

differences between the self employed is simply due to the underreporting of income by the self

employed. The results are nearly identical if we estimate the regression in levels and include households

with non-positive wealth.


8C.     The Empirical Importance of Precautionary Savings

        The first two examples show how accounting for the underreporting of income by the self

employed could lead to substantial changes in the results that directly compare the economic behavior of

the self employed to that of wage and salary workers. In the next several examples, we show that the

underreporting of income by the self employed can bias a variety of other types of analyses.

        We start by focusing on the importance of precautionary savings. Carroll and Samwick (1998)

uses data from the PSID during the 1980s to explore the relationship between wealth holdings and income

risk conditional on the level of income and other demographics. They measure income risk as the

variance of actual household income as well as decompose the variance of household income into its

permanent and transitory components. They instrument income risk using industry dummies. They




                                                    33
conclude that up to 50 percent of household wealth accumulation for households under the age of 50 is

due to precautionary motives.

        Defining a sample that is analogous to Carroll and Samwick and using their same specification,

we find that 47.5 percent of household saving can be attributed to precautionary motives. This estimate is

nearly identical to the results reported in their work.41    However, if we increase the income of the self

employed by 30 percent to adjust for the underreporting, the estimated importance of precautionary

savings is 13.5 percent lower (from 47.5 percent to 41.1 percent). What drives this decline? Industries in

which the self employed are more prevalent are also the industries which are found to have more income

risk.   When regressing wealth on income risk controlling for household income, it appears that

households in industries where there is more income risk are holding more wealth for a given amount of

income. However, some of this relationship is simply due to the fact that we are mismeasuring the level

of income for those households. Our results show that ignoring the income underreporting of the self

employed can introduce substantial upward biases in the importance of precautionary savings in

explaining total wealth accumulation of younger households.


8D.     Adjustments to Life Cycle Earnings Profiles

        Self employment probabilities change over the lifecycle. For example, within our PSID, CE and

CPS sample, the fraction of individuals that are self employed rises from 5.0 percent, 5.9 percent and 5.1

percent respectively when households are 25 to 19.1 percent, 11.2 percent and 16.5 percent respectively

when households are 45.        They rise further to 39.5 percent, 21.6 percent and 28.3 percent when

households are 65.42 Given that the self employment propensities are changing over the lifecycle, the

extent to which individual earnings is measured with error is changing over the lifecycle.



41
  The details of the specification and sample can be found in the online robustness appendix.
42
  We extend our sample to include households up to the age of 65 as long as they meet our other sample criteria.
The number of households whose head’s age is close to 65 is small in both the PSID (n=2,597) and the CE sample
(n=120). However our estimates are broadly consistent with the more precisely estimated versions from the CPS
where the number of households at age 65 is large (n=2,831).

                                                      34
        How much of the decline in average earnings between the ages of 45 and 65 could be driven by

the underreporting of income by the self employed? Within the PSID, CE and CPS samples, respectively,

average earnings fell by 27.3 percent, 21.5 percent and 14.3 percent between the ages of 45 and 65.43

Simply adjusting for underreporting reduces these declines by 1.4, 3.2, and 3.6 percentage points. Taken

together, between 5 and 10 percent of the decline in lifecycle earnings between the ages of 45 and 65 in

the PSID and the CE can be accounted for by the underreporting of income by the self employed.


8E.     Spatial Differences in Average Earnings

        Finally, we show that the underreporting of income by the self employed could bias conclusions

about the spatial differences in earnings. As shown by Glaeser (2007), self employment propensities

differ markedly across U.S. cities. Given this, comparing earnings across space will yield biased results if

one does not account for differences in self employment propensities across space.

        Using the Public Use Microdata Sample (PUMS) from the 2000 Census, we illustrate this point.

We construct a sample of male heads between the ages of 25 and 64, who are currently working, usually

work more than 30 hours per week, and worked 40 weeks during the previous year. We further restrict

this sample to only include individuals who live in a defined MSA. Within this sample, we find a

tremendous amount of variation in self employment rates across MSAs. Across the MSAs, the mean and

median self employment rates were 12.5 percent and 11.9 percent, respectively. The standard deviation

in self employment rates across the MSAs was 2.9 percent.

        To illustrate the potential for the underreporting of income by the self employed to yield biased

results when computing earnings differentials across place, we look at a few pair wise comparisons. To

do this, we examine conditional earnings differentials. Specifically, we regress log earnings on one year

age dummies and a series of education, usual hours worked per week, and weeks worked per year




43
  A more formal analysis of this question would want to adjust for either individual or cohort fixed effects. This
example is only meant to be illustrative.

                                                       35
dummies. We then compare these residuals, with and without adjusting for the underreporting of income

by the self employed, across MSAs.

        Not accounting for the underreporting of income and conditional on the demographic and work

hour adjustments, individuals in our sample from Nassau County New York earned 8.9 percent more than

individuals in our sample from Detroit. 16.8 percent of the individuals from Nassau County were self

employed while only 10.2 percent of the individuals from Detroit were self employed. Adjusting upward

the income of all self employed individuals, conditional on observables, by 30 percent, increases the

Nassau-Detroit earnings differential by nearly 20 percent (from 8.9 percent to 10.6 percent). A similar

comparison can be made between San Francisco (where 16.2 percent of individuals are self employed)

and Buffalo (where 10.2 percent of individuals are self employed). Adjusting for the underreporting of

income of the self employed increases the San-Francisco-Buffalo earnings gap by 6.7 percent (from 23.9

percent to 25.5 percent). The earnings differential between the Barnstable-Yarmouth, Massachusetts

MSA (which has the highest self employment rate among MSAs at 25.5 percent) and the Kokomo,

Indiana MSA (which has the lowest self employment rate among MSAs at 6.0 percent) gets reduced by

35 percent when adjusting for the underreporting of income by the self employed (from -14.7 percent to -

9.6 percent).


8F.     Potential Other Applications

        The above results show that not accounting for the underreporting of income of the self employed

can lead to quantitatively important biases when comparing the income and savings behavior of the self

employed with wage and salary workers, when computing the economic importance of precautionary

savings, when estimating lifecycle earnings profiles, and when computing earnings differentials across

space. There are many other situations where not adjusting for the underreporting of income by the self

employed can potentially lead to quantitatively important biases.       For example, given that self

employment propensities differ across races and genders, failing to account for the underreporting of

income could lead to biased estimates of racial and gender earnings gaps. Likewise, there is much

                                                  36
interest in comparing the borrowing and default behavior of the self employed to wage and salary

workers. Not properly measuring income for the self employed could lead to biased results in this setting

as well. We leave an assessment of the quantitative importance of these potential biases to future work.


9.      Conclusion

        Essentially all empirical work using data from household surveys assumes that household income

is not systematically mismeasured. However, there is reason to believe that this assumption may not

hold, particularly for the self employed.            Research from tax audits finds that the self employed

substantially underreport their income to tax authorities. What was less known to the research community

is the extent to which the self employed also underreport their income within U.S. surveys. Our paper

contributes to the literature by filling this gap.

        Using data from both the Consumer Expenditure Survey and the Panel Study of Income

Dynamics, we find that self employed underreport their income by about 30 percent within household

surveys relative to wage and salary workers. The results are remarkably consistent across both surveys.

As robustness analyses, we implement a sequence of alternative specifications that relax various elements

of our assumptions. Our results are essentially unchanged throughout. Consistent with data from the tax

audits, we also find that the amount of underreporting was higher when marginal tax rates were higher

and was lower among those with an advanced degree.

        The results in this paper have implications for many literatures that use the income data reported

in U.S. household surveys. In particular, we show that research that compares the earnings or saving

behavior between the self employed and wage and salary workers will yield substantially biased results if

the research does not account for the underreporting of income by the self employed. Moreover, we show

that in many other settings, failing to account for the underreporting of income by the self employed can

lead to quantitatively biased conclusions. In particular, we show this to be true with respect to studies of

the importance of precautionary savings, lifecycle earnings profiles, and differences in earnings across

MSAs.

                                                         37
        The results in this paper also point to a potentially bigger concern. There is an active literature

showing that individuals will respond to incentives when reporting information to administrative sources

(like tax authorities) or alter their behavior when participating in experiments. Yet, researchers often

ignore the potential of such problems spilling over into the household surveys that we use for much of our

economic analysis. It is naive to assume that individuals who are willing to misconstrue their behavior to

administrative sources would automatically provide accurate responses when participating in household

surveys. While it is likely true that the benefits of providing distorted information to household surveys

are small, it is also likely true that the benefits of providing accurate information are also small. To the

extent that individuals would have to exert effort to provide an accurate response to household surveys or

feel compelled to maintain consistency in light of concerns about confidentiality, economic theory would

suggest that they would continue to provide the erroneous information, even if there is no direct benefit of

doing so. We show these effects are present with respect to the income reporting of the self employed.

Future work should try to identify and explore other situations in which individuals may provide

systematically biased information to household surveys.




                                                    38
References

Aguiar, Mark and Mark Bils (2010).      “Has Consumption Inequality Mirrored Income Inequality”,

       University of Rochester Working Paper.

Aguiar, Mark and Erik Hurst (2009). "Deconstructing Lifecycle Expenditures", University of Chicago

       Working Paper.

Aguair, Mark and Erik Hurst (2007). "Lifecycle Prices and Production", American Economic Review,

       97(5), pp. 1533-59.

Aguiar, Mark and Erik Hurst (2005). "Consumption vs. Expenditure", Journal of Political Economy,

       113(5), pp. 919-48.

Andreoni, James, Brian Erard, and Jonathan Feinstein (1998). "Tax Compliance," Journal of Economic

       Literature, 36(2), pp. 818-60.

Banks, James, Richard Blundell, and Arthur Lewbel (1997). "Quadratic Engel Curves and Consumer

       Demand," The Review of Economics and Statistics, 79(4), pp. 527-39.

Barsky, Robert, Miles Kimball, Thomas Juster, and Matthew Shapiro (1997). "Preference Parameters and

       Behavioral Heterogeneity: An Experimental Approach in the Health and Retirement Study," The

       Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(2), pp. 537-79.

Becker, Gary (1965). “A Theory of the Allocation of Time.” The Economic Journal, 75, pp. 493 – 517.

Blank, Rebecca, Kerwin Charles and James Sallee (2009). "A Cautionary Tale about the Use of

       Administrative Data: Evidence from Age of Marriage Laws," American Economic Journal:

       Applied Economics, 1(2), pp. 128-49.

Blundell, Richard, Martin Browning, and Costas Meghir (1994), “Consumer Demand and the Life-Cycle

       Allocation of Household Expenditures,” Review of Economic Studies, 61, 57-80.

Bound, John, Brown, Charles, Duncan, Greg, and Rodgers, Willard (1994). "Evidence on the Validity of

       Cross Sectional and Longitudinal Labor Market Data", Journal of Labor Economics, vol. 12(3),

       pp. 345-68.
Bound, John, Charles Brown, and Nancy Mathiowetz (2001). "Measurement Error in Survey Data", in

       Handbook of Econometrics, Volume 5, eds. J.J. Heckman and E. Leamer, Elsevier Science.

Cagetti, Marco, and De Nardi, Mariacristina (2006). “Entrepreneurship, Frictions, and Wealth”, Journal

       of Political Economy, vol. 106(5), pp. 835-70.

Carroll, Chris and Samwick, Andrew (1998). "How Important is Precautionary Saving?" Review of

       Economics and Statistics, vol. 80(3), pp. 410-9.

Clotfelter, Charles (1983). "Tax Evasion and Tax Rates: An Analysis of Individual Returns," Review of

       Economics and Statistics, 65(3), pp. 363-73.

Deaton, Angus (1997).     The Analysis of Household Surveys:        A Microeconometric Approach to

       Development Policy. World Bank Publication.

Deaton, Angus and John Muellbauer (1980). "An Almost Ideal Demand System," American Economic

       Review, 70(3), pp. 312-26.

Feldman, Naomi and Joel Slemrod (2007).         "Estimating Tax Noncompliance with Evidence from

       Unaudited Tax Returns", Economic Journal, vol. 117 (518), pp. 327-52.

Fitzgerald, John, Peter Gottschalk, and Robert Moffitt (1998). "An Analysis of Sample Attrition in Panel

       Data: The Michigan Panel Study of Income Dynamics", Journal of Human Resources, 33(2),

       251-99.

Gentry, William and R. Glenn Hubbard (2004). "Entrepreneurship and Household Saving," Advances in

       Economic Analysis & Policy, 4(1), Article 8.

Ghez, Gilbert and Gary Becker (1975). The Allocation of Time and Goods over the Life Cycle, Columbia

       University Press, New York.

Gibson, John, Bonggeun Kim and Chul Chung (2009). "Using Panel Data to Exactly Estimate Income

       Under Reporting of the Self Employed". Labor Economics Working Papers, East Asian Bureau

       of Economic Research.

Glaeser, Edward (2007).    "Entrepreneurship and the City".    Harvard Institute of Economic Research

       Discussion Paper No. 2140.

                                                   40
Gorodnichenko, Yuriy, Jorge Martinez-Vazquez, and Klara Sabirianova Peter (2009). "Myth and Reality

       of Flat Tax Reform: Micro Estimates of Tax Evasion Response and Welfare Effects in Russia,"

       Journal of Political Economy, 117(3), pp. 504-554.

Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier and Jonathan Parker (2002), “Consumption over the Life Cycle,”

       Econometrica, January 2002, 70, 1, 47-89.

Haider, Steven and Gary Solon (2006). "Life-Cycle Variation in the Association Between Current and

       Lifetime Earnings".   American Economic Review, 96(4), 1308-1320

Hamilton, Barton H. (2000). “Does Entrepreneurship Pay? An Empirical Analysis of the Returns to Self-

       Employment.” Journal of Political Economy vol. 108 (3), pp. 604-31.

Hurst, Erik and Lusardi, Annamaria (2004). "Liquidity Constraints, Household Wealth, and

       Entrepreneurship", Journal of Political Economy, vol. 112(2), pp. 319-47.

Hurst, Erik and Ben Pugsley (2010). "The Non Pecuniary Benefits of Small Business Ownership",

       University of Chicago Working Paper.

Johansson, Edvard (2005).    "An Estimate of Self Employment Income Underreporting in Finland",

       Nordic Journal of Political Economy, vol 31(1), pp. 99 - 109.

Levitt, Steve and John List (2009). “Was there Really a Hawthorne Effect at the Hawthorne Plant? An

       Analysis of the Original Illumination Experiments”, NBER Working Paper 15016.

Meyer, Bruce, Wallace K.C. Mok, and James Sullivan (2009). "The Under-Reporting of Transfers in

       Household Surveys: Its Nature and Consequences" Harris School Working Paper #09.03,

Moskowitz, Tobias J., and Vissing-Jorgensen, Annette (2002). “The Returns to Entrepreneurial

       Investment: A Private Equity Premium Puzzle?” American Economic Review vol. 92(4), pp. 745-

       78.

Pissarides, Christopher and Guglielmo Weber (1989). "An Expenditure Based Estimate of Britain's Black

       Economy", Journal of Public Economics, vol. 39(1), pp. 17-32.

Schuetze, Herb (2002). "Profiles of Tax Noncompliance Among the Self Employed in Canada:1969-

       1992." Canadian Public Policy, vol. 28(2), pp. 219-37.

                                                   41
Slemrod, Joel (1985). "An Empirical Test for Tax Evasion," The Review of Economics and Statistics,

       67(2), pp. 232-38.

Slemrod, Joel (2007). "Cheating Ourselves: The Economics of Tax Evasion," Journal of Economic

       Perspectives, 21(1), pp. 25-48.

Zeldes, Steve (1989). "Consumption and Liquidity Constraints: An Empirical Investigation", Journal of

       Political Economy, vol. 97(2), pp. 305-46.




                                                    42
                                             Data Appendix


This appendix gives background information on all the data sources used in this paper.


CE Data

        The CE is conducted by the Bureau of Labor Statistics. The primary objective of the survey is to

collect detailed household expenditure information to update the weights used to construct the Consumer

Price Index. However, the household level data of the CE have also been used extensively in academic

research to explore household consumption behavior. The CE is a quarterly survey and its modern

version started in 1980. In addition to detailed information on household expenditures, the CE collects

key information on household demographics, income, and employment status. The CE interviews a

consumer unit up to five times, once every 3 months. The first interview is conducted to establish contact

with, and collect such data on, the interviewees; the subsequent four interviews are carried out to collect

most of the expenditure data. In the fifth interview, demographic, income, and labor supply variables are

updated. After the fifth interview, the consumer unit leaves the sample and new units are added to the

sample, giving the CE a rotating sample structure.

PSID Data

        The PSID is a longitudinal survey conducted by the Institute of Social Research at the University

of Michigan.     The PSID collects extensive information on employment history, demographic

characteristics, and household income.


CPS Sample

        To match the PSID and CE sample selection criteria, we restrict our analysis to households with a

civilian male household head, whose age is between 25 and 55 (inclusive), who worked at least 40 weeks

during the last calendar year and usually worked at least 30 hours per week in paid or self employment.

We further restrict the sample by excluding households with a male wage and salary worker, but whose

spouse (if present) was self employed. Lastly, we exclude any remaining households who had non-


                                                     43
positive labor plus business family income or who had any farm income. We define two measures of

household income within the CPS: family labor earnings plus family business income and total family

income. The two income measures are defined analogously to the way they were defined in the CE and

the PSID. Finally, self employed households are defined as those households whose male head reports

that for his longest job during the last year he was self employed.44 Over the sample period of 1980 to

2003 applying these restrictions yields a sample of 511,306 households, with 70,423 of those classified as

self employed.




44
   To determine the class of employment, the CPS interviewer asks a series of questions about the individual’s
employer to determine whether he worked for a private firm, for a government (federal, state, or local), worked
without pay in family business, or were self employed (incorporated or unincorporated). Since we have already
excluded those individuals working without pay, wage and salary workers are defined as those working for a private
firm or for a government.

                                                       44
          Table 1: Descriptive Statistics for Self Employed and Wage and Salary Worker Samples, CE, PSID, and CPS

                                                                                              Data Set
                                                            CE                                 PSID                                 CPS
                                                 Self              Wage              Self              Wage               Self              Wage
Income Measure/Sample                          Employed           Workers          Employed           Workers           Employed            Worker

                                                        Panel A: Income Measures
Total Family Income                             10.87         10.86         11.20         11.00                            10.97             10.93
Labor Plus Business Income                      10.81         10.84         11.02         10.91                            10.87             10.88
                                                      Panel B: Expenditure Measures
Food Expenditure                                 8.85          8.67          8.97          8.73                              -                  -
Nondurable Expenditure                           9.98          9.78            -             -                               -                  -
Total Expenditure                               10.74          10.51           -             -                               -                  -
                                          Panel C: Other Labor Supply and Demographic Measures
Average Age of Head                              41.4          39.0          40.7          37.9                            41.7              39.2
% Education = 12                                 26.9          29.2          20.5          24.0                            29.7              33.8
% Education = Some College                       23.2          23.3          31.2          31.2                            22.7              23.8
% Education = College                            20.3          18.9          21.4          19.2                            20.1              18.7
% Education = Graduate School                    17.9          12.5          14.9           9.9                            17.8              11.6
% Black                                           3.4           7.8           2.7           9.7                             3.2               8.9
% Married                                        83.2          80.6          86.7          78.6                            86.1              81.8
Average Family Size                              3.4           3.26          3.30          3.10                            3.36              3.22
Average Head Work Hours                         2,561         2,317         2,560         2,293                            2526              2280

Sample Size                                      2,508             24,704             4,207              29,639           70,423           440,883

Notes: This table compares income, expenditure, and demographic variables between the self employed and wage and salary workers within the CE, PSID, and
CPS. Each sample is restricted to include all households with male heads between the ages of 25 and 55 (inclusive) who are working full time. Additional
sample restrictions for each survey are discussed in the text.




                                                                            45
            Table 2: Conditional Log Income Differences for Full Time Wage and Salary Workers and Self Employed

                                                                                       Data Sets/Specification
                                                             I. Income = Total                              II. Income = Labor Earnings +
                                                               Family Income                                        Business Income
Variables                                         (1)               (2)                 (3)              (4)              (5)            (6)

Dummy: Self Employed                            -0.08               0.07               -0.07               -0.10              -0.01               -0.11
                                                (0.02)             (0.01)              (0.01)              (0.02)             (0.01)              (0.01)

Demographic Controls Included                    Yes                 Yes                Yes                 Yes                 Yes                Yes
Year Dummies Included                            Yes                 Yes                Yes                 Yes                 Yes                Yes

Sample                                           CE                 PSID                CPS                 CE                 PSID                CPS

Notes: The table shows the regression of household income on a self employment dummy and additional demographic and year controls. In panel I, our
measure of income is total family income for the household. In panel II, our measure of income is labor earnings of the household plus household business
income. We run the regressions separately within each of the three surveys. For example, columns (1) - (3) show the results from the same regression, but using
data from the CE, PSID, and CPS surveys, respectively. All regressions control for: a series of five year age dummies, four dummies indicating the education of
the household head (exactly high school, some college, exactly college, and more than college; less than high school was omitted), a dummy if the household
head was Black, a dummy if the household head was married, and a series of family size dummies. The CE, PSID, and CSP samples are the same as the ones
defined in Table 1. Robust standard errors are in parenthesis.




                                                                              46
         Table 3: Conditional Log Expenditure Differences For Full Time Wage and Salary Workers and Self Employed

                                                                                      Data Sets/Dependent Variable
                                                                                      I. CE                                                  II. PSID

Variables                                                 Food                     Nondurable                      Total                       Food

Dummy: Self Employed                                      0.12                         0.13                        0.16                         0.14
                                                         (0.01)                       (0.01)                      (0.01)                       (0.01)

Demographic Controls Included                              Yes                         Yes                          Yes                         Yes
Year Dummies Included                                      Yes                         Yes                          Yes                         Yes


Notes: The table shows the regression of household expenditure on a self employment dummy and additional demographic and year controls. In panel I, we
show the estimates using CE data. In panel II, we show the estimates using PSID data. For the CE sample, we explore conditional differences between the self
employed and the wage and salary workers using three measures of expenditures: food (column 1), nondurable expenditures (column 2), and total expenditures
(column 3). The PSID sample has information only on food expenditures. All regressions control for: a series of five year age dummies, four dummies
indicating the education of the household head (exactly high school, some college, exactly college, and more than college; less than high school was omitted), a
dummy if the household head was black, a dummy if the household head was married, and a series of family size dummies. The CE and PSID samples are the
same as the ones defined in Table 1. Robust standard errors are in parenthesis.




                                                                              47
   Table 4: Log Expenditure Differences Between Self Employed and Wage Workers,
                    Conditional on Log Income and Demographics
                                     I. Income = Total     II. Income = Labor Earnings
                                       Family Income           Plus Business Income
Sample/Expenditure Measure          OLS            IV           OLS             IV

                                          Panel A: Estimates of β

CEX, Nondurable Expenditure                      0.37              0.60              0.34              0.61
                                                (0.01)            (0.01)            (0.01)            (0.01)

CEX, Total Expenditure                           0.42              0.76              0.39              0.76
                                                (0.01)            (0.01)            (0.01)            (0.01)

CEX, Food Expenditure                            0.26              0.40              0.25              0.40
                                                (0.01)            (0.01)            (0.01)            (0.01)

PSID, Food Expenditure                           0.30              0.32              0.29              0.31
                                                (0.01)            (0.01)            (0.01)            (0.01)

                                          Panel B: Estimates of γ

CEX, Nondurable Expenditure                      0.17              0.18              0.18              0.19
                                                (0.01)            (0.01)            (0.01)            (0.01)

CEX, Total Expenditure                           0.20              0.21              0.21              0.23
                                                (0.01)            (0.01)            (0.01)            (0.02)

CEX, Food Expenditure                            0.15              0.15              0.15              0.16
                                                (0.01)            (0.01)            (0.01)            (0.01)

PSID, Food Expenditure                           0.12              0.11              0.14              0.13
                                                (0.01)            (0.01)            (0.01)            (0.01)

Notes: This table shows the OLS and IV estimates of equation (8) from the text. Equation (8) estimates the
relationship between log household expenditures and log household income conditional on a self employment
dummy and other demographics. The coefficient on log household income is denoted as β and the coefficient on the
self employment dummy is denoted γ. The demographic controls are the same as the controls used to estimate the
results in Tables 2 and 3, aside from the education dummies. We use the education dummies as the instruments for
income in the IV specifications. As with the results in Tables 2 and 3, we estimate the regression using different
measures of expenditures and for different samples (indicated down the rows) and for different measures of
household income (indicated across the columns). Robust standard errors are shown in parentheses. The samples
are the same as the ones discussed in Table 1.




                                                         48
                Table 5: Predicted Fraction of Income Underreported by Self Employed,
                                         Baseline Specification

                                                                    Estimate of (1-κ), in Percent
                                                               Income =                    Income =
                                                              Total Family           Labor Earnings Plus
  Expenditure Measure                                           Income                  Business Income

  CEX, Nondurable Expenditure                                    25.5                            27.5
                                                                 (1.5)                           (1.6)

  CEX, Total Expenditure                                         24.5                            26.5
                                                                 (1.5)                           (1.5)

  CEX, Food Expenditure                                          31.7                            33.5
                                                                 (2.0)                           (2.0)

  PSID, Food Expenditure                                         30.1                            34.9
                                                                 (2.2)                           (1.9)

Notes: This table shows the estimates of the amount of underreporting of income by the self employed, denoted by
(1 - κ), using the estimates of β and γ from Table 4. We show the different estimates of (1-κ) using different
measures of expenditure, using data from the different surveys, and using different measures of income. In this table,
we only show the estimates using the β and γ estimates from the IV specifications. Asymptotic standard errors are
computed for the transformation 1-κ using a robust estimate of the variance covariance matrix.




                                                         49
             Table 6: Predicted Fraction of Income Underreported by Self Employed, Alternate Specifications
                                                                 Specification/Sample
Expenditure Measure                      1                     2                      3                                                         4

CEX, Nondurable Expenditure                         25.2                           27.4                         26.6                          24.4
                                                    (1.5)                          (1.6)                        (2.7)                         (1.8)

CEX, Total Expenditure                              24.5                           26.7                         24.2                          24.6
                                                    (1.5)                          (1.5)                        (2.6)                         (1.7)

CEX, Food Expenditure                               31.5                           33.5                         35.7                          28.6
                                                    (2.0)                          (1.9)                        (3.7)                         (2.2)

PSID, Food Expenditure                              28.6                           34.1                         30.1                          28.4
                                                    (2.2)                          (1.8)                        (3.0)                         (3.0)

Income Measure                                      Total                Labor Plus Business                    Total                         Total

Specification                               Include Log Work              Include Log Work              Restrict To Heads             Restrict To Heads
                                            Hours as a Control            Hours as a Control             With Age 25-40                With Age 40-55

Notes: This table shows the amount of underreporting of income by the self employed (1-κ) for alternate specifications of equation (8) from the text. All
specifications in this table are based on the IV specification using CEX data with total nondurable expenditures as the expenditure measure. As a result, these
estimates should be compared to row (1) of Table 5. In columns (1) and (2), we add log work hours to our vector or control variables. The first column uses
total family income as the income measure while the second column uses labor plus business income as the income measure. In columns (3) and (4), we split the
samples by age (young vs. old). In columns (5) and (6), we only use data from the 1984, 1989, and 1994 PSID because they are the only years that collect
information on household business wealth. In column (5), we only include the self employed with zero business wealth. In column (6), we only include the s elf
employed with more than $10,000 in business wealth. For all specifications, the sample is otherwise the same as the one described in the note to Table 1.
Asymptotic standard errors are computed for the transformation 1-κ using a robust estimate of the variance covariance matrix.




                                                                              50
                         Table 7: Explaining the Income Gap Among the Self Employed, Percentage Changes to (1-  )
                                                                          I. CE                                    II. PSID
                                                            (1)                         (2)                            (3)
Variable                                           Nondurable Expenditure        Food Expenditure               Food Expenditure

Average marginal federal tax rate (percent)                         2.24                                 2.76                                 1.56
                                                                   (0.89)                               (1.18)                               (0.84)

Age: 40-55                                                          1.91                                 0.62                                 3.45
                                                                   (3.86)                               (5.32)                               (4.63)

Ed = Some College                                                   4.94                                 6.04                                14.51
                                                                   (5.15)                               (6.72)                               (4.74)
Ed = College                                                        -5.62                                -3.03                                2.20
                                                                   (5.08)                               (6.81)                               (6.16)
Ed = More than College                                             -11.48                                -2.89                               -23.03
                                                                   (6.00)                               (7.47)                               (9.74)

Black                                                               10.39                                2.98                                 6.03
                                                                   (16.30)                             (18.43)                              (11.25)
Married                                                              -8.19                              -21.05                               -4.11
                                                                    (5.47)                              (8.63)                               (9.39)

Income Measure                                                  Total Family                        Total Family                         Total Family

Note: This table shows how the estimates of (1-κ) change with economic and demographic variables. To get these estimates, we re-estimate equation (8) with
the relevant variable of interest interacted with a self employment dummy. To get this specification, we also included the average marginal federal tax rate as a
separate control. The results in this table are based on the IV specification using the relevant specifications. All specifications use total family income as the
income measure. Panel I shows the results using CE data while panel II shows the results using PSID data. The samples are the same as the ones used in Table
1. Asymptotic standard errors are computed for the transformation 1-κ using a robust estimate of the variance covariance matrix.




                                                                               51
       Figure 1: Relationship Between Total Family Money and Nondurable Expenditure, CE

                                             Panel A: OLS Estimation

                                                     Worker            Entre

   10.5


     10


    9.5


      9


    8.5
          9.5                 10                  10.5                 11                  11.5                 12

Notes: This figure shows the OLS estimates of the Engel curves as specified in equation (3) in the text, separately for
wage/salary workers (solid line) and the self employed (dashed line). We evaluate both curves at the sample means of the
demographic control for the pooled sample. The estimated intercepts for the self employed and the wage/salary workers,
respectively, are 7.02 and 5.55. The estimated slopes for each group, respectively, are 0.27 and 0.39. The sample for each
specification are the same as the ones described in the notes to Table 1.

                                              Panel B: IV Estimation

                                                     Worker            Entre

     11

   10.5

     10

    9.5

      9

    8.5

      8
          9.5                 10                 10.5                  11                 11.5                  12

Notes: This figure shows the OLS estimates of the Engel curves as specified in equation (3) in the text, separately for
wage/salary workers (solid line) and the self employed (dashed line). We evaluate both curves at the sample means of the
demographic control for the pooled sample. The estimated intercepts for the self employed and the wage/salary workers,
respectively, are 4.37 and 3.12. The estimated slopes for each group, respectively, are 0.51 and 0.61. The sample for each
specification are the same as the ones described in the notes to Table 1.




                                                           52
               Figure 2: Relationship Between Total Family Money and Food Expenditure, CE

                                             Panel A: OLS Estimation

                                                     Worker            Entre

   9.5


     9


   8.5


     8


   7.5
         9.5                 10                  10.5                  11                 11.5                  12

Notes: This figure shows the OLS estimates of the Engel curves as specified in equation (3) in the text, separately for
wage/salary workers (solid line) and the self employed (dashed line). We evaluate both curves at the sample means of the
demographic control for the pooled sample. The estimated intercepts for the self employed and the wage/salary workers,
respectively, are 6.54 and 5.68. The estimated slopes for each group, respectively, are 0.21 and 0.28. The sample for each
specification are the same as the ones described in the notes to Table 1.

                                              Panel B: IV Estimation

                                                     Worker            Entre

   9.5


     9


   8.5


     8


   7.5
         9.5                 10                  10.5                  11                 11.5                  12

Notes: This figure shows the OLS estimates of the Engel curves as specified in equation (3) in the text, separately for
wage/salary workers (solid line) and the self employed (dashed line). We evaluate both curves at the sample means of the
demographic control for the pooled sample. The estimated intercepts for the self employed and the wage/salary workers,
respectively, are 4.73 and 4.29. The estimated slopes for each group, respectively, are 0.38 and 0.40. The sample for each
specification are the same as the ones described in the notes to Table 1.




                                                           53
             Figure 3: Relationship Between Total Family Money and Food Expenditure, PSID

                                             Panel A: OLS Estimation

                                                     Worker             Entre

   9.5

     9

   8.5

     8
         9            9.5            10            10.5            11            11.5            12            12.5

Notes: This figure shows the OLS estimates of the Engel curves as specified in equation (3) in the text, separately for
wage/salary workers (solid line) and the self employed (dashed line). We evaluate both curves at the sample means of the
demographic control for the pooled sample. The estimated intercepts for the self employed and the wage/salary workers,
respectively, are 6.18 and 5.18. The estimated slopes for each group, respectively, are 0.24 and 0.32. The sample for each
specification are the same as the ones described in the notes to Table 1.

                                              Panel B: IV Estimation

                                                     Worker             Entre

   9.5


     9


   8.5


     8
         9            9.5            10            10.5            11            11.5            12            12.5

Notes: This figure shows the OLS estimates of the Engel curves as specified in equation (3) in the text, separately for
wage/salary workers (solid line) and the self employed (dashed line). We evaluate both curves at the sample means of the
demographic control for the pooled sample. The estimated intercepts for the self employed and the wage/salary workers,
respectively, are 5.47 and 5.23. The estimated slopes for each group, respectively, are 0.31 and 0.32. The sample for each
specification are the same as the ones described in the notes to Table 1.




                                                           54
  Figure 4: Estimates of the Underreporting of Income By Self Employed Over Time, CEX Data


   0.7


   0.6


   0.5


   0.4


   0.3


   0.2


   0.1


     0
          1980               1985                1990                1995                 2000
   ‐0.1
Notes: This table shows the estimates of underreporting (1-κ) by year using the CEX data (IV specification) where
nondurable income is the expenditure measure and total family money is the income measure. To get these
estimates, we re-estimated equation (8) including year dummies interacted with the self employed dummy. Robust
standard error bands are shown as the dashed lines.




                                                        55
                    Appendix Figure A1 - The Average Marginal Tax Rate in the U.S.


   0.35




   0.30




   0.25




   0.20




   0.15
          1980                 1985                  1990                  1995                  2000

Notes: Figure shows the time series variation in the average marginal tax rate. See text for details.




                                                          56
