                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




DO PRODUCT MARKET REGULATIONS IN UPSTREAM SECTORS CURB PRODUCTIVITY
          GROWTH? PANEL DATA EVIDENCE FOR OECD COUNTRIES

                                            Renaud Bourlès
                                             Gilbert Cette
                                             Jimmy Lopez
                                           Jacques Mairesse
                                           Giuseppe Nicoletti

                                         Working Paper 16520
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w16520


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2010




 The authors wish to thank Philippe Aghion for advice at the preparatory stage of this paper and Francesco
 Daveri for useful comments as well as participants in the OECD-CESifo conference on “Product market
 regulation: political economy and effects on performance”, Munich 29-30 January 2010, and in seminars
 at the OECD and Banque de France. The views expressed in the paper are those of the authors and
 do not necessarily reflect those of Banque de France, the OECD, its member countries, or the National
 Bureau of Economic Research.

 NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
 reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
 NBER publications.

 © 2010 by Renaud Bourlès, Gilbert Cette, Jimmy Lopez, Jacques Mairesse, and Giuseppe Nicoletti.
 All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
 permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Do Product Market Regulations in Upstream Sectors Curb Productivity Growth? Panel Data
Evidence for OECD Countries
Renaud Bourlès, Gilbert Cette, Jimmy Lopez, Jacques Mairesse, and Giuseppe Nicoletti
NBER Working Paper No. 16520
November 2010
JEL No. C23,L16,L5,O43,O57

                                            ABSTRACT

Based on an endogenous growth model, we show that intermediate goods markets imperfections can
curb incentives to improve productivity downstream. We confirm such prediction by estimating a
model of multifactor productivity growth in which the effects of upstream competition vary with distance
to frontier on a panel of 15 OECD countries and 20 sectors over 1985-2007. Competitive pressures
are proxied with sectoral product market regulation data. We find evidence that anticompetitive upstream
regulations have curbed MFP growth over the past 15 years, more strongly so for observations that
are close to the productivity frontier.


Renaud Bourlès                                     Jacques Mairesse
GREQAM-IDEP                                        CREST-INSEE
Centre de la Vieille Charité                       15, Boulevard Gabriel PERI
2, rue de la Charité                               92245 MALAKOFF CEDEX
13236 Marseille cedex 02                           FRANCE
France                                             and UNU-MERIT (Maastricht University)
and Ecole Centrale Marseille                       and also NBER
renaud.bourles@centrale-marseille.fr               mairesse@ensae.fr

Gilbert Cette                                      Giuseppe Nicoletti
Banque de France                                   OECD Economics Department
1, rue de la Vrillière                             2 rue André Pascal
75001 Paris, France                                75775 Paris CEDEX 16
and Université de la Mediterranee (DEFI)           FRANCE
gilbert.cette@banque-france.fr                     Giuseppe.nicoletti@oecd.org

Jimmy Lopez
Banque de France
1, rue de la Vrillière
75001 Paris, FRANCE
jimmy.lopez@banque-france.fr
1. INTRODUCTION


Competition –and policies affecting it– has been found to be an important determinant of
productivity growth in recent empirical research.1 Firm-level evidence has generally
supported the idea that competitive pressures are a driver of productivity enhancing
innovation and adoption (Geroski, 1995a, 1995b; Nickell, 1996; Nickell et al., 1997; Blundell
et al., 1999; Griffith et al., 2002; Haskel et al., 2007; Aghion et al., 2004), especially for
incumbent firms that are close to the technological frontier (Aghion et al., 2005; Aghion
et al., 2006a). Further evidence has also been provided at the industry level (Nicoletti and
Scarpetta, 2003; Griffith et al., 2006; Inklaar et al., 2008; Buccirossi et al., 2009) and for
aggregate productivity measures (Conway et al., 2006; Aghion et al., 2009) generally based
on cross-country panels.


Most empirical studies of the competition-growth link focused on competitive conditions
within each sector (or market) as drivers of firm or industry-level productivity enhancements.
Yet, to the extent that expected rents from innovation or technology adoption are underlying
efforts to improve efficiency relative to competitors, focusing on within-sector competition
misses an important part of the story. Indeed, these rents, and the corresponding within-sector
incentives to improve productivity, may be reduced by lack of competition in sectors that sell
intermediate inputs that are necessary to production. In other words, if there is market power
in these upstream sectors and if firms in downstream industries have to negotiate terms and
conditions of their contracts with suppliers, part of the rents expected downstream from
adopting best-practice techniques will be grabbed by intermediate input providers. This in
turn will reduce incentives to improve efficiency and curb productivity in downstream
sectors, even if competition may be thriving there. Moreover, lack of competition in upstream
sectors can also generate barriers to entry that curb competition in downstream sectors as

1
   Theoretically, the link between competition and productivity growth has been traced to three main
factors: innovation, technology adoption and reallocation across heterogeneous firms. While some
early models of endogenous technical change (Romer, 1990; Grossman and Helpman, 1991; Aghion
and Howitt, 1992) would predict competition to curb innovation in line with Schumpeterian theory,
more recent analyses (sometimes called neo-Schumpeterian) predict positive or hump-shaped effects
of competition on innovation (Aghion and Schankerman, 2004; Aghion et al., 2001). Firm
heterogeneity plays an important role in both neo-Schumpeterian theories and models that focus on
the positive impact of low market frictions and competitive pressures on reallocation from low to high
productivity firms (Melitz, 2003; Bernard et al., 2003; Melitz and Ottaviano, 2008; Restuccia and
Rogerson, 2007). Parente and Prescott (1994, 1999) have highlighted more specifically the negative
effects of barriers to competition on technology adoption.


                                                  3
well, further reducing pressures to improve efficiency in these sectors. For example, tight
licensing requirements in retail trade or transport can narrow access to distribution channels
and overly restrictive regulation in banking and finance can reduce the range of available
sources of financing for all firms in the economy.

The influence of competition in upstream sectors for productivity improvements downstream
is likely to be particularly relevant in developed countries where most industries are
increasingly involved in global competition. In sectors or markets exposed to trade, direct
competitive pressures from rival firms (both incumbents and new entrants) are often strong
and provide the expected incentives for efficiency improvement. By contrast, several non-
manufacturing sectors are often protected from extensive trade pressures by either the need
for proximity or the fact that service provision occurs through national physical networks.
With these non-manufacturing sectors accounting for rising shares of total intermediate
inputs, lack of competition there propagates throughout the economy by increasing the cost
(or reducing the quality) of the services provided to downstream sectors. In turn, the cost of
goods produced using these services are also inflated, with a cascading effect on other
intermediate inputs. Higher costs (or lower quality) of intermediate inputs indirectly frustrate
efforts of firms that purchase these goods and services to improve efficiency in order to
escape competition, because the expected returns from such efforts are shrunk.
As these returns are higher for firms that compete neck-and-neck with rivals that are close to
the technological frontier, lack of competition upstream is likely to reduce downstream
incentives to improve efficiency more markedly when distance to frontier is short, as it is
often the case in increasingly globalized markets.

Our paper tackles these issues squarely by focusing on the influence of upstream competition
for productivity outcomes in downstream sectors. To our knowledge, only a few papers
looked at this issue so far, and only in static cross-section analyses relating manufacturing
productivity outcomes to measures of competition in services (Allegra et al., 2004; Faini et
al., 2006; Barone and Cingano, 2008). Our contribution to this line of research is twofold.
First, we provide a full-fledged formalisation of the links between upstream competition and
downstream productivity based on an extension of the neo-Schumpeterian endogenous
growth model by Aghion et al. (1997). Second, we test the model prediction that lack of
upstream competition curbs downstream efficiency improvements by using a stylized version
of the dynamic “neo-Schumpeterian” model (Acemoglu et al., 2006) in which rent-seeking



                                               4
efficiency improvements are driven by both improvements at the frontier and the speed of
catch up to this frontier, measured by a distance factor. This makes it possible to differentiate
the potential downstream effects of lack of upstream competition in situations close and far
from the global technological frontier.

We measure industry-level efficiency improvements and distance to frontier through a
multifactor productivity (MFP) index. Using OECD industry statistics we construct MFP
measures for 15 OECD countries and 20 sectors over the 1984-2007 period. We proxy
competition upstream with detailed time series information on policies, rules and regulations
that generate entry barriers in key non-manufacturing industries (henceforth called
"upstream" industries) and measure the importance of these barriers for all industries that use
the non-manufacturing inputs (henceforth "downstream" industries) by means of input-output
relationships.2 We then match the MFP measures with the time-series indicators of the
indirect burden of anti-competitive regulations in non-manufacturing sectors on each of the
20 sectors covered by our data. We use these data to run panel regressions controlling for a
number of unobserved factors and perform extensive robustness checks on the results.

We find clear evidence that anticompetitive regulations in upstream sectors curb MFP growth
downstream. Consistent with the neo-Schumpeterian framework, these effects are non linear
and    depend      on    distance    to    frontier.       They   are   strongest    for    observations
(i.e. country/sector/period triads) that are close to the global technological frontier, but
remain generally negative for a large share of our data. Interestingly, the share of
observations whose MFP growth suffers from anticompetitive regulations increased over
time, with the negative indirect effects of regulations affecting virtually all observations over
the past 15 years. This could be due to increased integration of the world economy in the
context of the diffusion of new technologies: with competition correspondingly becoming
tougher downstream and adoption becoming more compelling, erosion of innovation rents by
regulated upstream sectors is increasingly more damaging for incentives to enhance
productivity. Measured at the average distance to frontier and average level of

2
   Our work is therefore related to the industry-level analysis of Conway et al. (2006) and the
firm-level analyses of Arnold et al. (2006) and Forlani (2009). However, Conway et al. focused on
labour productivity, an inadequate measure of efficiency improvements, and did not distinguish between
effects of competition in upstream and downstream sectors. Arnold et al. and Forlani only looked at the
effects of service sector competition on manufacturing MFP outcomes in single countries (Czech
Republic and France, respectively) and did not consider the effect of distance to frontier effects. Forlani
focused on market-based rather than policy-based measures of upstream competition.


                                                       5
anticompetitive regulations, the effect of increasing competition by instantaneously and
completely eliminating such regulations is to increase MFP growth by between 1 and 1.5 per
cent per year depending on the period covered. This is of course a purely illustrative case
because it would represent an unrealistically ambitious reform agenda. More realistic
scenarios, in which each country‟s regulations are aligned on actual best practices suggest
smaller but still sizeable yearly gains in MFP growth. Our results are robust to changes in the
way MFP is constructed, to the use of different input-output tables for measuring the burden
of upstream regulation on downstream sectors, to variations in the sample of countries and/or
sectors and to modifications in the set of fixed effects used to account for unobservable.

The paper is organised as follows. In the next section we formalise the link between lack of
competition in upstream sectors and efficiency growth downstream extending the "neo-
Schumpeterian" endogenous growth model of Aghion et al. (1997). We then present the
econometric specification (section III) used to test the main prediction of the model. Next, we
describe the main features of our MFP and regulation data (section IV). Finally, we discuss
our empirical results and the related robustness checks (section V). In this context, we
provide illustrative simulations of the potential effects of making upstream markets more
competitive (section VI). A few reflections on links to previous literature, open issues and
directions for future research conclude the paper (section VII). Details about model
derivations and data construction are provided in the appendix.




2. UPSTREAM MARKET COMPETITION AND DOWNSTREAM
    PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH:               THE CHANNELS

A large and growing body of research has studied the effects of competition on growth (see
Aghion and Griffith, 2005, for a survey). While competition can affect economic
performance through various channels, this line of research has usually focused on the direct
effects of lack of competition in a sector on its productivity performance.3 In this paper, we
focus on the effects of regulations that curb market competition in upstream sectors, such as
legal barriers to entry in some non-manufacturing markets (henceforth “anticompetitive
upstream regulations”), on the productivity performance of downstream sectors.

3
   For recent surveys, see Griffith and Harrison (2004), Crafts (2006), Schiantarelli (2005) and
Nicoletti and Scarpetta (2006).


                                               6
We highlight two main channels through which lack of competition in upstream sectors can
generate trickle-down effects that affect the productivity performance of other sectors.
Firstly, anticompetitive regulations in an upstream sector can reduce competition downstream
if access to downstream markets requires using intermediate inputs produced upstream,
particularly in the case of services inputs where import competition is limited. For example, if
financial market regulations narrow the range of available financial instruments or products,
access to finance by downstream firms can be made difficult, thereby curbing new entry and
firm growth. Similarly, if restrictive licensing or business conduct regulations in trade or
transport services hinder the development of open, efficient and innovative distribution
channels, market access by downstream firms can suffer, with negative repercussions for
productivity growth. Secondly, even if anticompetitive upstream regulations do not restrict
market access downstream, they can still curb incentives to improve efficiency in
downstream sectors or firms. If markets for intermediate inputs are imperfect, downstream
firms may have to negotiate with (and can be held up by) suppliers. In this case, regulations
that increase suppliers‟ market power can reduce incentives to improve efficiency
downstream, as part of the (possibly temporary) rents that downstream firms expect from
such improvements will have to be shared with suppliers of the intermediate inputs that are
necessary for downstream production.

Our theoretical model, drawn from Lopez (2010), highlights these two channels in the
following way. First, imperfect competition in upstream sectors makes the search for
intermediate input suppliers time-consuming and costly for new downstream firms. Formally,
finding a supplier of intermediate input, which is a necessary requirement to start producing,
involves a Poisson hazard rate of ρ < 1. During this search new entrants suffer an instantaneous
cost b. We assume that the hazard rate ρ is decreasing with the level of upstream competition.
This barrier to entry affects the number of downstream producers N through a free-entry
condition (the value of new firms is zero at the equilibrium). Second, rent-seeking efficiency
incentives in downstream sectors are reduced by the search costs implied by imperfect
competition in upstream sectors. These costs provide market power to upstream suppliers,
creating a gap between the intermediate input price    and the marginal cost c of producing the
input, which is assumed to be constant. In this setting, input prices are determined by the
sharing of the total product market rents R between upstream and downstream firms, which
depends on the power of negotiation of the upstream firms β:                        , with l the



                                               7
quantity of intermediate inputs. We assume that the power of negotiation of the upstream firms
is decreasing with the level of competition in the upstream sectors.

We introduce these implications of imperfections in intermediate input markets in a stylized
version of the “neo-Schumpeterian” model of Aghion et al. (1997).4 We consider an
economy composed of a unit mass of identical consumers. Each consumer has an
instantaneous utility function:                        with xj being consumption of final good
from industry j. Because of the logarithmic utility function each industry receives the same
expenditure share. Spending on each final good is normalised to unity:                          . Each
final good is produced using intermediate good lj as the only input, according to the
production function:               , with xij being the quantity of good j produced by the firm i
using a quantity li of intermediate input, ki the technological level of the firm i and γ captures
the size of the efficiency improvement steps              . In order to simplify the presentation,
the industry indices are omitted from now on.

Firms can move one technological step ahead at a Poisson hazard rate α by incurring a
cost        .5 Then catch-up occurs at an exogenous Poisson hazard rate of λ.6 We assume that
the largest possible gap between the leader and the follower is one technological step due to
knowledge externalities. If the leader innovates, the follower immediately climbs one step up
the quality ladder. Consequently, the leader has no incentive to keep innovating. Three types
of firms indexed by                 may therefore exist: followers             , leaders          , or
firms in a leveled industry             , meaning an industry in which all firms have the same
technological level. Firms compete in price. In a leveled industry profits should be equal to
zero, but we assume a degree of collusion             between firms, thus the total profit for the




4
   Along with these imperfections, our model differs principally from Aghion et al. (1997) by two
other assumptions. In Aghion et al. (1997) only two firms compete on each market and the catch-up
probability depends on the follower‟s effort. In our model the number of downstream firms is
endogenous but, in order to keep things tractable, the catch-up probability is exogenous.
                                                                                            α
5
    In order to have a positive equilibrium rate of efficiency improvements we assume:               ,
                                                                                            α
        α               α                    α                         α   α   α
                 α             ,    α                  and      α                    .
    α                  α                    α                              α

6
  In other words, the efficiency improvement of the leader is protected from catch-up for a period of
expectancy 1/λ.


                                                 8
industry is equal to   επ1, and each firm earns               .7 In an unleveled industry, a leader

maximizes its profit   π1 by applying a limit pricing rule, setting a price that makes the profit
π-1 of the followers equal to zero, thus grabbing all the expenditure share of its variety.

As already mentioned, the power of negotiation of the upstream suppliers distorts the
competition between the leader and the followers by introducing a price-cost gap for the input
good, which reduces the leader‟s profit:




The sequence of decisions is the following. At each instant some firms are exogenously
destroyed, at a Poisson hazard rate of δ, and others decide to enter in the downstream market,
according to the free-entry condition. The new entrants have to find a supplier of intermediate
inputs to be able to produce.8 Then these firms have to choose their optimal effort to increase
their technology. Finally, output and an input price are determined simultaneously, and then
the final goods are sold. The resolution of the model is recursive and is detailed in
Appendix 1. The main steps and results are presented below.


The steady state Bellman equations associated to each possible state: leveled J0, leader J1 and
follower J-1 can be expressed as:

                                                                                                   (1)

where r represents the discount rate.


Indeed, if we consider a firm in a leveled industry,

 with probability  , this firm innovates and become a leader,

 with probability  , another firm innovates (by symmetry   ( N  1) ), and



7
  We assume that ε is exogenous, even though it is likely that collusion would be increasingly hard to
achieve as the number of firms increase. Accounting for this effect would strengthen our conclusions.
8
  When catch-up happens, firms previously followers must also find a supplier of intermediate inputs
and they are impacted by the free-entry condition as the new entrants.


                                                  9
 with probability  , the firm is destroyed

Similarly,

                                                                                                  (2)

and

                                                                                                  (3)

as the technological leader is caught up by followers with probability λ and destroyed with
probability δ.

The downstream firms in a leveled industry choose the rate of efficiency improvements that
maximise their value:

                                                                                                  (4)



with                          is the risk of being overtaken in a leveled industry.


At the downstream firm optimum the marginal cost of efficiency improvements equals the
expected gains from the improvements. These gains, i.e. the incentives for efficiency
improvements, are growing with the level of competition downstream, as the profit in a
leveled industry is decreasing with the number of downstream producers. For a given number
of downstream producers, the incentives are also growing with the leader‟s profit.9

Firms enter the downstream markets until the value of a new entrant is higher than the
entry cost:



with V the value of a new entrant searching for a supplier of intermediate inputs.




9
  The incentives for efficiency improvements are also increasing with the risk of being overtaken in a
leveled industry. As this risk depends itself on the rate of efficiency improvements it could lead to
multiple equilibrium or corner solution. We assume that the cost of efficiency improvements increases
fast enough to avoid this possibility (see Appendix 1).


                                                 10
This free-entry condition –along with equations (1), (2) and (3)– determines the level of
competition on the downstream market, i.e. the number of firms:


                                                                                                   (5)


Equations (4) and (5) define the equilibrium values of the rate of efficiency improvements
and of the number of downstream producers. Whereas there is no explicit solution for the
last, the rate of efficiency improvements is given by the following equation:




where b/ρ is the expected cost of finding an intermediate input supplier.

The model has the following implications:10

    The number of downstream firms is inversely related to the expected cost (i.e. time) of
     finding an intermediate input supplier. In turn, stronger competition downstream
     increases the incentives to efficiency improvements by reducing profits in leveled
     industries, i.e. by increasing the gap between pre and post-innovation rents.

    The bargaining power of upstream firms reduces incentives to efficiency improvements
     because it decreases the leader‟s expected profit by distorting the competition
     with followers.

    It is natural to assume that, as competitive pressures increase in upstream markets, the
     bargaining power of intermediate goods suppliers and the expected cost for a
     downstream firm to find a supplier falls (because either the hazard rate or the search cost
     falls, or both).

     With easier access to suppliers and higher expected profits from becoming a leader,
     incentives to improve efficiency increase for downstream firms.


10
    Note that, since catch up by followers is assumed to be exogenous, the relationship between
competition and efficiency improvements is non-linear, as the effect is nil for followers and positive
for firms that are neck-and-neck. However, the model cannot yield the sort of inverted U-curve
highlighted in Aghion et al. (2005). This limitation of the innovation model however is not crucial for
the purposes of our analysis.


                                                  11
Therefore, the main prediction of the model is that weak upstream competition can curb
efficiency growth in downstream firms. The remainder of this paper is devoted to test this
prediction by means of an econometric specification that accounts for both this upstream
regulation-downward efficiency link and some of the other determinants of efficiency growth
already highlighted in the literature (the technological pass-through and the technological
catch-up). As explained later in detail, to this end we proxy efficiency with industry-level
MFP and lack of competitive pressures in upstream markets with the extent of industry-level
anti-competitive regulations. These are measured by the OECD indicators of sectoral barriers
to entry generated by product market policies. We further define as "upstream sectors" those
non-manufacturing sectors for which the OECD provides data on such barriers to entry and
we define as "downstream sectors" all sectors in the economy that source intermediate inputs
from such regulated sectors (including the regulated sectors themselves). The properties of
the specification tested in the empirical investigation and the data used in the empirical
analysis are described in the next two sections.




3.   THE ECONOMETRIC SPECIFICATION AND ITS LONG-TERM PROPERTIES

3.1 The econometric specification

Recent models of endogenous growth often include the feature that, with technology flows
unfettered across countries, productivity growth in follower countries or industries is a
positive function of growth at the world technological frontier and of the gap between this
frontier and the productivity level of the follower country or industry (e.g. Acemoglu et al.,
2006; Aghion and Howitt, 2006). In other words, countries and industries lagging behind the
technological frontier can enhance their productivity by adopting leading technologies
available on the market (the technological catch-up phenomenon). Thus, productivity growth
depends on both the ability to catch up and the ability to innovate, with the importance of the
latter increasing as the country or industry gets closer to the world frontier (Aghion and
Howitt, 1998, Ch. 8).11 According to this line of research, anticompetitive regulations




11
   Griffith et al. (2004) show, that follower countries that invest in R&D reap a double dividend: they
improve both their ability to innovate and their ability to incorporate frontier technologies into the
production process.


                                                  12
mainly influence the productivity of existing firms by altering the incentives to adopt the
leading technologies available in the market and innovate.12

Interestingly, in these models the aggregate impact of (domestic or foreign) competition on
productivity can be non-linear and depends on the characteristics of incumbent firms (e.g. on
the degree of firm heterogeneity). Two sets of effects influence the behaviour of productivity
in each market, the “escape competition” or “escape entry” effects on the one hand and the
Schumpeterian or “discouragement” effects on the other. The prevalence of one set of effects
over the other will affect the link between competition and productivity. In turn, this
prevalence is determined, among other things, by the average distance to frontier of firms in
the market. For instance, the positive “escape competition” or “escape entry” effects on
incumbents‟ efforts to improve productivity is likely to be stronger in markets where a large
proportion of firms is neck-and-neck and close to frontier than in markets where a large
proportion of firms have a wide technological gap to fill (Aghion et al., 2004; Aghion et al.,
2006b). Indeed, in markets dominated by firms that are far enough from the world frontier,
the Schumpeterian or discouragement effects due to an increase in competition can be strong
enough to deter any innovation activity. Therefore, anticompetitive regulations can have
differential aggregate effects on productivity in different countries and industries depending
on specific technological and market factors, such as the average position of firms relative to
frontier production techniques (Askenazy et al., 2008).

Our empirical analysis accounts for the different effects on productivity described so far. It
uses regulation data that are explicitly designed to account for the trickle down effects of
anticompetitive upstream regulations on the productivity performance of downstream sectors
and we use an econometric specification of productivity that allows for the effects of
regulation to depend on distance to the technological frontier. The empirical model also
allows for persistent heterogeneity in productivity levels and growth across countries and
industries, with productivity levels and growth in follower country-industry pairs driven by
developments at the global technology frontier. Productivity growth in follower
country-industry pairs is a function of both growth at the frontier and the catch-up to frontier
productivity levels. Hence, the model can be thought of as an empirical implementation of the
“neo-Schumpeterian” growth framework described above. It has been used extensively in


12
   The effects of competition through increased capital formation have been studied empirically by
Alesina et al. (2005).


                                               13
     recent empirical research on the determinants of productivity growth at both the firm level
     (e.g. Aghion et al., 2005) and industry level (Nicoletti and Scarpetta, 2003; Conway et al.,
     2006; Griffith et al., 2006).

     Multi-factor productivity for a given country-industry pair cs at time t (MFPcst) is modelled
     as an auto-regressive distributed lag ADL(1,1) process in which the level of MFP is co-
     integrated with the level of MFP of the frontier country-industry pair Fs. Formally,

     ln MFPcs ,t 0 ln MFPcs ,t 11 ln MFPFs ,t  2 ln MFPFs ,t 13 REGcs ,t 1 s  c,t  cs ,t (6)

     where MFPcs,t is the MFP level of a non-frontier country-industry pair cs, MFPFst is the MFP
     level at the technological frontier F for industry s at time t, REGcs,t is the indicator of the
     trickle down effects of anticompetitive upstream regulations in each sector/country/period
     triad, and γs , γc,t are sector and country-year fixed effects, respectively; εcs,t is a random error
     term. Under the assumption of long-run homogeneity (α0+ α1+ α2 = 1), the ADL(1,1) process
     in equation (6) has the following Error Correction Model (ECM) representation:

                                                MFP       
      ln MFPcs,t  1 ln MFPFs,t  1  0 ln   Fs,t1
                                                              3 REG cs,t1   s   c,t  cs,t
                                                MFPcs,t1 

     This ECM representation has many attractive statistical properties and a straightforward
   interpretation.13 Productivity growth of country-industry pair cs is expected to increase with
     productivity growth of the industry frontier Fs and with the country-industry pair distance
     from the industry frontier.14 The model implies heterogeneity in equilibrium MFP levels
     because the innovation potential of each country-industry pair is assumed to be only a
     fraction of the innovation potential at the frontier, and convergence to the frontier takes time.

     In keeping with the “neo-Schumpeterian” view of the effects of competition on productivity
     growth, our regressions also allow for a non-linear effect of anticompetitive upstream
     regulation on different country-industry pairs by interacting the regulation variable with
     distance to frontier. Therefore, the following regression model is the baseline specification in
     our empirical analysis:

     13
          See Hendry (1996) for the statistical properties of the ECM model.
     14
        Notice that, even though the ECM representation is estimated with MFP growth as the dependent
     variable, the underlying ADL(1,1) model is in productivity levels and not in growth rates because
     productivity growth at the industry frontier is not estimated (see Bond et al. 2003).


                                                        14
      ln MFPcs,t 1 ln MFPFs ,t 1  0 gapcs,t 13REGcs,t 14 REGcs,t 1  gapcs,t 1   s  c,t  cs,t   (7)

                                MFPFs ,t 
     where      gapcs ,t  ln            
                                                 is     the   country-industry        pair     distance     from      the
                                MFPcs , t 

     industry frontier.


     Throughout our analysis, the focus will be set on the total effects of anticompetitive upstream
     regulations, i.e. 3 + 4 gap. It should be stressed that if  3  0 and  4  0 regulation has
     negative effects on productivity growth that are increasing with distance to frontier, while if
      3  0 and  4  0 the negative effects decrease with distance to frontier. In other words, only
                                                       
     in the latter case results would be consistent with the neo-Schumpeterian view that lack of
     competition is more damaging for country-industry pairs that are close to frontier and that

     compete neck-and-neck with their global rivals.


     3.2 The long-term properties

     It is useful to analyse the steady-state properties of the empirical model. To do this, we first
     characterize MFP growth at the technological frontier. As gapFs,t = 0, we obtain via relation (7):

                                                         3                   s   F, t
                                 ln MFPFs, t                REG Fs, t 1 
                                                       1  1                  1  1

     At the technological frontier, MFP growth depends: (i) positively on the effects of the sector-
     specific (γs) and the country/time-specific (γF,t) technical progress ; (ii) negatively (if α3 < 0)

     on the effects of anti-competitive regulations in the upstream sectors (REGFs,t-1).


     At the steady-state, the distance to the technological frontier (gapcs,t-1), the anticompetitive

     regulations (REGFs,t-1), the effects of the technical progress (γs, γF,t), and the MFP growth (Δln

     MFPFs,t) are constant. Therefore, the steady-state distance to frontier for any follower country is:

                                         1
                   gap cs                             [ 3 (REG cs  REG Fs )  (  c   F )]                       (8)
                              (1   0   4 .REG cs )


     Thus, at the steady-state, the distance to the technological frontier (gapcs) is decreasing with
     the difference between the country and the frontier effect of the technical progress (γc - γF);

                                                               15
and increasing with the difference between the country and the frontier regulation level
(REGcs – REGFs).15

Relation (7) indicates that MFP growth is increasing with the distance to the technological
frontier (gapcs,t-1) under the assumptions of footnote 15. Hence, if from a steady-state
situation a random shock moves the MFP of a country/sector and alters the distance to the
technological frontier, this distance will consequently converge to its equilibrium value
expressed by relation (8).




4.   DATA

In order to investigate empirically we need data on: the extent of anti-competitive regulation
in a sub-set of industries that we define as "upstream"; the importance of these industries as
suppliers of intermediate inputs; and multifactor productivity (MFP). Merging different
sources we were able to assemble a cleaned unbalanced panel of 4629 observations for 15
countries and 20 industries over the 1984-2007 period.16 The data sources and specific
calculations are presented below.

4.1 Product market regulation

Empirical research on the effects of competition on productivity has used a variety of
approaches to measure competitive pressures. These include indicators of market structure
and/or market power, survey-based assessments of the business environment and indicators
of product market policies. The measures used in this paper try to address three major issues:
minimize endogeneity bias, account for the trickle down effects of competitive pressures in
upstream industries on downstream industries and provide a link with policies that
affect competition.




15
    Assuming that the distance to frontier has a positive impact on MFP growth and the effect of
anticompetitive regulation on MFP growth is negative and decreases with the distance to frontier (0 <
α0 < 1, α3 < 0 and α4 > 0).
16
   The cleaning method is presented in Appendix 2. As MFP growth at the technological frontier is an
explanatory variable it cannot be used also as a dependent variable. Observations for the country-
sector frontier are, therefore, excluded from the estimation sample in each period.


                                                 16
Addressing the endogeneity of competition measures has been one of the main empirical
challenges in trying to identify the impact of competition on innovation or productivity
outcomes. Traditional indicators of product market conditions, such as mark-ups or industry
concentration indices, can hardly be treated as exogenous determinants of economic
outcomes.17 Entry of new (possibly foreign) firms is also most likely not exogenous to
productivity outcomes. Moreover, research shows that some widely-used indicators of market
structure or market power are not univocally related to product market competition.18 Finally,
these indicators fail to provide a direct link to policy or regulation.

To address these concerns, the empirical analysis reported in the next section is based on
some of the potential policy determinants of competition, rather than on direct measures of it.
Griffith et al. (2006) and Aghion et al. (2006) have recently taken a similar approach.
However, while they focus on EU data on anti-monopoly cases and the implementation of the
Single Market Programme, we use indicators of product market regulations drawn from the
OECD international product market regulation database.19 Moreover, we focus on regulation
in non-manufacturing industries and on the trickle down effects of inappropriate regulations
in these industries on all sectors of the economy.20 The non-manufacturing sector is
undoubtedly the most regulated and sheltered part of the economy, while few explicit barriers
to competition remain in markets for manufactured goods of OECD economies. Moreover, as
suggested by our theoretical model even low-regulated industries can suffer from regulation-
induced market power and inefficiencies in non-manufacturing because all industries are
heavy intermediate consumers of non-manufacturing inputs.



17
    Amongst the very few cross-country studies that explore the role of competition for productivity,
Cheung and Garcia Pascual, (2001) use mark-ups and concentration indexes. At the single-country
level, Nickell (1996), Nickell et al. (1997), Blundell et al. (1999) and Disney et al. (2000) use a
variety of market indicators to capture competitive pressures. The potential problem of endogeneity of
market shares and mark-ups is even more serious at firm-level as firms that have high productivity
may gain market shares and enjoy innovation rents. Additional problems specific to market shares and
concentration indices are that they depend on precise definitions of geographic and product markets
(i.e. the relevant market where competition unfolds) and tend to neglect potential as well as
international competition.
18
  Boone (2000a, 2000b) suggests that there may be a hump-shaped relationship between competition
and mark-ups. Some authors have addressed this issue by using related indicators of relative profits
and profit persistence (Creusen et al., 2006; Greenhalgh and Rogers, 2006).
19
     The data are publicly available at www.oecd.org/eco/pmr.
20
   For similar approaches see Faini et al. (2006), Conway et al. (2006) and Barone and Cingano
(2008).


                                                  17
a) Non manufacturing regulation indicators

The OECD indicators of non-manufacturing regulation measure to what extent competition
and firm choices are restricted where there are no a priori reasons for government
interference, or where regulatory goals could plausibly be achieved by less coercive means.
They are based on detailed information on laws, rules and market and industry settings and
cover energy (gas and electricity), transport (rail, road and air) and communication (post,
fixed and cellular telecommunications), retail distribution and professional services, with
country and time coverage varying across industries. In addition this study uses the indicator
of restrictions to competition in banking constructed by de Serres et al. (2006).

The main advantages of using these indicators in empirical analysis is that they can be held to
be exogenous to productivity developments and that they are directly related to underlying
policies, a feature that measures of competition based on market outcomes and business
survey data do not have.21 Another advantage is that, as they are composite constructs based
on detailed information about policies, they address multicollinearity problems in estimation.
At the same time, they make it possible to focus on the specific aspects of policies that are
thought to be relevant for productivity. Yet another advantage of the OECD indicators is that
they vary over countries, industries and time, though full time variability is limited to a subset
of non-manufacturing industries.22

Figure 1 shows the evolution of non-manufacturing regulation over time as well as their
variability over the country-industry dimension. The box plot suggests relatively low time
variability over the 1975-1985 period, with a marked downward trend and increased
variability over the subsequent period. The cross-country dispersion is narrower at the
beginning and end of period, while it increases over the 1985-2003 period. By contrast,
variability in the country and industry dimensions remains relatively wide throughout the
sample period. Relatively restrictive regulations prevailed at beginning of period in most

21
    Of course, endogeneity cannot be completely ruled out with these indicators if, for instance,
policies are affected by productivity outcomes through political economy channels. On the relative
advantages of policy-based and survey-based composite indicators see Nicoletti and Pryor (2005).
22
   Indicators for energy, transport and communication cover 30 OECD countries over the 1975-2007
period; the indicators for retail distribution and professional services cover 30 OECD countries for
1998, 2003 and 2007; the indicator for banking covers 30 OECD countries for 2003. As a result,
while in the cross-section dimension the indicators cover most of the regulated sectors and countries,
time variability of the indicators originates mostly in policy changes in the energy, transport and
communication sectors.


                                                 18
countries and industries; a movement towards de-regulation started at the beginning of the
80s, but at different paces in different countries and industries; and a marked convergence in
policies characterized the end of period.

b) Regulatory burden indicators

Using the data on upstream non-manufacturing regulation, we construct indicators of the
trickle down effects of such regulation for 20 sectors that use the outputs of these non-
manufacturing industries as intermediate inputs. For brevity, these indicators will henceforth
be called “regulatory burden” (or REG) indicators. In each country c, we compute them for
the 1984-2007 period, using information from input-output tables in the following way (see
appendix 2 for details):


                REGckt   NMRcjt  wcjk                             0  wcjk  1
                              j


where the variable NMRcjt is an indicator of anti-competitive regulation in non-

manufacturing sector j at time t and the weight wcjk is the total input requirement of sector k
for intermediate inputs from non-manufacturing sector j. All indicators take continuous
values on a scale going from least to most restrictive of private governance and
competition.23 In order to illustrate how product market reforms change the values of the
regulatory burden indicators, a „best practice‟ indicator is defined for each sector and year
corresponding to a situation in which non-manufacturing regulations are set at the average of
the three most liberal countries in the sample. This best practice benchmark is later used to
perform simple simulations of the estimated effects of product market reforms on MFP.


To minimize endogeneity issues and measurement error, the indicators of regulatory burden
used in empirical analysis are based on the 2000 US input-output table (i.e. we set
wcjk = wUSjk for any c). As a result, the empirical specification is a variant of the
difference-in-difference approach in which, inter alia, we identify the effects of regulation on
productivity using the variability in the intensity of use of regulated intermediate inputs
across downstream sectors. Ideally, to fully control for endogeneity, the input-output table

23
   Conway and Nicoletti (2006) provide a detailed description of the indicators of non-manufacturing
regulation and the corresponding indicators of “regulatory burden”; Appendix 2 illustrates their main
features.


                                                 19
should come from a country not included in the sample and without any anti-competitive
regulation in non manufacturing sectors. The sensitivity analysis shows that estimation results
are robust to the exclusion of US from the sample or the use of the input-output table of the
UK, a country missing from our sample and where regulation is estimated to be close to best
practice in many non manufacturing sectors (see Appendix 3).


Figure 2 shows the sample average by country of the regulatory burden indicators in 1985,
2000 and 2007 as well as the 2000 and 2007 industry average, and corresponding best
practice. The changes over-time reflect the history of non-manufacturing regulation and de-
regulation in the countries covered by the sample. In spite of the convergence in policies at
the end of the period important cross-country differences remain in 2007. A switch to best
practice corresponds to a pervasive and important easing of anticompetitive regulations in
every non-manufacturing sector covered in our data set. It is therefore an extreme example of
structural policy reform.

4.2 Productivity

We measure industry-level efficiency improvements and distance to frontier by means of a
multifactor productivity (MFP) index. Using OECD industry statistics we construct MFP
measures for 15 OECD countries and 20 sectors over the period 1984-2007.

MFP growth is calculated as follow:

              ln MFPcs ,t   ln VAcs ,t   s *  ln Lcs ,t  1   s  *  ln Kcs ,t

where VA is value added in constant price, α the output elasticity of labour, approximated by
the labour share on value added, L total employment, in number of persons, and K the net
capital stock in constant price. 24 Data on value added and total employment come from the
STAN database for industrial analysis, net capital stock from the OECD Productivity
database by industry (PDBi). 25



24
   Ideally MFP should be calculated using data on hours worked and capital services. However, at the
time of writing comprehensive cross-country data on hours worked and capital services were only
available for the aggregate economy and estimates of MFP at lower levels of aggregation must be
computed using total employment and capital stocks.
25
    The construction of the PDBi net capital stocks series is described in Appendix 2 and more
information are available in the “PDBi Methodological Notes”.


                                                 20
The index of distance to frontier (gap) depends on MFP levels. These levels are calculated for
a base year (2000) and then extended over the sample period using data on MFP growth. To
ensure comparability across countries, value added and capital stock are converted into prices
denominated in a common currency using OECD aggregate purchasing power parities
(PPP)26 and a common labour share is used, i.e. the industry specific average share over all
countries and periods. Estimates are robust to the choice of country or year specific labour
shares and to the use of industry specific PPPs for value added (see Appendix 3).27 Another
comparability issue is raised by the value added prices of the “Electrical and optical
equipment” industry, which include communication and computing equipment. In this
industry, US prices are not comparable with others because of the extensive use of the
hedonic method, with an important impact on estimations. We therefore replaced US hedonic
prices in this industry by total manufacturing value added prices (see Appendix 3 for details).

Figure 3 shows the cross-country/cross-industry dispersion of the resulting MFP estimates in
selected years. It suggests that variability has been wide over the sample period. On the
whole, the leading country MFP has been 1.55 times higher than the median MFP. This
median ratio is stable over time, with dispersion around it shrinking over the 1990-1995 and
2003-2007 periods.




5.   EMPIRICAL RESULTS

Table 1 presents OLS regression results for different specifications of our regression model.
Column 1 reports results omitting the interaction between the gap and the regulatory burden
indicator, while column 2 is the estimate of our baseline equation (7) including the interaction
term. The last two columns report results from the same equation splitting the sample into
two sub periods To better compare specifications and always interpret the coefficient on each

26
    Although this implies the assumption of identical comparative price levels across industries, van
Biesebroeck (2004) finds that, overall, aggregate PPPs perform as well as sectoral PPPs, where
performance is measured as the correlation with sectoral deflators. For some service sectors aggregate
PPPs are found to perform better than sectoral PPPs, while for some manufacturing sectors sectoral
PPPs perform marginally better (see Appendix 3). In view of this, using aggregate PPPs seems a
reasonable approximation, at least for the set of advanced countries in our sample, where shifts in
relative prices across sectors are not extreme over the period covered by the analysis.
27
   Industry specific PPPs for value added are calculated from the EUKLEMS industry database of
PPPs on gross output as well as the input-output tables and PPPs on input from OECD, according to
Inklaar et al. (2008).


                                                 21
variable as the mean effect on MFP growth (even in the presence of the interaction term), the
technology-gap variable and the indicator of regulatory burden are centred on the sample
mean.28 To reduce omitted variable bias and control for idiosyncratic country-wide factors,
we always include industry and country-time fixed effects. For example, country-time fixed
effects account for (possibly time-varying) country-specific characteristics of labour or
financial markets, while industry effects account for (time invariant) structural differences in
technology or skills across industries.

In our sensitivity analysis we checked for the presence of specific industries, countries or
years that would influence significantly the overall results. This could reflect, for instance,
different technological features or simply measurement errors. We also estimated the same
equations using different definitions of MFP and estimates of the regulatory burden indicators
based on different sets of input-output tables. On the whole, the results presented in Table 1
are robust to these changes in the sample and definition of variables (see Appendix 3 for
more details).

Our empirical specification of MFP is corroborated by the data. MFP growth in the
productivity leader of the industry is always found to have a positive and highly significant
influence on productivity growth in less productive countries and sectors, indicating a
significant rate of technological pass-through. In addition, the coefficient of the technology-gap
variable is estimated to be positive and significant in all specifications, suggesting that, within
each industry, countries that are further behind the technological frontier experience higher
rates of productivity growth. In other words, catch-up is found to play an important role as a
driver of productivity growth, consistent with previous empirical research in this area.

Turning to our main result, the indicator of regulatory burden is found to curb MFP growth
and increasingly so the closer MFP is to the technological frontier. When estimated at its
mean, our regulatory burden indicator seems to have no significant effect on downstream
productivity growth. However, taking into account its indirect influence through the rate of
technological catch up, this lack of significance appears to come mainly from a composition
effect. Regressions including the interaction term indeed show that the burden of
anticompetitive regulation in upstream sectors has a significant effect on MFP growth

28
     If the variables were not centred, the coefficient on the regulatory burden indicator would
correspond – when the interaction term is present –to the effect of regulation at the frontier (i.e. when
the technology-gap is null).


                                                   22
downstream (as reflected by the tests of joint significance). Moreover, since the coefficient of
the interaction term is generally positive and significant (4>0), the depressing effect of anti-
competitive    upstream     regulation   on    MFP     growth    is   significantly   stronger   for
country/sector/period triads that operate close to the technological frontier of our sample.

The estimated effects of anticompetitive upstream regulation, as measured by the indicator of
regulatory burden, are consistent with the implications of our neo-Schumpeterian model of
the effects of upstream competitive pressures on downstream productivity performance.
When regulation restricts competition in sectors that supply intermediate inputs, the
incentives to improve efficiency are weaker in downstream sectors the more intensively these
sectors use the regulated products. This is because access to intermediate suppliers is limited
and the expected (temporary) rents from improving MFP are likely to be (at least partially)
captured by market power in upstream sectors. Consistently, our estimates show that
anticompetitive regulation in upstream sectors curbs MFP growth downstream. Moreover,
these effects are non linear and are strongest for observations that are close to the global
technological frontier. In other words, the “escape competition” effect dominates close to the
frontier whereas this effect is weakened by a “discouragement” effect far from the frontier
consistent with Aghion and Howitt (2006).29

Interestingly, regulatory burdens appear to have played an increasingly damaging role for
MFP over time, with the strongest damage being observed over the most recent period.
Indeed, when the sample is split into two sub-periods (Table 1, columns 3 and 4) the share of
observations whose MFP growth suffers from anticompetitive regulation in upstream sectors
is estimated to increase substantially over time. Indeed, while the average impact of the
regulatory burden indicator is estimated to be positive and non-significant in the 1985-94
period, it becomes negative and significant over the period 1995-2007. At the same time, the
attenuating effect of the gap on the MFP impact of regulatory burdens is more than halved in
the most recent period.




29
   Near the technological frontier small MFP improvements (through innovation or other means) can
generate large returns from getting temporarily ahead of neck-and-neck rivals. For instance, close to
frontier an innovator may be able to create a new variety and enjoy temporary market power on the
market for the new product. Such returns cannot be expected far from frontier, where only substantial
improvements can give a temporary advantage on competitors. Thus upstream rigidities lower
incentives to improve efficiency at the frontier to a larger extent than far from frontier.


                                                 23
Figure 4 illustrates these results graphically. It plots the impact of our indicator of regulatory
burden on MFP growth against the level of the technology-gap (we show values of the gap
expressed in both log-differences and percentage MFP ratios). As this effect depends on the
level of regulation, we represent this relationship for three regulatory settings in non-
manufacturing industries corresponding to the first, fifth and last deciles of the distribution of
our indicator of regulatory burden. The slope of these “isoregulation” lines flattens out as
regulation becomes more precompetitive (the line coincides with the horizontal axis when
there are no anticompetitive regulations at all). Panel A illustrates results for the whole
sample period, while panels B and C illustrate those for the two subperiods. On the whole
sample, the regulatory burden from upstream sectors curbs productivity downstream for more
than 85% of the observations (and curbs it significantly for about 50% of the observations).
The effect of regulation becomes positive only for a relatively small share of the
observations,30 whose MFP levels are less than half those of the technology leader, roughly
corresponding to the last decile of the distribution of MFP gaps in our sample. Measured at
the average gap (64% of MFP of the technology leader) and average level of regulation (a
value of 0.15 for our regulatory burden indicator), the effect of increasing competition in
upstream sectors by instantaneously eliminating all anticompetitive regulations is to increase
MFP growth by over 1 per cent per year. The results from splitting the sample into two sub-
periods translate graphically into a substantial flattening of the relationship between the
impact of regulation on MFP growth and the technology gap at each level of the regulatory
burden (Figure 4, Panels B and C). In other words, while regulation could have had a positive
effect on MFP for a large part of the sample (63%) over the first sub-period (but significantly
so for only 17% of the observations), it has had a negative effects for virtually all
observations (99%) and significantly so for 73% of the observations over the 1995-07 period.
During this period, an easing of regulatory burdens from their average level (0.14) to zero
(i.e. by eliminating all anticompetitive regulations in upstream sectors) would have increased
MFP growth of a country with an average MFP ratio of 65% by up to 1.7 percentage points
per year. It should be stressed that these estimated effects are purely illustrative as they would
correspond to radical and sudden changes in regulatory settings that are unlikely to be
politically implementable in practice. More realistic simulation scenarios are described in the
next section.



30
     This effect is significantly positive for only 3% of the sample.


                                                     24
The increasingly negative impact of regulation on MFP growth over time needs to be
investigated further, but one interpretation is related to two sources of structural change
affecting the global economy during this period: globalisation and the diffusion of new
technologies. With increased integration of the world economy in the context of the diffusion
of new technologies, competition has become tougher downstream and ICT adoption and the
corresponding reorganization of production processes have become more compelling for
maintaining market shares. At the same time, new entry by innovative firms has become a
more important source of productivity improvements. Thus, the erosion of returns from
efficiency improvements by regulated upstream sectors is increasingly more damaging for
incentives to enhance productivity, and possible barriers to entry generated by regulation in
upstream sectors are increasingly reflected in a drag on industry-level productivity
performance. It is important to note that these different effects of regulation depending on the
period studied, should not be understood as coming from different levels of development as
the effects appear to change over time at each given level of technological gap. They
therefore necessarily originate from structural changes in the global economy.

Both our baseline estimates of the MFP growth equation and our empirical findings
concerning the effects of upstream regulation are considerably robust to changes in data
coverage and variable definitions. The main sensitivity checks included (i) dropping sectors
or countries one by one, (ii) basing computation of the REG indicator on the I-O matrix of a
different country (or country-specific I-O matrices) and (iii) changing assumptions in the
construction of the MFP index. Variants in MFP construction included applying sectoral
instead of national PPPs and using different measures for the labour share. We also adjusted
the MFP index for possible bias in the computation of productivity originating from cross-
country differences in employment rates and working time (Bourlès and Cette, 2007) and
replicated most of the results using labour productivity growth as the dependent variable.
Finally, we checked robustness to changes in the definition of prices in the “electrical and
optical equipment” (ISIC 30-33) sector, where changes in quality were particularly important
over the estimation period. Annex 3 reports detailed results obtained through these robustness
analyses. Overall, the size and significance of coefficient estimates are not much affected.31



31
   One exception is when using sector-specific output prices for the 30-33 sector in the US, in which
case the interaction term loses significance and the negative effects of upstream regulation become
linear. Since this is likely to reflect the extensive use of hedonic pricing only in this country, the
baseline estimation uses instead global manufacturing output prices in this sector for the US. In any

                                                 25
6.   ESTIMATED IMPACT ON MFP GROWTH OF EASING REGULATION
     IN UPSTREAM SECTORS

To further illustrate the influence of regulatory burdens on MFP performance, we propose a
calculation of the MFP gains in the non-farm business sector from adopting, in the year 2000,
the best practice regulation which was observed in upstream sectors in 2007. As already
mentioned, for the purposes of this exercise best practice is defined, in each upstream sector,
as the average of the three lowest levels of regulation observed among the countries in the
dataset (global best practice corresponding to best practice in all upstream sectors). Figure 5
(Panel A) suggests that, in 2000, the degree of anticompetitive regulation in upstream sectors
differed considerably among countries. Regulation was friendliest to competition in Sweden,
Australia, the Netherlands and the United States, while it was most restrictive in France,
Austria, Italy and Greece, with cross-country differences originating mainly from transport
(ISIC 60-63) and utilities (ISIC 40-41) sectors. Seven years later (Panel B), cross-country
differences persisted despite some convergence, with Denmark, Sweden, the Netherlands and
Australia now being the four countries where regulation was friendliest to competition and
France, Italy, Austria and Greece continuing to be the most restrictive. From 2000 to 2007,
easing of anticompetitive regulations was widespread in the utility sectors and in post and
telecommunications (ISIC 64), with remaining differences across countries in 2007
concentrated essentially in the regulation of transport, business services (ISIC 71-74) and
wholesale and retail trade (ISIC 50-52). The gap with our measure of global best practice
remained sizeable in all countries over the whole period, though it declined over time.

To calculate the potential productivity gains from adopting best practice regulations, we use
estimates of equation (3) above as reported in the last column of Table 1 (i.e. the estimates
over the 1995-2007 period). In these calculations, the indicator of regulatory burden (REG) is
based on domestic input-output matrix, so as to take into account the differences across
countries in the intensity of downstream intermediate consumption of products from
regulated upstream sectors. Each country-sector-year MFP is projected dynamically: the MFP
impact of deregulation results from the initial decrease in the indicator of regulatory burden
obtained by adopting best practice regulations in upstream sectors and on the subsequent

case, results remain unchanged if the relevant US observations are dropped from the dataset or if the
US hedonic price index is used to deflate output in the 30-33 sector in all countries.

                                                 26
reductions in distance to frontier (gap) that this initial policy shock sets off over the
projection period.32 Figure 6 shows that the annual MFP gains are generally decreasing over
the years, with a peak in 2001.33 The subsequent decline in annual gains reflects the declining
catch-up effect on MFP, as well as, to a smaller extent, the reduction of the regulatory
burdens during the 2000-2006 period in the baseline situation (see figures 2 and 5). These
annual gains vary largely across countries, but are in average quite significant. In 2007, as
shown in Figure 7, Panel A, the simulated MFP gains (in the non-farm business sector) from
reforms that were assumed to be made in 2000 are very high, ranging from around 3 to
around 13 percentage points depending on the country. Looking at the impact of adopting
best practices in each upstream sector, the highest productivity gains originate from reforms
in retail trade and the professional services, while the lowest gains are obtained from
adopting best practices in financial intermediation and communication, where the country
regulatory practices were already closer in year 2000. As can be seen in Figure 7, Panel B, the
simulated differences in MFP gains resulting from aligning regulation best practice
simultaneously in all upstream sectors rather than adopting them one by one in each of the
upstream sectors are minor.34

The cross-country differences in the simulated MFP gains reflect four factors: (i) the excess
regulatory burden relative to best practice in each upstream sector, (ii) the initial distance to
frontier of productivity in downstream sectors, (iii) the intensity of intermediate consumption
of products from regulated upstream sectors, and (iv) the sectoral composition effect due to
the different importance of sector value added in the various countries. Table 2 presents an
estimation of the separate contributions of each of these four factors in the different countries
relatively to their contributions in the USA taken as the benchmark.35 It informs us on the

32
    For this calculation a measurement of the gap in MFP in each country-sector-year triad is
necessary. Since our dataset is unbalanced due to some missing data points for capital stocks, the
missing gaps in MFP were estimated in the following way: (i) gaps in MFP, when they were
available, were regressed on labour productivity gaps and (ii) the missing gaps in MFP were estimated
using these regression results and the labour productivity gaps, which are available for all country-
sector-year triads in our sample. The regression was carried out by OLS, with fixed effects for years,
sectors and countries (R²=0.60).
33
  No gains are obtained in 2000, since we assume in the model that regulations have an impact on
MFP growth with a one year lag.
34
    These differences come from the fact that adopting the best practice in one upstream sector
modifies distance to frontier (the MFP gap) in the following years, which modifies the MFP gains
obtained by adopting the best practice in other upstream sectors.
35
   See footnote to Table 2 for a detailed explanation of how these contributions are defined and
assessed.

                                                 27
underlying contribution of the adoption of upstream sector best practices (NMR in column 3)
independently of their overall amplification or attenuation effects due to the country
differences in TFP and industrial structure (in column 4), and it decomposes the latter into the
three components arising respectively from differences in TFP (GAP in column 5), in
upstream sector intermediate consumption (Domestic Input-Output Table in column 6), and
in sector value–added (VA in column 7). Interestingly it appears that the magnitude of the
contribution of adopting NMR best practices is in average larger that of overall
“transmission” effects (1.7% versus 0.8%) and for all countries except two (Australia and
Belgium). However, the smaller magnitude of the transmission effects results from
compensation between the TFP gap effects and the intermediate consumption composition
effects: the first are all negative and in average of -1.8%, while the second are all positive
with the exception of Greece and in average of 2.0%. The value added composition effects
are generally much smaller, of 0.5% in average.




7.   CONCLUSION

Regulations that bridle access to otherwise competitive markets and unnecessarily constrain
business operation can be a drag on productivity growth. While most analyses of this issue
have focused on the effects of these regulations on the productivity of the firms or sectors
directly concerned, the main point of this paper is that such regulations can also have
powerful indirect depressing effects on the productivity of other sectors through input-output
linkages. We modelled the main channels through which these effects may happen
–reduced access to key intermediate inputs and rent-seeking by intermediate input providers
that reduces incentives to improve productivity downstream. We then tested the existence and
estimated the magnitude of such effects on a sectoral panel of OECD countries over the last
two decades. Although our empirical productivity specification cannot distinguish among the
various channels at work, we find that differences in regulation of non-manufacturing sectors
providing intermediate inputs are indeed quite relevant in explaining the variance of
multifactor productivity growth rates in our sample, with upstream regulation curbing such
growth rates significantly in a large share of observations. Moreover, we showed that the
closer MFP is to the technological frontier the higher is the estimated negative impact of
upstream regulation on productivity growth. Interestingly, the estimated negative impact has
increased over time in concomitance with deepening globalization and diffusion of ICT.


                                              28
The need to find ways to boost GDP growth is particularly important in the recovery from the
current recession. The implementation of structural reforms aiming at decreasing
anticompetitive regulations may be one of them. As suggested in this paper, the MFP gains
obtained from such reforms could improve significantly potential output growth, thereby also
facilitating the adjustment of public finances, which have suffered from the crisis and the
ensuing recovery plans. The simulations we have performed show that all countries could
expect important MFP growth gains from structural reforms that consist of adopting best
regulation practices in sectors that are important providers of intermediate inputs to the
economy. However, these MFP growth gains are different across countries. The differences
stem from four factors: (i) the excess regulatory burden relative to best practice in upstream
sectors, (ii) the intensity of linkages between upstream and downstream sectors, (iii) the
weight of sectors in the economy (iv) and the distance of productivity in those sectors to the
global productivity frontier. The larger the excess regulatory burden, the higher the
intermediate consumption of regulated products, the greater the sectoral composition effect,
and the smaller the distance to the productivity frontier, the stronger the gains in productivity
from aligning regulations in upstream sectors with best international practice.

More work needs to be done to check the economic and statistical significance of our
econometric results. Although they appear rather robust, our results should be qualified on at
least two grounds. The illustrative simulations we consider are of course extremely drastic:
adopting the “best practices” in all upstream sectors over a short period (here one year) would
be an ambitious and unrealistic policy! Anticompetitive regulations on product markets could
be influenced by other variables that affect sectoral productivity and which are omitted in our
analysis. It is thus not unlikely that our estimates do not correspond only to the impact of
changes on MFP growth in upstream product market regulations, but that they may also
reflect the changes of these other variables. The econometric soundness of our results thus
needs to be confirmed by further investigation, and the economic mechanisms underlying
them have to be much better understood. In particular, it would be desirable to better identify
statistically the channels through which upstream regulation affects productivity such as
those highlighted in our illustrative theoretical model.

Progress to bridge better and more precisely the gap between our results and policy
implications could be made in the two interrelated dimensions of data and empirical and
theoretical modeling. The data dimension is perhaps the most important. In this paper we



                                               29
have taken advantage of the updated OECD data base of regulation indicators, and we can
expect further progress from such source of information, in particular as its coverage is
extended, as well as by careful comparison with other existing data bases and sources of
relevant information. As concerns modeling, more detailed research, ranging from
econometric analysis to case studies, investigating the various channels through which
specific regulations affect firm behavior is necessary. As our results suggest a clear link
between regulation and productivity over the past 15 years, focusing on the consequences of
ICT diffusion in the context of worldwide globalization, and exploring what could be the
aftermath of the current economic crisis, would also be essential to deepen our economic
understanding of this link.




                                            30
REFERENCES



Acemoglu, D., P. Aghion and F. Zilibotti (2006): “Distance to Frontier, Selection and
Economic Growth”, Journal of the European Economic Association, Vol. 4(1), p. 37-74.
Aghion, P., P. Askenazy, G. Cette, N. Dromel and R. Bourlès (2009): “Education, market
rigidities and growth”, Economics Letters, Vol. 102(1), p. 62-65.
Aghion, P., N. Bloom, R. Blundell, R. Griffith and P. Howitt (2005): “Competition and
Innovation: An Inverted U Relationship”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, May, p. 701-728.
Aghion, P., R. Blundell, R. Griffith, P. Howitt, and S. Prantl (2006a): “The Effects of
Entry on Incumbent Innovation and Productivity”, CEPR Discussion Paper No. 5323.
Aghion, P., R. Blundell, R. Griffith, P. Howitt, and S. Prantl (2004): "Entry and
Productivity Growth: Evidence From Microlevel Panel Data." Journal of the European
Economic Association, April-May, 2(2-3). p. 265-276.
Aghion, P., R. Burgess, S. Redding and F. Zilibotti (2006b): “The Unequal Effects of
Liberalization: Evidence from Dismantling the License Raj in India”, CEPR Discussion
Paper No. 5492.
Aghion, P. and R. Griffith (2005): “Competition and Growth”, the MIT Press, Cambridge,
Massachusetts.
Aghion, P., C. Harris, P. Howitt and J. Vickers (1997): “Competition and Growth with
Step-by-Step Innovation: An Example”, European Economic Review, Papers and
Proceedings, 771-782.
Aghion, P., C. Harris, P. Howitt and J. Vickers (2001): “Competition, Imitation and
Growth with Step-by-Step Innovation”, Review of Economic Studies, 68, 467-492.
Aghion, P. and P. Howitt (1992): “A Model of Growth through Creative Destruction”,
Econometrica, vol. 60(2), p. 323-351.
Aghion, P. and P. Howitt (1998): “Endogeneous Growth Theory”, Cambridge, Mass. The
MIT Press.
Aghion, P. and P. Howitt (2006): “Joseph Schumpeter Lecture: Appropriate Policy Growth:
A Unifying Framework”, Journal of the European Economic Association 4, No. 2-3,
p. 269-314.




                                             31
Aghion, P. and M. Schankerman (2004): “On the Welfare Effects and Political Economy of
Competition-Enhancing Policies”, Economic Journal, 114, p. 804-834.
Alesina, A., S. Ardagna, G. Nicoletti and F. Schiantarelli (2005): "Regulation and
Investment", Journal of the European Economic Association, Vol. 3, No. 4 (June),
p. 791-825.
Allegra, E., M. Forni, M. Grillo and L. Magnani (2004): “Antitrust Policy and National
Growth: Some Evidence from Italy”, Giornale degli Economisti e Annali di Economia, Vol.
63 (1), p. 69-86.
Arnold, J., B. Javorcik and A. Mattoo (2006): “Does Services Liberalization Benefit
Manufacturing Firms?,” CEPR Discussion Papers No. 5902.
Askenazy P., C. Cahn and D. Irac (2008): "Competition, R&D and the Cost of Innovation",
PSE Working Papers 2008-32, PSE (Ecole normale supérieure).
Barone G. and F. Cingano (2008): “Service regulation and growth: evidence from OECD
countries”, Temi di discussione (Economic working papers) 675, Bank of Italy, Economic
Research Department.
Bernard, A., J. Eaton, J.B. Jensen and S. Kortum (2003): "Plans and Productivity in
International Trade", American Economic Review, 93(04), p. 1268-1290.
Blundell, R., R. Griffith and J. Van Reenen (1999): “Market Share, Market Value and
Innovation in a Panel of British Manufacturing Firms”, Review of Economic Studies, 66,
p. 529-554.
Bond, S., J. Elston, J. Mairesse and B. Mulkay (2003): “Financial Factors and Investment
in Belgium, France, Germany, and the United Kingdom: A Comparison Using Company
Panel Data”, The Review of Economics and Statistics, 85(1), p. 153-165.
Boone, J. (2000a): “Competition”, Center Discussion Paper No. 2000-104, Tilburg
University, Netherlands, October.
Boone, J. (2000b): “Competitive Pressure: The Effects on Investments in Product and
Process Innovation”, RAND Journal of Economics, Vol. 31, No. 3, p. 549-569.
Bourlès, R. and G. Cette (2005): “A comparison of structural productivity in the major
industrialized countries”, OECD Economics Studies, N° 41, p. 75-107.
Bourlès, R. and G. Cette (2007): “Trends in “structural” productivity levels in the major
industrialized countries”, Economics Letters, Vol. 95(1), p. 151-156.



                                              32
Buccirossi, P., L. Ciari, T. Duso, G. Spagnolo and C. Vitale (2009): ”Competition Policy
and Productivity Growth: An Empirical Assessment”, CEPR Discussion Papers No. 7470.
Cheung, W. and A. Garcia Pascual (2001): “Market Structure, Technology Spillovers, and
Persistence in Productivity Differentials”, CESifo Working Paper series No. 517.
Conway, P. and G. Nicoletti (2006): “Product Market Regulation in the Non-Manufacturing
Sectors of OECD Countries: Measurement and Highlights”, OECD Economics Department
Working Papers No. 530.
Conway, P., D. de Rosa, G. Nicoletti and F. Steiner (2006): "Product Market Regulation
and Productivity Convergence", OECD Economic Studies No. 43: 39-76.
Crafts, N. (2006): "Regulation and Productivity Performance", Oxford Review of Economic
Policy 22, No. 2, p. 186-202.
Creusen, H., B. Minne, H. van der Wiel, (2006): “Measuring competition in the
Netherlands, A comparison of indicators over the period 1993-2001”, CPB Memorandum
163.
De Serres, A., S. Kobayakawa, T. Slok and L. Vartia (2006): "Regulation of Financial
Systems and Economic Growth in OECD Countries: An Empirical Analysis", OECD
Economic Studies No. 43: 77-113.
Disney, R., J. Haskel and Y. Heden (2000): “Restructuring and Productivity Growth in UK
Manufacturing”, CEPR Discussion Papers: 2463.
Faini, R., G. Barba Navaretti, J. Haskel, C. Scarpa and C. Wey (2006): “Contrasting
Europe‟s Decline: Do Product Market Reforms Help?”, in T. Boeri, M. Castanheira, R. Faini
and V. Galasso (eds.) Structural Reforms Without Prejudices, Oxford University Press,
Oxford.
Forlani, E. (2010): “Competition in the Service Sector and the Performances of
Manufacturing Firms: Does Liberalization Matter?”, CESifo Working Paper series No. 2942.
Geroski, P. (1995a): “What do we know about entry?”, International Journal of Industrial
Organization, Vol. 13, p. 421-440.
Geroski, P. (1995b): “Market Structure, Corporate Performance and Innovative Activity”,
Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Greenhalgh, C. and M. Rogers (2006): “The value of innovation: The interaction of
competition, R&D and IP”, Research Policy, vol. 35(4), p. 562-580.



                                             33
Griffith, R. and R. Harrison (2004): “The Link Between Product Market Reform and
Macro-Economic Performance”, Economic Paper No. 209, European Commission.
Griffith, R., R. Harrison and H. Simpson (2006): “Product Market Reform and Innovation
in the EU”, CEPR Discussion Papers 5849.
Griffith, R., S. Redding and J. van Reenen (2004): “Mapping the Two Faces of R&D:
Productivity Growth in a Panel of OECD Countries”, The Review of Economics and
Statistics, Nov., 86(4): 883-895.
Griffith, R., S. Redding and H. Simpson (2002): “Productivity Convergence and Foreign
Ownership at the Establishment level”, CEPR Discussion Paper No. 3765.
Grossman, G., and E. Helpman (1991): “Quality Ladders in the Theory of Growth”,
Review of Economic Studies 58, No. 1: 43-61.
Haskel, J., S. Pereira and M. Slaughter (2007): “Does Inward Foreign Direct Investment
Boost the Productivity of Domestic Firms?”, Review of Economics and Statistics 89, No. 3:
482-496.
Hendry, D.F. (1996): “Typologies of Linear Dynamic Systems and Models”, Journal of
Statistical Planning and Inference, 49, p. 177-201.
Inklaar, R., M. Timmer and B. van Ark (2008): “Market Services Productivity across
Europe and the US”, Economic Policy, Vol. 23, No. 53, p. 139-194, January.
Lopez, J. (2010): Ph. D Dissertation, mimeo.
Melitz, M. (2003): “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate
Industry Productivity”, Econometrica, vol. 71(6), p. 1695-1725.
Melitz, M. and G. Ottaviano (2008): “Market Size, Trade, and Productivity”, Review of
Economic Studies 75, Issue 1.
Nickell, S. (1996): “Competition and Corporate Performance”, Journal of Political Economy,
104, 724-746.
Nickell, S., D. Nicolitsas and N. Dryden (1997): “What Makes Firms Perform Well?”,
European Economic Review, 41.
Nicoletti, G. and F. Pryor (2006): “Subjective and Objective Measures of Governmental
Regulations in OECD Nations”, Journal of Economic Behaviour and Organization, 59, No.3,
p.433-449.
Nicoletti, G. and S. Scarpetta (2003): “Regulation, Productivity and Growth”, Economic
Policy, Vol. 36, p. 11-72.

                                               34
Nicoletti, G. and S. Scarpetta (2006): “Regulation and Economic Performance: Product
Market Reforms and Productivity in the OECD”, in Institutions, Development, and Economic
Growth (T. Eicher and C. Garcia-Peñalosa eds.), MIT Press.
Parente, S.L. and E.C. Prescott (1994): “Barriers to Technology Adoption and
Development”, Journal of Political Economy 102, No. 2: 298-321.
Parente, S.L. and E.C. Prescott (1999): “Monopoly Rights: A Barrier to Riches”, American
Economic Review 89, No. 5: 1216-1233.
Restuccia, D. and R. Rogerson (2007): “Policy Distortions and Aggregate Productivity with
Heterogeneous Plants”, National Bureau of Economic Research, NBER Working Papers:
13018.
Romer, P. (1990): “Endogenous Technological Change”, Journal of Political Economy, 98,
No. 5: S71-02.
Schiantarelli, F. (2005): “Product Market Regulation and Macroeconomic Performance:
A Review of Cross Country Evidence”, IZA Discussion Papers ,1791.
Van Biesebroeck, J. (2004): “Cross-country Conversion Factors for Sectoral Productivity
Comparisons”, NBER Working Papers, 10279.




                                            35
                                         APPENDIX 1
                                THE THEORETICAL MODEL


This appendix –drawn from Lopez (2010)– summarizes the theoretical model presented in
section 2.


Preferences and technology


We consider an economy composed of a unit mass of identical consumers. Each consumer
has an instantaneous utility function:                     . xj being consumption of final good
from industry j. Because of the logarithmic utility function each industry receives the same
expenditure share. Spending on each final good is normalised to unity, then the inverse
demand function is:                . Each final good is produced using an intermediate good as
the only input, according to a production function linear on input:                , xij being the
quantity of good j produced by the firm i using a quantity li of intermediate input, ki the
technological level of the firm i and γ captures the size of the efficiency improvement steps
        . Final good producers (henceforth called downstream firms) can move one
technological step ahead at a Poisson hazard rate α, by incurring a cost         , and we assume
that this step is the largest gap that can separate the leader from followers due to knowledge
externalities. Consequently three types of firms, indexed by                             , exist:
followers           , leaders        , or firms in a leveled industry        .


Market imperfections and price setting rules


Firms compete in price. In an unleveled industry, a leader maximizes its profit π1 by applying
a limit pricing rule, setting a price that make the profit π-1 of the follower equal to zero, thus
grabbing all the expenditure share of its variety. In a leveled industry profits should be equal
to zero, but we assume a degree of collusion          between firms, thus the total profit for the
industry is equal to επ1, and each firm earns                   . Thus, the leader‟s profit also
determines the instantaneous profit flows for each type of firm. To calculate it we need to
define the intermediate input prices and leader‟s optimal output price. Intermediate input
suppliers (henceforth called upstream firms) are assumed to operate in an imperfectly
competitive market. As a result, finding a supplier of intermediate input, which is a necessary


                                               36
requirement to start producing, involves a Poisson hazard rate of ρ < 1. Such market
imperfections translate into a certain degree β of market power when upstream firms set input
prices, which reflects the impossibility for downstream producers to instantaneously replace
one supplier with another. Thus, the input price             is fixed above the (constant) marginal
cost c of producing intermediate inputs li. It is an outcome of a bargaining between upstream
and downstream firms on the total rent Ri:




The intermediate input price is increasing with the bargaining power of upstream firms, the
unit profit of the downstream firm             , and the marginal cost of input production.


The downstream output price in an unleveled industry is determined by the price setting rule
of the leader (i = 1): it sets a price that makes the profit of the follower (i = -1) equal to zero.
Given consumer demand, the downstream firm production function and the input price
setting formula, the downstream output price p is: 36




The output price of a downstream firm is increasing with the marginal cost of producing the
intermediate input and decreasing with the technological level k of the industry and the size γ
of the efficiency improvement steps.


Given the input and output prices the leader‟s profit is:


                                                                                                     (1)


This profit is growing with the size of the efficiency improvement steps and decreasing with
the power of negotiation of the upstream suppliers. It is worth noticing that it is independent
of the input production marginal cost. Indeed, the power of negotiation of the upstream
36
     In order to simplify the presentation, industry indices for some variables are dropped from now on.


                                                    37
suppliers distorts competition between leaders and followers, making the input price depend
on the profit of the firm, whereas the marginal cost of inputs is the same for all firms.


Model solution and comparative statics


The steady state Bellman equations associated to each possible state (leveled, leader,
follower) can be expressed as:
                                                                                               (2)

                                                                                               (3)

                                                                                               (4)

with r the discount rate, α the Poisson hazard rate of efficiency improvements,        the hazard
rate that another firm innovate, δ the exogenous rate of firm destruction,             the cost of
efficiency improvements and λ the rate of catch-up.37


The downstream firms in a leveled industry choose the rate of efficiency improvements, or
equivalently the level of spending needed for expecting such improvements, in order to
maximize their value. From equation (2) the first order condition of the producer
maximization program implies:



                                                                                               (5)



In words, at the downstream firm optimum the marginal cost of efficiency improvements
equals the expected gains from innovating. The second order condition is satisfied given our
assumption on the shape of the cost function:




37
   In Aghion et al. (2005) only two firms compete on each market and the catch-up probability
depends on the follower‟s effort. In our model the number of downstream firms is endogenous but, in
order to keep things tractable, the catch-up probability is exogenous.


                                                38
The optimal rate of efficiency improvements can be derived as follows. From equations (2)
and (4) we get:

                                                                                           (6)



with                       representing the risk to be overtaken by another innovator.


Then, from equations (3) and (6), the expected gains from efficiency improvements are:



                                                                                           (7)



Therefore, incentives for efficiency improvements are growing with the leader‟s profit and
the level of competition downstream, as the profit in a leveled industry is decreasing with
competition. The incentives are also increasing with the risk to be overtaken in a
leveled industry.


Finally, from equations (5) and (7), the optimal rate of efficiency improvements is defined by
the following equality:




Short run


To solve the model it is worth noticing that, from equations (3) and (5), the optimal rate of
efficiency improvements, for a given number of firms, can be determined by the function:



                                                                                           (8)



with the value of a firm in a leveled industry stemming from equations (6) and (7):



                                                                                           (9)


                                              39
We can use equation (8) to study the existence and uniqueness of the equilibrium efficiency
improvements rate, for any given number of downstream firms. To this end we first find
conditions for monotony of the Φ(α*, N) function:




The sign of this derivative is not straightforward. The marginal cost of improvements is
increasing with the rate of improvements, but the expected gains from improvements are also
increasing. Indeed, through the risk to be overtaken Ω, the rate of efficiency improvements
has a negative externality effect on the value of a firm in a leveled industry. If the expected
gains from improvements increase more than its marginal costs the equation Φ                 is
growing with the rate of efficiency improvements and the equilibrium rate could be infinite.
In the following, we assume that the acceleration in the cost of efficiency improvements

       is stronger than the externality effect. Under this condition the function            is

strictly decreasing with the rate of efficiency improvements.


Second, we study the limits of the Φ(α*, N) function:




                                              40
Therefore, for any given number of downstream producers, under some assumptions on the
cost function of efficiency improvements, the function           is strictly decreasing with the
rate of efficiency improvements and defines a unique finite equilibrium efficiency
improvements rate.


We then turn to the comparative statics of the model for a given number of downstream
producers.


a. The effect of the rate of efficiency improvements on the value of a firm in a leveled
industry is:




At the producer optimum the private effect of an increase in the rate of efficiency
improvements is equal to zero, but there is an externality effect due to the impact of the rate
of efficiency improvements on the risk to be overtaken by other innovators (Ω):




 The value of a firm in a leveled industry decreases with the rate of efficiency
    improvements, for a given number of downstream producers, because of the
    corresponding increase in the risk to be overtaken.




                                              41
b. The effect of the bargaining power of upstream firms on the value of a firm in a leveled
industry, for a given number of firms and rate of efficiency improvements is:




 As the bargaining power of upstream firms has a negative effect on the profits
    of downstream firms, it also has a negative impact on the value of a firm in a
    leveled industry.


c. Finally, the effect of the bargaining power of upstream producers on the optimal efficiency
improvements rate is:


                                                                                         (10)




                                                                                         (11)




 For a given number of downstream producers, the optimal rate of efficiency
    improvements is decreasing with the power of negotiation of the upstream firms.




                                             42
Long run


The endogenous number of downstream producers is defined by the following condition:


                                                                                          (12)


with V the value of a firm searching for a supplier of intermediate inputs, ρ the Poisson
hazard rate to find one and b the searching cost.


As the search for an intermediate input supplier is time consuming it reduces access to the
downstream market. The equilibrium number of downstream producers and rate of efficiency
improvements are given by the system composed by equations (12), (8) and (9). The long-run
rate of efficiency improvements solution to this system is:




 The rate of optimal efficiency improvements is growing with the hazard rate to find an
    intermediate input supplier and declining with the search cost.


 The bargaining power of upstream firms has a negative effect of the equilibrium optimal
    rate of efficiency improvements.


The following points a, b, c and d describe how short and long run properties of the model
interact to lead to this reduced equation and to the corresponding implications.


a. The effect of the number of downstream producers on the value of a firm in a leveled
industry, for a given rate of efficiency improvements is:




                                               43
 Increasing the number of downstream producers has two negative effects on the value of a
    firm in a leveled industry: it decreases the profit of these firms and increases the risk
    to be overtaken.


b. The effect of the number of downstream producers on the rate of optimal efficiency
improvements is:




 Increasing the number of downstream producers has two positive effects on the optimal
    efficiency improvements rate. First, the profit of a firm in a leveled sector decreases,
    because it has to share the rent with more downstream producers. Second, the risk of
    being overtaken also increases.


c. The effects of the hazard rate of finding an intermediate input supplier and of the
corresponding search cost on the optimal rate of efficiency improvements can be inferred as
follows. We know that the value of a firm in a leveled industry decreases with the number of
competitors:




                                             44
But, from the free entry condition (12), we also know that the number of firms decreases with
the searching cost b and increases with the hazard rate ρ to find a supplier of intermediate
input. Moreover, the rate of optimal efficiency improvements is increasing with the number
of downstream producers.


 Therefore, the rate of optimal efficiency improvements is growing with the hazard rate to
    find an intermediate input supplier and declining with the search cost.


d. The effect of the bargaining power of upstream firms on the optimal rate of efficiency
improvements is:




The impact of the bargaining power of upstream firms on the optimal efficiency
improvements rate works through the effect on the number of downstream producers. This




                                              45
effect is negative only under certain conditions, 38 but these conditions are not necessary for
signing the effects of bargaining power on the rate of efficiency improvements.


 The bargaining power of upstream firms has a negative effect of the equilibrium optimal
     rate of efficiency improvements.




38
    The bargaining power of upstream firms has contrasting effects on the number of downstream
firms:




As we have already seen,                 ,             and            , then, for a given number of
firms, the bargaining power of upstream firms has two contrasting effects on the value of a firm in a
leveled industry: for a given rate of efficiency improvements it decreases the value of a firm, but it
decreases also the rate of efficiency improvements thereby increasing the value of a firm.

We can show that the negative impact overcomes the positive effect if, and only if:




This condition is stronger than the one needed to have a unique finite equilibrium. However this
condition isn‟t necessary to determine the impact of the bargaining power of upstream firms on the
optimal efficiency improvements rate.


                                                  46
                                         APPENDIX 2
                                   DATA DESCRIPTION


Product market indicators


a. The OECD indicators of non-manufacturing regulation


The overarching criterion on which this paper surveys and assesses regulations is their effect
on competition where competition is viable. Each of the OECD sectoral indicators reflects
regulations that curb efficiency-enhancing competition, whereas regulations in areas in which
competition would not lead to efficient outcomes (e.g. natural monopolies) are not
considered. This approach yields indicators that are well-focused and account for the
different technological characteristics of sectors. At the same time, the indicators are silent on
the quality of regulation according to criteria other than competition or the extent to which
regulations achieve non-economic policy goals.


By and large, all the indicators are constructed in a similar way. They cover information in
four main areas: state control, barriers to entry, involvement in business operations and, in
some cases, market structure. The information summarised by the indicators is “objective”, as
opposed to survey-based, and consists of rules, regulations and market conditions. All of
these regulatory data are vetted by OECD Member country officials and/or OECD experts.
The indicators are calculated using a bottom-up approach in which the regulatory data are
quantified using an appropriate scoring algorithm and then aggregated into summary
indicators by sector of activity in each of the four areas or across them. While this approach
involves a degree of discretion, notably in choosing scores and aggregation weights, it has the
merit of transparency and makes it possible to trace each indicator value to the underlying
detailed information about policies and market conditions.


The resulting indicators of non-manufacturing regulation cover energy (gas and electricity),
transport   (rail,   road   and   air)   and   communication      (post,   fixed   and    cellular
telecommunications) over the 1975-2007 period, and retail distribution and professional
services for 1998 and 2003 in 30 OECD countries. These indicators are used to derive
‟regulatory burden‟ indicators of the trickle down effects of anti-competitive regulation in


                                               47
these sectors (plus the finance sector) on sectors that use the outputs of these sectors as
intermediate inputs. All indicators are updated on a regular basis and their values as well as
background documentation are publicly available at www.oecd.org/eco/pmr (see Conway and
Nicoletti, 2006).


b. Measuring the effects of anti-competitive non-manufacturing regulation on downstream
     industries: the ‘regulatory burden’ indicators


The trickle down effects of non-manufacturing regulation are likely to have become
particularly salient over recent years given the large and increasingly important role of the
non-manufacturing sector as a supplier of intermediate inputs in OECD countries. For
example, on average across countries for which (harmonised) input-output data exist, in the
late 1990s almost 80% of the output of the business services sector was used as an
intermediate input in the production processes of other sectors in the economy. Similarly,
between 50 and 70 % of the output of the finance, electricity, and post and telecoms sectors is
destined to be used as intermediate inputs to the production process. In addition, the
importance of non-manufacturing sectors as a source of intermediate inputs has been growing
rapidly over recent decades, along with the rest of the services sector. For example, Kongsrud
and Wanner (2005) report that the service sector now accounts for roughly 70% of all jobs
and value-added in the OECD area, which is more than 5 percentage points higher than
in 1990.


In any given country the magnitude of the effects of non-manufacturing regulation on the
economy will be a reflection of two factors:


    the extent of anti-competitive regulation in non-manufacturing sectors, and


    the importance of these sectors as suppliers of intermediate inputs.


The first of these factors is captured by the OECD indicators of regulation in non-
manufacturing sectors;39 the second factor is measured using total input coefficients derived

38
   As mentioned above, an indicator of anti-competitive regulation in the finance sector – described in
detail in de Serres et al. (2006) – is also used as part of the analysis of anti-competitive regulation in
non-manufacturing and the calculation of the regulatory burden indicators.


                                                   48
from (harmonised) input-output tables, which provide a snapshot view of the purchases and
sales of intermediate inputs between different sectors in a given year.40


Using total input-output coefficients, the regulatory burden indicators (REG) are calculated as
follows in each country:41



                    REG kt   NMR jt  w jk                                0  w jk  1
                                  j




where the variable NMRjt is an indicator of anti-competitive regulation in non-manufacturing

sector j at time t and the weight wjk is the total input requirement of sector k for intermediate

inputs from non-manufacturing sector j. The (harmonised) input-output data for OECD

countries, and therefore the wjk, exist at the 2-digit (ISIC rev3) level, implying that the NMR
must also be calculated at this level of sectoral aggregation. Accordingly, the NMR indicators
are mapped into the ISIC system as shown in figure A2.1. If more than one of the NMR
indicators map into a given 2-digit ISIC sector then NMRjt is calculated as a simple average
of the constituent indicators. Finally REG is normalized on [0;1] over the study sample.


Where k=j in the above formula, wjj is the total input requirement for the sector‟s own
output. In this paper, we focus on the indirect effect of regulation in upstream sectors on
sectors downstream. Therefore, the „regulatory burden‟ indicators used in empirical analysis
are constructed under the constraint wjj=0 for any j. In other words, we ignore both the



39
   Total input coefficients are calculated as follows. If Y is a vector of industry gross outputs, D a
vector of demand for final goods, and A a matrix of technical coefficients – that is, the share of inputs
from industry j used in producing one unit of output of industry k – then the basic relation between
output and final demand can be expressed as:
                               D=(I-A)Y,     or alternatively, Y=(I-A)-1D
In this equation (I-A)-1 is the Inverse Leontief Matrix of the input-output coefficients and describes
how many units of an industry‟s output have to be produced at any stage of the value chain in order to
produce one unit for final demand.
40
    This technique for calculating the regulatory burden indicators is a variant of that used by Faini et
al. (2006). Total input-output coefficients have also been used by Allegra et al. (2004) to derive the
impact on export-oriented sectors of economic activities that are problematic from the point of view
of antitrust law.


                                                   49
impact of regulation in sector j originating from consumption of intermediate inputs produced
by the same sector and the direct impact of the sector‟s regulation on productivity outcomes.
The „regulatory burden‟ indicators are calculated in this way for 20 (ISIC rev3) sectors in the
15 OECD countries covered by our sample over the period 1984 to 2007. It should be noted
that, in the formula, NMRjt is equal to either the indicators for energy, transport and
communication industries, for which complete time-series data are available, or the indicators
for the other sectors (retail trade, professional services and finance), which have been
estimated for only 2003 (finance) or 1998, 2003 and 2007 (retail trade and professional
services). For the purpose of computing the „regulatory burden‟ indicators, regulation for
retail and professional services was kept constant at its 1998 value. Given the limited time
variability of regulation in these sectors (Figure 1), this is a relatively weak assumption. In
any case, it is important to keep in mind that, due to data limitations, the variability of the
„regulatory burden‟ indicators in the time dimension reflects changes in the regulation of the
energy, transport and communication sectors.


Productivity


MFP measures and distance to frontier indices are derived from data on value added, total
employment and net capital stock contained in OECD industry databases. Net capital stocks
in the Productivity database by industry (PDBi) are computed with the Permanent Inventory
Method (PIM) on a single asset, assuming geometric rates of depreciation and investment
taking place in mid-period. PDBi made available net capital stock series using four different
assumptions to compute the initial capital stock. In this study the initial capital stock is
estimated for the year 1984 by the cumulative depreciated past investment, using the long-run
growth rate of investment volume. 42


As discussed in the text the panel is cleaned. Observations with TFP growth over +/- 50% are
excluded from the sample (48 observations) as well as observations with MFP more than 20
times smaller than the MFP of the leading country (18 observations). Mistaken changes in the
variables gap and „leader MFP growth‟ occur when the leading country enter or exit of the
sample because of data availability. In order to take into account of this issue, all


41
   A full presentation of the data and methods used to calculate the net capital stocks is available in
the “PDBi Methodological Notes”.


                                                  50
observations before the entrance or after the exit of the leading country are excluded from the
sample, when the concerned years are few (64 observations). When, on the contrary, the data
availability of this leading country is scarce, the variables gap and „leader MFP growth‟ are
calculated using MFP of the first follower, assuming that this second country is a good
approximation of the first, and the leading country is excluded from the sample
(73 observations).


Finally a cleaned unbalanced panel of 4,629 observations from 15 countries and 20 industries
on 1984-2005 is available for the estimations. The 15 countries are: Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Italy, Netherlands, Norway,
Spain, Sweden and United-States. See figure A2.2 for the industry list.




                                              51
                                         APPENDIX 3
                   ANALYSIS OF ROBUSTNESS AND SIGNIFICANCE


The robustness of the estimations has been tested on several counts: the estimation period; the
country coverage; the sector coverage; the input-output matrix used to calculate the
regulatory burden indicators; the price measurement of the output of „electrical and optical
equipment‟ (30-33); the type of PPP adjustment; and the measurement of MFP. We have also
estimated the same model using labour productivity (LP) as a dependent variable. This
appendix focuses on the 1995-2007 period. The conclusions of the sensitivity analysis are
broadly the same over the whole period (1985-2007).


Estimation period


The estimation of equation (7) has been carried out on a moving 15-year time window (see
Table A3-1). The increasing impact (in absolute terms) of regulations and the decreasing
impact of the gap show up progressively over time. In parallel, the impact of the interaction
term decreases progressively. These developments are most apparent when the last years of
the 1980s are excluded and the first years of the 2000s are included in the dataset. This
observation gives some support to the idea discussed above that the change in results over
time is due to increased integration of the world economy in the context of the diffusion of
new technologies.


Country coverage


The estimation of equation (7) has been carried out by dropping one country at a time in
order to check that estimation results are not driven by the inclusion of any particular country
(see Table A3-2). The results are quite robust to these changes in coverage, which affect
neither the sign of the coefficients nor their significance. More precisely, we observe that: (i)
the MFP frontier growth and the gap coefficients experience only marginal changes; (ii) the
coefficient of REG and the interaction term between REG and gap are within a one standard-
deviation interval except in two cases, Austria for REG and Greece for the interaction term,
for which the coefficient is higher. Our main results could therefore be seen as lower
bound estimates.



                                               52
Sector coverage


The estimation of equation (7) has been carried out by dropping one sector at a time in order
to check that estimation results are not driven by the inclusion of any particular sector (see
Table A3-3). The results are again quite robust. Changes in sector coverage affect neither the
sign of the coefficients nor their significance. More precisely, we observe that: (i)
The MFP frontier growth coefficient decreases by more than 20% only when the sector
„electrical and optical equipment‟ (30-33) is dropped; (ii) The gap coefficient experiences
only marginal changes; (iii) the coefficients of REG and of the interaction term between
REG and gap sometimes change by more than 20% but remain always within a one standard-
deviation interval.


Input-output matrices used to calculate the regulatory burden indicators


Choice of the US input-output matrix in the baseline estimations was motivated by the wish
to minimize: (i) measurement error biases, supposing that the US matrix is estimated more
precisely than in other countries; (ii) endogeneity biases, the technical coefficients of
national input-output matrices being potentially influenced by the degree of regulation.
Ideally, one would want to use the input-output table from a country not included in the
estimation sample and without any anticompetitive regulation in non manufacturing sectors.
While strictly speaking such a country does not exist, the United-Kingdom is a second best
choice as its regulations are close to best practice in many sectors. We therefore re-
estimated our specification with the „regulatory burden‟ indicators calculated using the UK
input-output table. We also extended the robustness check to estimations using country-
specific input-output tables. Finally, we estimated our baseline equation (with the US table)
but excluding US observations. The results are remarkably robust to these changes
(see Table A3-4). The coefficients experience only marginal changes when the domestic
input-output matrices are used. The coefficients change more, especially the one of REG
and, to a lesser extent, the one of the interaction term between REG and gap, when the UK
input-output matrix is used. But the changes never affect the sign of the coefficients and
affect only slightly the estimation precision.




                                                 53
Price measurement of the output of ‘electrical and optical equipment’ (30-33)


In the baseline estimation, the output price index used for the US „electrical and optical
equipment‟ (30-33) sector is the global manufacturing output price. This choice has been
made because hedonic methods for building the output price index for this sector are more
common in the US than in other countries, which could have important implications for the
estimates given the larger correction for improved quality in only one country. We observe
that the results change marginally if the US are excluded from the dataset or if the US
relative price of the sector „electrical and optical equipment‟ (30-33) is used as the output
price index for all countries (see Table A3-5). However, if the US index price of the
„electrical and optical equipment‟ (30-33) sector is used only for the US MFP calculation,
we observe some impact: the coefficient of the interaction term between REG and gap
decreases (in absolute terms).


PPP adjustment


In the baseline estimation, the PPP adjustment is realized for each country with a national
level PPP index (provided by the OECD) for the volume MFP level calculation. An
alternative choice is to use sector-specific PPPs. In principle this choice would be more
appropriate but, in practice sector-specific indices suffer from more serious measurement
error, with the consequent estimation bias risks. We have tried this alternative, using the
Inklaar and Timmer (2008) method for constructing sector-specific PPP indices for each
country as follows:


            lnPPP _ Pcs   cs . lnPPP _ VAcs   1  cs . ln PPP _ II cs 


where PPP_P are the PPPs on gross output from the EUKLEMS industry database,

cs  cs  USs  / 2 with  cs the ratio of value added to gross output in current price,
from the STAN database, PPP_VA the PPPs for value added and PPP_II the PPPs for
intermediate inputs, computed using input-output tables and PPPs for inputs from OECD
input-output databases.




                                             54
Compared to the baseline estimation, the average impact of the regulatory burden indicator
does not change sensibly, but the coefficient estimates of the gap and of its interaction with
the regulatory burden indicator decrease.(see Table A3-6). As this may reflect more
measurement bias than in the baseline estimation, we have decided to report results using the
national level PPP indices.


MFP measurement


Due to decreasing returns at the extensive and intensive margins of labour utilization, the
elasticities of productivity to working time and to the employment rate are negative (see
Bourlès and Cette, 2005, 2007). In each country*sector, MFP growth may partly capture
changes in the working time and in the employment rate, and the distance of the MFP level to
the frontier (gap) may also be partly reflect differences in these factors. To account for this
                                                                           43
possibility, we used the elasticity estimates of Aghion et al. (2009)           and the gaps with the
US in working time and employment rates to calculate for each country*sector*year, a
“structural” MFP level, defined as the one that would be observed if, at any moment, the
working time and the employment rate were the same as in the US. We then estimated
equation (3) using these “structural” MFP measures instead of our baseline MFP variable.
Compared to the baseline estimation, the coefficient estimates decrease (in absolute terms),
except for the coefficient of REG (see Table A3-6). As this may reflect more measurement
bias we decided to report results using the standard MFP measures.


To calculate MFP, different assumptions can also be made concerning the labour share in
value added. In the baseline estimation, this share is sector-specific, and is calculated for each
sector by taking the average of the labour share over all countries and years in the dataset.
Estimation of equation (3) has also been made using four other measures of the labour share.
These four alternative measures are described in Table A3-7. Results are quite robust to using
these different measures.




43
     These elasticities come from the estimates of Aghion et al. (2009).


                                                    55
Productivity measurement: Labour productivity (LP) or MFP


Equation (7) has also been estimated using labour productivity (LP) instead of MFP as a
measure of productivity. The various specifications tested are shown in Table A3-8. From a
qualitative point of view, when all available observations are used results are very similar to
our baseline MFP estimates (compare columns 1 and 6). However, the precision of the
coefficient estimates of the gap and its interaction with the regulatory burden
indicator decreases.




                                              56
                                       GRAPHS



Figure 1: Non manufacturing regulation trends and cross-country dispersion
(scale 0-6 from least to most restrictive of competition)

A. Regulation in energy, transport and communication1, 1975-2007




B. Regulation in retail trade, professional services and banking, 2003




                                           57
Figure 2: Variability of the ‘regulatory burden’ indicators and ‘best practice’
(scale 0-1 from least to most restrictive)

A. Sample average by country in 1985, 2000 and 2007




B. Sample average by industry in 2000 and 2007




Sectors : Cf. Figure A2.2




                                           58
Figure 3: MFP growth and level, trends and cross country-industry dispersion

A. Average MFP growth over time and cross country-industry dispersion




B. Ratio of the leading country MFP to the MFP of its followers, trends
   and cross country-industry dispersion




                                          59
Figure 4: Regulation impact on MFP growth, 1985-2007, 85-94 and 95-07 estimates1

A. Regulation impact on MFP growth, 1985-2007 estimates




B. Regulation impact on MFP growth, 1985-1994 estimates




                                         60
C. Regulation impact on MFP growth, 1995-2007 estimates




The impact of the regulatory burden on MFP growth depends of the country-industry pair
distance from the industry frontier. This effect is introduced through the variable gap, which
is the logarithm of the ratio of the industry MFP leader to the MFP of its followers. The
quartiles as well as the first and last deciles of this variable are indicated on the figures (the
corresponding percentage ratios of follower MFP to frontier MFP are in brackets).
The first and last deciles of the regulatory burden indicator (REG) are also put on the figures,
so the quadrangle included between these deciles and the ones of gap represent around 60%
of the sample.




                                               61
Figure 5: Anticompetitive regulations levels in the upstream sectors in 2000 and 2007
(all sectoral indicators have a 0-6 range from least to most restrictive)

A. Anticompetitive regulations levels in the upstream sectors - 2000
   30

   25

   20                                                                         71-74

                                                                              65-67
   15
                                                                              64
   10                                                                         60-63
                                                                              50-52
    5
                                                                              40-41
    0




B. Anticompetitive regulations levels in the upstream sectors – 2007
   30

   25
                                                                               71-74
   20
                                                                               65-67
   15                                                                          64

   10                                                                          60-63

                                                                               50-52
    5
                                                                               40-41
    0




Sectors : 40-41 : Electricity, Gas and Water Supply ; 50-52 : Wholesale and Retail Trade,
Repairs ; 60-63 : Transport and Storage ; 64 : Post and Telecommunications ; 65-67 :
Financial Intermediation ; 71-74 : Renting of Material and Equipment and Other
Business Activity.

                                           62
Figure 6: Simulation of annual gains in MFP growth in selected countries
from adopting in 2000 the best practice observed in 2007 in the upstream sectors

  2,5%


  2,0%


  1,5%


  1,0%


  0,5%


  0,0%
     2000       2001             2002      2003        2004      2005            2006   2007

                       Belgium          Germany        Denmark          France
                       Italy            Netherlands    Spain            Sweden




                                                  63
Figure 7: Simulation of MFP gains in the non-farm business sector in 2007
from adopting in 2000 the best practice observed in 2007 in the upstream sectors

A. Decomposition of the MFP gains in 2007 by upstream sectors




Sectors : 40-41 : Electricity, Gas and Water Supply ; 50-52 : Wholesale and Retail Trade,
Repairs ; 60-63 : Transport and Storage ; 64 : Post and Telecommunications ; 65-67 :
Financial Intermediation ; 71-74 : Renting of Material and Equipment and Other
Business Activity.

B. MFP gains in 2007 – Alternative and simultaneous reforms
14%

12%

10%

 8%

 6%

 4%

 2%

 0%




                       Alternative reforms        Simultaneous reforms



                                             64
Table 1: Main estimation results
Dependent variable: Growth in multi-factor productivity (MFP)


                                                          1985-2007          1985-2007            1985-1994           1995-2007
Change in M FP in the technology leader t                  0.113***          0.114***               0.065*            0.122***
                                                            [0.016]           [0.016]               [0.033]             [0.019]
Gap in M FP levels t-1                                    0.037***           0.041***             0.065***            0.032***
                                                            [0.003]           [0.004]               [0.006]             [0.005]
Regulatory burden' indicators t-1                           -0,064             -0,067                0,044             -0.124**
                                                            [0.048]           [0.047]               [0.091]             [0.062]
Effect of gap on the regulation impact t-1                                   0.240***              0.375***             0.132**
                                                                              [0.040]               [0.064]             [0.054]
Fixed effects :
Time * Country                                     Yes                           Yes                          Yes
Industry                                           Yes                           Yes                          Yes
Tests of joint significance (p-values):
gap -1=REG -1=gap -1 * REG -1=0                                                 0,000               0,000               0,000
REG -1=gap -1 * REG -1=0                                                        0,000               0,000               0,011
Test of equality across both periods (p-values):
joint for gap-1, REG-1 and gap-1 * REG-1                                                                      0,000
Ratio M FP F on M FP above which REG -1 has a positive impact
Ratio                                                                         2.123***            1.425***             4.115*
Proportion of the sample above this threshold                                  13,22%              63,10%              1,40%
Observations                                      4629                          4629                1691                2938
R-squared                                         0,25                           0,25                         0,27
Standard errors in brackets. * Significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.



                                                                               65
     Table 2: Simulation of MFP gains in the non-farm business sector in 2007 from
      adopting in 2000 the best practice observed in 2007 in the upstream sectors:
          Decomposition into the effects of the four main underlying factors*


                                                                Originating from differences in:
                 Total MFP        Relative                     Industrial
   Country                                                                              Domestic
                 gains (1)        to US (2)    NMR (3)         structure   GAP (5)                    VA (7)
                                                                                      I-O Table (6)
                                                              and TFP (4)
Sweden             3.66%           -1.4%        -1.83%            0.44%    -0.44%         0.63%        0.25%
Netherlands        3.63%          -1.43%        -1.76%            0.33%    -0.79%        0.94%         0.18%
Denmark            2.91%          -2.15%        -1.18%           -0.96%     -1.3%        0.29%         0.05%
Australia           5.6%           0.54%        -0.73%            1.27%    -0.87%         1.83%        0.31%
USA                5.06%           0.00%        0.00%            0.00%      0.00%        0.00%         0.00%
Finland             6.2%           1.14%         0.45%             0.7%    -2.15%         2,00%        0.85%
Germany            8.37%           3.31%         1.16%            2.15%    -1.84%         3.51%        0.48%
Canada             8.34%           3.28%         1.92%            1.36%    -1.04%         1.87%        0.53%
Belgium           12.78%           7.72%         2.42%            5.31%     -2.4%         6.72%        0.99%
Spain              8.77%           3.71%         2.63%            1.09%    -2.59%         2.31%        1.37%
Norway             9.94%           4.88%         2.75%            2.13%    -1.73%         4.31%       -0.45%
France             7,00%           1.94%         3.48%           -1.54%    -1.71%         0.13%        0.04%
Italy             11.37%           6.31%         4.15%            2.15%    -3.21%         4.41%        0.95%
Austria           11.05%           5.99%         4.94%            1.05%    -2.42%         1.91%        1.56%
Greece             8.38%           3.32%         7.3%            -3.98%    -4.98%        -0.15%        1.15%
Average            7.54%           2.48%        1.71%            0.77%     -1.83%        2.05%         0.55%
*The four main   factors of the   country differences in   simulated MFP gains correspond to the country
differences respectively in (i) importance of non-manufacturing regulations (NMR), (ii) MFP distance
to the frontier (GAP), (iii) intensity of intermediate consumption from downstream sectors as
computed on the basis of country input-output coefficients (Domestic I-O Table), and (iv) sector
composition as measured in terms of value-added (VA). The contributions of these four factors to the
simulated MFP gains in a country are assessed by simulating the variation in MFP gains
corresponding to the sequential alignment of their values to that of another country taken as a
benchmark These contributions sum up to the overall difference between the overall country MFP
gains and that for the benchmark country, but can differ to some extent with the sequence of
simulations adopted. The order adopted here from the (i) to the (iv) factors seems natural. As a
benchmark country we could have defined an “average country”, but we thought simpler and more
informative to choose the USA.
By construction, the estimates shown in the different columns of the Table are such as:
(1) = (2) + 5.06% (i.e. + US total gains); (2) = (3) + (4); and (4) = (5) + (6) + (7). Total MFP gains
(1) are already shown in Figure 7 Panel A and B (simultaneous reforms). The countries are ranked in
the Table in terms of increasing contributions of adopting NMR best practice in column (3).



                                                    66
Figure A2.1:     The correspondence between the indicators of non-manufacturing
and ISIC sectors



               NMR sectors                                     ISIC sectors
                    Post
                                                         64 Post and telecommunications
                 Telecoms

                Electricity
                                                          40-41 Electricity, gas, and water
                    Ga

                  Airlines

                    Rail                                    60-63 Transport and storage

                   Road

                   Retail                                  50-52 Wholesale and retail trade

               Professional                                71-74 Renting of M&E and other
                 Service                                         business activities

              Other
                                                                    65-67 Finance
                    Finance
             (de Serres & al., 2006)




                                       Figure A2.2 Industry list1

   FOOD PRODUCTS, BEVERAGES AND TOBACCO                                                       15-16
   TEXTILES, TEXTILE PRODUCTS, LEATHER AND FOOTWEAR                                           17-19
   WOOD AND PRODUCTS OF WOOD AND CORK                                                          20
   PULP, PAPER, PAPER PRODUCTS, PRINTING AND PUBLISHING                                       21-22
   CHEMICAL, RUBBER, PLASTICS AND FUEL PRODUCTS                                               23-25
   OTHER NON-METALLIC MINERAL PRODUCTS                                                         26
   BASIC METALS AND FABRICATED METAL PRODUCTS                                                 27-28
   MACHINERY AND EQUIPMENT, N.E.C.                                                             29
   ELECTRICAL AND OPTICAL EQUIPMENT                                                           30-33
   TRANSPORT EQUIPMENT                                                                        34-35
   MANUFACTURING NEC; RECYCLING                                                               36-37
   ELECTRICITY GAS AND WATER SUPPLY (Energy)                                                  40-41
   CONSTRUCTION                                                                                45
   WHOLESALE AND RETAIL TRADE; REPAIRS (Retail)                                               50-52
   HOTELS AND RESTAURANTS                                                                      55
   TRANSPORT AND STORAGE (Transport)                                                          60-63
   POST AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS (Com.)                                                          64
   FINANCIAL INTERMEDIATION (Fin. S.)                                                         65-67
   REAL ESTATE ACTIVITIES                                                                      70
   RENTING OF M&EQ AND OTHER BUSINESS ACTIVITIES (Prof. S.)                                   71-74
1. “Upstream”sectors for which regulation data are underlined.




                                                  67
Table A3-1
Estimation on a moving 15 year time period window – Period: 1995-2007
                   1985-1999   1986-2000   1987-2001   1988-2002     1989-2003     1990-2004      1991-2005   1992-2006   1993-2007
∆ln(MFPF)           0.089***    0.097***    0.127***    0.134***      0.137***      0.140***       0.137***    0.115***    0.120***
                     [0.023]     [0.021]     [0.019]     [0.019]       [0.018]       [0.018]        [0.018]     [0.018]     [0.019]

gap-1              0.056***    0.053***    0.045***     0.040***     0.040***      0.036***       0.035***    0.034***    0.034***
                    [0.004]     [0.004]     [0.004]      [0.004]      [0.004]       [0.004]        [0.004]     [0.004]     [0.004]

REG-1                0,012      -0,015      -0,019       -0,021          -0,051     -0,077         -0.099*     -0.102*    -0.116**
                    [0.061]     [0.058]     [0.058]      [0.057]         [0.056]    [0.056]        [0.056]     [0.056]     [0.058]

gap-1 * REG-1      0.230***    0.250***    0.246***     0.227***     0.227***      0.167***       0.178***    0.175***    0.170***
                    [0.049]     [0.047]     [0.049]      [0.050]      [0.049]       [0.050]        [0.049]     [0.050]     [0.051]
Fixed effects:
Time           *
Country              Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes            Yes        Yes            Yes         Yes         Yes
Industry             Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes            Yes        Yes            Yes         Yes         Yes

Observations         2906        3152        3235         3318            3385       3452           3511        3510        3378

R-squared            0,29        0,29        0,27          0,26           0,26       0,26           0,26        0,24        0,24

Standard errors in brackets. * Significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                                    68
        Table A3-2
        One country is alternatively dropped from the dataset – Period: 1995-2007
                    Main
                             AUS      AUT      BEL      CAN      DEU      DNK      ESP       FIN     FRA      GRC      ITA      NLD      NOR      SWE      USA
                 estimation
∆ln(MFPF)         0.121*** 0.122*** 0.132*** 0.120*** 0.119*** 0.118*** 0.127*** 0.123*** 0.125*** 0.119*** 0.137*** 0.129*** 0.111*** 0.113*** 0.117*** 0.112***
                   [0.019]  [0.019] [0.020] [0.020] [0.020] [0.020] [0.019] [0.020] [0.019] [0.020] [0.019] [0.020] [0.020] [0.019] [0.019] [0.020]

gap-1             0.032*** 0.032*** 0.034*** 0.031*** 0.034*** 0.031*** 0.029*** 0.034*** 0.036*** 0.032*** 0.035*** 0.036*** 0.032*** 0.030*** 0.033*** 0.032***
                   [0.005]  [0.005] [0.005] [0.005] [0.005] [0.005] [0.005] [0.005] [0.005] [0.005] [0.006] [0.005] [0.005] [0.005] [0.005] [0.005]


REG-1             -0.124** -0.126** 0.248*** -0.125** -0,105     -0,105 -0.138** -0.128* -0.108* -0.142** -0,088     -0.111*    -0,109   -0.107*    -0,09 -0.130**
                   [0.062]  [0.063] [0.069] [0.064] [0.064]     [0.065] [0.063] [0.066] [0.063] [0.067] [0.063]      [0.065]   [0.067]   [0.059]   [0.071] [0.063]


gap-1 * REG-1     0.132**   0.136** 0.134** 0.124** 0.136** 0.139** 0.137** 0.116** 0,085 0.135** 0.210*** 0.153*** 0.131** 0.100* 0.146*** 0.127**
                  [0.054]   [0.055] [0.055] [0.056] [0.056] [0.055] [0.053] [0.056] [0.061] [0.056] [0.066] [0.058] [0.056] [0.052] [0.055] [0.055]

Fixed effects:
Time * Country      Yes       Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes     Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes       Yes       Yes     Yes
Industry            Yes       Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes     Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes       Yes       Yes     Yes

Observations        2938     2852     2688     2718     2760     2700     2729     2754     2724     2720     2796     2736     2709      2695     2724     2827

R-squared           0,22      0,21    0,23     0,22     0,22     0,21     0,22     0,21     0,21     0,21     0,22     0,21     0,21      0,23      0,21    0,21

        Standard errors in brackets. * Significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                              1
Table A3-3: One sector is alternatively dropped from the dataset – Period: 1995-2007
                  Main
                             15-16      17-19       20        21-22      23-25       26        27-28       29           30-33    34-35      36-37      40-41       45        50-52       55        60-63       64        65-67       70
               estimation
∆ln(MFPF)      0.121***     0.126*** 0.125*** 0.126*** 0.118*** 0.130*** 0.125*** 0.119*** 0.114*** 0.076*** 0.132*** 0.122*** 0.120*** 0.123*** 0.123*** 0.124*** 0.120*** 0.122*** 0.132*** 0.120***
                [0.019]      [0.020] [0.019] [0.019] [0.020] [0.019] [0.019] [0.019] [0.019] [0.022] [0.019] [0.019] [0.019] [0.020] [0.019] [0.019] [0.019] [0.019] [0.020] [0.019]

gap-1           0.032***    0.034***   0.032***   0.030***   0.031***   0.032***   0.031***   0.031***   0.031***   0.031***    0.031***   0.032***   0.032***   0.032***   0.032***   0.034***   0.031***   0.033***   0.037***   0.034***
                [0.005]     [0.005]    [0.005]    [0.005]    [0.005]    [0.005]    [0.005]    [0.005]    [0.005]    [0.005]     [0.005]    [0.005]    [0.005]    [0.005]    [0.005]    [0.005]    [0.005]    [0.005]    [0.005]    [0.005]

REG-1          -0.124**     -0,101     -0.149** -0.105*      -0.120*    -0.113*    -0.123*    -0.122* -0.132** -0.134** -0.131* -0.129** -0.104*                 -0.118* -0.170** -0.111*         -0.117* -0.143**      -0,068     -0.140**
                [0.062]     [0.066]     [0.063] [0.063]      [0.063]    [0.062]    [0.064]    [0.063] [0.063] [0.062] [0.068] [0.062] [0.063]                    [0.064] [0.068] [0.064]          [0.064] [0.064]       [0.066]     [0.066]

gap-1*REG-1     0.132**     0.140** 0.147*** 0.134**         0.129**    0.137**    0.112**    0.130**    0.116**    0.122**     0.135** 0.153*** 0.148*** 0.127**           0.129** 0.153*** 0.147*** 0.129**            0,08      0.114**
                [0.054]     [0.055] [0.055] [0.055]          [0.055]    [0.055]    [0.055]    [0.055]    [0.055]    [0.054]     [0.057] [0.057] [0.053] [0.055]             [0.056] [0.056] [0.055] [0.054]             [0.068]    [0.056]

Fixed eff.:
Time*Country      Yes         Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes           Yes      Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes
Industry          Yes         Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes           Yes      Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes

Observations     2938        2796       2779       2779       2779       2785       2780       2793       2787          2809     2780       2779       2796       2784       2764       2785       2813       2827       2779       2818


R-squared        0,22         0,22      0,22       0,22       0,22       0,22       0,22       0,21       0,21          0,21     0,23       0,21       0,23       0,21       0,22       0,22       0,22        0,2       0,23        0,22


Standard errors in brackets. * Significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                                                                    2
Table A3-4: The input-output matrix used to calculate the regulation indicators in the downstream sectors – Period: 1995-2007

                                                   US matrix
                             US matrix
                                                US excluded from      Domestic matrix             UK matrix   France matrix
                           Main estimation
                                                   the dataset
 ∆ln(MFPF)                     0.122***             0.112***              0.121***                0.121***      0.121***
                                [0.019]              [0.020]               [0.019]                 [0.019]       [0.019]

 gap-1                         0.032***              0.032***             0.033***                0.029***      0.031***
                                [0.005]               [0.005]              [0.005]                 [0.005]       [0.005]
 REG-1                         -0.124**              -0.130**             -0.145***                 -0,083        -0,054
                                [0.062]               [0.063]               [0.043]                [0.066]       [0.057]

 gap-1 * REG-1                  0.132**              0.127**                0,110                  0.099*        0.138**
                                [0.054]              [0.055]               [0.070]                 [0.055]       [0.056]

 Fixed effects:
 Time * Country                   Yes                  Yes                   Yes                    Yes           Yes
 Industry                         Yes                  Yes                   Yes                    Yes           Yes

 Observations                    2938                  2827                 2938                    2938          2938

 R-squared                        0,22                 0,21                  0,22                   0,21          0,21

 Standard errors in brackets. * Significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                              71
Table A3-5
The price measurement of the output ‘electrical and optical equipment’ (30-33)
Period: 1995-2007
                                                                                                 US 30-33 specific
                                                    30-33 specific
                                                                         US excluded             relative price is
                        Main estimation            price is retained
                                                                       from the dataset            used for all
                                                        for US
                                                                                                    countries
 ∆ln(MFPF)                   0.122***                  0.108***            0.110***                 0.129***
                              [0.019]                   [0.021]             [0.019]                  [0.022]

 gap-1                       0.032***                  0.022***            0.032***                  0.034***
                              [0.005]                   [0.004]             [0.005]                   [0.005]

 REG-1                         -0.124**                -0.135**            -0.123**                  -0.124*
                                [0.062]                 [0.064]             [0.062]                  [0.063]

 gap-1 * REG-1                 0.132**                   0,073              0.128**                  0.150***
                               [0.054]                  [0.052]             [0.054]                   [0.054]
 Fixed effects:
 Time * Country                  Yes                     Yes                     Yes                   Yes
 Industry                        Yes                      Yes                  Yes                     Yes
 Observations                   2938                     2938                  2925                    2938
 R-squared                       0,22                    0,21                  0,21                    0,21

Standard errors in brackets. * Significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%


Table A3-6
PPP adjustment and MFP measurement– Period: 1995-2007
                         Main estimation                     Sectorial PPP             "Structural productivity"
                    1985-2007     1995-2007            1985-2007      1995-2007         1985-2007    1995-2007
 ∆ln(MFPF)           0.114***      0.122***             0.049***        0.037*            0,001         0,033
                      [0.016]       [0.019]              [0.015]        [0.019]          [0.018]       [0.021]

 gap-1              0.041***            0.032***       0.010***        0.007**          0.027***       0.019***
                     [0.004]             [0.005]        [0.002]        [0.003]           [0.003]        [0.004]

 REG-1               -0,067             -0.124**        -0.085*        -0.112*         -0.133***        -0.158**
                     [0.047]             [0.062]        [0.049]        [0.066]           [0.051]         [0.064]

 gap-1 * REG-1      0.240***            0.132**        0.081***         0,054           0.186***        0.104**
                     [0.040]            [0.054]         [0.029]        [0.038]           [0.036]        [0.047]
 Fixed effects:
 Time           *
                       Yes                Yes               Yes         Yes               Yes             Yes
 Country
 Industry              Yes                Yes               Yes         Yes               Yes             Yes
 Observations         2938                   2938        4603           2922              4360            2888
 R-squared            0,22                      0,26        0,22        0,19              0,24            0,2

Standard errors in brackets. * Significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%


                                                       72
Table A3-7
MFP measurement – Period: 1995-2007
                          Main
                                          MFP1            MFP2             MFP3            MFP4
                       estimation
 ∆ln(MFPF)              0.122***        0.119***         0.118***        0.118***         0.117***
                         [0.019]         [0.019]          [0.019]         [0.019]          [0.019]
 gap-1                   0.032***       0.027***         0.027***        0.032***         0.033***
                          [0.005]        [0.005]          [0.005]         [0.005]          [0.005]

 REG-1                   -0.124**        -0.126**        -0.126**        -0.125**         -0.127**
                          [0.062]         [0.062]         [0.062]         [0.062]          [0.063]

 gap-1 * REG-1           0.132**         0.115**           0.077          0.115**         0.124**
                         [0.054]         [0.052]          [0.053]         [0.056]         [0.057]
 Fixed effects:
 Time * Country            Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes
 Industry                  Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes
 Observations             2938            2887             2895            2925             2919
 R-squared                 0.22            0.21            0.21             0.21            0.22

Standard errors in brackets. * Significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.
MFP1: The labour share in the value added is country*sector*year specific
MFP2: The labour share in the value added is country*sector specific, and calculated for each
country*sector by an average on 1984-2007
MFP3: The labour share in the value added is sector*year specific and is, for each sector*year, the
one observed in the US
MFP4: The labour share in the value added is sector specific and is, for each sector, the average of
the one observed in US on 1984-2007




                                                  73
Table A3-8
Productivity measurement: Labour productivity (LP) or MFP
                             Main estimation    (2)      (3)      (4)      (5)              (6)
∆ln(MFPF) or ∆ln(LPF)           0.122***     0.126*** 0.057*** 0.055*** 0.054**          0.093***
                                 [0.019]      [0.020] [0.021] [0.021] [0.022]             [0.021]
gap-1                            0.032***      0.033*** 0.031*** 0.016*** 0.022*** 0.011***
                                  [0.005]       [0.005] [0.005] [0.005] [0.005]     [0.004]

REG-1                            -0.124**        -0.079    -0.078   -0.133**    -0.102   -0.230***
                                  [0.062]       [0.064]   [0.064]    [0.066]   [0.068]     [0.064]

gap-1 * REG-1                     0.132**       0.133**   0.129**    -0.108     -0.085    0.091*
                                  [0.054]       [0.056]   [0.057]   [0.066]    [0.068]    [0.051]

∆(K/L)                                         0.366*** 0.361*** 0.338***
                                                [0.027] [0.027] [0.028]
Fixed effects :
Time * Country                      Yes           Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes
Industry                            Yes           Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes
Productivity measurement :
∆ln(MFP)                           TFP            LP        LP         LP        LP         LP
∆ln(MFPF)                          TFP           TFP        LP         LP        LP         LP
gap-1                              TFP           TFP        TFP        LP        LP         LP
Observations                       2938          2794      2794       2794      2794       4686
R-squared                          0.22          0.28       0.27      0.27      0.22       0.18
Standard errors in brackets. * Significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
The sample is smaller in estimations 2-5, than in the main estimation. This is because the leading
country-industry pairs in each period are not the same if productivity is measured by MFP or LP.
Observations before the entrance or after the exit of leaders are dropped to avoid spurious changes
in gap and ∆ln(MFPF) and their number differs depending on the definition of productivity.
Available observations for LP are many more than for MFP (whose construction which require
capital stock data) as reflected in column 6. Column 5 replicates the same regression on the same
number of observations as in columns 2-4 for comparison purposes.




                                                74
