                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         ACCELERATING ENERGY INNOVATION:
                          INSIGHTS FROM MULTIPLE SECTORS

                                       Rebecca Henderson
                                       Richard G. Newell

                                       Working Paper 16529
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w16529


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2010




We gratefully acknowledge funding from the Doris Duke Foundation and from an anonymous donor.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Rebecca Henderson and Richard G. Newell. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Accelerating Energy Innovation: Insights from Multiple Sectors
Rebecca Henderson and Richard G. Newell
NBER Working Paper No. 16529
November 2010
JEL No. O3

                                                 ABSTRACT

Re-orienting current energy systems toward a far greater reliance on technologies with low or no carbon
dioxide emissions is an immense challenge. At the broadest level the histories presented here are very
much consistent with widely held views within the energy innovation policy literature. In general,
this literature has suggested that greatly increasing rates of energy innovation requires creating significant
demand for low carbon technologies, substantially increased federal funding for “well-managed” research,
and in at least some cases support for the initial deployment of new technologies. As the other markets
explored in this volume do not face the same degree of unpriced environmental externality, there is
no straightforward equivalent to a carbon price in the history of agriculture, chemicals, IT or biopharmaceuticals.
Nonetheless, our authors outline a number of ways in which public policy has often stimulated demand,
particularly in the early stages of a technology’s evolution, and confirm that the expectation of rapidly
growing demand appears to have been a major stimulus to private sector investment in innovation.
Each history also confirms the centrality of publicly funded research to the generation of innovation,
particularly in the early stages of an industry’s history, and highlights a range of institutional mechanisms
that have enabled it to be simultaneously path breaking and directly connected to industrial practice.

Our histories depart somewhat from the bulk of the energy innovation policy literature in focusing
attention on the role of vigorous competition – particularly entry – in stimulating innovation, suggesting
that in several industries a mix of public policies – including procurement, antitrust and intellectual
property protection – played an important role in stimulating innovation by encouraging extensive
competition and entry by newly founded firms. Many of the most innovative industries profiled here
have been characterized by a lively “innovation ecosystem” that both rapidly incorporated the results
of publicly funded research and supports widespread private sector experimentation and rapid entry.
There are, of course important differences between the industries profiled here and the energy sector,
but we believe that exploring the potential of these kinds of innovation ecosystems in clean energy
might be a fruitful avenue for future research.

Rebecca Henderson
Heinz Professor of Environmental Management
Harvard Business School
Morgan 445
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
rhenderson@hbs.edu

Richard G. Newell
Nicholas School of the Environment
Duke University
Box 90227
Durham, NC 27708
richard.newell@duke.edu
          Accelerating Energy Innovation: Insights from Multiple Sectors

                                Chapter One: Introduction and Summary
                               Rebecca Henderson and Richard G. Newell1

This version: August 23, 2010

Re-orienting current energy systems toward a far greater reliance on technologies with low or no
carbon dioxide emissions is an immense challenge. Fossil fuels such as oil, coal, and natural gas
together satisfy 81 percent of global energy demand and generate 69 percent of global
anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions (IEA 2009). Moreover worldwide demand for energy is
expected to increase by about 40 percent over the next twenty years, with most of this increase
occurring in non-OECD countries (IEA 2009, EIA 2010).

Meeting this demand without significantly increasing global emissions using currently available
technology would be costly. For example, the International Energy Agency projects that about
$26 trillion of investment in energy-supply infrastructure will be needed over the 2008–2030
period simply to meet projected increases in energy demand (IEA 2009).2 Modeling scenarios of
cost-effective global climate mitigation policy suggest that, for atmospheric stabilization targets
in the range of 450–550 parts per million CO2, the cost of GHG mitigation through 2050 without
significant innovation in the underlying technologies would require additional trillions or tens of
trillions of dollars (Newell 2008). Longer-term total costs through 2100 could be approximately
double this amount.

Plausible developments in energy efficiency, bioenergy, wind, solar, nuclear and low-emitting
fossil fuel technologies could greatly reduce these costs. For example, Edmonds et al. (2007),
suggest that significant innovation could reduce the present-value cost of achieving CO2
stabilization at 550 ppm by more than $20 trillion. Other studies have found that the cumulative
costs of achieving any given stabilization target are reduced by 50 percent or more under
advanced technology scenarios (see, e.g., Manne and Richels 1992 and Clarke et al. 2006).
Accelerating innovation and technology adoption in energy is thus crucial to meeting greenhouse
gas mitigation goals.

Given this urgency it is not surprisingly that a flood of recent books and articles have explored
how the U.S. energy innovation system could be improved (See, for example, work by Anadon
and Holdren 2009; Gallagher, Holdren and Sagar, 2006; Gallagher, Anadon and Bunn, 2009;
Grübler et al., 1999; Lester, 2009; Narayanamurti et al. 2009a, 2009b; Newell 2008; Nemet and
Kammen, 2007; Ogden, Podesta and Deutch, 2008; Scott 2009 and Weiss and Bonvillian 2009).

1 Rebecca Henderson is the Senator John Heinz Professor of Environmental Management at Harvard Business
School and a research fellow at the National Bureau of Economic Research. Richard Newell completed his work on
this paper as the Gendell Associate Professor of Energy and Environmental Economics at Duke University’s
Nicholas School of Environment, when he was also a Research Associate at the National Bureau of Economic
Research and a University Fellow at Resources for the Future. He is currently on leave from Duke University as
Administrator of the U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA).
2 This figure does not include expenditures on energy demand-side technologies (e.g., transportation, appliances,
and equipment), investment demand for which will measure in the trillions of dollars each year.
By and large this is tightly argued and persuasive work that is a critically important starting point
for anyone interested in effective energy policy. This book explores the same questions using a
complementary approach. Instead of focusing on the history of the energy industry to draw
lessons for the future of energy innovation, it explores the history of innovation in several
industries that have already seen extraordinary rates of technological progress: in agriculture,
chemicals, semiconductors, computers, the internet and biopharmaceuticals. Each of the chapters
that follow explores the complex role that public policy and private markets have played in
triggering rapid innovation in the industry and in sustaining it once in motion. Each industry
differs from the energy sector in important ways, but we nonetheless believe that this approach
provides a useful complement to the existing literature.

In the first place, the history of each industry reminds us that relatively rapid, transformational
innovation can occur. Innovation in agriculture was a critical factor in reducing the manpower
needed to grow the nation’s crops from 49 percent of the U.S. workforce in 1880 to less than 2
percent in 2000. The chemical industry created entirely new materials and fuels, laying the
foundation both for progress in existing industries – as in the case of synthetic pesticides and
fertilizers – and for the creation of entirely new ones, including plastics and synthetic fibers.
Innovation in the IT industry appears to have greatly increased the productivity of the U.S.
economy: Jorgenson (2004) estimates that the quality-adjusted price of computers dropped at an
annual average of 16 percent during 1959–2001, and that this rate of decline doubled after the
mid-1990s, while Berndt and Rappaport (2001) report that personal computer prices declined an
average of 35 percent a year between 1992 and 2002. The Internet has clearly changed all our
lives and the net effect of IT and telecommunications investment on national productivity
appears to be quite high (Brynjolfsson and Hitt, 2003; Jorgenson and Stiroh, 2000). In the case of
life sciences, major breakthroughs in areas such as heart disease, cancer and HIV have
significantly reduced mortality rates (Cockburn 2007, Lichtenberg 2005; Duggan and Evans
2008). In each of these cases—with the possible exception of chemicals—well funded, well
managed federal research laid the foundation for an industry that created great prosperity and
that continues to be dominated by American firms.

The second reason that we believe that exploring the history of innovation in other industries
may be useful is that it provides an intriguing perspective on some of the policy
recommendations currently being advanced for the energy industry. Taken together the histories
point to three key factors as critical to accelerating innovation: (1) well funded, carefully
managed public research that is tightly linked to the private sector; (2) rapidly growing demand;
and (3) antitrust, intellectual property and standards policies that together promote vigorous
competition and the entry of new firms. Expressed at this level of generality these results echo
the fundamental findings of an innovation policy literature that stretches back to Vannevar Bush
(1945). Many scholars have noted the critical role played by well managed federal research
funds in shaping the United States’ most innovative industries, and the idea that effective
innovation feeds off both technology “supply” and market “demand” is a well established one
(Mowery and Rosenberg, 1979). The innovation policy literature has focused less on the role of
competition and new entrants in shaping innovation, but the intuition that new firms may have a
critical role in spurring innovation goes back to Schumpeter (1934) and has recently been
confirmed in a number of important studies (Aghion, Bloom and Blundell, 2005; Aghion et. al.

                                                                                                    2
2007). They are also broadly consistent with the bulk of the recommendations currently being
made for accelerating innovation in energy.

But in innovation policy the devil is in the details – particularly in the details of organizational
implementation – and conclusions at this level of generality abstract from the critical institutional
detail that is characteristic of each industry and that is particularly well captured in the chapters.
The energy policy literature stresses the importance of adequate federal funding and the
development of tight linkages between the public and private sectors (Anadon and Holdren 2009;
Gallagher, Holdren and Sagar, 2006; Gallagher, Anadon and Bunn, 2009; Lester, 2009). It
explores the critically important role of designing policy instruments that will support demand
for low carbon technologies (Newell 2008; Nemet and Kammen, 2007) and the potential role of
intellectual property regimes in shaping innovation diffusion (Sagar and Anadon, 2009). But
most importantly it stresses the critical need for the development of a comprehensive innovation
strategy that can coordinate policy across multiple entities and for the design of institutional
structures that ensure public money does not become pork (Lester, 2009, Ogden, Podesta and
Deutch, 2008; NCEP 2009; Weiss and Bonvillian, 2009). In presenting the detailed histories of
five industries where the delicate balance between public funding and private markets was
maintained productively for many years we hope to contribute in an important way to the
conversation about exactly how these kinds of strategic and organizational choices can best be
made.

Similarly much of the current energy innovation policy literature stress the potential importance
of public funding of “deployment” – or of supporting the initial implementation of new energy
technologies given their probable risk and scale. In four of the industries discussed here – in
agriculture, semiconductors, computers and the internet -- the federal government played an
important role in funding deployment of the new technology. Again, in presenting detailed case
examples of the variety of ways in which the federal government filled this role we hope to
stimulate useful debate about what might be most appropriate in the case of energy.

A comparison between contemporary prescriptions for energy innovation and the history of
accelerated innovation in a range of other industries is also intriguing because it highlights a
number of cases in which the two are significantly different. The current energy policy literature,
for example, focuses much more on innovation “supply” (public and private funding for
research) and on innovation “demand” (the use of policy instruments to create demand for low
carbon energy) than it does on the instruments of competition policy. One of the striking findings
from our industry histories, for example, is the (often seemingly unintended) role of antitrust and
procurement policy in enabling widespread entry into the innovating industry. The histories also
stress the important role that federally funded research has played in generating highly trained
human capital for the private sector, an issue that has been stressed in some of the current energy
innovation policy literature (Newell 2008, 2010), but not broadly so.


The remainder of this introduction frames the volume by attempting to draw together some of the
key themes that occur across the chapters. The book then opens with Richard Newell’s brief
overview of the history of innovation in energy. The energy sector is vast and highly complex,

                                                                                                    3
but nonetheless Newell sketches out some “central tendencies” that provide important
background for the chapters that follow. In Chapter 3 Brian Wright and Tiffany Shih describe the
history of innovation in agriculture, an industry that – in its time – had the scale and reach of the
energy sector in our own day, and in which both local funding for diffusion and federally funded
innovation proved to be critical. Their chapter also raises a number of important issues around
the role of intellectual property rights and public/private partnership in framing innovation. In
Chapter 4 Ashish Arora and Alfonso Gambardella explore the sources of innovation in the
chemical industry, an industry that resembles some aspects of the energy sector in the chemical
industry’s focus on process development, and whose early development was significantly more
global than those of the others discussed here. Chapter 5 presents Iain Cockburn, Scott Stern, and
Jack Zausner’s review of the roots of innovation in life sciences, an industry that has been the
second largest recipient of federal research funding (after defense) and that is justly celebrated
for the extraordinary productivity of the “innovation ecosystem” that links its public and private
sectors.

Chapter 6 moves to David Mowery’s review of the innovative history of the computer and
semiconductor industries, and in Chapter 7 Shane Greenstein discusses the institutional roots of
the innovations that led to the development of the Internet. Given the centrality of information
technology and telecommunications to the modern economy it is particularly intriguing to be
reminded of the critically important role that the federal government played in the development
of both sectors – and to be exposed to careful discussions of the institutional structures and
strategic decisions that made public support so very powerful in both industries. Finally, in
Chapter 8 Josh Lerner concludes the book with a detailed focus on venture capital, one often-
cited potential solution to the clean energy innovation problem. He notes that despite the fact that
venture capital investments are a relatively small share of total R&D investment they are
exceedingly effective. However, he notes that while public policy public policy can help to
maintain a healthy level of venture capital investment, direct government investment in venture
capital funding can exacerbate the boom and bust cycles characteristic of the industry.

Taken together, these chapters do not provide a comprehensive review of innovation policy since
several excellent reviews of innovation policy exist (See, for example, Branscomb and Keller,
1999; Cohen and Noll, 1991; Mowery and Nelson, 1999). Neither are they a comprehensive
history of modern industrial innovation or of innovation policy. We were unable to persuade an
expert on the history of innovation in the space or defense industries to participate in the project,
for example, and with the notable exception of the chapters on agriculture and chemicals, the
accounts by and large focus on the history of innovation in the United States. Mowery and his
colleagues (2009) focus particularly on the history of innovation in the UK and on the relevance
of the Manhattan and Apollo projects for our understanding of energy policy and their paper is
highly recommended. We believe, however, that given the centrality of the industries we explore
to modern economic growth and the critical role of U.S. public policy in supporting each of them
our focus still yields important insights.

Lastly, we do not attempt to draw policy recommendations. This is in keeping with longstanding
NBER policy – but it also reflects our awareness that the energy sector is importantly different


                                                                                                    4
from the industries discussed here. We hope instead to provide the kind of rich data that will
allow the interested reader to draw their own conclusions.

The book’s key themes

In broad outline, the chapters highlight three mechanisms that have historically served to support
accelerated innovation: substantial, sustained and effectively managed federal funding for
fundamental research, the generation of growing customer demand, either through procurement
or through the market, and the enabling of aggressive competition, particularly from newly
entering firms.

Public Support for Fundamental Research

The hypothesis that one of the central roles of public policy with respect to innovation is to fund
“basic” or “fundamental” research is a well-established idea in the innovation policy literature
(Bush, 1945), and rests on the observation that the gains from work designed to uncover core
scientific principles and that is relatively remote from immediate commercial application are in
general very difficult for private firms to appropriate. Much of the existing energy innovation
policy literature stresses the central importance of this issue for U.S. innovation policy, stressing
the relatively low levels of federal funding for fundamental energy research (Gallagher, Holdren
and Sager, 2006; Nemet and Kammen, 2007; Newell, 2009; Ogden, Podesta & Deutch, 2008).

Publicly funded energy research constitutes about 3 percent of the total federal R&D budget (or
less than 0.03 percent of gross domestic product). Annual energy R&D funding decreased by
more than half from a high of about $9 billion (real 2009 dollars) in the late 1970s to about $3
billion by the mid-1990s, where it remained for over a decade (Figure 1; Newell 2008). This
represented a drop from about 25 percent to 7 percent of nondefense federal R&D spending.
Very recently this trend has reversed: the allocation to energy research increased by over 20
percent, surpassing $4 billion in 2007, although this still represented less than 4 percent of total
federal R&D spending. Energy R&D budgets increased modestly again in 2008, and in 2009
grew dramatically as a result of spending under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act in
response to the economic downturn. (Note that the Recovery Act spending includes significant
amounts for technology demonstration projects.) While the Recovery Act spending represents a
short-lived event, regular appropriations for energy R&D are slated to increase to about $6
billion by 2011 and the Obama Administration has sought to further increase funding for basic
research.




                                                                                                    5
Figure 1. U.S. Federal Energy RD&D Spending (1974–2009, with estimates for 2010-2011)


                                      20

                                      18
                                           2009 includes $14 billion in Recovery Act spending
   Billions of real dollars ($2009)




                                      16

                                      14

                                      12

                                      10

                                      8

                                      6

                                      4

                                      2

                                      0




Source: IEA 2010. DOE 2010 for 2010-2011 estimates.
The most significant trend in recent years in federal R&D spending has been the large rise in
defense R&D and in health-related R&D, which has increased from 25 percent of the federal
nondefense R&D budget in 1980 to 54 percent in 2007 (Figure 2). To place these figures in some
perspective, in 2006 health expenditures accounted for 16 percent of GDP, energy expenditures
accounted for 8-9 percent of GDP in recent years, and agriculture accounted for about 1 percent
of GDP in 2004 (Newell 2008).




                                                                                                6
Figure 2. U.S. Federal R&D Spending by Budget Function (1955-2008)
                                90


                                80

                                     Energy              Health
                                70
                                     National def ense   Space
  Billions of nominal dollars




                                60


                                50


                                40


                                30


                                20


                                10


                                0




Source: NSF Science Indicators, 2009
Faced with these numbers, many analysts have suggested very significantly increasing federal
commitment to fundamental energy research (Gallagher, Holden and Sager, 2006; Nemet and
Kammen, 2007; Newell, 2009; Ogden, Podesta & Deutch, 2008).

This idea is certainly consistent with the histories presented in our chapters. In every industry
that we review, public support for fundamental research appears to have played a critical role in
accelerating innovation in the industry, and there is some evidence that it has generated
extraordinarily high returns. For example Wright and Shih (chapter x, below), suggest that
marginal returns to public research in agriculture have been on the order of 45 to 60 percent.
Similarly Cockburn, Stern, and Zausner (chapter x, below) highlight high, stable levels of public
support as the primary foundation of industry’s success in the life sciences, suggesting that this
funding has led not only to many of the fundamental advances in scientific knowledge that have
been indispensible to advances in modern molecular biology, but that it has also underwritten the
development of a wide range of critical tools and techniques. For example, federal R&D
underwrote the gene-splicing technique pioneered by Stanley Cohen and Herbert Boyer in 1973
that opened up the modern field of genetic engineering. Federal support for R&D was also
critical to the early history of the semiconductor and computer industries.


                                                                                                 7
For example Mowery (chapter X, this volume), notes that although the first solid state transistor
was developed privately by AT&T, the firm’s invention built on an extensive program of
government funded wartime research, and that at the time it occurred AT&T was in a
competitive race with a publicly funded effort at Purdue University. Early work in the computer
industry was entirely government funded, and from 1949-1959 federal funds were nearly 60% of
of computer-related R&D spending. Even as private spending grew more important on a
percentage basis, federal funding continued to increase, with federally funded basic research in
computer science growing from $65 million in 1976 to $265 million in nominal dollars in 1995.
The early development of the Internet rested entirely on federal funding of the seemingly obscure
technology of large-scale packet switching – a technology that was part of a portfolio of research
whose commercial applications were entirely unknown at the time. Even in the case of chemicals
– an industry in which many critical scientific discoveries were made in private firms – much of
the foundational science of the field was performed inside universities.

Each of our authors suggests, however, that it is not only the magnitude of the public
commitment to research funding that is critical, but also the ways in which this funding is
governed. In this respect the results we present here are very much consistent with those in the
energy innovation policy community who have stressed that it is not enough for the federal
government to dramatically increase funding for fundamental research: it is also critical that this
research be managed appropriately (Lester 2009; Newell 2008; Ogden, Podesta, Deutch 2008).

Four themes in particular emerge from the chapters below. First, in every industry with the
possible exception of chemicals, federal support for fundamental research was sustained over
long periods of time. In both agriculture and life sciences, our authors explicitly point out that it
took at least 20 years for fundamental research to have a notable effect on practice, and that it is
the “stock” of knowledge, not the flow, that has the greatest impact on accelerating private sector
innovation. For example, Wright and Shih note that it took several decades of development and
learning before the U.S. land grant/State Agricultural Extension Service (SAES) system had
acquired the scientific capacity and research base necessary to become an efficient system of
innovation, and Cockburn, Scott and Zausner suggest that the recent “surge and retreat” in NIH
funding over the last decade has probably resulted in a less productive innovation system and
significantly distorted researcher incentives and career dynamics. In the case of IT, the ground
breaking investments were made in the 1940s and 1950s, but IT did not have a significant effect
on the productivity of the economy until the 1990s. These examples suggest that a sustained
investment in energy innovation may have ground breaking implications – but that it may be
years before these investments bear their full fruit.

Second, every author explores in some detail the ways in which effective governance steered a
middle course between public funding of research that is so abstract and removed from potential
application that it becomes isolated from practice, and the danger that public funds become so
applied that they will substitute for private funds. This is an old concern in the technology policy
literature (Cohen and Noll, 1991) and one that particularly concerns analysts of energy
innovation policy (Newell, this volume).
 For example, Wright and Shih highlight the important role that locally supported, locally sited
extension stations have played in ensuring that public funding for agriculture has been closely

                                                                                                      8
linked to actual practice. At the same time they cite a 1986 analysis of a public/private research
effort in Canada’s malting barley industry in which the authors estimate that social gains would
have been 40 percent higher if the public researchers had focused only on more fundamental
research. Arora and Gambardella, in their study of the chemical industry, highlight ways in
which tight links between U.S. universities and the private sector have been instrumental in
codifying and diffusing scientific advances made by the industry.

In the case of the life sciences, Cockburn, Stern, and Zausner note that federally funded research
is administered overwhelmingly through investigator initiated, peer reviewed processes that are
expected to ensure that the resources are allocated to genuinely promising scientific
opportunities. Peer review processes are not without their drawbacks, but they have the great
advantage of putting every proposal through a rigorous “quality control” process controlled by
experts in the field and thus of increasing the odds that the research will contribute meaningfully
to the body of fundamental science. The authors stress, however, that the tight links that typically
exist between public and private researchers in this sector serve to mitigate the risk that publicly
funded research will become too removed from the problems and issues that are likely to have
real world application. Many publicly funded researchers work closely with private companies
and many privately funded researchers publish widely in the public literature and participate in
academic conferences.

In the case of the Internet, in contrast, Greenstein stresses the unique role of DARPA in enabling
fundamental, leading edge research unencumbered by broader peer review. He focuses particular
attention on DARPA’s practice of funding “wild ducks” – creative researchers who were not
constrained by institutional expectations. He also details the importance of involving a wide
variety of researchers from many different backgrounds. Furthermore, program officers relied
not only on their own deep knowledge of the technology in making critical funding decisions,
but also on constantly bringing the network of researchers together to share ideas and to
exchange criticism. They thus appear to have created a “market place for ideas” that was
intensely robust and that generated very significant innovation. In both cases, the vast majority of
publicly funded research was conducted through extramural performers, something that may also
have contributed to the formation of effective links between research and practice. In general, the
histories described in this volume highlight the fact that in each of these sectors, academic
interaction with industry has been a two-way street – one in which important knowledge,
expertise, people, and access to facilities have flowed in both directions.

Third, each of our authors stresses the important role that well designed institutional mechanisms
have played in effectively diffusing the results of federally funded work. In semiconductors and
computers, for example, the federal government ensured the effective transfer of knowledge by
requiring grant recipients to conduct seminars and distribute publications that actively
disseminated information to others in the field. When AT&T developed the transistor, the
military services that supported the company’s transistor research also encouraged the
dissemination of transistor technology. The proceedings of symposia funded by the military and
held by Bell Labs (the research arm of AT&T) in the 1950s were widely distributed, and one
produced two thick volumes on semiconductor technology that became known as “the Bible.”


                                                                                                     9
Greenstein’s history of the Internet similarly provides a description of how DARPA’s insistence
that new technologies be embodied in prototypes and widely shared with other researchers led to
the development of a powerful selection environment that mimicked the role of the market.
Problems were quickly identified, and technologies that were found to be useful were
immediately incorporated into other innovations, triggering a virtuous cycle of innovation that
spread useful ideas rapidly around the research community.

Wright and Shih stress the critical role that the combination of SAESs and the federally funded
agricultural extension service played in developing locally appropriate technologies and in
ensuring their widespread diffusion. The authors explore the ways in which this structure
balanced federal and state roles by combining federal financial support with state management of
administration and direction of research. Wright and Shih suggest that the resulting structure
provided an avenue to address local research needs while also exploiting interstate competition
to motivate fruitful research.

The life sciences industry is also characterized by a particularly vibrant interchange between the
public and private sectors. In their extensive discussion of the history and institutions that
support this lively interface, Cockburn, Stern and Zausner stress that the life sciences innovation
network is highly decentralized and involves multiple linkages between and among different
institutions, including universities, start-up firms, established biotechnology companies,
pharmaceutical firms, government, and venture capitalists. The authors identify a number of
factors as particularly important to maintaining this network. For example, they credit the
combination of the Bayh-Dole Act, which allowed federally funded researchers to take title to
their inventions and the Diamond v Chakrabarty decision, which established that genetically
engineered organisms were eligible for patent protection, as instrumental in laying the
foundations for the dynamic early-stage commercialization.

They also suggest that the creation of academic medical centers, which co-locate publicly funded
researchers working on fundamental problems with doctors who are actively treating patients,
was a particularly important institutional invention. Although this structure was initially regarded
with some suspicion, it has proved to be very fruitful – the authors suggest that it has led to
numerous Nobel prizes, and has to numerous findings that were both fundamental scientific
discoveries and also the basis for new commercially oriented technologies.

Several chapters in this volume explore the efficacy of public/private partnerships as
mechanisms to ensure that publicly funded research is widely diffused. Here no single lesson
emerges. Arora and Gambardella, for example, explore the history of the synthetic rubber
program in World War II. They suggest that the program met two of its initial objectives: it
succeeded in greatly expanding the scale of synthetic rubber production and in improving
synthetic rubber quality, and it attracted many new firms to the industry. It did not, however,
make much progress towards its third goal, the generation and diffusion of significant new
knowledge about polymers. Arora and Gambardella suggest that this may have been because the
government insisted that participating firms adhere to a common recipe – thus slowing down the
rate of innovation, and leading the many research programs within the participating firms to be
kept rigorously distinct from the publicly funded efforts.

                                                                                                 10
In the case of agriculture, in contrast, Wright and Shih describe a number of cases in which
public/private partnerships appear to have played an extremely positive role in both stimulating
and diffusing critical knowledge. They note, for example, that research consortium models such
as those adopted by the Latin American Maize Project (LAMP) and the Germplasm
Enhancement of Maize Project (GEM) have been lauded for productively balancing public goods
research with commercial viability. They also note, however, that while the U.S. Department of
Agriculture has formed at least 700 cooperative research and development agreements with
private firms, and while these have produced and commercialized some important innovations,
researchers continue to be concerned that these arrangements will divert funds away from more
basic research towards more applied work.

Last but not least, the research presented here shows that public funding of research can also play
a critically important role in training the scientific and technical personnel who become the
backbone of an innovative private sector.

Cockburn, Stern, and Zausner, for example, suggest that this dynamic has been fundamental to
the development of the extraordinarily innovative private sector that characterizes the life
sciences. They note, for example, that the practice of funding public research through peer
reviewed extramural NIH funding has created a high level of competition for funds and has
supported the development of departments in universities focused on the biosciences. Within
these departments, grant-supported training of PhD and postdoctoral students engaging in
frontier research has helped to create a mobile, knowledge-based workforce that has moved
fluidly between industry and academia. Between the early 1970s and today, the number of life
science doctorate holders employed in academia more than doubled and there has also been a
significant expansion in the number of bachelors levels students who receive a degree in the life
sciences fields. Universities have played a similarly critical role in the chemical industry by
institutionalizing the learning being created by firms and by training students. Arora and
Gambardella credit universities for creating the disciplines of petroleum engineering, chemical
engineering, polymer chemistry, and polymer engineering.

Mowery makes the point that federal support of fundamental R&D in semiconductors and
computers played an instrumental role in building the “R&D infrastructure” – the institutions
that identified and trained the highly skilled people whose work was fundamental to innovation
in the commercial sector. For example in the case of the software industry, the SAGE air defense
project acted as a “university” of sorts for hundreds of software programmers – a development
that laid the foundation for the future development of the industry within the United States.
Similarly, the (much later) development of the so called “shrink wrapped” or “mass market”
software industry was greatly aided by a (largely federally funded) university-based research
complex. Greenstein makes an analogous point in the case of the Internet, suggesting that many
of the key players who went on to private sector careers developed their expertise in the context
of early government-funded work.

Taken together the work presented here is thus broadly consistent with much of the current
energy innovation policy literature: in the highly innovative industries reviewed here public
                                                                                                11
funding for fundamental research was not only significant and sustained but also managed in
such a way that it was tightly linked to practice, widely diffused and led to the generation of a
highly trained private sector workforce. The ways in which this was accomplished, however,
differ significantly across each industry, with each history highlighting governance mechanisms
that may be worth considering in the energy context.


Demand and Induced Innovation

Rapidly growing demand plays two key roles in stimulating innovation. First and foremost, it
signals a plausibly large and potentially rapidly growing market – something that greatly
accelerates private-sector investment in innovation and the rapid diffusion of new technologies.
Second, and perhaps more subtly, growing demand provides an important opportunity for
immediate feedback from the market, whereby new product development underpins innovation
that is more directly responsive to real market needs and less likely to fall prey to the isolation of
the ivory tower.

In every one of the sectors explored here, rapidly growing demand triggered both extensive
private sector investment and extensive diffusion of new technology. For example in Cockburn,
Stern, and Zausner’s review of innovation in the life sciences suggests that one of the reasons
R&D investment rates in the biopharmaceutical industry have remained so consistently high is
because private firms have been consistently assured of robust demand for innovative products,
as historically so many health care needs have remained unmet. The authors note that the nature
of demand for biopharmaceuticals has profoundly affected the life sciences innovation system.
Intrinsically high willingness to pay for products that extend life or improve the quality of life—
especially in the notably price-insensitive U.S. healthcare delivery system—has translated into
relatively price-inelastic and stable demand. As a result, firms have been able to secure
significant returns over a long period of time by focusing on the development and
commercialization of innovative and novel biotherapeutic compounds. In agriculture, Wright and
Shih find that similarly unmet needs – for higher yields and improved crop varieties able to
withstand extreme weather, weed encroachment, and constantly evolving pests – have acted as a
strong stimulus to innovation.

In both the semiconductor and computer industries, the large-scale entry of private firms
coincided with a decline in prices, partly as a result of early government purchases, and an
explosion in demand as both technologies allowed customers to do things that had never been
done before. Similarly, the early commercialization of the Internet – and the excitement about its
potential uses – was associated with a rush of private firms into the industry and a dramatic
increase in the pace of innovation. Arora and Gambardella, in their chapter on the chemical
industry, suggest that the explosion in demand for chemicals that accompanied the rapid
industrialization of the early twentieth century was a critical factor in persuading private firms to
invest heavily in chemical research. They also note that a lack of commercial demand was almost
certainly the most important factor leading to the perceived failure of the government’s Synfuels
programs.

                                                                                                    12
As many scholars have noted, one of the major barriers to the replication of these kinds of
dynamics in the energy industry is the fact that “low carbon” or “carbon free” energy is typically
indistinguishable from “dirty” energy at the point of consumption. In the industries whose
history we include here – in agriculture, chemicals, semiconductors, computers, the Internet and
biopharmaceuticals – once the technology reached some critical threshold of performance,
demand exploded because the new technologies offered dramatic improvements over existing
products, in many cases meeting consumer needs that had never been met before. This is
unlikely to be the case with energy innovation.

Many authors working within the energy innovation policy literature have therefore argued that
the single most important thing public policy can do to support the accelerated development and
deployment of clean energy technologies is to create demand for low-carbon energy (Aghion et
al, 2007; Anadon et al. 2009a, 2009b; Newell 2008, 2010; Stavins, 2008; Weiss and Bonvillian
2009). Attention has focused on two kinds of mechanisms: on the creation of a “price” for
carbon through some kind of tax or cap and trade regime; and/or on the direct creation of
markets through, for example, the imposition of renewable energy standards in energy
purchasing or through the direct government support of “first in class” technology
implementation through subsidy or purchase.

Proponents of the first approach stress its likely economic and technical efficiency (Stavins,
2008; Newell 2010; Aghion et al 2007). For example Mowery et al. (2009) suggest that a
“Manhattan” or “Apollo” project approach is not an appropriate model for clean energy
innovation. In the defense and space industries, the government can entirely define the nature of
customer demand, because it is the final customer. In the case of clean energy, however, Mowery
et al. argue that it is deeply implausible to think that any discrete government program could
foresee the precise technological solutions that will be appropriate. This is particularly true given
that these technologies will need to be deployed throughout the world by many different actors,
the deployment decisions will require huge outlays of private funds, and their largely embryonic
state means that they will continue to evolve and improve over many years.
Proponents of the second approach, in contrast, stress the need for public subsidies to cross the
“valley of death” between technological proof of concept and first commercialization, suggesting
that this valley is likely to be particularly wide and expensive in the case of energy (Lester 2009;
Ogden, Podesta and Deutch, 2008).

The results presented below are consistent with both perspectives. On the one hand, there are
several cases in which the federal government acted as the “first customer” for a new technology,
arguably providing the critical support that was required to bridge the gap between prototype and
private commercialization. Mowery’s account of the early development of the semiconductor
industry is an intriguing example of this dynamic in action. He documents how the prospect of
large military procurement contracts in the early years of the semiconductor industry acted as a
“prize,” stimulating widespread entry and extensive innovation. He also details the important
role that early military demand played in driving up industry production volumes and driving
down production costs to the point where the new technology became commercially viable. He
contrasts the success of these early efforts with the much more mixed track record of the Very
High Speed Integrated Circuit (VHSIC) program – an early 1980s program that failed to meet its

                                                                                                  13
objectives and failed to successfully compete with the U.S. semiconductor market, which by then
was dominated by commercial applications.

Mowery also documents the central role that federal procurement played in the early days of the
computer industry. The first electronic U.S. digital computer was purchased by the military, and
the first fully operational stored program computer built in the United States was purchased by
the National Bureau of Standards. Even in the case of IBM’s 650 -- the most commercially
successful machine built in the 1950s -- the projected sales of 50 machines to the federal
government was critical to IBM’s decision to move the computer to full scale commercial
development. In the 1970s and 1980s, the government’s role as purchaser of high performance
computer equipment remained significant. Mowery further argues that federal procurement
fostered the early development of the software industry. The rapid growth of the industry
between 1969 and 1980 that gave the U.S. industry a worldwide advantage was spurred by
federal willingness to invest in large, complex software development projects at a time when the
commercial market for such projects did not exist.

Early government demand also looms large in Greenstein’s account of how the Defense
Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) funded research that proved ultimately to be
immensely useful despite the absence of immediate commercial demand. Greenstein makes the
point that DARPA’s investments in the development of large-scale packet switching and a
“networks of networks” were considered highly risky, and that no one foresaw any commercial
application for them. This is not to say, however, that the early research went forward without
any interaction with potential customers, or without some sense of what demand might look like.
Rather, the military had identified potential military uses for some of the new technology, and
this potential military application shaped the early DARPA research.

Similarly while it is the case that in none of the industries whose history is outlined below did the
government explicitly set a price for the new technology, Cockburn, Stern, and Zausner suggest
that in the case of the life sciences the government has played a critical role in sustaining demand
for innovative biopharmaceuticals. They hypothesize that--“whether by accident or design”-- the
interaction between the patent system, the FDA regulatory process, and the way care is paid for
within the U.S. healthcare system, provide strong incentives for breakthrough innovation. The
combination of a high willingness to pay for products, insurance that insulates purchasers from
paying the marginal price, and the Hatch-Waxman regulatory framework provide strong
incentives for the private sector to develop blockbuster therapies. These factors also provide
incentives to develop a stream of innovations over time, as the threat of generic entry upon
patent expiration means that the returns to any single innovation are transitory).

What are the implications of these histories for our understanding of the role of government in
creating demand for low-carbon energy? The industries we explore here differ crucially from
energy in that one of the most important outcomes of innovation in each of them has been the
creation of highly differentiated products that have met hitherto unmet needs, while “clean”
energy cannot be easily differentiated at the point of delivery. It is thus difficult to imagine
creating demand for low-carbon energy without government intervention – in the form of a price
for greenhouse gas emissions, purchase mandates or subsidies. Much ink has been spilled on the

                                                                                                  14
question of which of these interventions is likely to be the most economically efficient (See, for
example, Popp et al., 2008 and Jaffe et al 2005). The histories contained in this volume do not
attempt to resolve this debate, but they do suggest that each may be effective, and they
underscore the imperative of inducing clean energy demand if we are to see substantial,
sustained, private-sector investment in energy innovation and the rapid deployment of new
technologies.


Enabling Competition: Antitrust, Intellectual Property and Standards Policy.

Accelerating innovation requires increasing both the supply of and the demand for new
technologies. Beyond supply and demand, however, the theme that emerges most clearly from
our histories is the important role that public policy has played in fostering vigorous competition
and “markets for technology” in each industry and the centrally important role that this
competition has played in accelerating innovation. Here again our histories suggest that there is
no single policy or set of policies that is always appropriate, but that policy design must be
actively tailored to the structure of the industry and the particular circumstances of the market.
They focus attention on three policy instruments in particular: antitrust, intellectual property and
support for public open standards.

In the case of chemicals, Arora and Gambardella explore in some depth the role that
appropriately narrowly-defined patents and aggressive antitrust enforcement have played in
encouraging entry in general and the rise of specialized engineering firms in particular. They
note that new technologies in the industry have typically diffused extraordinarily fast, largely
because of the presence of a robust market for technology fueled by the activities of small,
independent specialized engineering firms. These firms not only build about 75 percent of all
new plants, allowing easier entry into the industry, but are also responsible for about 35 percent
of all new process inventions. Arora and Gambardella suggest that the existence of this market
reflects the fact that patents in chemicals are both precise and narrowly specified. This makes the
patents effective in protecting particular innovations, but also allows competitors to enter the
industry in closely related areas.

Arora and Gambardella also suggest that antitrust action has accelerated the widespread industry
practice of licensing, focusing particularly on the cases of Standard Oil and DuPont. In 1909-
1910, Standard Oil scientist William Burton developed the first commercially successful cracking
process. It was a major innovation in refining technology, but Standard Oil was reluctant to invest in
the process. However as a result of an anti-trust suit, the original Standard Oil was broken up into
several firms in 1911, among which was Standard Oil of Indiana, where Burton worked. Standard
Oil of Indiana not only commercialized Burton’s process, but also licensed it to a number of other
oil refiners. Similarly, Du Pont was split into three separate firms following a successful anti-trust
suit in 1913 that also helped to convince Du Pont’s managers that the only path to future growth lay
in entering new markets through innovation, rather than through the acquisition of existing
producers.



                                                                                                   15
In the life sciences, Cockburn, Stern and Zausner note that there are multiple routes to the highly
diversified, highly innovative private sector “ecosystem” that characterizes the industry. The fact
that this is one of the very few industries in which patent rights can be crisply defined appears to
play an important role—notably by undergirding a vigorous biotechnology sector whose
numerous small firms are largely venture capital funded. They note that the industry has seen the
founding of more than 1,300 biotechnology companies in the United States and approximately
5,000 worldwide, and that by the early 2000s, 25-40 percent of all pharmaceutical sales came
from products having their origins in biotechnology. There has also been significant entry of
specialized suppliers of biomedical materials and tools (e.g., gene sequencers and biomaterials);
the development of contract research organizations that can provide expertise in areas such as
early-stage clinical trials; and the development of specialized managers, lawyers, and venture
capitalists, who together can facilitate more effective transactions in what has become an
increasingly complex web of relationships between academe, entrepreneurs, and downstream
firms. Their analysis parallels Arora and Gambardella’s suggestion that the emergence of a well
functioning “market for technology” can be hugely valuable in both stimulating private sector
innovation and in supporting its widespread diffusion. They stress the fact that both the structure
of demand and the nature of regulation has meant that competition in the industry has been
largely focused around innovation.

Greenstein’s chapter describing the history of the Internet is one of the most eloquent on this set
of issues. He suggests that effective competition was critical to the development of the Internet,
and rested on three key factors: “economic experiments, vigorous standards competition, and
entrepreneurial invention.” He stresses the crucial role that federal policy played in supporting all
three factors. On the one hand many of the established firms in the industry – including AT&T,
the “Baby Bells” and IBM – actively rejected the possibility of investment in commercializing
services related to TCP/IP (the technological “core” of what later became the internet) in the late
1980s. On the other, long standing regulation of the telecommunications industry that favored
new entry meant that the commercialization of the Internet was accompanied by a dramatic wave
of new firm foundation.

Greenstein’s account also explores the ways in which the process of standard setting in the
industry was instrumental in supporting widespread, highly distributed innovation. Many of the
key patents in the industry were publicly owned. This public ownership, coupled with the fact
that early control of the technology rested largely in the hands of public sector researchers, built
a set of processes for standard setting that has been transparent and highly participatory.
Greenstein makes the point that while this process has sometimes been frustrating, it has enabled
the development of a highly complex value chain in which private, proprietary “platforms”
coexist with public technologies in a way that makes it possible for small, innovative firms to
innovate successfully without having to reinvent the entire system.

Mowery notes the importance to the semiconductor industry of both AT&T’s ongoing antitrust
litigation and of the government’s procurement policies. Both encouraged the widespread
diffusion of semiconductor technology and subsequent rapid entry into the industry. In the early
1950s AT&T was reluctant, for antitrust reasons, to expand beyond its core base of
telecommunications, thus leaving sales of the new technology into other applications as a

                                                                                                  16
tempting market for new entrants. At the same time federal policies – driven partly by the desire
to have “second sources” available for key military components – encouraged widespread
diffusion of the new knowledge. For example Mowery describes a symposium held at Bell labs
in 1951 attended by 130 industrial representatives, 121 military personnel and 41 university
scientists whose proceedings were widely distributed at government expense. The military was
also willing to award large procurement contracts to newly founded firms, another mechanism
that Mowery suggests was instrumental to the development of a highly competitive, highly
innovative market structure that he contrasts with the very different semiconductor industries that
emerged in Germany and Japan.

Mowery describes a similar dynamic in the case of computers—documenting how the military’s
belief that a strong technical infrastructure in support of innovation could only be built by the
widest possible dissemination of technology—which led them to both use federal procurement
policies to support new firms and to invest aggressively in information diffusion. He also
describes how the IBM antitrust suit and subsequent consent decree was almost certainly
instrumental in encouraging widespread entry into the hardware industry and the entry of many
independent software vendors. He further observes that many of these entrants had been
suppliers of computer services to federal government agencies. He speculates that U.S. import
policies – which were notably more liberal than those adopted by Western European and
Japanese governments – also played an important role in stimulating the competitiveness of the
IT industry and the rapid declines in price/performance ratios that so accelerated the adoption of
IT and the subsequent U.S. dominance of the industry.

In agriculture, in contrast, Wright and Shih voice deep concern over the role that patents play in
the industry. They note the increasing evidence that multiple, mutually blocking intellectual
property claims on inputs are hindering access to research tools that can be incorporated in the
marketed products of agricultural research (Wright and Pardey 2006; Pardey et al. 2007). The
authors suggest that the increasing concentration of the industry –for example, one estimate
suggests that the top ten firms own more than half of all the agricultural biotech patents granted
through 2000 – is plausibly an attempt to retain “freedom to operate” by the major players and
suggest that it may retard innovation in the industry. Even more critically, they suggest that the
rising application of intellectual property rights to plant components and processes imposes high
transaction costs for researchers who must acquire or license fragmented proprietary inputs to
develop and commercialize a single downstream innovation. They further suggest that patents on
locked-in but otherwise non-crucial genetic technologies have been retarding innovation and
affecting the market structure of private research.

Although some energy policy analysts have explored the role of intellectual property regimes in
shaping energy innovation (Reichman et al. 2008; Popp et al 2008; Sagar and Anadon, 2009),
this has not been an area of central concern to scholars working in the field. Perhaps this
approach reflects the belief that the scale of energy investment is such that only large established
firms can be expected to introduce major innovations – but the importance of new entry to recent
progress in both wind and solar technologies at least raises the question of whether some of the
instruments that appear to have been important in the industries we study might also play an
important role in stimulating vigorous, innovation focused competition in the energy industry.

                                                                                                  17
Conclusions

At the broadest level the histories presented here are very much consistent with widely held
views within the energy innovation policy literature. In general, this literature has suggested that
greatly increasing rates of energy innovation requires creating significant demand for low carbon
technologies, substantially increased federal funding for “well-managed” research, and in at least
some cases support for the initial deployment of new technologies. As the other markets
explored in this volume do not face the same degree of unpriced environmental externality, there
is no straightforward equivalent to a carbon price in the history of agriculture, chemicals, IT or
biopharmaceuticals. Nonetheless, our authors outline a number of ways in which public policy
has often stimulated demand, particularly in the early stages of a technology’s evolution, and
confirm that the expectation of rapidly growing demand appears to have been a major stimulus to
private sector investment in innovation. Each history also confirms the centrality of publicly
funded research to the generation of innovation, particularly in the early stages of an industry’s
history, and highlights a range of institutional mechanisms that have enabled it to be
simultaneously path breaking and directly connected to industrial practice.

Our histories depart somewhat from the bulk of the energy innovation policy literature in
focusing attention on the role of vigorous competition – particularly entry – in stimulating
innovation, suggesting that in several industries a mix of public policies – including
procurement, antitrust and intellectual property protection – played an important role in
stimulating innovation by encouraging extensive competition and entry by newly founded firms.
Many of the most innovative industries profiled here have been characterized by a lively
“innovation ecosystem” that both rapidly incorporates the results of publicly funded research and
supports widespread private sector experimentation and rapid entry. There are, of course
important differences between the industries profiled here and the energy sector, but we believe
that exploring the potential of these kinds of innovation ecosystems in clean energy might be a
fruitful avenue for future research.




                                                                                                 18
References

Acemoglu, D., P. Aghion, L Burszytyn and D. Hemous “The Environment and Directed
Technological Change” Mimeo, Harvard University, April 2010. Available on line at:
http://www.economics.harvard.edu/faculty/aghion/files/Environment%20and%20Directed.pdf

Aghion P, Blundell R, Griffith R, Howitt P and Prantl S (2007) “Entry, Innovation, and Growth:
Theory and Evidence”, Review of Economics and Statistics.

Aghion, P, N. Bloom and R. Blundell, Competition and Innovation: An Inverted-U Relationship.
Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 120, No 2, Pages 701-728. May 2005.

Anadon, Laura Diaz and John P. Holdren. "Policy for Energy Technology Innovation." Chap. 5
in Acting in Time on Energy Policy. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press, May 2009.

Andadon, Laura Diaz, Kelly Sims Gallagher and Mathew Bunn: “DOE FY 2010 Budget Request
and Recovery Act Funding for Energy Research, Development, Demonstration, and
Deployment: Analysis and Recommendations” Working paper, Energy Technology Innovation
Policy Group, the Belfer Center, the Kennedy School of Government at Harvard University. June
2009.

Baldwin, Carliss and Kim Clark: Design Rules, Vol. 1: The Power of Modularity. MIT Press
2000

Berndt, Ernst R. and Neal J. Rappaport, “Price and Quality of Desktop and Mobile Personal
Computers: A Quarter Century Historical Overview,” American Economic Review, Vol. 91, No.
2, May 2001, 268-273.

Branscombe, L.M. and J.H. Keller Investing in Innovation: Creating a research and innovation
policy that works. 1999. The MIT Press, Cambridge Massachusetts.

Brynjolfsson, Erik and Lorin M. Hitt, Computing Productivity: Firm-Level Evidence. Review of
Economics and Statistics, November 2003, Vol. 85, No. 4, Pages 793-808

Bush, Vannevar “Science, the Endless Frontier”. Report to the President, 1945

Clarke, Leon. E., M. Wise, M. Placet, C. Izaurralde, J. Lurz, S. Kim, et al. 2006. Climate Change
Mitigation: An Analysis of Advanced Technology Scenarios. Pacific Northwest National
Laboratory, Richland, WA.

Cockburn, I. “Is the Pharmaceutical Industry in a Productivity Crisis?” Chapter in A. Jaffe, J.
Lerner, and S. Stern (eds.) Innovation Policy and the Economy, Volume 7. MIT Press for the
National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge MA. 2007.

Cohen, Linda and Roger Noll: The Technology Pork Barrel, Brookings, 1991

                                                                                                  19
U.S. Department of Energy (DOE). 2010. FY2011 Congressional Budget Request: Budget
Highlights. Washington, DC: U.S. DOE.

Duggan ,MG and William N. Evans (2008) "Estimating the Impact of Medical Innovation: A
Case Study of HIV Antiretroviral Treatments," Forum for Health Economics & Policy: Vol. 11:
Issue 2 (Economics of the HIV Epidemic), Article 1. Available at:
http://www.bepress.com/fhep/11/2/1

Edmonds, Jae, M. A. Wise, James J. Dooley, S. H. Kim, S. J. Smith, Paul. J. Runci, et al. 2007.
Global Energy Technology Strategy: Addressing Climate Change. Joint Global Change Research
Institute, Battelle Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, College Park, MD.
Energy Information Association Annual Energy Outlook, 2008

Energy Information Administration (EIA). 2010. International Energy Outlook 2010. DOE/EIA-
0484(2010). Washington, DC: EIA.

Gallagher, K.S, J.P. Holdren and A.D. Sagar. “Energy Technology Innovation” Annual review of
Environmental Resources. 2006. 31: 193-237

Gompers, Paul, and Josh Lerner, 1999, Capital Market Imperfections in Venture Markets: A
Report to the Advanced Technology Program, Washington, Advanced Technology Program, U.S.
Department of Commerce.

Grübler, Arnulf and Nebojša Nakićenović and David Victor. “Modeling Technological Change:
Implications for the Global Environment. Annu. Rev. Energy Environment. 1999 24: 545-69.

International Energy Agency (IEA). 2009. World Energy Outlook 2009. Paris: OECD/IEA.

———. 2010. Energy Technology RD&D Budgets (2010 Edition). Paris: OECD/IEA.

Henderson, Rebecca. "Of Life Cycles Real and Imaginary: The Unexpectedly Long Old Age of
Optical Lithography" Research Policy, 1995, Vol. 24, pp 631-643.

Jorgenson, D.W. “Productivity and Growth: Alternative Scenarios,” in D.W. Jorgenson and
C.W. Wessner, eds., Productivity and Cycliality in Semiconductors (National Academies Press,
2004]

Jorgenson, D. W. and K. Stiroh (2000). “Raising the Speed Limit: U.S. Economic Growth in the
Information Age,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1: 125-211.

Lester, Richard. “American’s Energy Innovation Problem”. MIT-IPC-Energy Innovation
Working Paper 09-007, November 2009. Available on line at:
http://web.mit.edu/ipc/research/energy/pdf/EIP_09-007.pdf


                                                                                            20
Lichtenberg, Frank "The impact of new drug launches on longevity: evidence from longitudinal
disease-level data from 52 countries, 1982-2001," International Journal of Health Care Finance
and Economics 5, 2005, pp. 47-73.

Manne and Richels. 1992. Buying Greenhouse Insurance. Cambridge: MIT Press.

Mowery, D.C., and R.R. Nelson, “Conclusion: Explaining Industrial Leadership,” in D.C.
Mowery and R.R. Nelson, eds., Sources of Industrial Leadership (New York: Cambridge
University Press, 1999)

Mowery, David and Nathan Rosenberg “The influence of market demand upon innovation: a
critical review of some recent empirical studies.” Research Policy, 8 (1979) 102-153

Mowery, David C., Richard R. Nelson and Ben R. Martin “Technology Policy and Global
Warming: Why New Policy Models are Needed (Or Why Putting New Wine in Ol d Bottles
Won’t Work). Working paper, Nesta, Summer 2009. Available on line at:
http://www.nesta.org.uk/library/documents/technology-policy-global-warming.pdf

Narayanamurti, Venakatesh, Laura Anadon, and Ambuj Sagar. 2009a. "Institutions for Energy
Innovation: A Transformational Challenge." Energy Technology Innovation Policy research
group, Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs, Harvard Kennedy School, September.
Available at:
http://belfercenter.ksg.harvard.edu/publication/19572/institutions_for_energy_innovation.html

Narayanamurti, Venkatesh, Laura D. Anadon, and Ambuj D. Sagar. 2009b. "Transforming
Energy Innovation." Issues in Science and Technology (Fall 2009): 57-64.

National Science Foundation, Division of Science Resource Statistics, 2008

Nelson, Richard National Innovation Systems: A comparative analysis Oxford University Press,
1993.

Nemet, G.F. and D.M. Kammen: “U.S. energy research and development: Declining investment,
increasing need, and the feasibility of expansion.” Energy Policy, 35 (2007) 746-755.

Newell, Richard G. 2010. The role of markets and policies in delivering innovation for climate
change mitigation. Oxford Review of Economic Policy 26(2): 253-269.

Newell, Richard “A U.S. Innovation strategy for Climate Change Mitigation. The Brookings
Institution, Discussion Paper 2008-15, December 2008. Available at:
http://www.brookings.edu/papers/2008/12_climate_change_newell.aspx.

P. Ogden, J. Podesta and J. Deutch. “A new strategy to spur energy innovation”. Issues in
Science and Technology, Winter 2008.


                                                                                                 21
Pardey PG, J James, J Alston, S Wood, B Koo, E Binenbaum, T Hurley, and P Glewwe. (2007)
Science, Technology, and Skills [International Science and Technology Practice and Policy
(INSTEPP). Rome: CGIAR and Department of Applied Economics, University of Minnesota, for
FAO.

Popp, David, Richard G. Newell, and Adam B. Jaffe. 2008. Energy, the environment, and
technological change. Prepared for publication in Handbook of Economics of Technical Change,
ed. Bronwyn H. Hall and Nathan Rosenberg. Oxford: North-Holland.

Reichman, Jerome, Arti K. Rai, Richard G. Newell, and Jonathan B. Weiner. 2008. “Intellectual
property and Alternatives: Strategies for a Green Revolution.” Energy, Environment, and
Development Programme Paper 08/03. Chatham House, London, UK.

Sagar, A.D. and L.D. Anadon “Climate Change: IPR and Technology Transfer” Working paper
prepared for the UNFCCC Secretariat, September 2009.

Schumpeter, Joseph A. (1934) The Theory of Economic Development, Cambridge, MA: Harvard
     University Press, 1934.

Stavins, Robert. “Addressing Climate Change with a Comprehensive U.S. Cap and Trade
System” The Oxford Review of Economic Policy, Volume 24, Number 2, 2008, pp. 298-321.

Weiss, Charles and Bonvillian, William: Structuring an Energy Technology Revolution. The
MIT Press, 2009.

Wright BD, and PG Pardey. (2007) “Changing intellectual property regimes: implications for
developing country agriculture.” International Journal of Technology and Globalization,
2(1/2):93–114.




                                                                                             22
