                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     THE CONTRIBUTION OF THE MINIMUM WAGE
                   TO U.S. WAGE INEQUALITY OVER THREE DECADES:
                                  A REASSESSMENT

                                          David H. Autor
                                           Alan Manning
                                        Christopher L. Smith

                                        Working Paper 16533
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16533


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2010




We thank Daron Acemoglu, Joshua Angrist, Lawrence Katz, David Lee, Thomas Lemieux, Christina
Patterson, Emmanuel Saez, Gary Solon and many seminar participants for valuable suggestions. We
also thank David Lee and Arindrajit Dube for providing data on minimum wage laws by state. Any
opinions and conclusions expressed herein are those of the authors and do not indicate concurrence
with other members of the research staff of the Federal Reserve, the Board of Governors, or the National
Bureau of Economic Research. Autor acknowledges financial support from the National Science
Foundation (CAREER SES-0239538).

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by David H. Autor, Alan Manning, and Christopher L. Smith. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Contribution of the Minimum Wage to U.S. Wage Inequality over Three Decades: A
Reassessment
David H. Autor, Alan Manning, and Christopher L. Smith
NBER Working Paper No. 16533
November 2010, Revised February 2014
JEL No. J3,J31,J33,J38

                                             ABSTRACT

We reassess the effect of state and federal minimum wages on U.S. earnings inequality using two additional
decades of data and far greater variation in minimum wages than was available to earlier studies. We
argue that prior literature suffers from two sources of bias and propose an IV strategy to address both.
We find that the minimum wage reduces inequality in the lower tail of the wage distribution (the 50/
10 wage ratio), but the impacts are typically less than half as large as those reported elsewhere and
are almost negligible for males. Nevertheless, the estimated effects extend to wage percentiles where
the minimum is nominally non-binding, implying spillovers. However, we show that spillovers and
measurement error (absent spillovers) have similar implications for the effect of the minimum on the
shape of the lower tail of the measured wage distribution. With available precision, we cannot reject the
hypothesis that estimated spillovers to non-binding percentiles are due to reporting artifacts. Accepting
this null, the implied effect of the minimum wage on the actual wage distribution is smaller than the
effect of the minimum wage on the measured wage distribution.


David H. Autor                                       Christopher L. Smith
Department of Economics, E17-216                     Federal Reserve Board
MIT                                                  Research Division
77 Massachusetts Avenue                              Stop # 80
Cambridge, MA 02139                                  20th & C Sts., NW
and NBER                                             Washington, DC 20551-0001
dautor@mit.edu                                       Christopher.L.Smith@frb.gov

Alan Manning
Economics Department
London School of Economics
Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE
a.manning@lse.ac.uk
Introduction

    While economists have vigorously debated the effect of the minimum wage on employment
levels for at least six decades (cf. Stigler, 1946), its contribution to the evolution of earnings
inequality was largely ignored prior to the seminal contribution of DiNardo, Fortin and Lemieux
(1996, DFL hereafter). Using kernel density techniques, DFL produced overwhelming visual
evidence that the minimum wage substantially ‘held up’ the lower tail of the US earnings
distribution in 1979, yielding a pronounced spike in hourly earnings at the nominal minimum
value, particularly for females. By 1988, however, this spike had virtually disappeared.
Simultaneously, the inequality of hourly earnings increased markedly in both the upper and
lower halves of the male and female wage distributions: between 1979 and 1988, the 50/10
(‘lower tail’) log hourly earnings ratio expanded by 11 log points overall, and by 8 and 22 log
points respectively among males and females (Table 1). To assess the causes of this rise, DFL
constructed counterfactual wage distributions that potentially accounted for the impact of
changing worker characteristics, labor demand, union penetration, and minimum wages on the
shape of the wage distribution. Comparing counterfactual with observed wage densities, DFL
concluded that the erosion of the federal minimum wage—which declined in real terms by 30
log points between 1979 and 1988—was the predominant cause of rising lower tail inequality
between 1979 and 1988, explaining two‐thirds of the growth of the 10/50 for both males and
females.1
    Though striking, a well‐understood limitation of the DFL findings is that the estimated
counterfactual wage distributions derive exclusively from reweighting of observed wage
densities rather than from controlled comparisons. Thus, they are closer in spirit to simulation
than to inference. Cognizant of this limitation, DFL highlight in their conclusion that the
expansion of lower tail inequality during 1979 to 1988 was noticeably more pronounced in
‘low‐wage’ than ‘high‐wage states,’ consistent with the hypothesis that the falling federal
minimum caused a differential increase in lower tail equality in states where the minimum
wage was initially more binding. Building on this observation, Lee (1999) exploited cross‐state

1
  DFL attribute 62 percent of the growth of the female 10/50 and 65 percent of the growth of the male 10/50 to
the declining value of the minimum wage (Table III).
                                                                                                            1
variation in the gap between state median wages and the applicable federal or state minimum
wage (the ‘effective minimum’) to estimate what the share of the observed rise in wage
inequality from 1979 through 1988 was due to the falling minimum rather than changes in
underlying (‘latent’) wage inequality. Amplifying the findings of DFL, Lee concluded that more
than the entire rise of the 50/10 earnings differential between 1979 and 1988 was due to the
falling federal minimum wage; had the minimum been constant throughout this period,
observed wage inequality would have fallen.2
    There has been very little research on the impact of the minimum wage on wage inequality
since these two very influential papers, even though the data they use is now over 20 years old.
One possible reason for this is that while lower‐tail wage inequality rose dramatically in the
1980s, it has not exhibited much of a trend since then (see Figure 2A). But this does not mean
that the last 20 years contain no useful information; the extra years of data are very helpful
both because they contain a number of years in which the federal minimum was raised and
because they include a much larger number of cases where state minimum wages are above
the federal minimum wage. This proves crucial in identifying the impact of minimum wages on
wage inequality. Indeed, we show that there is insufficient cross‐state variation in the minimum
wage during the 1980s to reliably estimate the impact of the minimum wage on the shape of
the wage distribution—thus, additional years of data are needed
    The inclusion of twenty additional years of data also permits us to conduct a more thorough
analysis of the identification strategy and principle findings of Lee’s influential 1999 study.
Central to Lee’s identification strategy is the assumption that there is no correlation between
mean state wage levels and latent state wage inequality (i.e., absent the minimum wage).
Under this assumption there is no need to include state fixed effects in regression models when
estimating the impact of the minimum wage on state wage inequality, and, following this logic,
Lee’s primary models exclude state effects. We present evidence that this assumption is
strongly violated in the data, and consequently, that exclusion of state fixed effects leads Lee’s


2
  Using cross‐region rather than cross‐state variation in the ‘bindingness’ of minimum wages, Teulings (2000 and
2003) reaches similar conclusions. See also Mishel, Bernstein and Allegretto (2006, chapter 3) for an assessment of
the minimum wage’s effect on wage inequality.
                                                                                                                 2
estimates of the impact of the minimum wage on wage inequality to be upward biased for the
lower tail (10/50 inequality) and downward biased for the upper tail (90/50 inequality).
    While the conventional response to this source of bias is to include state fixed effects or
state trends, we show (as Lee also argued) that their inclusion worsens another source of bias
endemic to a regression of measures of wage inequality on other distributional statistics such
as the median: since transitory fluctuations in wages at different percentiles are only
imperfectly correlated with one another, temporary upward (downward) fluctuations in a
state’s median wage this will generally lead to a temporary increase (decrease) in lower‐tail
inequality and a temporary decrease (increase) in upper‐tail inequality. With state fixed effects
or trends included in the regression model, these transitory fluctuations become a first‐order
issue, leading to an upward bias in the estimated impact of the minimum wage on both lower
and upper tail wage inequality.3 We propose a simple instrumental variables solution to both
types of bias (i.e., stemming from transitory fluctuations and the failure of the state mean‐
variance orthogonality condition). We instrument for the effective minimum wage in each
state—that is, the log gap between the state minimum and the state median—using only
legislated variation in the state minimum and the average level of wages in a state. We find that
this approach satisfies the intuitive falsification test proposed by Lee (1999)—specifically, it
finds no impact of the minimum wage on the upper tail of the wage distribution.4
    After addressing both sources of bias, we find that the impact of the minimum wage on
inequality is substantially smaller than that found by Lee (1999), though still economically
consequential. For example, conventional OLS estimates, comparable to those in Lee (1999),
indicate that the falling real minimum wage accounted for almost the entirety of the observed
increase in the 50/10 in the 1980s; had the minimum been at its real 1989 level in both 1979
and 1989, OLS models imply that 50/10 wage inequality would have risen by only 3 log points
for females, and would have fallen for the male and pooled distributions. By contrast, 2SLS


3
  Recognizing this concern, Lee (1999) elected to use models without state fixed effects as his preferred
specification and also took steps to reduce transitory fluctuations in the state median stemming from
measurement error. We discuss his approach further below.
4
  Lee’s own estimates for the female wage distribution satisfy this falsification test, while those for the male and
pooled‐gender wage distributions fail the test.
                                                                                                                       3
models find that, under the same counterfactual assumptions, female 50/10 inequality would
have risen by 12‐15 log points, male inequality would have risen slightly, and pooled gender
inequality would have risen by around 7‐8 log points. In most specifications, the decline in the
real value of the minimum wage explains 30 to 50 percent of the rise in lower‐tail wage
inequality in the 1980s.
    The finding that the impact of the minimum wage on wage inequality is only half as large as
previously estimated also helps to explain another puzzle. Between 1979 and 2012, no more
than thirteen percent of all hours worked by females, six percent of hours worked by males,
and nine percent of hours worked in the aggregate were paid at or below the federal or
applicable state minimum wage (see Figure 1 and Table 1, columns 4 and 8); indeed, only for
females was the minimum wage directly binding at or above the 10th percentile.5 This
observation implies that any impact of the minimum wage on 50/10 male and pooled gender
wage inequality must arise from a spillover effect, whereby the minimum wage raises the
wages of workers earning above the minimum.6 Such spillovers are a potentially important and
little understood effect of minimum wage laws and, and Lee’s estimates imply that these
spillover effects are very large. Our estimates, while substantially smaller than those reported
by Lee (1999), also imply important spillovers from the binding minimum wage to quantiles of
the wage distribution where the minimum is not binding. Distinct from prior literature, we
explore a novel interpretation of this result: measurement error. In particular, we assess
whether the spillovers found in our samples, based on the Current Population Survey, may
result from measurement errors in wage reporting rather than from true spillovers. This can
occur if a fraction of minimum wage workers report their wages inaccurately, leading to a hump
in the wage distribution centered on the minimum wage rather than (or in addition to) a spike
at the minimum. After bounding the potential magnitude of these measurement errors, we are
unable to reject the hypothesis that the apparent spillover from the minimum wage to higher


5
  We define percentiles based on the distribution of paid hours, which weights the earnings distribution by hours
worked.
6
  We assume no disemployment effects at the modest minimum wage levels mandated in the US, an assumption
that is supported by a large recent literature (e.g., Card, Katz and Krueger, 1993; Card and Krueger, 2000; Neumark
and Wascher, 2000).
                                                                                                                 4
(non‐covered) percentiles is spurious. That is, while the spillovers are present in the data, they
may not be present in the distribution of wages actually paid. These results do not rule out the
possibility of true spillovers. But they underscore that spillovers estimated with conventional
household survey data sources must be treated with caution since they cannot necessarily be
distinguished from measurement artifacts with available precision.
     The paper proceeds as follows. Section I discusses data and sources of identification.
Section II presents the measurement framework and estimates a set of causal effects estimates
models that, like Lee (1999), explicitly account for the bite of the minimum wage in estimating
its effect on the wage distribution. We compare parameterized OLS and 2SLS models and
document the pitfalls that arise in the OLS estimation. Section III uses point estimates from the
main regression models to calculate counterfactual changes in wage inequality, holding the real
minimum wage constant. Section IV analyzes the extent to which apparent spillovers may be
due to measurement error. The final section concludes.

I.   Change in the federal minimum wage and variation in state minimum wages

     In July of 2007, the real value of the U.S. Federal minimum wage fell to its lowest point in
over three decades, reflecting a nearly continuous decline from a 1979 high point, including
two decade‐long spans in which the minimum wage remained fixed in nominal terms—1981
through 1990, and 1997 through 2007. Perhaps responding to federal inaction, numerous
states have over the past two decades legislated state minimum wages that exceed the federal
level. At the end of the 1980s, 12 states’ minimum wages exceeded the federal level; by 2008,
this number had reached 31 (subsequently reduced to 26 by the 2009 federal minimum wage
increase). Consequently, the real value of the minimum wage applicable to the average worker
in 2007 was not much lower than in 1997, and was significantly higher than if states had not
enacted their own minimum wages. Moreover, the post‐2007 federal increases brought the
minimum wage faced by the average worker up to a real level not seen since the mid‐1980s.
Appendix Table 1 illustrates the extent of state minimum wage variation between 1979 and
2012.


                                                                                                5
   These differences in legislated minimum wages across states and over time are one of two
sources of variation that we use to identify the impact of the minimum wage on the wage
distribution. The second source of variation we use, following Lee (1999), is variation in the
‘bindingness’ of the minimum wage, stemming from the observation that a given legislated
minimum wage should have a larger effect on the shape of the wage distribution in a state with
a lower wage level. Table 1 provides examples. In each year, there is significant variation in the
percentile of the state wage distribution where the state or federal minimum wage “binds.” For
instance, in 1979 the minimum wage bound at the 12th percentile of the female wage
distribution for the median state, but it bound at the 5th percentile in Alaska and the 28th
percentile in Mississippi. This variation in the bite or bindingness of the minimum wage was due
mainly to cross‐state differences in wage levels in 1979, since only Alaska had a state minimum
wage that exceeded the federal minimum. In later years, particularly the current decade, this
variation was also due to differences in the value of state minimum wages.

A. Sample and variable construction

   Our analysis uses the percentiles of states’ annual wage distributions as the primary
outcomes of interest. We form these samples by pooling all individual responses from the
Current Population Survey Merged Outgoing Rotation Group (CPS MORG) for each year. We use
the reported hourly wage for those who report being paid by the hour, otherwise we calculate
the hourly wage as weekly earnings divided by hours worked in the prior week. We limit the
sample to individuals age 18 through 64, and we multiply top‐coded values by 1.5. We exclude
self‐employed individuals and those with wages imputed by the BLS. To reduce the influence of
outliers, we Winsorize the top two percentiles of the wage distribution in each state, year, sex
grouping (male, female or pooled) by assigning the 97th percentile value to the 98th and 99th
percentiles. Using these individual wage data, we calculate all percentiles of state wage
distributions by sex for 1979‐2012, weighting individual observations by their CPS sampling
weight multiplied by their weekly hours worked.
   Our primary analysis is performed at the state‐year level, but minimum wages often change
part way through the year. We address this issue by assigning the value of the minimum wage

                                                                                                6
that was in effect for the longest time throughout the calendar year in a state and year. For
those states and years in which more than one minimum wage was in effect for six months in
the year, the maximum of the two is used. We have also tried assigning the maximum of the
minimum wage within a year as the applicable minimum wage, and this leaves our conclusions
unchanged.



II.   Reduced form estimation of minimum wage effects on the wage distribution

A. General specification and OLS estimates

      To begin, we consider our primary estimation equation and potential biases from
straightforward OLS estimation of this model. The general model we estimate for the evolution
of inequality at any point in the wage distribution (the difference between the log wage at the
pth percentile and the log of the median) for state s in year t is of the form:



                 50

                         50                        50                            x
                                                                                                             (1)

In this equation,             represents the log real wage at percentile p in state s at time t; time‐
invariant state effects are represented by              ; state‐specific trends are represented by
         ; time effects represented by           ; and transitory effects represented by             , which
we assume to be independent of the state and year effects and trends.
      In equation (1),        is the log minimum wage for that state/year. We follow Lee (1999) in
defining the bindingness of the minimum wage to be the log difference between the minimum
wage and the median (Lee refers to this as the effective minimum), and in modeling the impact
of the minimum wage to be quadratic.7 The quadratic term is important to capture the idea
that a change in the minimum wage is likely to have more impact on the wage distribution


7
  Hence, in this formulation a “more binding minimum wage” is a minimum wage that is closer to the median,
resulting in a higher (less negative) effective minimum wage.
                                                                                                               7
where it is more binding.8 By differentiating (1) we have that the predicted impact of a change
in the minimum wage on a percentile is given by                     2                      50 .
    First, consider what happens if we estimate equation (1) by OLS excluding the state fixed
effects and trends (which is the preferred specification from Lee 1999).9 Column 1 of Tables 2A,
and 2B reports estimates of this specification. We report the marginal effects of the effective
minimum for selected percentiles when estimated at the weighted average of the effective
minimum over all states and all years between 1979 and 2012. Figures 3A, 3C, and 3E provide a
graphical representation of these estimated marginal effects for all percentiles. Similar to Lee,
we find large significant effects of the minimum wage on the lower percentiles of the wage
distribution that extend throughout all percentiles below the median for the male, female and
pooled wage distributions. Also note that, with the exception of the male estimates, the upper
tail ‘effects’ are small and insignificantly different from zero, which might be considered a
necessary condition for the results to be credible estimates of the impact of the minimum wage
on wage inequality at any point in the distribution.

B. Potential biases, and the need for state fixed effects / state time trends

    Next, we consider possible causes of bias in estimates of (1). It is helpful to consider the
following general model for the median log wage for state s in year t:

                                     50                 x                                                       (1)

That is, the median wage for the state is a function of a state effect,              , a state trend,      ,a
common year effect,         , and a transitory effect,       .
    The existence, extent, and direction of bias depend on the covariance of the effective
minimum wage terms with the errors in the equation. One natural assumption—which we


8
  Since the log wage distribution has greater mass towards its center than at its tail, a 1 log point rise in the
minimum wage affects a larger fraction of wages when the minimum lies at the 40th percentile of the distribution
than when it lies at the 1st percentile.
9
  We include time effects in all of our estimation, as does Lee 1999. We estimate the model separately for each p
(from 1 to 99), and impose no restrictions on the coefficients or error structure across equations.

                                                                                                                 8
maintain through the course of our estimation—is that                                   50 ,       50        0, that
is, even after allowing for the fact that they may have a state minimum higher than the federal
minimum, the bindingness of the minimum wage is lower in high wage states. Under this
assumption, the possible sources of bias in estimates of equation (1) arise from the potential
correlation between the residuals in the first and second equations. We consider two sources
of this bias. The first is that             ,          may not be zero—that is, transitory fluctuations in
state wage medians may be correlated with the gap between the state wage median and other
wage percentiles. The second is that, because there are no state effects in our initial estimates
of equation (1),             ,          may be correlated with             ,     —that is, that there may be a
non‐zero correlation between the state fixed effects and trends in the underlying level of
inequality on the one hand and the state fixed effects and trends in the median on the other.
     We begin by considering the first form of bias—stemming from transitory fluctuations—and
assume for the moment that the latter correlations are zero, effectively imposing that in the
absence of the minimum wage, high median wage states would not have systematic different
levels of inequality from low median wage states. Under these assumptions, the only potential
source of bias comes from the correlation between the transitory components in equations (1)
and (2), that is,           ,          . This covariance need not be zero. In fact, one might naturally
expect that transitory shocks to the median do not translate one‐for‐one to other percentiles.
If, plausibly, the effects dissipate as one moves further from the median, this would generate
bias due to the non‐zero correlation between shocks to the median wage and measured
inequality throughout the distribution. Another possible source of such a correlation is
sampling variation, which leads to a form of division bias (Borjas, 1980) since the measured
median is included on the left‐ and right‐hand sides of (1).10 Either form of bias implies that we



10
   As discussed in footnote 3, Lee (1999) recognizes the potential bias stemming from sampling variation and
attempts to address it by using two different measures of central tendency in the dependent and independent
variables: the median of the dependent variable on the left‐hand side, and the trimmed mean on the right (that is,
the mean after excluding the bottom and top 30 percentiles). Although this procedure does reduce the correlation,
it does not eliminate it. See the derivation in section A of the Appendix that, if the latent log wage distribution is
normal, the correlation between the trimmed mean and the median will be about 0.93—i.e. not unity, but very
high. Nevertheless, we have run simulations that suggest sampling variation with division bias is not a significant
                                                                                                                    9
would expect that              ,             0 and that this covariance would attenuate as one
considers percentiles further from the median. In this case the estimated minimum wage
effects will be biased upwards (in magnitude) in both lower and upper tails.11 The fact that
there appears to be no relationship between the effective minimum wage and inequality in the
upper tail (as in figures 3A and 3E) seemingly suggests that this bias is small (at least for the
female and pooled samples).
    However, this conclusion is predicated on the assumption proposed by Lee that the second
form of bias is not meaningfully important, that is                 ,          are uncorrelated with
     ,     . The assumption that state log wage levels and latent state log wage inequality are
uncorrelated can be tested if one has a measure of inequality that is unlikely to be affected by
the level of the minimum wage. For this purpose we use 60/40 inequality (that is, the difference
in the log of the 60th and 40th percentiles), which serves as a valid proxy measure of states’
underlying (or ‘latent’) wage inequality under the assumption that the minimum wage has no
effect on the 40th through 60th percentiles. We believe that this assumption is reasonable, given
that the minimum wage never binds very far above the 10th percentile of the wage distribution
over our sample period. To assess whether in practice average state latent inequality or trends
in latent inequality are associated with average state wage levels or trends in state wage levels
(using the log of the median as a measure of a state’s wage level), we run state‐level
regressions of a state’s average 60/40 inequality, or estimates of a state’s trend in 60/40
inequality, on the state’s average median wages and/or the trend in its median wages.
    Table 3 reports these results, estimated separately for the female, male, and pooled
distributions. The left‐hand panel presents coefficient estimates from regressions of a state’s
average 60/40 inequality on its average real median wage (column 1), the trend in its log



source of bias with our larger sample sizes (using data from 1979 through 2012), though it does impart significant
upward bias for the shorter sample period used by Lee (results from these simulations are available upon request).
11
   Since the state median enters with a negative side of both sides of equation (1), transitory variation in the
median will impart a positive bias to estimates of . Moreover, if          ,         attenuates at more distant
percentiles from the median, as hypothesized, then the upward bias in impact estimates will be larger when
estimating the impact of the minimum wage on very high and low wage percentiles (e.g., p10, p90) than when
estimating intermediate percentiles (e.g., p30, p70).
                                                                                                               10
median wage (column 2), and the mean and trend (column 3).12 In all cases, there is a positive
relationship between the state‐level median and state‐level 60/40 inequality: states with higher
medians have greater inequality (though we note that the relationship is statistically
insignificant for males). The right‐hand panel presents coefficient estimates from regressions of
the trend in a state’s 60/40 inequality on its 60/40, log median wage, and the trend in the
median wage. Again, in almost all instances there is a positive and statistically significant
relationship between the trend in a state’s inequality and its average ‘latent’ inequality
(measured by the 60/40), average median wage, and the trend in its median. Figure 4 depicts
these regressions visually. In the top panel, for each of the three samples, the cross‐state
relationship between the average log(p60)‐log(p40) is plotted against the average log(p50). In
the bottom panel, the cross‐state relationship between the trends in the two measures is
plotted. In all cases but panel E, there is a strong, positive visual relationship between the
two—and, as table 3 demonstrates, even for the male sample there is, in fact, a statistically
significant positive relationship between the trends in the log(p60)‐log(p40) and log(p50).
     The finding of a positive correlation between underlying inequality and the state median
implies there is likely to be omitted variable bias from the exclusion of state fixed effects and
trends—specifically, a further upward bias to the estimated minimum wage effect in the lower
tail and, simultaneously, a downward bias in the upper tail. To see why, note that higher wage
states have lower (more negative) effective minimum wages (defined as the log gap between
the legislated minimum and the state median), and the results from table 3 imply that these
states also have higher levels of latent inequality; thus they will have a more negative value of
the left‐hand side variable in our main estimating equation (1) for percentiles below the
median, and a more positive value for percentiles above the median. Since the state median
enters the right‐hand side expression for the effective minimum wage with a negative sign,
estimates of the relationship between the effective minimum and wage inequality will be
upward‐biased in the lower tail and downward‐biased in the upper tail.



12
   We estimate the trend in the log(60)‐log(40) or log median wage by regressing the variable, for each state, on a
linear time trend. We use the coefficient from the time trend as a regressor in the regressions reported in Table 3.
                                                                                                                  11
     Combined with our discussion above on potential biases stemming from the correlation
between the transitory error components on both sides of equation (1) (leading to an upward
bias on the coefficient on the effective minimum wage in both lower and upper tails), we infer
that these two sources of bias reinforce each other in the lower tail, likely leading to an
overestimate of the impact of the minimum wage on lower tail inequality. Simultaneously, they
have countervailing effects on the upper tail. Thus our finding in the first column of Table 2 of a
relatively weak relationship between the effective minimum wage and upper tail inequality (for
the female and pooled samples) may arise because these two countervailing sources of bias
largely offset one another for upper tail estimates. But since these biases are reinforcing in the
lower tail of the distribution, the absence of an upper tail correlation is not sufficient evidence
for the absence of lower tail bias.
     If this reasoning is correct we would expect to find that including state fixed effects and
trends—which alleviates the second form of bias stemming from the correlation between state
medians and state latent inequality—would reduce the estimated impact of the minimum wage
in the lower tail but increase it in the upper tail. Indeed, column 2 of Tables 2A and 2B, and
Figures 3B, 3D, and 3E show that this is precisely what happens.13 In all three samples, the
estimated effect of the minimum wage in the lower tail falls quite substantially (though remains
significantly different from zero) and for the female and pooled distributions there now appears
a large positive relationship between the effective minimum wage and upper tail inequality (for
the male distribution, the large positive relationship remains, similar to the base specification).
This is consistent with bias now only coming from the transitory shocks (or from division bias),
which we have argued is likely to be positive for both the lower and upper tails.14 In the next
sub‐section, we address this second form of bias.


C. Correcting for additional bias, and our preferred specification

13
   In the table and figures, we include both state fixed effects and time trends. Excluding time trends, but including
state fixed effects, we still find a large and positive relationship between the effective minimum and upper‐tail
inequality in all samples. We also estimate a first‐differenced version of the levels equation (column 3), which
produces even larger estimates at the top of the distribution (column 3).
14
   Our results from these two specifications (with and without state fixed effects) are qualitatively similar to those
reported by Lee (1999).
                                                                                                                   12
     The inclusion of state fixed effects and state trends in (1) accounts for the correlations
between state wage levels and state inequality levels and trends documented in Table 3, but it
does not correct for the bias stemming from                              ,              0. As noted above, this
covariance may be due to division bias (stemming from the inclusion of the median on the right
and left sides of the estimating equation combined with sampling error in the median) or from
transitory shocks to the median that do not translate one‐for‐one to other percentiles. In either
case, the problem posed by these error covariances becomes more severe when state fixed
effects are included, since more of the remaining variation is the result of transitory variation.
Indeed, Lee (1999) emphasizes this econometric pitfall, documents that inclusion of state fixed
effects appears to exacerbate the problematic correlation between the effective minimum and
upper tail inequality, and accordingly prefers estimates that exclude state fixed effects. Our
Table 3 results imply, however, that state effects and trends are non‐optional. Hence, we
require an estimator that permits inclusion of state effects while purging the error covariance
between the dependent and independent variables.
     We address this challenge by applying an IV approach that has a long history as a method
for dealing with problems caused by measurement error or other transitory shocks (Durbin,
1954). We instrument the observed effective minimum and its square using an instrument set
that consists of: 1) the log of the real statutory minimum wage, 2) the square of the log of the
real minimum wage, and 3) the interaction between the log minimum wage and average log
median real wage for the state over the sample period. In this IV specification, identification in
(1) for the linear term in the effective minimum wage comes entirely from the variation in the
statutory minimum wage, and identification for the quadratic term comes from the inclusion of
the square of the log statutory minimum wage and the interaction term.15 As there are always


15
   To see why the interaction is important to include, expand the square of the effective minimum wage, log(min)‐
log(p50), which yields three terms, one of which is the interaction of log(min) and log(p50). We have also tried
replacing the square and interaction terms with the square of the predicted value for the effective minimum,
where the predicted value is derived from a regression of the effective minimum on the log statutory minimum,
state and time fixed effects, and state trends (similar to an approach suggested by Wooldridge, 2002; section
9.5.2). 2SLS results using this alternative instrument are virtually identical to the strategy outlined in the main text.
In general, using the statutory minimum as an instrument is similar in spirit to the approach taken by Card, Katz
and Krueger (1993) in their analysis of the employment effects of the minimum wage.
                                                                                                                      13
time effects included in our estimation, all the identifying variation in the statutory minimum
therefore comes from the state‐specific minimum wages, which we assume to be exogenous to
state wage levels or inequality.16 Our second instrument is the square of the predicted value for
the effective minimum from the regression outlined above, and relies on the same identifying
assumptions (exogeneity of the statutory minimum wage).
     Columns (4) of Tables 2A and 2B report the estimates when we instrument the effective
minimum in the way we have described. Compared to column (2) the estimated impacts of the
minimum wage in the lower tail are reduced, especially above the 10th percentile. This is
consistent with what we have argued is the most plausible direction of bias in the OLS estimate
in column (2). And, for all three samples, the estimated effect in the upper tail is now small and
insignificantly different from zero, again consistent with the IV strategy reducing bias in the
predicted direction.17
     Our primary results are from models estimated in levels. For robustness, we also estimate
them in first differences. Column (5) shows the results from first‐differenced regressions that
include state and year fixed effects, instrumenting the endogenous differenced variables using
differenced analogues to the instruments described above. 18 Figures 5A, 5C, and 5E show the
results for all percentiles from the levels IV specifications; figures 5B, 5D, and 5F show results
from the first‐differenced IV specifications. Qualitatively, the first‐differenced regressions are
similar to the levels regressions, although they imply slightly larger effects of the minimum
wage at the bottom of the wage distribution.
     Although our 2SLS estimates of the impact of the minimum wage on the lower tail are
reduced, they are not trivial; they imply that the minimum wage has had a statistically
significant impact, on average, up through about the 25th percentile for women, up through the


16
   For our entire sample period (1979‐2012), there is enough variation to estimate this, but for Lee’s sample of
1979‐1989 (with limited changes in federal and state minimum wages), there is little cross‐state variation, and so
our IV strategy will be much less useful for that restricted sample period, as described later in this section.
17
   For all 2SLS models, F‐tests (not tabulated) indicate that the instruments are jointly highly significant and pass
standard diagnostic tests for weak instruments (e.g., Stock, Wright and Yogo, 2002).
18
   The instruments for the first‐differenced analogue are ∆       and ∆           50       , where ∆      represents
the annual change in the log of the legislated minimum wage, and ∆               50       represents the change in
the square of the predicted value for the effective minimum wage.
                                                                                                                    14
10th percentile for men, and up through the 15th percentile or so for the pooled wage
distribution. 2SLS estimates imply that a 10 log point increase in the effective minimum wage
reduces 50/10 inequality by approximately 2 log points for women, by no more than 0.5 log
points for men, and by roughly 1.5 log points for the pooled distribution. These estimates are
less than half as large as those found by the baseline OLS specification.



D. Robustness to choice of time period

   Our primary estimates are derived using data from 1979‐2012, whereas the original work
that explored rising inequality over the 1980s used data from 1979 through the late 1980s or
early 1990s. As we have previously argued, an IV strategy is required due to the potential
endogeneity of the effective minimum wage. However, our strategy—which relies on variation
in statutory minimum wages across states and over time—does not perform well when limited
to data only from the 1980s period. To demonstrate this, we estimate marginal effects by
percentile, for the male and female pooled wage distribution, using our 2SLS estimation
strategy (in levels and including state time trends, analogous to column 4 of Table 2) for each of
three time periods: 1979‐1989 (when there was little state‐level variation in the minimum
wage), 1979‐1991 (incorporating an additional two years in which numerous states raised their
minimum wage), and 1979‐2012. Figure 6 shows the results of this exercise.
   As seen in the top panel, our estimation strategy performs very poorly when using data only
through 1989. The point estimates are enormous relative to both OLS estimates and 2SLS
estimates that use additional years of data, and the confidence bands are extremely large (note
that the scale in the figure runs from ‐25 to 25, many orders of magnitude larger than even the
largest point estimates from Table 2). This lack of statistical significance is not surprising in light
of the small number of policy changes in this period: between 1979 and 1985, only one state
aside from Alaska adopted a minimum wage in excess of the federal minimum; the ten
additional adoptions through 1989 all occurred between 1986 and 1989 (Table 1).
Consequently, when calculating counterfactuals below, we apply marginal effects estimates
obtained using additional years of data.

                                                                                                    15
   By extending the estimation window to 1991 (as was also done by Lee, 1999), we exploit
the substantial federal minimum wage increase that took place between 1990 and 1991. This
federal increase generated numerous cross‐state contrasts since 9 states had by 1989 raised
their minimums above the 1989 federal level and below the 1991 federal level (and an
additional three raised their minimum to $4.25, which would be the level of the 1991 federal
minimum wage). Adding these additional two years of data (panel B of Figure 6) reduces the
standard errors around our estimates significantly, though the estimated marginal effects of
changes in the effective minimum on a particular percentile are quite noisy across percentiles.
Adding additional data (panel C) reduces the standard errors further and helps smooth out
estimated marginal effects across percentiles.
   Our interpretation of these findings is that, given the sort of variation required for our IV
strategy to successfully identify minimum wage effects, it would have been impossible using
data prior to 1991 to successfully estimate the effect of the minimum wage on the wage
distribution using only a decade of data. It is only with subsequent data on comovements in
state wage distributions and the minimum wage that more accurate estimates can be obtained.
For this reason, our primary counterfactual estimates of changes in inequality (holding the
minimum wage fixed at a particular level) rely on coefficient estimates from the full sample.
However, we also discuss below the robustness of our findings to the choice of estimation
sample.


III. Counterfactual estimates of changes in inequality

   How much of the expansion in lower‐tail wage inequality since 1979 was due to the
declining minimum wage? Following Lee (1999), we present reduced form counterfactual
estimates of the change in latent wage inequality absent the decline in the minimum wage—
that is, the change in wage inequality that would have been observed had the minimum wage
been held at a constant real benchmark. These reduced form counterfactual estimates do not
distinguish between mechanical and spillover effects of the minimum wage, a topic that we



                                                                                                   16
analyze next. We consider counterfactual changes over two periods: 1979‐1989 (which
captures the large widening of lower‐tail income inequality over the 1980s), and 1979‐2012.
     To estimate changes in latent wage inequality, Lee (1999) proposes the following simple
procedure. For each observation in the dataset, calculate its rank in its respective state‐year
wage distribution. Then, adjust each wage by the quantity:
                    ∆                         ,         ,                  ,         ,                        (3)

where      ,   is the observed end‐of period effective minimum in state s in some year 1,                       ,

is the corresponding beginning‐of‐period effective minimum in 0, and                         ,         are point
estimates from the OLS and 2SLS estimates in Table 2 (columns 1, 4, or 5).19 We pool these
adjusted wage observations to form a counterfactual national wage distribution, and we
compare changes in inequality in the simulated distribution to those in the observed
distribution.20
     The estimates in the top panel of Table 4 show that between 1979 and 1989, the female
50/10 log wage ratio increased by 25 log points. Applying the coefficient estimates on the
effective minimum and its square obtained using the OLS model fit to the female wage data for
1979 through 2012 (first column in panel 1), we calculate that had the minimum wage been
constant at its real 1989 level throughout this period, female 50/10 inequality would
counterfactually have risen by only 2.5 log points. Applying the coefficient estimates for only
the 1979‐1991 period (second column in panel 1), female 50/10 inequality would have risen by
4 log points. Thus, consistent with Lee (1999), the OLS estimate implies that the decline in the
real minimum wage can account for the bulk (22.5 of 25 log points) of the expansion of lower
tail female wage inequality in this period.
     The next two columns of the table present analogous counterfactuals estimated using 2SLS
models estimated over 1979‐2012 (either fixed effect or first difference) in place of OLS. These
estimates find a substantially smaller role for the minimum wage. For females, the IV estimate

19
   So, for example, taking        1979 and        1989, and subtracting ∆        from each observed wage in 1979
would adjust the 1979 distribution to its counterfactual under the realized effective minima in 1989.
20
   Also distinct from Lee, we use states’ observed median wages when calculating           rather than the national
median deflated by the price index. This choice has no substantive effect on the results, but appears most
consistent with the identifying assumptions.
                                                                                                                17
implies that the minimum wage explains roughly one‐third to one‐half of the rise in female
50/10 inequality in this period (using the first‐differenced specification, the minimum wage
explains 9.2 log points of the 24.6 log point increase; using the levels specification, it explains
12.4 log points, or roughly half of the increase). These are non‐trivial effects, of course, and
they confirm, in accordance with the visual evidence in Figure 2, that the falling minimum wage
contributed meaningfully to rising female lower‐tail inequality during the 1980s and early
1990s.
   The second and third rows of Table 4 calculate the effect of the minimum wage on male and
pooled gender inequality. Here, the discrepancy between OLS and IV‐based counterfactuals is
substantially more pronounced. OLS estimates imply that the minimum wage more than
explains the rise in male and pooled 50/10 inequality between 1979 and 1989. By contrast, 2SLS
models indicate that the minimum wage makes a very modest contribution to the rise in male
wage inequality and explains about one‐third of the rise in pooled gender inequality.
   Despite their substantial discrepancy with the OLS models, these estimates appear highly
plausible. Figure 1 shows that the minimum wage was nominally non‐binding for males
throughout the sample period, with fewer than 6 percent of all male wages falling at or below
the relevant minimum wage in any given year. For the pooled gender distribution, the
minimum wage had somewhat more bite, with a bit more than 8 percent of all hours paid at or
below the minimum in the first few years of the sample. But this is modest relative to its
position in the female distribution, where 9 to 13 percent of wages were at or below the
relevant minimum in the first five years of the sample. Consistent with these facts, 2SLS
estimates indicate that the falling minimum wage generated a sizable increase in female wage
inequality, a modest increase in pooled gender inequality, and a minimal increase in male wage
inequality.
   Panel B of Table 4 calculates counterfactual (minimum wage constant) changes in inequality
over 1979‐2012. In all cases, the contribution of the minimum wage to rising inequality is
smaller when estimated using 2SLS in place of OLS models, and its impacts are substantial for
females, modest for the pooled distribution, and negligible for males.


                                                                                                18
     Figure 7 and the top panel of Figure 8 provide a visual comparison of observed and
counterfactual changes in male, female and pooled‐gender wage inequality during the critical
period of 1979 through 1989, during which time the minimum wage remained nominally fixed
while lower‐tail inequality rose rapidly for all groups. As per Lee (1999), the OLS counterfactuals
depicted in these plots suggest that the minimum wage explains essentially all (or more than
all) of the rise in 50/10 inequality in the female, male and pooled‐gender distributions during
this period. The 2SLS counterfactuals place this contribution at a far more modest level. For
example, the counterfactual series for males is indistinguishable from the observed series,
implying that the minimum wage made almost no contribution to the rise in male inequality in
this period. The lower panel of Figure 8, which plots observed and counterfactual wages change
in the pooled gender distribution for the full sample period of 1979 through 2012 (again holding
the minimum wage at its 1988 value), shows a similarly pronounced discrepancy between OLS
and 2SLS models.21
     To summarize, our estimates consistently find a considerably smaller role for the minimum
wage in rise of U.S. inequality than prior work has suggested. While they do not reverse the
view that the falling minimum wage contributed to the growth of lower tail inequality growth
during the 1980s, they suggest a qualitatively and quantitatively large downward revision to the
estimated magnitude of this contribution.


IV. The Limits of Inference: Distinguishing spillovers from measurement error

     As highlighted in Figure 1, federal and state minimum wages were nominally non‐binding at
the 10th percentile of the wage distribution throughout most of the sample; in fact, there is only
one three year interval (1979 to 1983), when more than ten percent of hours paid were at or
below the minimum wage—and this was only the case for females. Yet our main estimates
imply that the minimum wage modestly compressed both male and pooled‐gender 50/10 wage

21
  As a robustness test, we have repeated these counterfactual calculations using coefficient estimates from years
1979 through 1991 (using the additional cross‐state identification offered by the increases in the federal minimum
wage over this period) rather than the full 1979‐2012 sample period. The counterfactual estimates in this table are
somewhat smaller but largely consistent with the full sample, both during the critical period of 1979 through 1989
and during other intervals.
                                                                                                                19
inequality during the 1980s. This implies that the minimum wage had spillover effects onto
percentiles above where it binds.
     A mundane but nonetheless plausible explanation for this finding is measurement error. To
see why, suppose that a subset of workers who are paid the minimum wage tend to report
wage values that are modestly above or below the true minimum—that is, they report with
error. Moreover, suppose that the central tendency of this reporting error moves in tandem
with the minimum wage; when the minimum wage rises or falls, the measurement error cloud
moves with it. Under these assumptions, the presence of measurement error may create the
appearance of spillovers where none are present.
     For example, consider a case where the minimum wage is set at the 5th percentile of the
latent wage distribution and has no spillover effects. However, due to misreporting, the spike in
the wage distribution at the true minimum wage is surrounded by a measurement error cloud
that extends from the 1st through the 9th percentiles. If the legislated minimum wage were to
rise to the 9th percentile and measurement error were to remain constant, the rise in the
minimum wage would compress the measured wage distribution up to the 13th percentile (thus,
reducing the measured 50/10 wage gap). This apparent spillover would be a feature of the
data, but it would not be a feature of the true wage distribution.22
     In this final section of the paper, we quantify the possible bias wrought by these
measurement spillovers. Specifically, we ask whether we can reject the null hypothesis that the
minimum wage only affects the earnings of those at or below the minimum (in which case, the
apparent spillovers would be consistent with measurement error).23 We use a simple
                                                                               ∗
measurement error model to test this hypothesis. Denote by                         a percentile of the latent wage
distribution (i.e. the percentile absent measurement error and without a minimum wage), and
                                                        ∗   ∗ 24
write the latent wage associated with it as                    . Assuming that there are only direct effects

22
   This argument holds in reverse for a decline in the minimum: a fall in the minimum from the 9th to the 6th
percentile may reduce measured 50/10 wage inequality even if there is no impact on actual 50/10 wage inequality.
23
   Note that we are not testing whether an apparent spillover for a particular percentile, for a particular
state/year, is attributable to measurement error—we are testing whether, on average, all of the observed
spillovers could be attributable to measurement error.
24
   In the following discussion, it will be useful to distinguish between three distinct wage distributions: 1) the latent
wage distribution, which is the wage distribution in the absence of a minimum wage and measurement error; 2)
                                                                                                                      20
of the minimum wage (i.e., no true spillovers and no disemployment effects), then the true
                          ∗
wage at percentile            will be given by:
                                             ∗                        ∗
                                                      ≡ max       ,           ,                                       (4)
           ∗
where               is the true latent log wage percentile and                            the log of the minimum wage.
Denote by ̂             the true percentile at which the minimum wage binds. Then:
                                                  ∗
                                                       ̂                  .                                           (5)
Now, allow for the possibility of measurement error, so that for a worker at true wage
               ∗
percentile         , we observe:
                                                              ∗
                                                                      ,                                               (6)
where      is an error term with density function                     , which we assume to be independent of
                                                                                                          ∗
the true wage. The density of wages among workers whose true percentile is                                    is therefore
                           ∗
given by                        . The density of observed wages is simply the average of                         ⋅ across
true percentiles:

                                                                      ∗           ∗
                                                                                      .                               (7)

And the cumulative density function for observed wages is given by:

                                                                          ∗           ∗
                                                                                              .                       (8)

This can be inverted to give an implicit equation for the wage at observed percentile ,                               :

                                                                      ∗           ∗
                                                                                          .                           (9)

By differentiating this expression with respect to the minimum wage, we obtain the following
key result (with details given in Appendix B):
    Result 1: Under the null hypothesis of no actual spillovers and no disemployment, the
    elasticity of wages at an observed percentile with respect to the minimum wage is equal
    to the fraction of people at that observed percentile whose true wage is equal to the
    minimum.


the true wage distribution, which is the wage distribution in the absence of measurement error but allowing for
minimum wage effects; and 3) the observed wage distribution, which is the wage distribution allowing for
measurement error and a minimum wage (i.e. what is measured from CPS data).
                                                                                                                          21
The intuition for this result is straightforward: if changes in the minimum wage only affect the
wages of those directly affected, then the wage at an observed percentile can only change to
the extent that some of those workers are truly paid the minimum wage. Thus, if the minimum
wage rises by 10 percent, and 10 percent of workers at a given percentile are paid the minimum
wage, the observed wage percentile at that percentile will rise by 1 percent.
   This result has a simple corollary (proved in the Appendix C) that we use in the estimation
below:
   Result 2: Under the null hypothesis of no true spillovers, the elasticity of the overall
   mean log wage with respect to the minimum wage is equal to the fraction of the wage
   distribution that is truly paid the minimum wage—that is, the size of the true spike.
This result follows from the fact that all individuals who are truly paid the minimum wage must
appear somewhere in the observed wage distribution. And of course, changes at any point in
the distribution also change the mean. Thus, if the true spike at the minimum wage comprises
10 percent of the mass of the true wage distribution, a 10 percent rise in the minimum will
increase the true and observed mean wage by 1 percent. Note that no distributional
assumptions about measurement error are needed for either Result 1 or Result 2, other than
the assumption that the measurement error distribution is independent of wage levels.
   The practical value of Result 2 is that we can readily estimate the effect of changes in the
minimum wage on the mean using the methods developed above. Under the null hypothesis of
no spillovers, Result 2 tells us that the effect of the minimum wage on the mean wage effect
will be equal to the size of the ‘true’ spike. If the null hypothesis is false, however, we would
expect the elasticity to exceed the size of the true spike since a subset of workers whose wages
exceed the minimum wage will also have their wages increased by the minimum.
   In practice, we estimate a version of equation (1), using as the dependent variable the
average log real wage. On the right hand side, we include the effective minimum wage and its
square as endogenous regressors (and instrument for them using the same instruments as in
the earlier analysis), state and year fixed effects, state time trends, and the log of the median
(to control for shocks to the wage level of the state that are unrelated to the minimum wage,
assuming that any spillovers do not extend through the median). The dashed line in Figure 9
                                                                                                 22
represent the marginal effect on the mean by year, taking the weighted average across all
states for each year. Under the null hypothesis of no true spillovers, this estimate of the effect
the minimum on the mean is an estimate of the size of the true spike. Under the alternative
hypothesis that true spillovers are present, the marginal effect on the mean will exceed the size
of the true spike. To distinguish these alternatives requires a second, independent estimate of
the size of the true spike.

B. Estimating measurement error

     We develop a second estimate of the magnitude of the true spike by directly estimating
measurement error in wage reporting and then using this estimate to infer the size of the spike
absent this error. We exploit the fact that under the assumption of full compliance with the
minimum wage, all observations found below the minimum wage must be observations with
measurement error.25 Of course, wage observations below the minimum can only provide
information on individuals with negative measurement error, since minimum wage earners
with positive measurement error must have an observed wage above the minimum. Thus, a key
identifying assumption is that that the measurement error is symmetric, that is                                 .
     In what follows, we use maximum likelihood to estimate the distribution of wages below
the minimum and the fraction of workers at and above the minimum (for the sample of non‐
tipped workers as described in footnote 25). We assume that the ‘true’ wage distribution only
                                                              ∗   ∗
has a mass point at the minimum wage so that                          has a continuous derivative. We also
assume that the measurement error distribution only has a mass point at zero so that there is a
non‐zero probability of observing the ‘true’ wage. (Without this assumption, we would be
unable to rationalize the existence of a spike in the observed wage distribution at the minimum
wage.) Denote the probability that the wage is correctly reported as . For those who report an

25
   There are surely some individuals who report sub‐minimum wage wages and actually receive sub‐minimum
wages. One potentially large occupation class is tipped workers, who in many states can legally receive a sub‐
minimum hourly wage as long as tips push their total hourly income above the minimum. For instance, in 2009,
about 55 percent of those who reported their primary occupation as waiter or waitress reported an hourly wage
less than the applicable minimum wage for their state, and about 17 percent of all observed sub‐minimum wages
were from waiters and waitresses. If we treat the wages of these individuals as measurement error, we will clearly
over‐state the extent of misreporting. We circumvent this problem by conducting the measurement/spillover
analysis on a sample that excludes employees in low‐paying occupations that commonly receive tips or
commission. These are: food service jobs, barbers and hairdressers, retail salespersons and telemarketers.
                                                                                                                23
error‐ridden wage, we will use, in a slight departure from previous notation,                     to denote the
distribution of the error.
     With these assumptions, the size of the spike in the observed wage distribution at the
minimum wage, which we denote by , is equal to the true spike times the probability that the
wage is correctly reported:
                                                           ̂.                                                 (10)
Hence, using an estimate of , we can estimate the magnitude of the true spike as ̂                        / .26
     To estimate , we use observations on the fraction of workers paid strictly below the
minimum, which we denote by . Assuming full compliance with the minimum wage statute, all
of these subminimum wages will represent negative measurement error. We therefore have:

                                                                       ∗   ∗      ∗
                                1            0.5 ̂                                                            (11)

The symmetry assumption implies that half of those at the true spike who report wages with
error will report wages below the minimum, and this is reflected as the first term in the
bracketed expression (0.5 ̂ ). In addition, for workers paid above the minimum, some subset
will report with sufficiently negative error that their reported wage will fall below the minimum,
thus also contributing to the mass below the statutory minimum. This contributor to                               is
captured by the second term in the bracketed expression.

C. Finding: Spillovers cannot be distinguished from measurement error

     We assume that the latent log wage distribution is normal with mean                  and variance        and
that the measurement error distribution is normal with mean 0 variance                        . Our estimation
proceeds in two steps. First, we use observations on the top part of the wage distribution—
which we assume are unaffected by changes to the minimum wage—to estimate the median
and variance of the observed latent wage distribution, allowing for variation across state and
time. Equipped with these estimates, as well as the observed Z for each state and year, we


26
  One might wonder why none of the observed spike are ‘errors’, individuals whose are not paid the minimum
but, by chance, have an error which makes them appeared to be paid the minimum. But, the assumption on the
absence of mass points in the true wage distribution and the error distribution mean that this group is of measure
zero so can be ignored.
                                                                                                                  24
estimate      ,    by maximum likelihood. We assume that           ,     vary over time but not
across states (with further details found in Appendix D). As previously noted, we perform this
analysis on a sample that excludes individuals from lower‐paying occupations that tend to earn
tips or commission.
   Estimates of     for males, females, and the pooled sample (not shown) generally find that
the probability of correct reporting is around 80 percent, and mostly varies from between 70 to
90 percent over time (though is estimated to be around 65 to 70 percent in the early 1980s for
females and the pooled distribution). We combine this estimate with the observed spike to get
an estimate of the ‘true’ spike in each period, though this will be an estimate of the size of the
true spike only for the estimation sample of workers in non‐tipped occupations.
   This leaves us in need of an estimate of the ‘true’ spike for the tipped occupations. Given
the complexity of the state laws surrounding the minimum wage for tipped employees, we do
not attempt to model these subminimum wages. Rather we simply note that the spike for
tipped employees must be between zero and one, and we use this observation to bound the
‘true’ spike for the entire workforce. Because the fraction of workers in tipped occupations is
small, these bounds are relatively narrow.
   Figure 9 compares these bounds with the earlier estimates of the ‘true’ spike based on the
elasticity of the mean with respect to the minimum in each year. Under the null hypothesis that
the minimum wage has no true spillovers, the effect on the mean should equal the size of the
‘true’ spike. And indeed, the estimated mean effect lies within the bounds of the estimated
‘true’ spike in almost all years. We are accordingly unable to reject the hypothesis that the
apparent effect of the minimum wage on percentiles above the minimum is a measurement
error spillover rather than a true spillover.
   If we tentatively accept this null, it has an important implication for our findings. Table 1
shows that there is only one short time period in our sample window (1979‐1982) when more
than 10 percent of the hourly wages were paid above the statutory minimum, and even then,
this is just for the female distribution. For males and for the pooled‐gender distribution, the




                                                                                               25
minimum wage never covers more than 9 percent of the distribution.27 Under the null
hypothesis of no spillovers, we would have to conclude that the minimum wage had no effect
on actual 50/10 inequality for the male and pooled‐gender wage distributions throughout the
sample period, and ceased having an effect on the actual female 50/10 after 1982. Thus, any
changes in the actual (rather than the measured) 50/10 differential after 1983 could not be
accounted for by the minimum wage.
     Two points deserve emphasis. First, even accepting the null of no spillovers, our estimates
for the effect of the minimum wage on observed wage inequality (both direct and spillover
effects) in the prior sections are valid. However, observed and actual wage effects may differ
systematically in a manner that overstates the role of the minimum wage. And clearly,
spillovers from the legislated minimum to wages actually paid are of greater economic
consequence than spillovers to wages that are (mis‐)reported.
     Second, our findings do not exclude the possibility of true spillovers—and indeed, we
suspect these spillovers are present. Our results do, however, highlight that we do not have
sufficient precision to distinguish actual spillovers from measurement error spillovers in
currently available data. Better wage data, perhaps administrative payroll data, may be more
conclusive.

V. Conclusion

     This paper offers a reassessment of the impact of the minimum wage on the wage
distribution by using a longer panel than was available to previous studies, incorporating many
additional years of data and including significantly more variation in state minimum wages, and
using an econometric approach that purges division bias and confounding correlations between
state wage levels and wage variances that we find bias earlier estimates. Under our preferred
model specification and estimation sample, we estimate that between 1979 and 1989, the


27
   More precisely, the relevant comparison is the fraction of hours paid below the minimum in the true wage
distribution (purged of measurement error) rather than the fraction in the error‐ridden distribution. Given that the
minimum lies in the left‐hand tail of the distribution, that the assumed error distribution is additive, and that the
statutory minimum is known without error, the fraction of hours below the minimum in the error‐ridden
distribution strictly overestimates the fraction of hours below the minimum in the true wage distribution.
                                                                                                                  26
decline in the real value of the minimum wage is responsible for 30 to 50 percent of the growth
of lower tail inequality in the female, male, and pooled wage distributions (as measured by the
differential between the log of the 50th and 10th percentiles). Similarly, calculations indicate that
the declining minimum wage made a meaningful contribution to female inequality, a modest
contribution to pooled gender inequality, and a negligible contribution to male lower tail
inequality during the full sample period of 1979 – 2012. In net, these estimates indicate a
substantially smaller role for the U.S. minimum in the rise of inequality than suggested by
earlier work, which had attributed 85% to 110% of this rise to the falling minimum.
   Despite these modest total effects, we estimate that the effect of the minimum wage
extends further up the wage distribution than would be predicted if the minimum wage had a
purely mechanical effect on wages (i.e. raising the wage of all who earned below it). One
interpretation of these significant spillovers is that they represent a true wage effect for
workers initially earning above the minimum. An alternative explanation is that wages for low‐
wage workers are mismeasured or misreported. If a significant share of minimum wage earners
report wages in excess of the minimum wage, and this measurement error persists in response
to changes in the minimum, then we would observe changes in percentiles above where the
minimum wage directly binds in response to changes in the minimum wage. Our investigation
of this hypothesis in Section IV is unable to reject the null hypothesis that all of the apparent
effect of the minimum wage on percentiles above the minimum is the consequence of
measurement error. Accepting this null, the implied effect of the minimum wage on the actual
wage distribution is even smaller than the effect of the minimum wage on the measured wage
distribution.
   In net, our analysis suggests that there was a significant expansion in latent lower tail
inequality over the 1980s, mirroring the expansion of inequality in the upper tail. While the
minimum wage was certainly a contributing factor to widening lower tail inequality—
particularly for females—it was not the primary one.




                                                                                                  27
VI. Appendix

A. Correlation between the Trimmed Mean and the Median

   Here, we derive the correlation coefficient between the median and a trimmed mean under
the assumption that log wages are normally distributed and that we are drawing samples of
size N from an underlying identical population. As in the main text, denote by                                    the log
wage at percentile .
   A standard result (not dependent on a normality assumption) is that the covariance
between wages at two percentiles is given by:
                                                                            1                                       (A.1)
                 cov           ,                                                                     ,
                                                                                ⋅
Where      ⋅ is the density function. If p1  p2 , this gives the variance of the wage at a particular

percentile so that the variance of the median can be written as:
                                                                                  1                                 (A.2)
                                   var w 0.5
                                                            4                         0.5
The trimmed mean between the 30th and 70th percentiles can be written as:
                                                                    .
                                               1                                                                    (A.3)
                                              0.4           .

So that the covariance between the median and the trimmed mean can be written as:
                                                                        .
                                               1                                                                    (A.4)
                     cov       ,    0.5                                     cov             ,       0.5
                                              0.4               .

The variance of the trimmed mean can be written as:
                                              .         .
                                     1                                                                              (A.5)
                                                                cov                     ,       ′             ′
                                    0.4   .         .

   The formulae in (A.2), (A.4) and (A.5) can be used to compute the correlation coefficient
between the median and trimmed mean, which turns out to be about 0.93. Note that this
correlation does not depend on the sample size N. If the distribution is normal with mean                            and
variance     then the formula for the covariance in (A.1) can be written as:
                                                  2                             1                                   (A.6)
               cov         ,                                                                              ,


                                                                                                                      28
Where Φ      p is the inverse of the standard normal cumulative density function. The variance
for the median is given by:
                                                                                         (A.7)
                                   var w 0.5
                                                  2
Note that the correlation coefficient will not depend on either   or   .




                                                                                           29
B. Proof of Result 1:

Differentiate (9) to give:
                                                                        ∗               (A.8)
                             ∗       ∗                                      ∗
                                                                                0

Now we have that:
                                         ∗                          ∗
                                                       ∗                                (A.9)

Which, from (4) is:
                                 ∗                         ∗
                                                                    ̂                  (A.10)
                                                           ∗
                                                  0             ̂


Substituting (7) and (A.10) into (A.8) and re‐arranging we have that:

                                             ̂                                         (A.11)


The numerator is the fraction of workers who are really paid the minimum wage but are
observed with wage           because they have measurement error equal to           . Hence
the numerator divided by the denominator is the fraction of workers observed at wage
who are really paid the minimum wage.




                                                                                          30
C. Proof of Result 2

One implication of (A.11) is the following. Suppose we are interested in the effect of minimum
wages on the mean log wage,          . We have that:

                                                   ̂                                     (A.12)


Change the variable of integration to       . We will have:
                                                       1                                 (A.13)


Hence (A.12) becomes:

                                                                                         (A.14)
                                        ̂                     ̂

That is, the elasticity of average log wages with respect to the log minimum is just the size of
the true spike.




                                                                                             31
D. Estimation Procedure for the Measurement Error Model

Our assumption is that the true latent log wage is normally distributed according to:
                                        ∗
                                            ~        ,                                            (A.15)
To keep notation to a minimum we suppress variation across states and time, though this is
incorporated into the estimation. The true wage is given by:

                                                             ∗
                                     w max               ,                                        (A.16)
And the observed wage is given by:

                                                         ε                                        (A.17)
Where D is a binary variable taking the value 0 if the true wage is observed and 1 if it is not. We
assume that:

                                      Pr         1       1‐γ                                      (A.18)
We assume that  is normally distributed according to:

                                                 1                                                (A.19)
                                   ε~       0,

We choose to parameterize the variance of the error process as proportional to the variance of
the true latent wage distribution as this will be convenient later. We later show that             is the
correlation coefficient between the true latent wage and the observed latent wage when mis‐
reported—a lower value of      implies more measurement error so leads to a lower correlation
                                                                 ∗
between the true and observed wage. We assume that                   , ,   are all mutually independent.

Our estimation procedure uses maximum likelihood to estimate the parameters of the
measurement error model. There are three types of entries in the likelihood function:

           a. those with an observed wage equal to the minimum wage

           b. those with an observed wage above the minimum wage

           c. those with an observed wage below the minimum wage

Let us consider the contribution to the likelihood function for these three groups in turn.



                                                                                                      32
a.        Those Observed to be Paid the Minimum Wage

With the assumptions made above, the ‘true’ size of the spike is given by:

                                                                                               (A.20)
                                          ̂   Φ

And the size of the observed ‘spike’ is given by:

                                                                                               (A.21)
                                                  Φ

This is the contribution to the likelihood function for those paid the minimum wage.

b.        Those Observed to be Paid Below the Minimum Wage

Now let us consider the contribution to the likelihood function for those who report being paid
below paid the minimum wage. We need to work out the density function of actual observed
wages w, where             . None of those who report their correct wages (i.e. have           0) will
report a sub‐minimum wage, so we need only consider those who mis‐report their wage (i.e.
those with        1). Some of these will have a true wage equal to the minimum and some will
have a true wage above the minimum. Those who are truly paid the minimum will have
measurement error equal to                        so, using (A.19) and (A.20) the contribution to the
likelihood function will be:

                                                                                               (A.22)
                     1                                                Φ
                                 1                            1
Now, consider those whose true wage is above the minimum but have a measurement error
that pushes their observed wage below the minimum. For this group, their observed wage is
below the minimum and their latent wage is above the minimum. The fraction of those who
mis‐report who are in this category is, with some abuse of the concept of probability:

                                                          ∗
                                     Pr               ,                                        (A.23)
Define:
                                              ∗           ∗
                                                                  ε                            (A.24)


                                                                                                   33
Which is what the observed wage would be if there was no minimum wage and they misreport
i.e.    1.

From (A.15) and (A.17):
                                      ∗                                                            (A.25)
                                       ∗   ~           ,
                                      ∗                            1           1
                                       ∗   ~           ,
                                                                       1       1
This implies the following:

                          ∗                                                    1           1       (A.26)
                     ∗            ∗    ~                           ,
                                                   1
                                                                                   1   1
Which is an orthogonalization that will be convenient.

Now for those paid above the minimum but whose wage is misreported, the true wage is w*
and the observed wage is v*. So:
                 ∗                         ∗               ∗
     Pr     w,                        Pr           ,                                               (A.27)
                                           ∗               ∗           ∗
                                      Pr           ,
                                           ∗                   ∗               ∗
                                      Pr               Pr

                                                                   1       Φ
                                                                                               1
where the third line uses the independence of (A.26).


Putting together (A.22) and (A.27) the fraction of the population observed to be paid at a wage
                                           below the minimum is given by:

                     1        ∙                                                                    (A.28)

                                                                       Φ
                          1                        1

                                               1       Φ
                                                                                   1


c.        Those Observed to be Paid Above the Minimum Wage



                                                                                                      34
Now let us consider the fraction observed above the minimum wage. These workers might be
one of three types:

          i.      Those really paid the minimum wage who misreport a wage above the minimum

          ii.     Those really paid above the minimum wage who do not misreport

          iii. Those really paid above the minimum wage, who do misreport, but do not report a
                  sub‐minimum wage.

For those who are truly paid the minimum wage and have a misreported wage, a half will be
above, so the fraction of those who report a wage above the minimum is:

                                       1                                                       (A.29)
                                         1           γ Φ
                                       2
Those who do not misreport and truly have a wage above the minimum will be:

                                                                                               (A.30)
                                        γ 1          Φ

Now, consider those whose true wage is above the minimum but who misreport. For this group
we know their observed latent wage is above the minimum and that their true latent wage is
above the minimum. The fraction who are in this category is:

                                                 ∗               ∗
                                       Pr                    ,                                 (A.31)
Now:
              ∗          ∗                           ∗                    ∗        ∗       ∗
     Pr              ,             1        Pr                       Pr       Pr       ,

=1        Φ              Φ                  Φ            ,            ,

                                                                                               (A.32)
Where the final term is the cumulative density function of the bivariate normal distribution.
Putting together (A.29), (A.30), and (A.32) the fraction of the population observed to be paid
above the minimum is given by:




                                                                                                  35
 1         ∙                                                                                                 (A.33)
 1
   Φ                  1     Φ                  Φ                       Φ              ,              ,
 2

       1       Φ

This is the contribution to the likelihood function for those paid above the minimum.

There are three parameters in this model                  , ,   . These parameters may vary with state or
time. In the paper we have already documented how the variance in observed wages varies
across state and time so it is important to allow for this variation. Nevertheless, for ease of
computation our estimates assume that                 ,    only vary across time and are constant across
states.

To estimate the parameters we use two steps.

Step 1:

We first use the information on the shape of the wage distribution above the median to obtain
an estimate of the median and variance of the latent observed wage distribution for each
state/year.28 This assumes that the latent distribution above the median is unaffected by the
minimum wage. It also assumes that latent observed wage distribution is normal, which is not
consistent with our measurement error model (recall our model assumes that the latent
observed wage distribution is a mixture of two normal, i.e. those who report their wage
correctly and those who do not). This does not affect the estimate of the median but does


28
   To estimate this, we assume that the latent wage distribution for each state/year is log normal and can be
summarized by its median and variance, so that ∗                              , where    is the log median and    is
the variance. We then assume that the minimum wage has no effect on the shape of the wage distribution above
the median, so that upper‐tail percentiles are estimates of the latent distribution. To estimate     and    , we pool
the 50th through 75th log wage percentiles, regress the log value of the percentile on the inverse CDF of the
standard normal distribution, and allowing the intercept ( ) and coefficient ( ) to vary by state and year (and
including state‐specific time trends in both the intercept and coefficient). Since we assume the wage distribution is
unaffected by the minimum wage between the 50th and 75th percentiles, the distribution between the 50th and
75th percentiles, combined with our parametric assumptions, allows us to infer the shape of the wage distribution
for lower percentiles. We have experimented with the percentiles used to estimate the latent wage distribution
and the results are not very sensitive to the choices made.

                                                                                                                  36
affect the interpretation of the variance. Here we show how to map between this estimate of
the variance and the parameters of our measurement error model.

Our measurement error model implies that the log wage at percentile p, w(p) satisfies the
following equation:

                                                                                            (A.34)
                         p γΦ                  1           Φ

Differentiating this we obtain the following equation for w’(p):

                     1                                                                      (A.35)
           1                               1



Our estimated model which assumes a single normal distribution uses, instead, the equation:

                                     1                                                      (A.36)
                                1

And our estimation procedure provides an estimate of . Equating the two terms we have the
following expression for the relationship between              and :
                                                                                            (A.37)
                                                   1



If the values of the density functions are similar then one can approximate this relationship by:

                                                       1                                    (A.38)
This is an approximation, but simulation of the model for the parameters we estimate suggest it
is a good approximation. This implies that we can write all elements of the likelihood function
as functions of:
                                                                                            (A.39)


That is,       is the standardized deviation of the minimum from the median using the estimate of
the observed variance obtained as described above from step 1 of the estimation procedure.



                                                                                                37
Step 2:

In this step we estimate the parameters   ,      using maximum‐likelihood. The elements of the
likelihood function have been described above.




                                                                                           38
VII. References

Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2004. “How Much Should we Trust
    Difference‐in‐Difference Estimators?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(1), 249‐275.

Borjas, George J. 1980. “The Relationship between Wages and Weekly Hours of Work: The Role
    of Division Bias” Journal of Human Resources, 15(3) pp 409‐423

Card, David, Lawrence F. Katz and Alan B. Kruger. 1993. “An Evaluation of Recent Evidence on
    the Employment Effects of Minimum and Subminimum Wages.” NBER Working Paper No.
    4528, November.

Card, David and Alan B. Krueger. 2000. “Minimum Wages and Employment: A Case Study of the
    Fast‐Food Industry in New Jersey and Pennsylvania: Reply.” American Economic Review,
    90(5), 1397‐1420.

DiNardo, John, Nicole M. Fortin and Thomas Lemieux. 1996. “Labor Market Institutions and the
    Distribution of Wages, 1973‐1992: A semiparametric approach.” Econometrica, 64(5),
    September, 1001 ‐1044.

Durbin, James. 1954. “Errors in Variables.” Review of the International Statistical Institute. 22,
    23–32.

Lee, David. 1999. “Wage Inequality in the United States During the 1980s: Rising Dispersion or
    Falling Minimum Wage?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114(3), August, 977‐1023.

Manning, Alan. 2004. “We Can Work it Out: the Impact of Technological Change on the Demand
   for Low‐Skill Workers.” Scottish Journal of Political Economy, 51(5), November, 581‐608.

Mishel, Lawrence, Jared Bernstein and Sylvia Allegretto. 2006. The State of Working America,
    2006/2007. New York: ILR Press

Neumark, David and William Wascher. 2000. “Minimum Wages and Employment: A Case Study
   of the Fast‐Food Industry in New Jersey and Pennsylvania: Comment.” American Economic
   Review, 90(5), 1362‐1396.

Stigler, George. 1946. “The Economics of Minimum Wage Legislation.” American Economic
     Review, 36, 358‐365.

Stock, James H., Jonathan H. Wright and Motohiro Yogo. 2002. “A Survey of Weak Instruments
    and Weak Identification in Generalized Method of Moments.” Journal of Business and
    Economics Statistics, 20(4), October, 518‐529.

Teulings, Coen N. 2000. “Aggregation Bias in Elasticities of Substitution and the Minimum Wage
    Paradox,” International Economic Review, 41, 359–398.
                                                                                               39
Teulings, Coen N. 2003. “The Contribution of Minimum Wages to Increasing Inequality.”
    Economic Journal, 113, October, 801‐833.

White, Hal. 1980. "Using Least Squares to Approximate Unknown Regression Functions,"
   International Economic Review, 21, 149‐170

Wooldridge, Jeffrey M. 1992. “Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data.”
   Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press.




                                                                                  40
        Table 1a - Summary Statistics for Bindingness of State and Federal Minimum Wages

                                 A. Females                                 B. Males
       # states      Min.   Max.      Share of      Agg.       Min.   Max.      Share of      Agg.
       w/higher    binding binding hours at or   log(10)-    binding binding hours at or   log(10)-
         min        pctile  pctile below min      log(50)     pctile  pctile below min      log(50)
          (1)        (2)     (3)        (4)          (5)       (6)     (7)        (8)          (9)

1979       1         5.0     28.0      0.13       -0.38        2.0     10.5       0.05       -0.64
1980       1         6.0     24.0      0.13       -0.40        2.5     10.0       0.06       -0.65
1981       1         5.0     24.0      0.13       -0.41        1.5      9.0       0.06       -0.68
1982       1         5.0     21.5      0.11       -0.48        2.0      8.0       0.05       -0.71
1983       1         3.5     17.5      0.10       -0.51        2.0      8.0       0.05       -0.73
1984       1         2.5     15.5      0.09       -0.54        1.5      7.5       0.04       -0.73
1985       2         2.0     14.5      0.08       -0.56        1.0      6.5       0.04       -0.74
1986       5         2.0     16.0      0.07       -0.59        1.0      6.5       0.03       -0.74
1987       6         2.0     14.0      0.06       -0.60        1.0      6.0       0.03       -0.73
1988      10         2.0     12.5      0.06       -0.60        1.0      6.0       0.03       -0.72
1989      12         1.0     12.5      0.05       -0.61        1.0      5.0       0.03       -0.72
1990      11         1.0     14.0      0.05       -0.58        0.5      6.0       0.03       -0.72
1991       4         1.5     18.5      0.07       -0.58        0.5      9.0       0.04       -0.71
1992       7         2.0     14.0      0.07       -0.58        1.0      6.5       0.04       -0.72
1993       7         2.5     11.0      0.06       -0.59        1.0      5.0       0.03       -0.73
1994       8         2.5     11.0      0.06       -0.61        1.0      4.5       0.03       -0.71
1995       9         2.0      9.5      0.05       -0.61        0.5      4.5       0.03       -0.71
1996      11         2.0     12.5      0.05       -0.61        1.0      7.0       0.03       -0.71
1997      10         2.5     14.5      0.06       -0.60        1.0      7.5       0.04       -0.69
1998       7         2.5     11.5      0.06       -0.58        1.0      7.0       0.04       -0.69
1999      10         2.5     11.0      0.05       -0.58        1.0      5.5       0.03       -0.69
2000      10         2.0      9.5      0.05       -0.59        1.0      6.0       0.03       -0.68
2001      10         2.0      8.5      0.05       -0.60        1.0      5.5       0.03       -0.69
2002      11         1.5      9.0      0.04       -0.60        1.0      6.0       0.03       -0.70
2003      11         1.5      9.0      0.04       -0.61        0.5      5.0       0.03       -0.69
2004      12         1.5      7.5      0.04       -0.63        1.0      5.0       0.03       -0.70
2005      15         1.5      8.5      0.04       -0.64        1.0      5.0       0.02       -0.71
2006      19         1.5      9.5      0.04       -0.64        0.5      6.0       0.02       -0.70
2007      30         1.5     10.0      0.05       -0.63        0.5      6.0       0.03       -0.70
2008      31         2.0     13.0      0.06       -0.64        1.0      6.5       0.04       -0.71
2009      26         2.5     10.5      0.06       -0.64        1.0      6.0       0.04       -0.74
2010      15         3.5      9.5      0.06       -0.64        2.0      6.5       0.04       -0.73
2011      19         3.0     10.5      0.06       -0.65        1.5      8.0       0.04       -0.72
2012      19         3.0      9.5      0.06       -0.66        1.5      7.0       0.04       -0.74

Notes: Column 1 displays the number of states with a minimum that exceeds the federal minimum for
at least 6 months of the year. Columns 2 and 6, and 3 and 8 display estimates of the lowest and
highest percentile at which the minimum wage binds across states (DC is excluded). The binding
percentile is estimated as the highest percentile in the annual distribution of wages at which the
minimum wage binds (rounded to the nearest half of a percentile), where the annual distribution
includes only those months for which the minimum wage was equal to its modal value for the year.
Columns 4 and 8 display the share of hours worked for wages at or below the minimum wage.
Columns 5 and 9 display the weighted average value of the log(p10)-log(p50) for the male or female
wage distributions across states.
Table 1b - Summary Statistics for Bindingness of State and
               Federal Minimum Wages

                       C. Males and Females, Pooled
       # states      Min.   Max.     Share of    Avg.
       w/higher    binding binding hours at or log(10)-
         min.       pctile  pctile below min. log(50)
          (1)        (2)     (3)       (4)        (5)

1979       1         3.5     17.0       0.08       -0.58
1980       1         4.0     15.5       0.09       -0.59
1981       1         2.5     14.5       0.09       -0.60
1982       1         3.5     12.5       0.07       -0.63
1983       1         3.0     11.5       0.07       -0.65
1984       1         2.0     10.5       0.06       -0.67
1985       2         1.5      9.5       0.06       -0.69
1986       5         1.5     10.0       0.05       -0.70
1987       6         1.5      9.0       0.04       -0.70
1988      10         1.5      8.0       0.04       -0.69
1989      12         1.0      7.0       0.04       -0.68
1990      11         0.5      9.0       0.04       -0.67
1991       4         1.0     12.5       0.05       -0.67
1992       7         1.5      9.5       0.05       -0.67
1993       7         1.5      7.5       0.04       -0.68
1994       8         2.0      7.5       0.04       -0.69
1995       9         1.5      6.0       0.04       -0.68
1996      11         1.5      9.5       0.04       -0.67
1997      10         1.5     10.0       0.05       -0.66
1998       7         2.0      8.0       0.05       -0.65
1999      10         2.0      7.0       0.04       -0.65
2000      10         1.5      7.5       0.04       -0.65
2001      10         1.5      6.5       0.04       -0.66
2002      11         1.5      7.0       0.03       -0.66
2003      11         1.5      6.5       0.03       -0.66
2004      12         1.5      6.0       0.03       -0.68
2005      15         1.5      6.5       0.03       -0.68
2006      19         1.0      7.5       0.03       -0.68
2007      30         1.5      7.5       0.04       -0.68
2008      31         1.0      8.5       0.04       -0.69
2009      26         2.0      8.0       0.05       -0.71
2010      15         3.0      7.5       0.05       -0.70
2011      19         2.5      9.0       0.05       -0.69
2012      19         2.0      8.0       0.05       -0.71
See notes for Table 1a.
  Table 2a: OLS and 2SLS relationship between log(p)-log(p50) and
    log(min. wage)-log(p50), for select percentiles of given wage
                      distribution, 1979 - 2012
                       (1)       (2)      (3)      (4)      (5)
                                        Females
         5              0.63    0.44      0.54     0.32     0.39
                      (0.04)   (0.03)    (0.05)   (0.04)   (0.05)
        10              0.52    0.27      0.46     0.22     0.17
                      (0.03)   (0.03)    (0.03)   (0.05)   (0.03)
        20              0.29    0.12      0.29     0.10     0.07
                      (0.03)   (0.03)    (0.03)   (0.05)   (0.03)
        30              0.15    0.07      0.23     0.02     0.04
                      (0.02)   (0.01)    (0.02)   (0.02)   (0.03)
        40              0.07    0.04      0.17     -0.01    0.03
                      (0.01)   (0.02)    (0.02)   (0.03)   (0.03)
        75             -0.05    0.09      0.24     -0.03    0.01
                      (0.02)   (0.02)    (0.03)   (0.02)   (0.03)
        90             -0.04    0.15      0.34     -0.02    0.04
                      (0.04)   (0.03)    (0.03)   (0.04)   (0.04)
                                         Males
         5             0.55     0.25      0.43     0.17     0.16
                      (0.04)   (0.02)    (0.03)   (0.02)   (0.04)
        10             0.38     0.12      0.34     0.04     0.05
                      (0.04)   (0.04)    (0.02)   (0.04)   (0.03)
        20             0.21     0.06      0.24     0.01     0.02
                      (0.03)   (0.03)    (0.02)   (0.03)   (0.03)
        30             0.09     0.05      0.19     0.01     0.00
                      (0.02)   (0.02)    (0.02)   (0.02)   (0.03)
        40             0.04     0.06      0.15     0.04     0.02
                      (0.01)   (0.01)    (0.02)   (0.02)   (0.04)
        75             0.09     0.14      0.24     0.00     0.02
                      (0.04)   (0.02)    (0.02)   (0.02)   (0.02)
        90             0.14     0.16      0.30     0.02     0.03
                      (0.07)   (0.03)    (0.03)   (0.03)   (0.04)

OLS / 2SLS             OLS      OLS      OLS      2SLS     2SLS
Levels / First-Diff   Levels   Levels    FD       Levels    FD
Year FE                Yes      Yes      Yes       Yes      Yes
State FE               No       Yes      Yes       Yes      Yes
State trends           No       Yes      No        Yes      No
See Notes at bottom of Panel B
  Table 2b: OLS and 2SLS relationship between log(p)-log(p50) and
    log(min. wage)-log(p50), for select percentiles of pooled wage
                      distribution, 1979 - 2012
                       (1)      (2)        (3)       (4)        (5)
                               Males and Females Pooled
         5             0.62     0.35      0.45       0.29      0.29
                      (0.03)   (0.02)    (0.04)     (0.03)    (0.06)
        10             0.44     0.18      0.35       0.16      0.17
                      (0.03)   (0.02)    (0.03)     (0.02)    (0.04)
        20             0.26     0.09      0.23       0.07      0.04
                      (0.03)   (0.02)    (0.03)     (0.02)    (0.03)
        30             0.14     0.06      0.20       0.03      0.01
                      (0.02)   (0.01)    (0.02)     (0.02)    (0.03)
        40             0.06     0.05      0.16       0.03      0.02
                      (0.01)   (0.01)    (0.02)     (0.01)    (0.03)
        75             0.01     0.11      0.22       0.00      0.02
                      (0.02)   (0.01)    (0.02)     (0.02)    (0.02)
        90             0.04     0.15      0.27       0.01      0.02
                      (0.05)   (0.03)    (0.03)     (0.04)    (0.04)

OLS / 2SLS             OLS      OLS       OLS      2SLS       2SLS
Levels / First-Diff   Levels   Levels     FD       Levels      FD
Year FE                Yes      Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes
State FE               No       Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes
State trends           No       Yes       No        Yes        No
Notes: N=1700 for levels estimation, N=1650 for first-differenced
estimation. Sample period is 1979-2012. Estimates are the marginal
effects of log(min. wage)-log(p50), evaluated at its hours-weighted
average across states and years. Standard errors clustered at the
state level are in parenthesis. Regressions are weighted by the sum
of individuals' reported weekly hours worked multiplied by CPS
sampling weights. For 2SLS specifications, the effective minimum
and its square are instrumented by the log of the minimum, the
square of the log minimum, and the log minimum interacted with the
average real log median for the state over the sample. For the first-
differenced specification, the instruments are first-differenced
equivalents.
     Table 3: Relationship between log(p60)-log(p40) and log(p50): OLS estimates

                                A. Mean log(p60)-           B. Trend log(p60)-log(p40),
                              log(p40), 1979-2012                   1979-2012

                              (1)      (2)       (3)        (1)       (2)     (3)       (4)

                                                         Females

Mean log(p50), 1979-         0.123              0.139      0.005             0.005
2012                        (0.029)            (0.024)    (0.001)           (0.001)

Trend log(p50), 1979-                  -0.80    -2.44                0.161 0.107
2012                                  (1.55)   (1.32)               (0.071) (0.063)

Mean log(p60)-log(p40),                                                                0.029
1979-2012                                                                             (0.005)
                                                          Males

Mean log(p50), 1979-         0.060              0.062      0.009             0.009
2012                        (0.053)            (0.048)    (0.001)           (0.001)

Trend log(p50), 1979-                  -1.85    -1.93                0.038 0.026
2012                                  (1.68)   (1.67)               (0.076) (0.045)

Mean log(p60)-log(p40),                                                                0.020
1979-2012                                                                             (0.007)
                                               Males and Females Pooled

Mean log(p60)-log(p40),      0.113              0.122      0.005             0.005
1979-2012                   (0.039)            (0.033)    (0.002)           (0.002)

Mean log(p50), 1979-                   -2.01    -2.60                0.147 0.122
2012                                  (1.29)   (1.13)               (0.058) (0.055)

Mean log(p60)-log(p40),                                                                0.029
1979-2012                                                                             (0.007)

Notes: N=50 (one observation per state). Observations are wighted by the average
hours worked per state. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. The dependent
variable in panel A (left) is the mean log(p60)-log(p40) for the state, over the 1979-2012
period. The dependent variable in panel B (right) is the linear trend in the log(p60)-
log(p40) for the state, over the 1979-2012 period.
    Table 4: Actual and counterfactual changes in log(p50/10) between selected years:
                         Changes in log points (100 x log change)
                              OLS Counterfactuals             2SLS Counterfactuals
            Observed             Levels, No FE              Levels FE     First Diffs
             Change         1979-2012     1979-1991         1979-2012    1979-2012
                                           A. 1979 - 1989
Females        24.6             2.5             4.0             12.2           15.4
Males           2.5            -6.6            -5.4              1.3            1.5
Pooled         11.8            -1.5            -0.2             7.0            8.2
                                           B. 1979 - 2012
Females        28.5            6.0             7.1              15.7           18.8
Males           7.9            3.0             3.5               6.9            7.1
Pooled         11.4            0.7             1.8               7.1            8.1

Note: Estimates represent changes in actual and counterfactual log(p50)-log(p10) between
1979 and 1989, and 1979 and 2012, measured in log points (100 x log change).
Counterfactual wage changes in panels A represents counterfactual changes in the 50/10
had the effective minimum wage in 1979 equalled the effective minimum wage in 1989 for
each state. Counterfactual wage changes in Panel B represent changes had the effective
minima in 1979 and 2012 equaled the effective minimum in 1989. OLS counterfactual
estimates (using point estimates from the 1979-2012 period) are formed using coefficients
from estimation reported in column 1 of Table 2. 2SLS counterfactuals (using point
estimates from the 1979-2012 period) are formed using coefficients from estimation
reported in columns 4 and 5 of Table 2. Counterfactuals using point estimates from the
1979-1991 period are formed using coefficients from analogous regressions for the shorter
sample period.
                                           Appendix Table 1 - Variation in State Minimum Wages

                     1979 1980 1981 1982 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996

Federal min. wage     2.90   3.10   3.35   3.35   3.35   3.35   3.35   3.35   3.35   3.35   3.35   3.80   4.25   4.25   4.25   4.25   4.25   4.25
Alabama
Alaska                3.40   3.60   3.85   3.85   3.85   3.85   3.85   3.85   3.85   3.85   3.85   4.30   4.75   4.75   4.75   4.75   4.75   4.75
Arizona
Arkansas
California                                                                                  4.25   4.25
Colorado
Connecticut                                                                          3.75   4.25   4.25   4.27   4.27   4.27   4.27   4.27   4.27
Delaware                                                                                                                                     4.65
Florida
Georgia
Hawaii                                                                               3.85   3.85   3.85          4.75   5.25   5.25   5.25   5.25
Idaho
Illinois
Indiana
Iowa                                                                                               3.85          4.65   4.65   4.65   4.65   4.65
Kansas
Kentucky
Louisiana
Maine                                                           3.45   3.55   3.65   3.65   3.75   3.85
Maryland
Massachusetts                                                                 3.65   3.70   3.75                                             4.75
Michigan
Minnesota                                                                            3.55   3.85   3.95
Mississippi
Missouri
Montana
Nebraska
Nevada
New Hampshire                                                                 3.45   3.55   3.65
New Jersey                                                                                                       5.05   5.05   5.05   5.05   5.05
New Mexico
New York
North Carolina
North Dakota
Ohio
Oklahoma
Oregon                                                                                             4.25   4.75   4.75   4.75   4.75   4.75   4.75
Pennsylvania
Rhode island                                                                  3.60   3.83   4.13   4.25   4.45   4.45   4.45   4.45   4.45   4.45
South Carolina
South Dakota
Tennessee
Texas
Utah
Vermont                                                                       3.50   3.60   3.70   3.85                               4.50   4.75
Virginia
Washington                                                                                  3.85   3.85                        4.90   4.90   4.90
West Virginia
Wisconsin
Wyoming
Note: Table indicates years in which each state had a state minimum wage that exceeded the federal minimum wage for at 6 months or more
of the year.
                               Appendix Table 1 (cont) - Variation in State Minimum Wages

                      1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012

Federal min. wage     4.75   5.15   5.15   5.15   5.15   5.15   5.15   5.15   5.15   5.15   5.15   5.85   6.55   7.25   7.25   7.25
Alabama
Alaska                5.25   5.65   5.65   5.65   5.65   5.65   7.15   7.15   7.15   7.15   7.15   7.15   7.15   7.75   7.75   7.75
Arizona                                                                                     6.75   6.90   7.25          7.35   7.65
Arkansas                                                                                    6.25   6.25
California            5.00   5.75   5.75   5.75   6.25   6.75   6.75   6.75   6.75   6.75   7.50   8.00   8.00   8.00   8.00   8.00
Colorado                                                                                    6.85   7.02   7.28          7.36   7.64
Connecticut           4.77   5.18   5.65   6.15   6.40   6.70   6.90   7.10   7.10   7.40   7.65   7.65   8.00   8.25   8.25   8.25
Delaware                            5.65   5.65   6.15   6.15   6.15   6.15   6.15   6.15   6.65   7.15   7.15
Florida                                                                       6.15   6.40   6.67   6.79   7.21          7.31   7.67
Georgia
Hawaii                5.25   5.25   5.25   5.25   5.25   5.75   6.25   6.25   6.25   6.75   7.25   7.25   7.25
Idaho
Illinois                                                               5.50   6.50   6.50   7.00   7.63   7.88   8.13   8.25   8.25
Indiana
Iowa                                                                                        6.20   7.25   7.25
Kansas
Kentucky
Louisiana
Maine                                                    5.75   6.25   6.25   6.35   6.50   6.75   7.00   7.25   7.50   7.50   7.50
Maryland                                                                             6.15   6.15   6.15
Massachusetts         5.25   5.25   5.25   6.00   6.75   6.75   6.75   6.75   6.75   6.75   7.50   8.00   8.00   8.00   8.00   8.00
Michigan                                                                                    7.05   7.28   7.40   7.40   7.40   7.40
Minnesota                                                                            6.15   6.15   6.15
Mississippi
Missouri                                                                                    6.50   6.65   7.05
Montana                                                                                     6.15   6.25   6.90          7.35   7.65
Nebraska
Nevada                                                                                      6.24   6.59   7.20   7.55   8.25   8.25
New Hampshire
New Jersey            5.05                                                           6.15   7.15   7.15   7.15
New Mexico                                                                                         6.50   7.50   7.50   7.50   7.50
New York                                                                      6.00   6.75   7.15   7.15   7.15
North Carolina                                                                              6.15   6.15
North Dakota
Ohio                                                                                        6.85   7.00   7.30   7.30   7.40   7.70
Oklahoma
Oregon                5.50   6.00   6.50   6.50   6.50   6.50   6.90   7.05   7.25   7.50   7.80   7.95   8.40   8.40   8.50   8.80
Pennsylvania                                                                                6.70   7.15   7.15
Rhode island          5.15                 5.65   6.15   6.15   6.15   6.75   6.75   7.10   7.40   7.40   7.40   7.40   7.40   7.40
South Carolina
South Dakota
Tennessee
Texas
Utah
Vermont               5.00   5.25   5.25   5.75   6.25   6.25   6.25   6.75   7.00   7.25   7.53   7.68   8.06   8.06   8.15   8.46
Virginia
Washington            4.90          5.70   6.50   6.72   6.90   7.01   7.16   7.35   7.63   7.93   8.07   8.55   8.55   8.67   9.04
West Virginia                                                                               6.20   6.90   7.25
Wisconsin                                                                     5.70   6.50   6.50   6.50
Wyoming

Note: Table indicates years in which each state had a state minimum wage that exceeded the federal minimum wage for at least
6 months or more of the year.
                                                  Figure 1: Share of hours at or below the minimum wage




                                     .14
                                     .12
                                     .1
     Share at or below the minimum

                                     .08
                                     .06
                                     .04
                                     .02
                                     0




                                           1979     1985        1990             1995       2000          2005   2010


                                                                       Female                      Male

                                                                       Male/female pooled




Note: Lines are estimates of the share of hours worked for reported wages equal to or less than the
applicable state or federal minimum wage, and correspond with data from column 4 and 8 of Table 1A, and
column 4 of Table 1B.
                                       Figure 2A: Trends in state and federal minimum wages, and log(p10)-log(p50)




                                                                                                                                                           -.2
                                      2.2




                                                                                                                                                           -.3
                                      2.1
Log real minimum wage, 2012 dollars




                                                                                                                                                           -.4
                                      2




                                                                                                                                                                 Log(p10)-log(p50)
                                                                                                                                                           -.5
                                      1.9




                                                                                                                                                           -.6
                                      1.8




                                                                                                                                                           -.7
                                      1.7
                                      1.6




                                                                                                                                                           -.8
                                            1974            1980          1985             1990           1995      2000           2005          2010


                                                               Real value of average state/federal mins                        Real value of fed. min.

                                                               log(p10)-log(p50), female                                       log(p10)-log(p50), male

                                            Note: Annual data on state and federal minimum wages and log percentiles. Minimum wages are in 2012 dollars.



                                       Figure 2B: Trends in state and federal minimum wages, and log(p90)-log(p50)




                                                                                                                                                           1.1
                                      2.2




                                                                                                                                                           1
                                      2.1
Log real minimum wage, 2012 dollars




                                                                                                                                                           .9
                                      2




                                                                                                                                                                 Log(p90)-log(p50)
                                                                                                                                                           .8
                                      1.9




                                                                                                                                                           .7
                                      1.8




                                                                                                                                                           .6
                                      1.7
                                      1.6




                                                                                                                                                           .5




                                            1974            1980          1985             1990           1995      2000           2005          2010


                                                               Real value of average state/federal mins                        Real value of fed. min.

                                                               log(p90)-log(p50), female                                       log(p90)-log(p50), male

                                            Note: Annual data on state and federal minimum wages and log percentiles. Minimum wages are in 2012 dollars.
                   Figure 3: OLS estimates of the relationship between log(p)-log(p50) and log(min)-log(p50) and its square, 1979-2012
              Figure 3: OLS estimates of the relationship between log(p)-log(p50) and log(min)-log(p50) or log(min) and its square, 1979-2012

                                      A. Females - no state FE                                              B. Females - state FE and trends




                                                                                  .7
        .7
        .6




                                                                                  .6
                                                                                  .5
        .5




                                                                                  .4
        .4
        .3




                                                                                  .3
        .2




                                                                                  .2
                                                                                  .1
        .1
        -.3 -.2 -.1 0




                                                                                  -.3 -.2 -.1 0
                        0   10   20   30   40    50   60    70   80   90   1 00                   0   10   20      30   40    50   60    70      80   90   1 00




                                       C. Males - no state FE                                                   D. Males - state FE and trends
        .7




                                                                                  .7
        .6




                                                                                  .6
        .5




                                                                                  .5
        .4




                                                                                  .4
        .3




                                                                                  .3
        .2




                                                                                  .2
        .1




                                                                                  .1
        -.3 -.2 -.1 0




                                                                                  -.3 -.2 -.1 0



                        0   10   20   30   40    50   60    70   80   90   1 00                   0   10   20      30   40    50   60    70      80   90   1 00




Note: Estimates are the marginal effects of log(min. wage)-log(p50), evaluated at the hours-weighted average of log(min. wage)-log(p50) across
states and years. Observations are state-year observations. 95% confidence interval is represented by the dashed lines. Panels A and C
correspond with column 1 of Table 2. Panels B and D correspond with column 2 of Table 2.
                                           Figure 3 (cont.): OLS estimates of the relationship between log(p)-log(p50) and log(min)-log(p50) and its square, 1979-2012


                                                     E. Males and females - no state FE                                                             F. Males and females - state FE and trends


      -.3 -.2 -.1 0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7




                                                                                                          -.3 -.2 -.1 0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7
                                           0    10   20   30    40   50    60   70    80   90   1 00                                           0   10   20   30   40    50    60   70    80      90   1 00


Note: Estimates are the marginal effects of log(min. wage)-log(p50), evaluated at the hours-weighted average of log(min. wage)-log(p50) across
states and years. Observations are state-year observations. 95% confidence interval is represented by the dashed lines. Panel E corresponds
with column 1 of Table 2. Panels F corresponds with column 2 of Table 2.
     Figure 4 : OLS estimates of the relationship between mean (and trend) log(p60)-log(p40) and mean (and trend) log(p50), 1979-2012
                                                                                                                  Relationship between mean log(p60)-log(p40) and mean log(p50), 1979-2012
                                                                                   A. Females                                                                                                          B. Males                                                                             C. Males and Females Pooled




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .34
                                                                                                                            NY                                                                                                           CA                                                                                                                              CA
                                          .3                                                                                      CA




                                                                                                                                                       .34
                                                                                                                                           NJ
                                                                                                                                           MD
                                                                                            TX                   VA
     Mean log(p60)-log(p40), 1979-2012



                                                                 LA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              LA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                WV




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .32
                                                                             NM                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            NJ
                                          .28


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         VA
                                                                WV                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      NY




                                                                                                                                                       .32
                                                                                                                                                                                                 TX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  MI
                                                                                                            MI                                                                                                                                                                                                           TX
                                                                                                                 IL
                                                                                                                 DE                                                                              NM                             VA NY
                                                                                                                                            CT                                                                                                                                                                                                                    IL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           AL       NM
                                                                                                                      CO          MA
                                                                AL          OK                                                                                                                 WV                                                                                                                                        WY              DECO                     MD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              NJ




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         IL                                                                 MT
                                                                                             GA OH                                                                                              GA AZ
                                          .26




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        AZ




                                                                                                                                                       .3
                                                                                                                                                                                            AL  LA                                  CO                                                                                        MO                                             WA
                                                                           KY                    PA                        WA                                                                         NV
                                                                                                                                                                                                     MO                        HI                   MD
                                                                                   FL                                                                                                                                                                                                                             KY
                                                      MS                                              AZ                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            OR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    DE                                                                           OK
                                                                                                                                                                                                 OK
                                                                                         MO                                                                                                                                                                                                MS                                 GA                                               MA            CT
                                                                                        KS                                                                                               FL                                                   MI                                                                              KS UT               OH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  RI          MN




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .28
                                                                            WY                             OR         MN                                                                         ID        KS                                                                                                                                      PA




                                                                                                                                                       .28
                                                                                       IA                   RI                                                                                                                                                                                                  ID
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 FL
                                          .24




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NV
                                                                             TN                                                                                                                                                                     MA
                                                                          ID                                                                                                                                         UT                                                                                                                            HI
                                                                                                                                                                                                  KY
                                                                                                                                                                                                  MT                      RI         MN                                                                                            IN
                                                                                                   NV                                                                                    TN                               WY                                                                                                                      WI
                                                                 MT        SC
                                                                            NE                    WI             HI                                                         MS                                                                      WA                                                     TN
                                                           AR                     NCUT                                                                                                   NE
                                                                                                  VT             NH                                                                    ND                                                                                                                                  IA
                                                                                                                                                                                        NC




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .26
                                                                                   IN                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ND NE




                                                                                                                                                       .26
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             OR                                                                           NC                                                 NH
                                                                     ND                                                                                                                                                    OH NH
                                          .22




                                                                                                                                                                                         SC                                PA
                                                                                                                                                                       AR                                                                                       CT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                IN                                                                                          SC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           AR
                                                                                       ME                                                                                                        ME IA




                                                                                                                                                       .24




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .24
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          WI                                                                                          ME
                                                                 SD                                                                                                                                                                                                                             SD
                                                                                                                                                                            SD
                                          .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                      VT                                                                                                                        VT



                                                  1.6                1.7                1.8                 1.9             2                   2.1            1.8                            2                                 2.2                                  2.4            1.7         1.8                 1.9                       2               2.1                    2.2
                                                                          Mean log(p50), 1979-2012                                                                                   Mean log(p50), 1979-2012                                                                                          Mean log(p50), 1979-2012

                                                                                                                       Relationship between trend log(p60)-log(p40) and trend log(p50), 1979-2012
                                                                                   D. Females                                                                                                          E. Males                                                                             F. Males and Females Pooled
                                          .006




                                                                                                                                                       .006




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .003
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       NJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        NY                                  MA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                CA
                                                                                                                                          NJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  RI
     Trend log(p60)-log(p40), 1979-2012




                                                                                                                                       MA
                                                                                                                                        CT                                                                                                     NJ                                                                             IL                                                             CT




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .002
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              NC
                                                                                                                                                       .004
                                          .004




                                                                                                             NY       AL
                                                                                                  AR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 VA
                                                                                                                                           NH                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              NH
                                                                                             CA                                                                                   CA                                                                          MA
                                                                                        IL                                        RI                                    OR          IL                                                         RI                                                                   TX                                                   SC
                                                                                                           NC               VA                                          MI                                                                                                                                                                                                ME
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           GA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .001
                                                                            TX                                                                                                              WA
                                                                                                  TN GA                                                                                                                                                  NH                                                                                             AR         FL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                NY                                                                                                                                                              VT
                                                                           LA                          ME                             MD                                                                                                                                                                                                                TN                    MD
                                                                                             PA                                                                                                                                                         VA CT                                                         LA
                                                                                                                                                       .002




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         PA
                                                                                        WA MS                                                                                                         PA
                                          .002




                                                                                                    FL MN                   DE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       MI
                                                                                       OR                                                                                                                                      NC                                                                                             KS
                                                                               MI NMUT
                                                                                    KS            SC                             VT                                          OH                                                                                                                            OK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               MD                                                                                                                        DE
                                                                                          AZ                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      NE MS AL
                                                                                      OH        MO                                                                           TX          KS                                              GA                                                                         OH            WA                     MN
                                                                                                                                                                                         UT




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                 ID          KY NE                                                                          OK                         LA TNDE                           ME                                                                                     ID
                                                                                WV           IA                                                                                           CO
                                                                                                   WI                                                                                    WI                  MN                FL                  VT
                                                                                                 IN SD                                                                                                         AR                                                                                                          UT NM
                                                                  MT                          CO                                                                                                              AL                         SC                                                                                             IN
                                                                 OK           NV                                                                                                            IN                                                                                                                                                 MO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    OR
                                                                                                                                                       0




                                                                                                                                                                                   KY                           MS                                                                                                                            CO
                                          0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -.001
                                                                                                                                                                       NV                                                                                                                                                     HI
                                                                                  HI             ND                                                                               ID                    NE
                                                                                                                                                                       AZ           HIIA                                                                                                                   WV        NV
                                                                                                                                                                 MT                               MO                                                                                                                            AZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                WY                       WI
                                                                                                                                                                       WV                                                                                                                                                           IA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   KY
                                                                      WY                                                                                                                                                                                                                              MT
                                                                                                                                                                                  WY        NM




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -.002
                                                                                                                                                       -.002




                                                                                                                                                                                       ND                                                                                                                                          ND
                                          -.002




                                                                                                                                                                                                            SD                                                                                                                                               SD



                                                  0                          .005                                .01                            .015           -.005                             0                              .005                                 .01           -.005                        0                                  .005                                .01
                                                                          Trend log(p50), 1979-2012                                                                                 Trend log(p50), 1979-2012                                                                                          Trend log(p50), 1979-2012




Note: Estimates correspond with regressions from Table 3. The top panel shows the cross-state relationship between the average log(p60)-
log(p40) and log(p50) between 1979 and 2012. The bottom panel shows the cross-state relationship between the state trends in log(p60)-
log(p40) and log(p50), when estimated over the same period. Alaska, which tends to be an outlier, is dropped for visual clarity, though this
does not materially affect the slope of the line (Table 3 includes Alaska).
                               Figure 5: 2SLS estimates of the relationship between log(p)-log(p50) and log(min)-log(p50), 1979-2012


                               A. Female - 2SLS, levels (state trends)                                    B. Female - 2SLS, first-differenced (state FE)


      .7




                                                                                     .7
      .6




                                                                                     .6
      .5




                                                                                     .5
      .4




                                                                                     .4
      .3




                                                                                     .3
      .2




                                                                                     .2
      .1




                                                                                     .1
      -.3 -.2 -.1 0




                                                                                     -.3 -.2 -.1 0
                      0   10    20    30    40   50    60    70    80    90   1 00                   0   10      20    30    40    50    60    70    80      90   1 00




                                C. Male - 2SLS, levels (state trends)                                         D. Male - 2SLS, first-differenced (state FE)
      .7




                                                                                     .7
      .6




                                                                                     .6
      .5




                                                                                     .5
      .4




                                                                                     .4
      .3




                                                                                     .3
      .2




                                                                                     .2
      .1




                                                                                     .1
      -.3 -.2 -.1 0




                                                                                     -.3 -.2 -.1 0



                      0   10    20    30    40   50    60    70    80    90   1 00                   0   10      20    30    40    50    60    70    80      90   1 00




Note: Estimates are the marginal effects of log(min. wage)-log(p50), evaluated at the hours-weighted average of log(min. wage)-log(p50) across
states and years. Observations are state-year observations. 95% confidence interval is represented by the dashed lines. Panels A and C
correspond with column 4 of Table 2, and Panels B and D correspond with column 5.
                                                 Figure 5 (cont.): 2SLS estimates of the relationship between log(p)-log(p50) and log(min)-log(p50), 1979-2012


                                               E. Male and female - 2SLS, levels (state trends)                                                     F. Male and female - 2SLS, first-differenced (state FE)

      -.3 -.2 -.1 0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7




                                                                                                           -.3 -.2 -.1 0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7
                                           0   10    20   30    40    50    60    70    80    90   1 00                                         0      10    20    30    40   50    60    70    80    90      1 00


Note: Estimates are the marginal effects of log(min. wage)-log(p50), evaluated at the hours-weighted average of log(min. wage)-log(p50) across
states and years. Observations are state-year observations. 95% confidence interval is represented by the dashed lines. Panel E corresponds
with column 4 of Table 2, Panel F with column 5.
                                        Figure 6: 2SLS estimates of the relationship between log(p)-log(p50) and log(min)-log(p50) over various time periods


                                                  A. Estimation sample: 1979-1989



                        25
                        15
     Mar g. e ffe cts
                        5
                        -5
                        -1 5
                        -2 5




                                        0   10   20   30   40    50   60    70      80   90   1 00




                                                  B. Estimation sample: 1979-1991                                                                C. Estimation sample: 1979-2012
                        .7




                                                                                                                        .7
                        .6




                                                                                                                        .6
                        .5




                                                                                                                        .5
                        .4




                                                                                                                        .4
     Mar g. e ffe cts




                                                                                                     Mar g. e ffe cts
                        .3




                                                                                                                        .3
                        .2




                                                                                                                        .2
                        .1




                                                                                                                        .1
                        -.3 -.2 -.1 0




                                                                                                                        -.3 -.2 -.1 0


                                        0   10   20   30   40    50   60    70      80   90   1 00                                      0   10   20   30   40   50   60    70      80   90   1 00




Note: Estimates are the marginal effects of log(min. wage)-log(p50), using regression coefficients from the listed years (1979 to 1989, 1991, or
2012), and evaluated at the hours-weighted average of log(min. wage)-log(p50) across states from 1979-2012. Observations are state-year
observations. 95% confidence interval is represented by the dashed lines.
                                                Figure 7A: Actual and counterfactual change in log(p)-log(p50)
                                                           Female wage distribution, 1979 to 1989




                       .2
                       .1
  Change in log(p)-log(p50), 1979-1989
             -.1       -.2
                       -.3   0




                                            0    5   10   15   20   25    30     35     40    45      50      55   60   65     70     75    80    85       90   95   100
                                                                                                   Percentile


                                                                    Actual change                                            Cntfct. change, no state FE

                                                                    Cntfct. change, state time trends                        Cntfct. change, FD




                                                Figure 7B: Actual and counterfactual change in log(p)-log(p50),
                                                             Male wage distribution, 1979 to 1989
                       .2              .1
    Change in log(p)-log(p50), 1979-1989
  -.1                 0-.2




                                            0    5   10   15   20   25    30     35     40    45      50      55   60   65     70     75    80    85       90   95   100
                                                                                                   Percentile


                                                                    Actual change                                            Cntfct. change, no state FE

                                                                    Cntfct. change, state time trends                        Cntfct. change, FD




Note: Plots represent the actual and counterfactual changes in the 5th through 95th
percentiles of the male wage distribution. Counterfactual changes are calculated by
adjusting the 1979 wage distributions by the value of states' effective minima in 1989
using coefficients from OLS regressions without state fixed effects (column 1 of table 2)
and 2SLS regressions with state fixed effects and time trends or first-differenced 2SLS
regressions with state fixed effects (columns 4 and 5 of table 2).
                                                Figure 8A: Actual and counterfactual change in log(p)-log(p50),
                                                   Male and female pooled wage distribution, 1979 to 1989




                       .1               0
   Change in log(p)-log(p50), 1979-1989
  -.2                 -.1
                       -.3




                                            0    5   10   15   20   25    30     35     40    45      50      55   60   65     70     75    80    85       90   95   100
                                                                                                   Percentile


                                                                    Actual change                                            Cntfct. change, no state FE

                                                                    Cntfct. change, state time trends                        Cntfct. change, FD




                                                Figure 8B: Actual and counterfactual change in log(p)-log(p50),
                                                   Male and female pooled wage distribution, 1979 to 2012
                       .3
                       .2
  Change in log(p)-log(p50), 1979-2012
             0         -.1
                       -.2   .1




                                            0    5   10   15   20   25    30     35     40    45      50      55   60   65     70     75    80    85       90   95   100
                                                                                                   Percentile


                                                                    Actual change                                            Cntfct. change, no state FE

                                                                    Cntfct. change, state time trends                        Cntfct. change, FD




Note: Plots represent the actual and counterfactual changes in the 5th through 95th
percentiles of the male and female pooled wage distribution. Counterfactual changes in
Panel A are calculated by adjusting the 1979 wage distributions by the value of states'
effective minima in 1989 using coefficients from OLS regressions (column 1 of table 2)
and 2SLS regressions (columns 5 and 6 of table 2). Counterfactual changes in Panel B
are calculated by adjusting both the 1979 and 2012 wage distributions by the value of
states' effective minima in 1989 using coefficients from OLS regressions (column 1 of
table 2) and 2SLS regressions (columns 4 and 5 of table 2).
                                                  Figure 9: Comparison of estimated effects of the minimum on the mean and density at the true spike


                                                                 A. Female                                                          B. Male

                                    .2




                                                                                                     .2
                                    .15




                                                                                                     .15
                                    .1




                                                                                                     .1
                                    .05




                                                                                                     .05
                                    0




                                                                                                     0
   Effect of minimum wage on mean
                                    -.05




                                                                                                     -.05
                                    -.1




                                                                                                     -.1
                                           1979   1985    1990     1995   2000    2005     2010             1979      1985   1990    1995     2000   2005   2010



                                                         C. Males and females
                                    .2
                                    .15
                                    .1
                                    .05
                                    0
                                    -.05
                                    -.1




                                           1979   1985    1990     1995   2000    2005     2010




                                                                                    Est. marg effects (2SLS levels)

                                                                                    Density of true spike, upper and lower bounds




Notes: Mean effects represent the average marginal effects of the minimum wage (weighted across states), estimated from 2SLS
regressions of log(mean) on the effective minimum and its square, year and state fixed effects, state time trends, and the log median, where
the effective minimum and its square are instrumented as in the earlier analysis. The bounds for the density of the true spike are estimated
from a maximum likelihood procedure procedure described in Appendix D.
