NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CANDIDATES, CHARACTER, AND CORRUPTION
B. Douglas Bernheim
Navin Kartik
Working Paper 16530
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16530
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2010

This paper previously circulated under the title "Of Candidates and Character." For useful comments
we thank anonymous referees, Simon Loertscher, Kali P. Rath, and seminar participants at NYU, UC
Berkeley, UC San Diego, and the 2007 Wallis Institute Conference on Political Economy at the University
of Rochester. For ˝nancial support, Bernheim thanks the National Science Foundation (grants SES-0137129
and SES-0452300), and Kartik thanks the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation (Sloan Research Fellowship)
and the Institute for Advanced Study at Princeton (Roger W. Ferguson, Jr. and Annette L. Nazareth
membership). Kartik also thanks the Institute for its hospitality. Preliminary versions of some of the
results in this paper were reported in Kartik's Ph.D. dissertation submitted to Stanford University.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by B. Douglas Bernheim and Navin Kartik. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Candidates, Character, and Corruption
B. Douglas Bernheim and Navin Kartik
NBER Working Paper No. 16530
November 2010, Revised February 2013
JEL No. D72
ABSTRACT
We study the characteristics of self-selected candidates in corrupt political systems. Potential candidates
differ along two dimensions of unobservable character: public spirit (altruism toward others) and honesty
(the disutility suffered when selling out to special interests after securing office). Both aspects combine
to determine an individual's quality as governor. We characterize properties of equilibrium candidate
pools for arbitrary costs of running for office, including the case where those costs become vanishingly
small. We explore how policy instruments such as the governor's compensation and anti-corruption
enforcement affect the expected quality of governance through candidate self-selection. We also show
that self-selection can have surprising implications for the effect of information disclosures concerning
candidates' backgrounds.
B. Douglas Bernheim
Department of Economics
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
bernheim@stanford.edu
Navin Kartik
Columbia University
nkartik@gmail.com

An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w16530

“Ninety-eight percent of the adults in this country are decent, hardworking,
honest Americans. It’s the other lousy two percent that get all the publicity. But
then, we elected them.” — Lily Tomlin

1

Introduction

According to one long-standing and widespread view, representative democracies suﬀer from
a pernicious adverse selection problem: the citizens who are best suited to govern are least
likely to seek oﬃce. Drawing on the citizen-candidate models of representative democracy
due to Besley and Coate (1997) and Osborne and Slivinski (1996), a recent and growing
literature has examined the nature of candidate self-selection with respect to ability or competence.1 Yet concerns over adverse self-selection extend beyond candidates’ abilities, to
questions of character. As the political scientist V.O. Key quipped, “If the people can only
choose among rascals, they are certain to choose a rascal.”(Key, 1966) Some commentators
attribute the purported prevalence of rascals among politicians to special interest groups,
suggesting that they sully the political process and attract those of low character while
discouraging those with conscience.
It is not obvious, however, that one should expect negative rather than positive candidate self-selection along all pertinent dimensions of character. On the one hand, oﬃceholding provides opportunities for personal rent-seeking at the expense of the public good,
which are presumably more attractive to selﬁsh than public-spirited citizens. But on the
one hand, the opportunities to promote the greater good that accompany oﬃce-holding are
presumably more attractive to public-spirited citizens than to selﬁsh ones.
The literature on candidate self-selection has largely ignored questions of character (we
discuss exceptions later). In this paper, we study candidate self-selection with respect to
two dimensions of character: public spirit, which is deﬁned as altruism toward other citizens,
and honesty, which is deﬁned as susceptibility to corruption. Those two characteristics
impact the quality of governance, deﬁned as the net beneﬁt the representative citizen derives
from the public sector. In our model, citizens who run for oﬃce may hope to beneﬁt from
both legitimate compensation (salary and ego-rents) and illicit compensation (contributions
or bribes from interest groups). They bear campaign costs and, if elected, eﬀort costs
1

See, e.g., Caselli and Morelli (2004), Messner and Polborn (2004), Dal Bó et al. (2006), Poutvaara and
Takalo (2007), and Mattozzi and Merlo (2008, 2010).

1

associated with producing public goods. Each citizen also recognizes that, if elected, his
character will impact the quality of governance and hence general welfare. Character aﬀects
the tradeoﬀs between these costs and beneﬁts. However, a candidate’s character is not
observed by the electorate (at least not initially). Thus, having a better character than
one’s opponents does not guarantee election.
A central feature of our model is that, as a consequence of the competing considerations
noted in the previous paragraph, the incentive to run for oﬃce is a U-shaped function of
public spirit. Moreover, dishonest citizens extract greater rents from holding oﬃce because
of special interest politics. As a result, the citizens with the greatest incentive to run for oﬃce
are those who are maximally dishonest, and either maximally or minimally public-spirited.
This property has important implications for candidate self-selection.
We ﬁnd that for any given number of candidates, the set of equilibrium candidate pools
(when non-empty) is typically characterized by non-trivial lower and upper bounds on the
expected quality of governance.2 Candidates tend to be of mediocre quality: neither too
good, because opponents would then drop out, nor too bad, because others would then
enter. Note that the upper bound obtains without assuming a positive correlation between
a citizen’s quality and his outside market option; rather, in our model, all individuals have
the same outside option. Indeed, because our focus is on citizens’ character rather than
competence, it is not clear that higher quality should be positively correlated with better
private sector opportunities.
The bounds on average candidate quality yield a negative correlation between publicspiritedness and honesty among candidates, even when these characteristics are uncorrelated
in the population. Equilibria may be either symmetric (with candidates of identical or similar quality running for oﬃce) or asymmetric (with candidates of sharply diﬀerent quality),
but in some cases all equilibria with a given number of candidates are asymmetric. This
is a consequence of the U-shaped entry incentives noted earlier. Thus, the model generates
endogenous volatility in the quality of governance.
We investigate the eﬀects of changes in two public policy instruments: the governor’s
compensation and the level of anti-corruption enforcement. The eﬀects of these policies on
the costs and beneﬁts of holding oﬃce depend on a candidate’s character; hence, beyond any
incentive eﬀects once in oﬃce, the policies alter the composition of the self-selected candidate
2

The number of candidates will be endogenously determined, but one must ﬁrst understand the properties
of candidate pools taking this number as given.

2

pool. As the set of equilibria for a given number of candidates tends to be large (when it is
non-empty), we focus on the comparative statics for the best and worst equilibria.
For equilibria with a given number of candidates, the expected quality of governance
in the best equilibria rises with the level of the governor’s compensation, but does not improve, and may even decline, with the level of anti-corruption enforcement. Subject to some
qualiﬁcations, the quality of governance in the worst equilibria typically improves when the
governor’s compensation rises, but declines when anti-corruption enforcement becomes more
vigorous. Thus, focusing on equilibria with any ﬁxed number of candidates, higher compensation tends to promote good governance, while anti-corruption enforcement is surprisingly
counterproductive (and at best ineﬀective). The latter result holds even though enforcement
reduces the degree to which any given governor would make concessions to special interests;
it turns out that perverse selection eﬀects overwhelm the beneﬁcial pure incentive eﬀects.
Apart from certain exceptional points in the policy space, the comparative static results
described in the previous paragraph also hold locally for the overall best and worst equilibria
(i.e., without ﬁxing the number of candidates). At the exceptional points, policy changes
alter the sizes of candidate pools for which equilibria exist, bringing additional eﬀects into
play. Speciﬁcally, if the number of candidates in the overall best or worst equilibrium also
changes at such a point, overall quality can jump discontinuously. As a general matter, an
increase in the number of candidates tends to generate detrimental selection eﬀects: from the
perspective of selection, the fewer candidates the better. It follows that, for our two policy
variables at the aforementioned exceptional points, these eﬀects tend to work in the opposite
direction from those discussed in the previous paragraph. Thus, when the policy parameters
pass through the exceptional points, the overall eﬀects of the governor’s compensation and
anti-corruption enforcement on the quality of governance reﬂect opposing forces.
As the costs of running for oﬃce become vanishingly small (a common assumption in
the “citizen-candidate” literature), multiple-candidate equilibria converge to an essentially
unique limiting equilibrium, which we characterize. This equilibrium consists of citizens
with the greatest incentives to run for oﬃce, who eﬀectively crowd out all other types of
candidates. Typically, there is a bimodal distribution of character: all of the candidates
are maximally dishonest, but, due to the U-shaped entry incentives noted above, there is
a mixture of those with maximal and minimal public spirit. In other words, with small
costs of running for oﬃce, typically only highly asymmetric equilibria survive; the model
then has the strong implication that there is no variability in the predictable (dis)honesty of

3

politicians, but substantial variability in the quality of governance through volatility in the
public-spiritedness of the electoral victor.
For the limiting multiple-candidate equilibrium, we show that an increase in anticorruption enforcement unambiguously improves the quality of governance. While this
ﬁnding is consistent with simple intuition, the mechanism is surprising: for a wide range
of parameter values, anti-corruption enforcement is on balance beneﬁcial only because it
reduces the number of candidates in equilibrium, thereby indirectly improving selection. In
contrast, an increase in the governor’s compensation has no overall eﬀect, either beneﬁcial
or adverse; in other words, salary is surprisingly irrelevant.
As an extension of the model, we also allow for the possibility that candidates may have
diﬀerent track records and/or reputations. We ﬁnd that as long as this information is not
conclusive in a sense we make precise, changes in the information structure have no eﬀect
on the set of equilibrium outcomes. This neutrality result has surprising implications for
public policy. First, positive short-term eﬀects of information disclosures on voters’ choices,
documented for example by Ferraz and Finan (2008) and Banerjee et al. (2010, 2011), can
be neutralized by self-selection eﬀects once such disclosures are institutionalized. Second,
elections for lower oﬃce in decentralized democracies—which provide opportunities for establishing track records and reputations—need not necessarily improve electoral outcomes
for higher oﬃce by ﬁltering the set of candidates (cf. Cooter, 2003; Myerson, 2006).
We are not the ﬁrst to study political self-selection with respect to any aspect of candidate character (as opposed to competence). Caselli and Morelli (2001)—the working
paper version of Caselli and Morelli (2004)—and Besley (2004) consider models in which
citizens choose to run for oﬃce based on a characteristic which one can interpret as honesty.3 Neither of these papers studies selection with respect to public-spiritedness, which
is central to our analysis. Both conclude that higher compensation improves the quality of
the candidate pool—a result our model does not replicate for small entry costs—but neither
explicitly models special-interest inﬂuence activities or studies anti-corruption enforcement.4
3

In Caselli and Morelli (2001), candidates diﬀer in a binary propensity to extract rents from a randomly
encountered citizen; in Besley (2004), they are either “congruent” or “dissonant” with the electorate.
4
Messner and Polborn (2004) and Mattozzi and Merlo (2008) derive more nuanced or even opposite
conclusions concerning the eﬀect of higher compensation on candidates’ competence (rather than character).
The empirical evidence on this issue is mixed: using data from Brazlian municipal elections, Ferraz and Finan
(2010) suggest that higher salaries do attract somewhat more educated and more experienced candidates;
on the other hand, in their study of the European Parliament, Fisman et al. (2012) ﬁnd that higher salaries
reduce of fraction of parliamentarians who attended highly-ranked colleges. Both studies agree, however,
that higher salaries lead to larger numbers of candidates for oﬃce.

4

Their analyses of self-selection with respect to honesty also involve very diﬀerent mechanisms
than the one examined here, and these diﬀerences account for our contrasting conclusions
concerning the eﬀects of compensation.5
In examining the eﬀects of special-interest inﬂuence activities on candidate self-selection,
our work is also related to Dal Bó et al. (2006) and Besley and Coate (2001). However, Dal
Bó et al. (2006) focus on candidates’ ability rather than character, while Besley and Coate
(2001) analyze candidates’ policy preferences. Moreover, Dal Bó et al. (2006) are primarily
concerned with the interest groups’ choice between violence and bribes (see also Dal Bó and
Di Tella (2003)). Reddy et al. (2012) show theoretically that increasing the level of immunity
provided to politicians, which can be viewed as reducing anti-corruption enforcement, may
lead to more dishonest individuals selecting into politics. They also ﬁnd empirically that
higher levels of immunity generate more corruption from those in oﬃce; see also Fisman and
Miguel (2007).
The next section lays out the basic model. Section 3 studies post-election behavior of
the governor and derives key convexity properties that generate U-shaped incentives to run
for oﬃce as a function of public spirit. We then characterize the outcomes of political selfselection in Section 4. Section 5 concludes. All formal proofs are collected in the Appendix;
a Supplementary Appendix available at the authors’ webpages contains additional material.

2

The Model

We consider a society consisting of a continuum of citizens. Each citizen consumes two
goods, a public good x and a private good r. For convenience, each citizen’s endowment
of the private good is normalized to zero. Citizens diﬀer with respect to two preference
parameters: an altruism or public spirit parameter a ∈ [0, 1], and an honesty parameter
h ∈ [0, 1]. The public spirit parameter, a, measures the degree to which a citizen cares
5

In Caselli and Morelli’s model, dishonest candidates successfully run for oﬃce when the supply of honest
candidates is insuﬃcient to ﬁll all available positions. Because the quality of governance is assumed to reﬂect
the combined decisions of a continuum of oﬃce holders, honest candidates are not motivated by the desire
to displace dishonest oﬃce holders, as they are in our model. Besley’s assumptions concerning candidates’
payoﬀs likewise remove any incentive to displace dissonant oﬃce holders. Furthermore, he assumes that
the costs of running for oﬃce are zero, rather than vanishingly small. As a result, the pool of candidates
does not consist of the citizens with the greatest incentives to run for oﬃce, as it does in our model. If the
costs of running for oﬃce were vanishingly small rather than zero, all candidates would be dissonants with
poor private-sector prospects, and as in our framework, compensation would have no impact on the quality
of candidate pool.

5

about the well-being of other citizens. The honesty parameter, h, will come into play only
if a citizen holds oﬃce; it determines the size of a utility penalty the individual suﬀers if he
accepts payments from special interests. The magnitude of h could reﬂect susceptibility to
pangs of conscience, aversion to social stigma or penalties, or skill at evading detection. We
will refer to the pair (a, h) as a citizen’s character.
Citizens who choose to run for political oﬃce incur a personal campaign cost, k > 0.
Although we are interested in arbitrary k, large or small, some of our results are for the limit
as k becomes vanishingly small, a case that is prominent in the citizen-candidate literature.
The purpose of considering k vanishingly small rather than zero is to assure that the expected
number of candidates is ﬁnite and the probability of winning for any candidate is non-zero.
Governance. One citizen eventually becomes governor through a process explained below.
The governor receives compensation s, which includes a salary and any ego beneﬁts/costs
from holding oﬃce.6 He exerts eﬀort e ≥ 0 to produce f (e) ≥ 0 units of the public good
at a personal cost c (e), where both f (·) and c(·) are twice-diﬀerentiable functions.7 Eﬀort
has positive but declining marginal returns (f  > 0 > f  ), as well as positive and increasing
marginal costs (c > 0 and c > 0). For the usual reasons, we also assume f (0) = c(0) = 0,
f  (0) > c (0), and lime→∞ c (e) = ∞. In addition to producing the public good, the governor
must decide whether to undertake a highly ineﬃcient special-interest project (z = 1 denotes
yes, z = 0 denotes no) which provides concentrated beneﬁts to a small special-interest group
(as described further momentarily) at a non-negligble cost to every citizen. In particular,
if implemented, the project is funded by a per-capita lump-sum tax, q > 0, levied on all
citizens, including the governor.
Special Interests. There is one special interest group or lobby, denoted L. The lobby’s
constituency consists of a small group of citizens which, for simplicity, we take to be of
negligible size relative to the entire population.8 These constituents receive a total payoﬀ
v ≥ 0 if the governor chooses z = 1, and zero if z = 0. After the governor is elected, v
is drawn from a cumulative distribution Φ(v) with support [0, v] and density φ(v) > 0 for
6

Because there is a continuum of citizens, the per capita costs of the governor’s compensation is inﬁnitessimal, and hence it does not require a strictly positive per capita tax.
7
For simplicity, the level of expenditure on the public good is taken as ﬁxed, so that the governor’s
eﬀort is the only variable input. Any positive expenditure on the public good requires a tax, but since the
expenditure (and hence the tax) is ﬁxed, we can suppress it in the notation.
8
Another interpretation is that the lobby represents foreign interests.

6

v ∈ [0, v]. L can attempt to inﬂuence the governor by negotiating a payment to him, t ≥ 0,
contingent on choosing z = 1. Agreeing to a contingent payment triggers a utility penalty
on the governor of g (h, σ) ≥ 0. The penalty depends upon the governor’s honesty, h, as
well as a policy variable, σ ∈ [0, σ], which captures the level of anti-corruption enforcement.9
We assume g is twice continuously diﬀerentiable with gh > 0 and gσ > 0, where subscripts
denote partial derivatives. Thus, higher levels of honesty and anti-corruption enforcement
imply higher costs to the governor of selling out to special interests.
For simplicity, we assume that the contingent transfer, t, is determined by generalized
Nash bargaining between the governor and the lobby. (Other models of lobbying yield similar
results.) Speciﬁcally, the governor extracts the fraction α > 0 of any bilateral surplus from
the project. Implicitly, this assumption presupposes that prior to negotiating the contingent
payment, the lobby learns not only the stakes (v) but also the governor’s true character
(a, h), perhaps from their interaction after the governor takes oﬃce. Complete information
between the lobby and the governor simpliﬁes the bargaining problem but is not critical;
our analysis requires only that more honest governors receive smaller beneﬁts from special
interest interactions, which is a property that will hold in a wide range of settings.
Special interest activities are limited to lobbying. Members of the special interest group
do not run for oﬃce, and the lobby sponsors no candidates. While it would be of interest
to investigate these other types of special interest activities, such an inquiry is beyond the
scope of the current paper; we make some pertinent observations in the concluding section.
Net Payoﬀs. We assume that a citizen i’s preferences are represented by the (von NeumannMorgenstern) utility function
Ui (·) = ui (·) + ai uc (·),
(1)
where ui is i’s utility from personal consumption of private and public goods, uc is the
utility from personal consumption of the average (non-candidate) citizen, and ai is i’s public
spiritedness characteristic.10 Our central results hold generally for altruistic preferences
9

For simplicity, we assume that more aggressive anti-corruption enforcement involves the redeployment
of otherwise slack government resources (ﬁnanced by a ﬁxed tax, suppressed in the notation), and hence is
costless. Adding a direct cost (and hence a variable tax) changes nothing of consequence; in that case, the
beneﬁts of more aggressive enforcement (if any) must simply be weighed against the costs.
10
Even though citizens are altruistic, the payoﬀs of candidates and the governor do not show up in a
typical citizen’s utility function, because those individuals are of measure zero. Likewise, we do not include
the special interest group’s payoﬀ in any citizen’s utility, because the interest group is assumed to have
constituents of measure zero (and the governor himself is not a constituent).

7

belonging to this broad and widely-studied class (cf. fn. 17),11 but to ease exposition we
adopt a simple functional form for ui (·). Speciﬁcally, letting r = −zq denote the level of
private good consumption for non-candidate citizens,12 assume that for any individual i,
Ui (x, ri , r; ai ) = (x + ri ) + ai (x + r).

(2)

For a non-candidate citizen i, ri = r = −zq, and hence Ui (x, ri , r; ai ) = (1 + ai )(x − zq); if i
is a losing candidate, ri = r − k = −zq − k, and hence Ui (x, ri , r; ai ) = (1 + ai )(x − zq) − k.
This formulation implicitly assumes that all candidates have identical outside options.
Unlike ability, characteristics such as honesty and public spiritedness create both advantages
and disadvantages in the private sector, and it is not obvious whether they render the outside
option more or less attractive. Systematic variation in potential private sector compensation
would, of course, skew the candidate pool toward types with inferior alternatives.
We will use the index G to denote the governor. If G does not accept payments from
L (so that z = 0), his payoﬀ takes the same form as that of a losing candidate, except that
he receives compensation, s, and incurs the disutility of eﬀort, c(e), to produce the public
good. If G accepts a payment t ≥ 0 from L (so that z = 1), he also receives t and incurs a
utility penalty g(hG , σ). Thus, the governor’s utility is given by:


UG (x, rG , r, e; aG ) = (1 + aG )(x − zq) − k + s − c(e) + z t − g(hG , σ) .

(3)

Throughout, we maintain the following assumption:
Assumption 1. The distribution of character (a, h) has full support on [0, 1] × [0, 1].
Note that we make no assumption about correlation or lack thereof between honesty and
public spirit. Candidates of the four extreme types will play signiﬁcant roles in our analysis:
those with maximal public spirit and maximal honesty, a = h = 1 (Saints); those with
minimal public spirit and minimal honesty, a = h = 0 (Scoundrels); those with maximal
public spirit and minimal honesty (Sell-Outs); and those with minimal public spirit and
maximal honesty (Principled Egoists).
11

The use of a simple weighted average of own- and other-utility has a long tradition in economics (see,
e.g. Barro and Becker, 1989), and is now standard (see, e.g. Levine, 1998). Our results can be generalized
to an even broader class of utility functions under suitable assumptions.
12
Recall that we normalized private good endowment to 0 and the special-interest project is funded by a
per-capita tax of q.

8

Candidates and elections. We assume that only political insiders have the opportunity
to run for oﬃce.13 The distribution of insiders’ characteristics is representative of the
population and has full support on the character space, [0, 1] × [0, 1]. The mass of insiders
is negligible, so the election is determined by political outsiders, who share the objective of
maximizing x + r. As detailed below, we distinguish between insiders and outsiders so that
we can make diﬀerent assumptions concerning the knowledge of (potential) candidates and
that of the electorate.
It is natural to assume that outsiders know rather little about the character of any
yet-to-be-elected insider; for the sake of simplicity we assume that they are completely uninformed in that regard. In keeping with the citizen-candidate approach, candidates cannot
diﬀerentiate themselves by commiting to either eﬀort or project choices before they take
oﬃce, and cannot signal their character during the electoral process.14 Because candidates appear identical to the electorate ex ante, we make the following stylized assumption
concerning the electoral process:
Assumption 2. Every candidate wins the election with equal probability.15
This assumption ensures that there is no inherent advantage for candidates of one type
or another during the election phase. The assumption is compatible with outsiders voting
on the basis of some idiosyncratic or even publicly observable shock, such as candidates’
personalities or other valence attributes, so long as the distribution of voters’ idiosyncratic
valuations is ex-ante identical across indistinguishable candidates.
It is natural to assume that political insiders know more about each others’ characteristics (through professional reputations, past dealings, and explicit inquiries) than does the
general public. For tractability, we make the stark but directionally reasonable assumption that insiders can observe each others’ characters perfectly. This greatly simpliﬁes our
analysis because the baseline game then entails complete information.
13

In democratic systems, even political outsiders can usually run for oﬃce. However, viable candidates
tend to become politically active before running for oﬃce. One can think of the insiders in our model as
activists.
14
In a Downsian model, Kartik and McAfee (2007) study the policy consequences of an exogenous set of
candidates trying to signal character through their platforms.
15
Some care must be taken when the set of candidates is countably inﬁnite, because one cannot deﬁne a
uniform probability measure on a countably inﬁnite space. What is important for our purposes, however,
is the probability with which any insider believes he will win the election if he runs, taking as given the
set of other candidates. We assume that this probability is zero when there is an inﬁnite number of other
candidates. The actual probability measure governing the winner’s selection from the inﬁnite number of
candidates is inessential.

9

Sequence of Events. Events unfold as follows:
1. Insiders decide whether to run for oﬃce.
2. The governor is elected through a simple lottery, and his character is observed by the
lobby group and political outsiders. If there are no candidates, no governor is elected
and the quality of governance is assumed to be very low (as detailed later).
3. The magnitude of lobbying stakes, v ∈ [0, v], is realized, and is observed by the governor
and the lobby group. The lobby then makes an oﬀer to the governor, determined by
generalized Nash bargaining.
4. The governor chooses eﬀort, e ≥ 0, and makes a project implementation decision,
z ∈ {0, 1}, imposing any necessary taxes.
We study the subgame perfect Nash equilibria of this game.

3

Post-Electoral Governance

In this section, we solve for post-electoral behavior, including the governor’s choices of
whether to implement the special interest project and how much eﬀort to expend toward
producing the public good. For notational simplicity, in this section only we will use h and
a without a G superscript to denote the characteristics of the governor.

3.1

The Public Good

The governor’s eﬀort at producing the public good is determined solely by his public spirit,
and does not depend on his honesty or the special-interest transfer.16 The optimal eﬀort
level, e∗ (a), is given by the ﬁrst order condition (1 + a) f  (e∗ (a)) = c (e∗ (a)). Since f is
strictly concave and c is strictly convex, e∗ (·) is strictly increasing. For every citizen j, let
ej := e∗ (aj ) and xj := f (ej ).
The contribution of the public good to the well-being of the governor is given by
π (a) := (1 + a) f (e∗ (a)) − c (e∗ (a)) .
16

(4)

This result follows from the assumed separability of utility. Our analysis only requires that the governor’s
eﬀort is increasing in his public spirit, which would also be the case under less restrictive assumptions.

10

∗

By the envelope theorem, π  (a) = f (e∗ (a)) > 0. Furthermore, π  (a) = f  (e∗ (a)) deda(a) > 0,
i.e. the governor’s gain from providing the public good (measured as an equivalent variation
in units of the private good) is a convex function of the public spirit parameter, a. This
convexity property will prove important, so it is essential to recognize that it does not rely
on the particular functional form for preferences speciﬁed in (2). The intuition is transparent: given preferences of the form (1), the envelope theorem implies that the derivative of
the governor’s utility with respect to his public spirit is just the utility of the average citizen evaluated using the governor’s optimal choices, and under mild conditions the average
citizen’s utility is increasing in the governor’s public spirit.17

3.2

The Special Interest Project

Ignoring any transfer from the interest group, implementing the special-interest project imposes a cost on the governor of
v ∗ (a, h, σ) := (1 + a)q + g(h, σ).

(5)

Nash bargaining implies that the project will be implemented if and only if it generates
positive bilateral surplus for G and L combined, which requires v − v ∗ (a, h, σ) > 0.18 The
governor receives the fraction α of any positive surplus, so t = αv + (1 − α)v ∗ (a, h, σ).
Since v ∗ (a, h, σ) is increasing in each argument, governors who are more public spirited
and more honest are less likely to accept special interest payments, and the frequency with
which any governor sells out declines with the level of anti-corruption enforcement. Thus,
one might expect anti-corruption enforcement to improve the quality of governance; we will
see, however, that matters are more complex.
Throughout, we impose the following assumption:
17

More formally, suppose that any citizen i’s personal utility can be written as u1 (x, ei ) + u2 (ri , zi hi )
and his overall utility is given by (1). Note that here ei and zi refer respectively to the eﬀort exerted by
i and whether i has committed the dishonest act of accepting payments from special interests; both are
necessarily 0 for any citizen who is not the governor. Suppose further that standard conditions justifying
interior optima, the envelope theorem, and local comparative statics hold. Then, in lieu of (4), we would
have π(a) = u1 (f (e∗ (a)), e∗ (a)) + au1 (f (e∗ (a)), 0). Diﬀerentiating and applying the envelope theorem yields
∗
π  (a) = u1 (f (e∗ (a)), 0), and diﬀerentiating again yields π  (a) = u1x (f (e∗ (a)), 0)f  (e∗ (a)) de a(a) , which is
strictly positive as long as eﬀort rises with public-spiritedness, as it must in any reasonable speciﬁcation.
18
We assume the project is not implemented when the surplus is exactly zero; this is innocuous because
the distribution of v is atomless.

11

Assumption 3. v ∗ (0, 1, 0) > v > v ∗ (1, 0, σ).19
According to the ﬁrst inequality, a maximally honest governor never sells out even
if he is minimally public spirited (i.e., a Principled Egoist) and anti-corruption policy is
lax. According to the second inequality, even with maximal anti-corruption enforcement, a
minimally honest but maximally public-spirited governor (i.e., a Sell-Out) always sells out if
the stakes are suﬃciently high. We note that no governor (including a Scoundrel) will sell
out when v is suﬃciently small, even under minimal anti-corruption policies.
The preceding discussion readily implies that the governor’s expected rents from special
interest politics, evaluated prior to the realization of v, is Ev max{α[v − v ∗ (a, h, σ)], 0}.
Moreover, the special interest’s impact on the expected payoﬀ of any citizen with public
spiritedness a is −(1 + a )q [1 − Φ (v ∗ (a, h, σ))] (see Lemma 2 in the Appendix). Notice
that the governor’s expected rents from lobbying depend not only on his honesty, but also on
his public-spiritedness. As a result, special interest politics distort self-selection incentives
toward less public-spirited insiders (and not simply toward less honest ones), who have
relatively more to gain from securing oﬃce in their presence. Moreover, anti-corruption
enforcement can aﬀect the quality of governance through selection eﬀects involving publicspiritedness as well as honesty. As we will see, this selection eﬀect turns out to be important.
In what follows, it will be useful to understand how the governor’s expected rents from
lobbying vary with his public spiritedness. Using equation (5),
∂
Ev max{α[v − v ∗ (a, h, σ)], 0} = −αq(1 − Φ(v ∗ (a, h, σ))) ≤ 0,
∂a

(6)

and

∂2
Ev max{α[v − v ∗ (a, h, σ)], 0} = αq 2 φ (v ∗ (a, h, σ)) ≥ 0,
2
∂a
where both inequalities are strict when v > v ∗ (a, h, σ). Thus, a higher level of public
spiritedness reduces the expected rents for a governor from special interests. Furthermore,
the governor’s expected payoﬀ from lobbying, like his beneﬁt from providing the public
good, is a convex function of public spirit. This second convexity property will also prove
important, so we emphasize that it too does not rely on the speciﬁc functional form of
preferences speciﬁed in (2). The general intuition is as follows: when taking the derivative
of the governor’s expected rents from lobbying with respect to a, the eﬀect of a on the set of
19

Recall that v is the upper bound on v. Stated in terms of primitives, the assumption requires g(1, 0)+q >
v > g(0, σ) + 2q.

12

lobbying stakes for which the governor sells out (i.e., on the interval [v ∗ (a, h, σ), ∞)) can be
ignored because the governor optimizes the scope of that set. Thus, as long as preferences
take the general form shown in (1), that derivative will equal the expected utility loss the
average citizen experiences because the governor sometimes bows to the lobby (scaled by the
governor’s bargaining weight). This derivative, which is negative, will be increasing in a as
long as greater public spirit reduces the likelihood that the governor sells out.20

3.3

Total Payoﬀs and a Citizen’s Quality of Governance

Henceforth, we will let uG (a, h | σ, s) denote the expected payoﬀ (evaluated prior to the
realization of lobbying stakes, v) for a governor of type (a, h) ignoring entry cost k, and let
u (a, h | a , σ) denote the expected payoﬀ for a non-candidate of type a when the governor’s
type is (a, h). From the preceding analysis, we have
uG (a, h | σ, s) = π(a) + Ev max{α[v − v ∗ (a, h, σ)], 0} + s,

(7)

u (a, h | a , σ) = (1 + a ) Y (a, h|σ),
where
Y (a, h|σ) := f (e∗ (a)) − q (1 − Φ (v ∗ (a, h, σ))) .

(8)

We will refer to Y (a, h|σ) as the quality of governance when the governor’s characteristics are (a, h), and to y i (σ) := Y (ai , hi |σ) as the quality of candidate i. Note that quality
depends on the levels of the public good and expected taxes. Anti-corruption enforcement,
σ, has a direct eﬀect on a candidate’s quality (except when h is suﬃciently high) because
it aﬀects the lobbying stakes for which the candidate would sell out as governor; on the
other hand, compensation, s, does not have such a direct eﬀect. Quality is monotonic in
each component of a citizen’s character and hence is bounded above by that of a Saint,
Y (1, 1) = f (e∗ (1)), and below by that of a Scoundrel, Y (0, 0 | σ).21
In the (a, h)-plane, constant quality curves deﬁned by the equation Y (a, h | σ) = C (for
some constant C) are generally downward sloping because an increase in public spiritedness
is required to oﬀset a decrease in honesty.22 An increase in anti-corruption enforcement, σ,
20

A formal argument can be given along the same lines as in fn. 17.
The quality of a Saint does not depend on anti-corruption enforcement, σ, because a Saint never
succumbs to the interest group even under minimal anti-corruption enforcement.
22
The “generally” caveat excludes cases where honesty is already so high that the candidate never sells
21

13

(weakly) improves the quality of any given candidate, thereby inducing a leftward shift in
every such curve.
Finally, we note for subsequent reference that both the governor’s payoﬀ (expression
(7)) and the quality of governance (expression (8)) depend on the governor’s honesty, h, and
anti-corruption enforcement, σ, only through the eﬀect these variables have on the disutility
of selling out, g(h, σ)—see, in particular, the deﬁnition of v ∗ (·) (expression (5)).

4

Candidate Self-selection

This section examines insiders’ decisions to run for oﬃce. Given the continuation payoﬀs
derived in Section 3, the problem reduces to a simultaneous-move entry game. We focus
initially on pure-strategy Nash equilibria with multiple candidates (assuming they exist).23
The analysis reveals the various equilibrium forces at work, both for a given set of parameters and as the parameters change. Equilibrium existence is assured in Subsection 4.3 by
extending the analysis to randomized entry decisions, where we also study the prominent
special case of vanishing entry costs.

4.1

Equilibrium Conditions

Denote the set of candidates as N and the number of candidates as N := |N |. As we restrict
attention for the moment to pure entry strategies, N completely describes an equilibrium
and N is necessarily ﬁnite. The expected quality of governance in such an equilibrium is

y N (σ) := N1 j∈N y j (σ).
Two conditions are necessary and suﬃcient for N to constitute an equilibrium:
∀i ∈ N :




1  G i i
u a , h | σ, s − Ej∈N \i u aj , hj | ai , σ ≥ k,
N

∀i ∈
/ N:




1  G i i
u a , h | σ, s − Ej∈N u aj , hj | ai , σ ≤ k.
N +1

(9)

(10)

out to the interest group.
23
For some parameters, there exist equilibria where only one candidate runs. We view single-candidate
equilibria as less interesting and less empirically relevant; the 2012 working paper version of this article
contains a thorough analysis.

14

The inequalities in (9), which we call the willing-candidate constraints, require that ever
candidate (weakly) prefer to enter the campaign rather than stay out.24 The inequalities
in (10), which we call the willing-bystander constraints, require that each non-candidate
(weakly) prefer to stay out rather than enter. These constraints are central to our analysis,
and in the next two subsections we examine them in depth.
4.1.1

The willing-candidate constraints

Intuitively, the willing-candidate constraints collectively provide an upper bound on the quality of governance: if opponents are of suﬃcient quality, potential candidates will refrain from
running. While this intuition proves correct, we will see that there are also circumstances
in which these same constraints can provide a lower bound on quality.
Each willing-candidate constraint can be rewritten as
N k ≤ uG (a, h | σ, s) − (1 + a)y =: I(a, h | y, σ, s),

(11)

where y is the average quality of the other (N − 1) candidates. Since utility as governor, uG ,
decreases with the level of the governor’s honesty, h, it follows that if the willing-candidate
constraint is satisﬁed for some individual, it is also satisﬁed for less honest individuals with
the same level of public spirit. Thus, the equation I(a, h | y, σ, s) = N k deﬁnes the boundary
between candidates who are willing and not willing to run for oﬃce, given N − 1 opponents
of average quality y. Figure 1 depicts this willing-candidate boundary for two diﬀerent levels
of average opponent quality, y < y  , and the associated set of willing candidates (shaded).
Lemma 1 in the Appendix veriﬁes that the boundary is single-troughed, as in the ﬁgure.
We next deﬁne a willing-candidate-quality correspondence, ΨN (·), that maps the average
quality of N − 1 opponents into the quality levels of all candidates who are willing to run:
ΨN (y | σ, s) = {y  | ∃(a, h) ∈ [0, 1]2 with Y (a, h | σ) = y  and I(a, h | y, σ, s) ≥ N k}.
It is routine to verify that an increase in the opponents’ average quality, y, shrinks (weakly)
the set of willing candidates (and hence ΨN (y | σ, s)), and therefore reduces the quality of
the best willing candidate (i.e., max ΨN (y | σ, s)).
24

If N is a singleton, then the left hand side of (9) is not well deﬁned. We assume that any insider is
willing to run if no-one else will because the consequences of having no governor are suﬃciently dire.

15

1
Willing-candidate boundary with
opponents of low average quality, y

Honesty (h)

0

Willing-candidate boundary
with opponents of high
average quality, y’

Public spiritedness (a)

1

Figure 1: Willing Candidates

If the set of willing candidates given the average quality of the N − 1 opponents is
path-connected (as it is for the value y in Figure 1), then the willing-candidate-quality correspondence is convex-valued, because Y (·, ·|σ) is continuous. However, the set of willing
candidates need not be path-connected for all levels of opponents’ average quality. An inspection of (11) reveals that when opponents’ average quality increases, the willing-candidate
boundary shifts downward, and more so at higher values of a because more public spirited
individuals attach greater weight to quality. Consequently, when opponents’ average quality is suﬃciently large, the willing-candidate boundary can intersect the a-axis twice (as it
does for the value y  in Figure 1), in which case the set of willing candidates (dark shading
in Figure 1) is not path-connected, and the willing-candidate correspondence may not be
convex-valued.
Figure 2 illustrates willing-candidate-quality correspondences with two candidates: for
candidate 1, it is bounded by the dashed curve, and for candidate 2, it is bounded by the
solid curve. We have drawn each correspondence as convex-valued for low values of y but
not for moderate values, reﬂecting the possibilities shown in Figure 1. We have also drawn
the correspondences as empty for high values of y to illustrate the possibility that there may
be no willing candidates when the average of quality of opponents is too high. Together,
the two willing-candidate constraints require that the candidates’ qualities correspond to a
point in the light- or dark-shaded areas. In this case, these constraints indeed establish only
an upper bound on the expected quality of governance.

16

Saint
Boundary of willingcandidate-quality
correspondence for
candidate 1
Boundary of willingcandidate-quality
correspondence for
candidate 2

Quality of
candidate 2

Equilibria

Scoundrel
Willing-bystander constraint

Quality of
candidate 1

Saint

Figure 2: Two-Candidate Equilibria

Under less favorable entry conditions, the willing-candidate correspondence for candidate 1 will shift to the left, and the one for candidate 2 will shift downward. It is then
possible that neither correspondence will be convex valued even for low values of y. We
illustrate such a case in Figure 3. Once again, the two willing-candidate constraints are
satisﬁed only for candidate-quality pairs in the light- or dark-shaded regions. In this case,
these constraints not only establish an upper bound on the expected quality of governance,
but also rule out intermediate values.
4.1.2

The willing-bystander constraints

Intuitively, the willing-bystander constraints collectively provide a lower bound on the expected quality of governance: if expected quality is suﬃciently low, new candidates will
enter. This subsection derives the lower bound.
Generally, most of the willing-bystander constraints do not bind. The ones that do
bind (and hence matter) are associated with the types of non-candidate insiders who have
the greatest incentive to run for oﬃce. If y is the average candidate quality, the magnitude
of that incentive is given by uG (a, h | σ, s) − (1 + a)y.25 The governor’s personal beneﬁt from
lobbying is weakly decreasing in his honesty, h. As was shown in Section 3, the beneﬁts
25

For this expression, we can ignore the probability of winning as well as the cost of running because these
factors aﬀect all potential candidates equally. An individual of type (a, h) has a strict incentive to enter if
and only if uG (a, h | σ, s) − (1 + a)y > (N + 1)k.

17

Saint
Boundary of willingcandidate-quality
correspondence for
candidate 2

Equilibria

Boundary of willingcandidate-quality
correspondence for
candidate 1

Quality of
candidate 2

Scoundrel

Saint

Quality of
candidate 1
Equilibria

Willing-bystander constraint

Figure 3: Only Asymmetric Two-Candidate Equilibria
from holding oﬃce (both π(a) and Ev max {α[v − v ∗ (a, h, σ)], 0}) are convex in public spirt,
a. It follows that either Scoundrels or Sell-Outs (or both) have strictly greater incentives
to run than all other insiders.
Between Scoundrels and Sell-Outs, the type with the greater incentive to run depends
on y and σ, which diﬀerentially aﬀect their gains from holding oﬃce. Low (resp. high) y
provides relatively greater (resp. lesser) incentives for Sell-Outs due to their greater public
spirit. Consequently, there is a threshold quality level, y ∗ (σ), such that the non-candidate
insiders with the greatest incentives to run are all Sell-Outs if y N (σ) < y ∗ (σ), all Scoundrels
if y N (σ) > y ∗ (σ), and both Sell-Outs and Scoundrels if y N (σ) = y ∗ (σ). Lemma 3 in the
Appendix formalizes these points and deﬁnes y ∗ (σ).
It follows that all of the willing-bystander constraints are satisﬁed if and only if they are
satisﬁed for Scoundrels and Sell-Outs. Accordingly, the set of constraints (10) is equivalent
to the following simple lower bound on average candidate quality:

y

N

≥


yN
(σ, s)

:= max


uG (1, 0 | σ, s) − (N + 1)k G
, u (0, 0 | σ, s) − (N + 1)k .
2

(12)

2
≥ y2 (σ, s). Hence, in the (y1 , y2 )-plane,
With two candidates, (12) simply requires y1 +y
2
we can represent the constraint as a straight line with a slope of −1, as shown in Figures 2
and 3; no equilibrium quality pair can lie below this line.

18

4.1.3

The equilibrium set

Figures 3 and 4 show how to identify two-candidate equilibria. In each ﬁgure, the sets
of equlibrium quality pairs correspond to the points in the dark-shaded regions, which (by
construction) satisfy the willing-candidate constraints and the willing-bystander constraints.
Two features of Figure 3 merit notice. First, the willing-candidate constraints bound
average quality from above, while the willing-bystander constraints bound average quality
from below. Thus, in a multi-candidate equilibrium, the candidate pool tends to be of
intermediate quality: neither too good (or opponents would drop out) nor too bad (or others
would enter).26 Second, because the upper and lower boundaries on the set of equilibrium
quality pairs slope downward, there will tend to be negative correlation between publicspiritedness and honesty among candidates, even if those characteristics are unrelated in the
population from which candidates are drawn.
Two features of Figure 4 are also noteworthy. First, the lower bound on the expected
quality of governance is determined by the willing-candidate constraint rather than the
willing-bystander constraint. Second, in contrast to Figure 3, all equilibria are asymmetric. In such cases, there will necessarily be substantial random variation in the quality of
governance from election to election. This is not merely a technical curiosity; we will see
subsequently that only analogs of these asymmetric equilibria may survive as the costs of
running for oﬃce become small.

4.2

Eﬀects of Policy Instruments

We now study the eﬀects of anti-corruption enforcement, σ, and the governor’s compensation,
s, on the quality of governance. Since equilibria are not generally locally unique, we focus on
the policies’ eﬀects on the highest and lowest expected quality achievable in an equilibrium.
A change in a policy variable (σ or s) can aﬀect electoral outcomes either by altering
the set of equilibria for a ﬁxed number of candidates (N ), or by inducing either more or fewer
26

One might argue that there are more compelling explanations for why the citizens of highest quality do
not run for oﬃce, e.g., that they have better opportunities in the private sector. It is important to bear in
mind, however, that our analysis focuses not on competence or ability, but rather on honesty and publicspiritedness. It is not at all obvious that these dimensions of candidate quality are positively correlated with
private sector opportunities. We readily grant that the mediocrity of politicians with respect to competence
reﬂects other considerations; our analysis shows, in addition, why politics does not attract the most publicspirited or honest citizens among those with any given level of competence. In eﬀect, citizens of the highest
character have less incentive to enter politics than those who are willing to beneﬁt from corruption.

19

candidates to enter. We begin by studying policy eﬀects for ﬁxed N , which are interesting
for three separate reasons. First, any directional local comparative static result for the
best (or worst) equilibrium with N ﬁxed will also generally hold for the overall best (or
worst) equilibrium. The exception is when a policy change alters the set of N for which
equilibria exist in a way that produces a discontinuous jump in the best or worst equilibrium.
However, for local policy changes, such exceptions are presumably “rare.”27 Second, even
when a policy change crosses one of the exceptional points in the parameter space, one still
obtains a better understanding of comparative statics by examining the component eﬀects
separately. Third, it is possible that social norms, potentially reinforced by slowly changing
institutions (such as parties), would create inertia with respect to the number of candidates,
so that N would remain ﬁxed whenever feasible.
4.2.1

Comparative Statics with a Fixed Number of Candidates

As we will see, with N ﬁxed, anti-corruption enforcement has both an incentive eﬀect (an
impact on the post-election behavior of the governor) and a selection eﬀect (an impact on
the composition of the candidate pool through the willing-candidate and willing-bystander
constraints), which work in opposite directions. In contrast, the governor’s compensation
only has a selection eﬀect.
Theorem 1. Assume that for N > 1, N -candidate equilibria exist for some range of policy parameters. The expected quality of governance in the best such equilibrium weakly
decreases with higher anti-corruption enforcement and weakly increases with higher compensation (strictly unless all candidates are Saints).
The intuition for this result is as follows. From Figures 3 and 4, it should be clear that
when a policy change expands the set of willing-candidate quality levels regardless of the
opponent’s quality, it will improve the best equilibrium. Plainly, higher compensation produces such an expansion. What is perhaps more surprising is that increased anti-corruption
enforcement has the opposite eﬀect. To understand why, suppose a given candidate is willing to run against N − 1 opponents of average quality y when the enforcement level is σ  .
Then, for some slightly lower enforcement level, σ  , there is a slightly more honest potential
candidate who experiences the same disutility from selling out as does the ﬁrst candidate
under policy σ  . Now recall from the end of Subsection 3.3 that both candidate quality and
27

To be precise, we conjecture that the policy points at which such exceptions occur are isolated.

20

the governor’s utility (and hence the incentive to enter, uG (a, h | σ, s) − (1 + a)y) depend on
h and σ only through the disutility from selling out. Since the second candidate’s incentive
to enter under policy σ  is the same as the ﬁrst candidate’s under policy σ  , the second candidate is willing to run against N − 1 opponents of average quality y when the enforcement
level is σ  . Furthermore, the second candidate’s quality under policy σ  is the same as the
ﬁrst candidate’s under policy σ  . It follows that a reduction in anti-corruption enforcement
cannot reduce the set of willing-candidate quality levels.
Analysis of the worst equilibria is more complicated because it could be determined by
(i) the willing-bystander constraint, as in Figure 3, (ii) the willing-candidate constraint, as in
Figure 4, or (iii) neither, and hence by the quality of Scoundrels. Case (iii) is easiest, because
the expected quality of governance in the worst equilibrium is simply Y (0, 0 | σ), which is
increasing in the level of anti-corruption enforcement and unaﬀected by compensation. For
case (ii), the policy eﬀects on the worst equilibrium are precisely opposite those for the
best equilibrium: greater anti-corruption enforcement leads to an improvement, and higher
compensation makes matters worse. In light of the intuition provided for Theorem 1, the
reason is clear: expanding a set has opposite eﬀects on its maximum and its minimum.28
For case (i), we have the following result:
Theorem 2. Assume that for N > 1, N -candidate equilibria exist for some range of policy
parameters. If, throughout this range, the expected quality of governance in the worst N candidate equilibrium is determined by the willing-bystander constraint, it strictly decreases
with higher anti-corruption enforcement and strictly increases with higher compensation.
The intuition for this result is as follows. An increase in compensation improves
the worst equilibrium because it increases the lure of running for oﬃce, and consequently
renders potential candidates less willing to settle for poor governance; thus, the lower bound
on the quality of governance must rise. Once again, the surprise is that anti-corruption
enforcement has the opposite eﬀect; after all, greater enforcement has a positive incentive
eﬀect on the quality of any given candidate, and it is not obvious that selection eﬀects are of
the opposite sign and dominate. However, the explanation is straightforward. Recall that
the willing-bystander constraint is satisﬁed when non-candidate Scoundrels and Sell-Outs
28

If the set of equilibrium expected quality levels is non-convex, changes in the best and worst equilibria
do not completely characterize the eﬀects of policy changes on the range of expected governance quality.
Suppose the set in question is a sequence of disjoint intervals. In that case, an increase in s (resp. σ)
increases (resp. decreases) the upper bound of every interval, and decreases (resp. increases) the lower
bound (some of those eﬀects being strict and some weak). Additional intervals may also appear.

21

have no incentive to run for oﬃce. It is straightforward to check that these incentives are
strictly decreasing in the level of anti-corruption enforcement. Hence, with more aggressive
enforcement, a lower average-quality group of candidates can go unchallenged.
Together, Theorems 1 and 2 imply that, in what we view as the most interesting case
(where the willing-bystander constraint determines the lower bound on equilibrium quality),
both the best and the worst N -candidate equilibria improve as the governor’s compensation
increases, and as anti-corruption enforcement declines.
4.2.2

Comparative Statics Involving the Number of Candidates

Now we turn our attention to the questions of whether a change in a policy variable can alter
the set of N for which equilibria exist in a way that produces a discontinuous jump in the
best or worst equilibrium, and how such possibilities aﬀect comparative statics of the policy
instruments. The discussion in this section is intuitive and informal; the next section will
derive formal results when entry costs vanish.
First consider the eﬀect of diﬀerent values of N . The only eﬀect an increase in N has on
any insider’s entry incentive is to reduce the probability of winning the election. Hence, as
is readily veriﬁed, the willing-candidate constraints become more restrictive, which reduces
expected quality in the best equilibrium, while the willing-bystander constraints become less
restrictive, which reduces expected quality in the worst equilibrium (assuming this constraint
binds). Two conclusions follow. First, with respect to the expected quality of governance,
an increase in the number of candidates tends to generate detrimental selection eﬀects: from
the perspective of selection, the fewer candidates the better.29 Second, the best equilibria
tend to involve the smallest feasible number of candidates, and the worst equilibria tend to
involve the greatest.
Now consider the eﬀects of policy variables on the existence of equilibria with any given
number of candidates. Intuitively, higher compensation makes entry more attractive, which
can eliminate equilibria with smaller numbers of candidates and introduce equilibria with
larger numbers of candidates. More aggressive anti-corruption enforcement would have the
opposite eﬀect. It follows from this observation and the arguments in the previous paragraph
that when a change in a policy variable creates a discontinuous jump in the best or worst
29

We say “tends to” because there may be exceptions, depending on which constraints bind and the nature
of non-convexities.

22

equilibrium by suitably changing the set of N for which equilibria exist, the eﬀects tend to
work in the opposite direction from those examined in the previous sub-section for ﬁxed N .
For small policy changes that cross one of these exceptional points in the parameter
space, the eﬀects discussed in this section will dominate (because the eﬀect for given N will
also typically be small), reversing the conclusions of the preceding sub-section. In contrast,
for large policy changes, one cannot generally say which eﬀect will dominate. However, as we
show in the next subsection, it is possible to evaluate all the pertinent eﬀects in combination
when the costs of running for oﬃce are treated as vanishingly small, a common assumption
in the citizen-candidate literature.

4.3

Equilibria with Small Entry Costs

We now examine the behavior of the model as k becomes vanishingly small. As before, we
focus on multiple-candidate equilibria and their comparative statics, accounting simultaneously for all of the eﬀects discussed in Subsection 4.2. More speciﬁcally, we assume that
parameters are such that single-candidate equilibria do not exist when running costs are
suﬃciently small.30
Due to integer constraints, the existence of pure-strategy equilibria is not generally assured. Consequently, we now broaden the scope of our analysis to include mixed-strategy
equilibria. We study mixed-strategy equilibria in which insiders probabilistically run for
oﬃce if and only if they belong to a ﬁnite or countably inﬁnite set of (potential) candidates. Formally, a mixed-strategy equilibrium—or just equilibrium hereafter—consists of
a denumerable set N of political insiders with cardinality N := |N | ∈ N ∪ {+∞}, plus an
N -dimensional vector μ = (μi )i∈N , where each μi ∈ (0, 1] is the probability of the respective
insider running, such that the natural generalizations of the willing-candidate and willingbystander constraints, (9) and (10), are satisﬁed (see the Appendix for speciﬁcs). Insiders
not in the set N run with zero probability. A multiple-candidate equilibrium refers to any
such (N , μ) with N > 1. Clearly, this formulation subsumes pure-strategy equilibria.
Given any (N , μ), whether an equilibrium or not, we denote the associated expected quality
of governance by y N (μ, σ).
30

Lemma 5 in the Appendix establishes that as running costs vanish, all equilibria are multiple-candidate
equilibria if and only if the quality of a Saint is lower than some threshold that is determined by the willingness
of Sell-Outs and Scoundrels to enter costlessly against a Saint. We assume throughout this subsection that
this condition is satisﬁed. For example, it is suﬃcient (but not necessary) that compensation be large enough.

23

As we are not aware of an equilibrium existence result that applies to the current
framework,31 we record the following:
Theorem 3. For any k > 0, a mixed-strategy equilibrium exists.
Assured of existence, we next establish the crucial result that as the cost of running
for oﬃce approaches zero, the character of every candidate must approach that of either a
Scoundrel or a Sell-Out.
Theorem 4. For any ε > 0, there exists k̂ (ε) > 0 such that when k < k̂ (ε), any multiplecandidate equilibrium, (N , μ), satisﬁes: if n ∈ N , then (an , hn ) ∈ Bε (1, 0) ∪ Bε (0, 0), where
Bε (a, h) denotes an open ball of radius ε around the point (a, h).
In proving this result, a key step demonstrates that as running costs vanish, so does
the probability that any particular candidate will win the election (see Lemma 6 in the
Appendix). It follows that, in the limit, the willing-candidate constraints are virtually
identical to the willing-bystander constraints, except that the direction of the inequality is
reversed. Theorem 4 then follows from the earlier observation that either Scoundrels or
Sell-Outs always have the greatest incentive to run for oﬃce. For, if a candidate were of
any other type, the fact that the willing-candidate constraint is satisﬁed for that candidate
would imply that the willing-bystander constraint is violated for either Scoundrels or SellOuts, precluding an equilibrium.
Given this characterization of the support of candidates’ character types, the expected
quality of governance can now be pinned down. Recall that we had deﬁned y ∗ (σ) as
the expected quality of governance that equalizes the incentives to enter for Sell-Outs and
Scoundrels: for y > y ∗ (σ), Scoundrels have greater incentive to enter than Sell-Outs, and
vice versa for y < y ∗ (σ).
Theorem 5. For any ε > 0, there exists k  (ε) > 0 such that when k < k  (ε), any multiplecandidate equilibrium, (N , μ), satisﬁes

y N (μ, σ) ∈

⎧
⎪
⎪
B (y ∗ (σ))
⎪
⎨ ε

Bε (Y (0, 0 | σ))
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩B (Y (1, 0 | σ))
ε

if y ∗ (σ) ∈ (Y (0, 0 | σ), Y (1, 0 | σ))
if y ∗ (σ) ≤ Y (0, 0 | σ)
if y ∗ (σ) ≥ Y (1, 0 | σ),

31

Following Schmeidler (1973), existence results in games with a continuum of players generally assume
that choices by a measure zero set of opponents do not aﬀect a player’s payoﬀ. That requirement is
obviously not satisﬁed here: for example, if an insider chooses to run, his (expected) payoﬀ depends on the
exact number and identities of opponents.

24

where Bε (y) denotes an open ball of radius ε around y.
In other words, as entry costs vanish, the equilibrium quality of governance converges
to y ∗ (σ), but is truncated above at the quality of a Sell-Out and below at the quality of a
Scoundrel. To build intuition for this result, suppose y ∗ (σ) is strictly between the quality of a
Scoundrel and that of a Sell-Out. Theorem 4 says that, as entry costs vanish, Sell-Outs and
Scoundrels run for oﬃce. Clearly, the equilibrium cannot consist of all Scoundrels, because
that would entail y N (μ, σ) < y ∗ (σ), which implies that Sell-Outs would have greater incentive
to enter than Scoundrels. Similarly, the equilibrium cannot consist of all Sell-Outs, because
then we would have y N (μ, σ) > y ∗ (σ), which implies that Scoundrels would have greater
incentive to enter than Sell-Outs. Thus, the equilibrium must involve a non-degenerate
mixture of Scoundrels and Sell-Outs. To preserve a mixture in the limit, Scoundrels and
Sell-Outs must have the same incentives to enter, which implies that y N (μ, σ) = y ∗ (σ).
Together, Theorems 4 and 5 have a surprising and important implication: with small
entry costs, the quality of governance is typically highly variable.32 Though all candidates
are maximally dishonest, they vary widely in public spirit. A given election can yield a
governor with either extremely high or extremely low public spirit (Sell-Outs or Scoundrels),
and hence either the maximum or minimum level of the public good. Thus, analogs of the
asymmetric equilibria identiﬁed in Subsection 4.2 typically turn out to be the only ones that
survive in the limit. It is worth remembering, however, that when entry costs are not small,
asymmetric equilibria can also yield substantial variability with respect to the governor’s
honesty; it is only as k → 0 that all candidates necessarily become maximally dishonest.
Theorem 5 also allows us to determine the eﬀects of our two public policy instruments,
s and σ, on the expected quality of governance as k vanishes. We begin with s, the governor’s
compensation. Since y ∗ (σ), Y (0, 0 | σ), and Y (1, 0 | σ) are all independent of s, it follows
that, in the limit, changes in compensation have no eﬀect on the expected quality of governance. The reason is clear when the candidates are either all Sell-Outs or all Scoundrels: in
such cases there are no candidate selection eﬀects, and selection provides the only possible
channel through which compensation can inﬂuence the quality of governance. More interestingly, the result tells us that when both Sell-Outs and Scoundrels run for oﬃce, the typically
detrimental selection eﬀects that an increase in s has through stimulating additional entry
exactly oﬀset, at the limit, the beneﬁcial selection eﬀects for a ﬁxed number of candidates.
Next we consider the eﬀects of σ, the level of anti-corruption enforcement. Plainly, both
32

“Typically” because this requires y ∗ (σ) ∈ (Y (0, 0|σ), Y (1, 0|σ)), which we view as the interesting case.

25

Y (0, 0 | σ) and Y (1, 0 | σ) are strictly increasing in σ. Furthermore, y ∗ (σ) is also strictly
increasing: while increased anti-corruption enforcement makes holding oﬃce less attractive to
both Scoundrels and Sell-Outs, it has a stronger eﬀect on Scoundrels because they succumb
to lobbying more often; hence, a higher expected quality of governance is required to restore
equal entry incentives. (See Lemma 3 in the Appendix for a formal proof.) Therefore,
Theorem 5 implies that in the limit as k → 0, an increase in σ unambiguously improves the
quality of governance. The explanation is again clear when the candidates are either all SellOuts or all Scoundrels: with no selection eﬀects, an increase in σ must be beneﬁcial because
it has positive incentive eﬀects on both types. When Sell-Outs and Scoundrels both run for
oﬃce, selection eﬀects also come into play. If an increase in σ did not aﬀect the expected
quality of governance that equalizes entry incentives for the two types, then the policy change
would have no net beneﬁt—the positive incentive eﬀects would be exactly oﬀset by a selection
eﬀect shift toward more Scoundrels. However, as already noted, higher expected quality is
in fact required to preserve equal incentives for Sell-Outs and Scoundrels to run for oﬃce.
Thus, in the limit as k → 0, the direct incentive eﬀects of anti-corruption enforcement and
the typically beneﬁcial selection eﬀects associated with deterring additional entry combine to
more than oﬀset the typically detrimental selection eﬀects for a ﬁxed number of candidates.
While the direction of this eﬀect is consistent with simple intuition, the mechanism is
rather surprising and worth emphasizing. As entry costs vanish, any eﬀect of anti-corruption
enforcement, σ, on candidate selection operates entirely through public-spiritedness (the mix
of Scoundrels and Sell-Outs), rather than through honesty (given that all candidates are
maximally dishonest in the limit). Also, recall from Theorems 1 and 2 that if the number
of candidates is held ﬁxed, the positive incentive eﬀects of anti-corruption enforcement on a
governor’s incentives are typically more than oﬀset by perverse selection eﬀects. Thus, as
entry costs vanish, anti-corruption enforcement is on balance beneﬁcial only because it also
reduces the number of candidates in equilibrium, thereby indirectly improving selection.
Setting aside the incentive eﬀects of increased anti-corruption enforcement, it is also
of interest whether the overall selection eﬀects are beneﬁcial or not as entry costs vanish;
i.e. are the typically detrimental eﬀects for a ﬁxed number of candidates dominated by the
typically beneﬁcial eﬀects operating through reduced entry? This is equivalent to asking
whether the ratio among candidates of Sell-Outs to Scoundrels falls or rises at the limit. It
turns out that either may happen.
The following result summarizes our policy conclusions:

26

Theorem 6. Consider multiple-candidate equilibria in the limit as the costs of running
become vanishingly small. An increase in anti-corruption enforcement (σ) strictly increases
the expected quality of governance but may increase or decrease the fraction of Sell-Outs who
run for oﬃce relative to Scoundrels, while a change in the governor’s compensation (s) has
no impact on the expected quality of governance or the composition of the candidate pool.

4.4

An Extension: Observably Diﬀerentiated Candidates

So far we have assumed that the electorate cannot distinguish at all between candidates’
character. In practice, information concerning candidates’ personal backgrounds and track
records in other positions may be available, and this has been found to inﬂuence voters’
choices (e.g. Banerjee et al., 2010, 2011). Indeed, some scholars argue that elections for
lower oﬃce may improve electoral outcomes for higher oﬃce by providing opportunities for
candidates to establish reputations, thereby beneﬁcially ﬁltering the set of candidates (e.g.
Cooter, 2003; Myerson, 2006). We examine these possibilities here by extending our model to
allow for observable diﬀerences among candidates. Our main conclusion is that a change in
the information structure (such as the provision of more extensive background information)
has no eﬀect on the set of equilibrium candidate-character proﬁles, provided the information
remains inconclusive in a sense made precise below.
Let β be an observable parameter that encapsulates the past track record of any particular insider. To keep matters simple, we will assume that β is a scalar that lies in the
normalized interval [0, 1], but one could just as easily take it to be a vector. We will also
make the following weak but critical assumption: the distribution of (a, h) has full support
on [0, 1] × [0, 1] for all β.33 In other words, no track record allows a voter to rule out with
certainty the possibility that an insider is of any given type; it is in this sense that observable
information is inconclusive.
The introduction of observable diﬀerences among candidates potentially complicates the
analysis of equilibria. Without such diﬀerences, all candidates are indistinguishable, and
hence must have the same probability of winning on and oﬀ the equilibrium path. With
observable diﬀerences, the probability with which a candidate wins can depend upon his
observable β, and the manner in which the probabilities vary with β both on and oﬀ the
equilibrium path will depend on the electorate’s beliefs.
33

Note that this assumption rules out the case where (a, h) is perfectly observable. Moreover, we implicitly
assume that there is a continuum of insiders with each possible β.

27

Depending on whether and how one reﬁnes the set of equilibria, introducing observable
diﬀerences among candidates may or may not change the set of equilibrium candidate-quality
proﬁles, compared to the baseline model without observable diﬀerentiation.34 However, if
there is a change, it generally reﬂects the introduction of observable labels (here, β), rather
than correlations between those labels and aspects of character (a and h).
To see why, ﬁrst consider the set of unreﬁned equilibria (i.e., absent any restriction
on oﬀ-path beliefs). An equilibrium consists of a candidate set (where each candidate is
identiﬁed by a triplet (β, a, h)) and a system of beliefs (concerning candidate qualities both
on and oﬀ the equilibrium path), such that the beliefs are consistent with the true candidate
set on the equilibrium path, and such that all willing-candidate and willing-bystander constraints are satisﬁed, given the beliefs. Now suppose the underlying correlations between
β, a, and h change. Since information is inconclusive (in the sense deﬁned above), the
set of population types compatible with any observed β is unchanged. Therefore, one can
assign the same candidate pool and the same system of beliefs, in which case the willingcandidate and willing-bystander constraints continue to hold, because these constraints do
not depend directly either on β or on the correlations between β, a, and h. It follows that
the conﬁguration remains an equilibrium.
In principle, one could impose a belief restriction that depends in some fashion on the
correlations between β, a, and h, in which case a change in those correlations could alter the
(reﬁned) equilibrium constraints. However, familiar equilibrium reﬁnements do not have
that property. To the contrary, typical criteria for restricting oﬀ-path beliefs (e.g. Cho
and Kreps, 1987) are based on the incentives of each type to make a deviation rather than
the underlying frequencies of those types within the population. Thus, the irrelevance of
background information is robust to a wide range of equilibrium reﬁnements.
These ﬁndings have surprising implications for public policy. First, policies requiring
the disclosure of background information concerning political candidates may have little or
34

To illustrate, suppose we restrict attention to equilibria in which all candidates have the same track
record (e.g. the best record, β = 1), and impose no restriction on oﬀ-path beliefs. Then it is easy to
show that the set of candidate-quality proﬁles are the same regardless of whether or not the candidates
are observably diﬀerentiated. The same conclusion follows if one reﬁnes beliefs by insisting that perceived
candidate quality is increasing in β. If one instead imposes a restriction on beliefs in the spirit of the D1
criterion (Cho and Kreps, 1987), attributing unexpected entry to a candidate whose character provides the
“greatest” or “most robust” incentive to enter (i.e., the type that would enter for the lowest probability of
electoral success), then one can show that equilibrium candidate-quality proﬁles must satisfy an additional
constraint that bounds from below the expected quality of governance. Consideration of equilibria involving
candidates with diﬀerent track records generally opens up additional possibilities.

28

no eﬀect on the character of elected oﬃcials or the quality of governance. To put the
matter starkly, the set of equilibria is identical regardless of whether β represents zip codes
for primary residences, or zip codes supplemented with criminal records (provided the fullsupport condition is satisﬁed). Positive eﬀects of information disclosures on voters’ choices,
as documented for example by Ferraz and Finan (2008) and Banerjee et al. (2010, 2011),
may be rendered ineﬀective by selection eﬀects once such disclosures are institutionalized.
Thus, our analysis may help explain why Chemin (2008) ﬁnds no evidence that the election
of criminal politicians increases bribe-taking in India following a 2003 Supreme Court ruling
mandating that all political candidates reveal criminal records.35 Second, our neutrality
result provides a cautionary note to the notion that elections for lower oﬃce in decentralized
democracies beneﬁcially ﬁlter the set of candidates for higher oﬃce according to their track
records, as suggested for example by Cooter (2003) and Myerson (2006).

5

Concluding Remarks

We have examined the impact of special interest politics on the character of self-selected
politicians. Our focus has been on two dimensions of character: honesty and public spirit.
Our analysis emphasizes the role of selection eﬀects in determining the quality of governance.
The eﬀects of public policy instruments, such as the level of the governor’s compensation,
the intensity of anti-corruption enforcement, and the disclosure of background information,
turn out to be surprisingly subtle. Nevertheless, a number of robust—and in some cases
unexpected—ﬁndings emerge, which we have summarized in the Introduction and hence will
not repeat here. We conclude instead by discussing some additional issues.
We have focussed on a one-time election with no incumbent. Assuming character is at
least partially revealed during a governor’s ﬁrst term, re-election opportunities can promote
better governance through three channels. The ﬁrst is purely mechanical: the electorate
gains opportunities to re-elect desirable incumbents. This generates a second channel, which
is the standard account of electoral accountability: a desire to be re-elected can have positive
incentive eﬀects on the governor. Consequently, even policies such as the governor’s compensation level can have incentive eﬀects (by altering the value of re-election), unlike in the
one-period model. The third, and most novel, channel operates through self-selection eﬀects:
the beneﬁts of running for oﬃce in the ﬁrst place, as a non-incumbent, rise for high-quality
35

In fact, Chemin ﬁnds that bribe-taking is lower when the victorious candidate has a criminal record,
which he interprets as indicating that criminal oﬃceholders reduce the prosecution of corruption.

29

candidates (for whom the odds of re-election are high) relative to low-quality candidates (for
whom the odds are low). In a Supplementary Appendix, we formally develop this point in
both a two-period model and an inﬁnite-horizon model with a two-term limit.
The Supplementary Appendix also raises a counterpoint: if lower-quality candidates
beneﬁt more from re-election than higher-quality candidates, then the possibility of reelection can have pernicious selection eﬀects. Such eﬀects can emerge if, as many have
suggested, more senior politicians are able to extract greater pork and/or rents from holding oﬃce, e.g. by cultivating relationships with large contributors or obtaining appointments to powerful committees. These possibilities generate adverse self-selection among
non-incumbents unless the electorate can diﬀerentiate suﬃciently well between incumbents
of good and bad character. Future research may fruitfully examine the optimal choice of
term limits in light of these potentially opposing eﬀects of longer terms on self-selection.
We have assumed throughout that insiders diﬀer only with respect to honesty and
public-spiritedness. Another potentially interesting dimension along which candidates may
diﬀer is the relative weight they attach to monetary payments, public goods, eﬀort, and
honesty. To take a simple case, suppose insiders are diﬀerentiated by a third characteristic,
m ∈ [0, 1], that acts as a multiplier for all monetary payoﬀs (larger m indicating greater
weight on money relative to other considerations). In multiple-candidate equilibria, elections
will tend to attract those with higher values of m. The potential implications for the eﬀects of
compensation and anti-corruption enforcement are intriguing. An increase in compensation,
s, will tend to attract candidates with higher values of m, which is deleterious insofar as such
individuals will more easily succumb to the inﬂuence of special interests. Thus, increasing
compensation may reduce the quality of governance. On the other hand, increasing anticorruption enforcement, σ, will not have that eﬀect.
We have also assumed throughout that the special interest group interacts with politicians only after they gain oﬃce. In practice, such groups also encourage particular candidates to run for oﬃce by supporting their campaigns. In our model, lobbies plainly have
incentives to reduce entry barriers for citizens of low character such as Scoundrels. The implications of allowing campaign contributions will depend on (i) the amount of information
the lobby has about the candidate before he takes oﬃce, (ii) the likelihood that voters will
observe the contributions, (iii) the extent to which the incentives to support a Scoundrel are
diluted by the public goods problem among lobbies (all of which will prefer Scoundrels), and
(iv) the extent to which public interest groups provide oﬀsetting incentives.

30

Appendix
Lemma 1. The willing-candidate boundary is single-troughed.
Proof. Applying the implicit function theorem to calculate
boundary for a point on its interior yields
dh
da

=
I(a,h|y,σ,s)=N k

dh
da

along the willing-candidate

f (e∗ (a)) − αq(1 − Φ [v ∗ (a, h, σ)]) − y
.
αgh (h, σ)(1 − Φ [v ∗ (a, h, σ)])

(13)

Since gh (h, σ) > 0, the sign of (13) is the same as that of the numerator. As the numerator is
increasing in both a and h, it follows that if the boundary is upward sloping in a at (a, h), it
is upward sloping at all points (a , h ) ≥ (a, h).36 Thus, for any given y, the willing-candidate
boundary in (a, h)-space is single-troughed.
Lemma 2. A governor’s expected rents from special interest politics, evaluated prior to the
realization of v, is Ev max{α[v − v ∗ (a, h, σ)], 0}. The associated impact on the expected
payoﬀ of any other citizen with public spiritedness a is −(1 + a )q [1 − Φ (v ∗ (a, h, σ))].
Proof. The ﬁrst statement follows from the discussion in the text about the outcome of Nashbargaining: if v < v ∗ (a, h, σ), the governor does not implement the project; if v > v ∗ (a, h, σ),
he does and receives a transfer t such that t − v ∗ (a, h, σ) = α(v − v ∗ (a, h, σ)). For the
second statement, note that 1 − Φ (v ∗ (a, h, σ)) is the probability of project implementation.
Whenever the project is implemented, non-governor citizens with public spirit a suﬀer a
disutility of (1 + a )q; thus, the citizen’s expected cost is (1 + a )q [1 − Φ (v ∗ (a, h, σ))].
Lemma 3. Deﬁne
y ∗ (σ) := uG (1, 0|σ, s) − uG (0, 0|σ, s)
= π(1) − π(0) + α [Ev max{v − v ∗ (1, 0, σ), 0} − Ev max{v − v ∗ (0, 0, σ), 0}] . (14)
Given any set N of candidates, the set of non-candidate insider types with the greatest
incentive to enter (i.e. that maximize uG (a, h | σ, s) − (1 + a)y N (σ)) consists of Sell-Outs
alone if and only if y N (σ) < y ∗ (σ), Scoundrels alone if and only if y N > y ∗ (σ), and both SellOuts and Scoundrels if and only if y N (σ) = y ∗ (σ). Moreover, y ∗ (σ) is a strictly increasing
function.
36

Here, ≥ is in the usual component-wise vector order.

31

Proof. We prove the second statement ﬁrst. Diﬀerentiating (14) and using the deﬁnition of
v ∗ (·) from (5) yields
dy ∗
= αgσ (0, σ) [Φ(v ∗ (1, 0, σ)) − Φ(v ∗ (0, 0, σ))] > 0,
dσ

(15)

where the inequality is because α > 0, gσ (·) > 0, and the term in square brackets is strictly
positive by Assumption 3.
To prove the ﬁrst statement, ﬁx policies (σ, s) and deﬁne
Δ(a, h, y) := uG (a, h | σ, s) − (1 + a)y
= (1 + a) f (e∗ (a)) − c (e∗ (a)) + Ev max{α(v − g(h, σ) − (1 + a)q), 0}
+ s − (1 + a)y.

(16)

Fix any y. The goal is to determine which pairs of (a, h) maximize Δ(·, ·, y). Since
g(h, σ) is strictly increasing in h, Δ(a, h, y) is weakly decreasing in h; moreover, by Assumption 3, Δ(a, h, y) is strictly decreasing for h suﬃciently small. Thus, for each a, Δ(a, h, y)
is maximized uniquely at h = 0, so we can restrict attention to candidates with minimal
honesty.
∂
Note next that
Δ(a, 0, y) = f (e∗ (a)) − αq [1 − Φ (g(0, σ) + (1 + a)q)] − y, and
∂a
∂2
de∗ (a)
 ∗
+ αq 2 φ (g(0, σ) + (1 + a)q) > 0.
Δ(a, 0, y) = f (e (a))
2
∂a
da
Thus, the function Δ(a, 0, y) is convex in a, hence is maximized only by a ∈ {0, 1}. The
proof is completed by observing that
Δ (1, 0, y) − Δ (0, 0, y) = uG (1, 0|σ, s) − uG (0, 0|σ, s) − y = y ∗ (σ) − y,
where the second equality is by the deﬁnition of y ∗ (σ).
Lemma 4. Let N  be an N -candidate slate that satisﬁes the willing-candidate constraints
(9) given anti-corruption enforcement σ  . Then, for σ < σ  , there exists an N -candidate
slate, N , that satisﬁes the willing-candidate constraints under anti-corruption enforcement

σ, such that y N (σ) = y N (σ  ).

32

Proof. For each i ∈ N  , we claim that there exists some j(i) with aj(i) = ai such that
Y (aj(i) , hj(i) | σ) = Y (ai , hi | σ  ).

(17)

To see this, note ﬁrst that if g(hi , σ  ) + (1 + ai )q ≥ v, agent i would never implement
the special-interest project, hence Y (a, h | σ  ) = f (e∗ (ai )). We can then take j(i) such
that (aj(i) , h(j(i) ) = (ai , 1), since a maximally honest agent never implements special interest
projects, no matter the level of anti-corruption enforcement (Assumption 3). So suppose
that g(hi , σ  ) + (1 + ai )q < v. Then, because g(hi , σ) < g(hi , σ  ) while g(1, σ) + (1 + ai )q > v
(by Assumption 3), the continuity of g(·, σ) implies that there is some h∗ ∈ (hi , 1) such that
g(h∗ , σ) = g(hi , σ  ). Choose j(i) such that (aj(i) , hj(i) ) = (ai , h∗ ).
Now we claim that under anti-corruption enforcement σ, the slate N = {j(1), . . . , j(N )}
satisﬁes the willing-candidate constraints (9). This is trivially true if N = 1, so consider
N > 1. Observe that since (17) holds for all i = 1, . . . , N , we have that for any i = 1, . . . , N ,






Ek∈N  \i u ak , hk | ai , σ  = Ek∈N  \i u aj(k) , hj(k) | aj(i) , σ = Ek∈N \j(i) u ak , hk | aj(i) , σ .
In other words, the expected candidate quality is the same if i withdraws from slate N 
under σ  , and if j(i) withdraws from slate N under σ. Next note that for any i = 1, . . . , N ,
the payoﬀ to holding oﬃce, uG (ai , hi | σ  , s) = uG (aj(i) , hj(i) | σ, s) because, by construction,
either (i) both i and j(i) never accept lobby payments (under σ  and σ respectively), or (ii)
g(hi , σ  ) = g(hj(i) , σ). It follows that (9) holds for N under σ.
Proof of Theorem 1. First ﬁx some s and consider an increase in anti-corruption enforcement
from σ  to σ. Let N be the best equilibrium with N candidates under σ. By Lemma 4, there

exists a slate of N candidates, N  , such that y N (σ) = y N (σ  ) and N  satisﬁes the willingcandidate constraints (9) under σ  . Since the willing-bystander constraints (10) amount to a
lower bound on equilibrium expected candidate quality under σ  , and because N -candidate
equilibria are assumed to exist under σ  , either N  is an equilibrium under σ  or there is
some N -candidate equilibrium under σ  with strictly higher expected candidate quality.
Next ﬁx some σ and consider an increase in compensation from s to s. Note that this
change does not aﬀect any citizen’s quality. Let N be best equilibrium with N candidates
under s . Inspection of (9) reveals that N satisﬁes the willing-candidate constraints with
strict inequality under s because salary does not aﬀect any citizen’s quality but strictly
increases the governor’s utility. There are two cases now: either (i) N satisﬁes the willing33

bystander constraints (10) under s, or (ii) it does not. In the latter case, since (10) amounts
to a lower bound on equilibrium expected quality and an N -candidate equilibrium is assumed
to exist under s, some N -candidate equilibrium under s must have strictly higher expected
quality than y N (σ), so we are done. In case (i), N is an equilibrium under s. Furthermore, if
y N (σ) < Y (1, 1), then since the willing-candidate constraints (9) hold with strict inequality
for N under s and u(·) and uG (·) are continuous, there exists another slate N  that satisﬁes

(9) under s with y N (σ) > y N (σ). Plainly, N  also satisﬁes the willing-bystander constraints
(10), and hence is an equilibrium under s.
Proof of Theorem 2. First ﬁx some s and consider an increase in anti-corruption enforcement
from σ  to σ. Let N  be the worst equilibrium with N candidates under σ  and similarly
N under σ. Given the assumption that the willing-bystander constraints bind in both



cases, (12) must hold with equality in both cases, which implies y N (σ  ) = yN
 (σ , s) and

y N (σ) = yN
(σ, s). The desired conclusion follows from using the formula in (12) to observe



that yN (σ , s) > yN
(σ, s), because both Scoundrels’ and Sell-Outs’ utility as governor is
strictly decreasing in the level of anti-corruption enforcement (by Assumption 3).

The proof is analogous for an increase in compensation, because yN
(σ, s) is strictly
increasing in s.

Lemma 5. A single-candidate equilibrium exists for arbitrarily small k if and only if

Y (1, 1) ≥ max


uG (1, 0 | σ, s) G
, u (0, 0 | σ, s) .
2

(18)

Proof. Recall from fn. 24 that the willing-candidate constraint for a single candidate is always
satisﬁed because the consequences of having no governor are suﬃciently dire. Moreover,
using (10) and Lemma 3, the willing-bystander constraints in a single-candidate equilibrium
are satisﬁed for arbitrarily small k if and only the quality of the single candidate, y, is such
that uG (1, 0 | σ, s) ≤ 2y and uG (0, 0 | σ, s) ≤ y. Since a citizen’s quality is monotonic in
each component of his character (a, h), the result follows.
Equilibrium conditions for mixed-strategy equilibria. For any given (N , μ), the
probabilities of running translate into probabilities of winning conditional on running for
each i ∈ N , denoted ρi (N , μ).37 The unconditional probability of i winning in equilibrium
37

The probability of winning for any set of realized candidates remains uniform, but the realized number
of candidates is now stochastic; ρi (N , μ) encompasses both sources of randomness. Note that ρi (N , μ)
depends on (μj )j∈N \i but not on μi .

34

is μi ρi (N , μ). Consequently, the formula for y N (μ, σ), the expected quality of governance
when the set N runs with probabilities μ, is
y N (μ, σ) :=



μj ρj (N , μ) y j (σ) + [1 −

j∈N



μj ρj (N , μ)]yA ,

j∈N

where yA denotes the quality of governance when there is no governor (which, recall, is
assumed to be extremely dire).
Henceforth μ(−i) will denote the probability vector obtained from μ by deleting the
element containing the probability of entry for i ∈ N . Thus, if i ∈ N changes his probability
of entry from μi to zero, the conditional probability of winning for any j ∈ N \i changes
to ρj (N \i, μ(−i)). Likewise, μ(+i) will denote the probability vector obtained from μ by
adding an element indicating that i ∈
/ N enters with probability one. Thus, if i ∈
/ N changes
his probability of entering from zero to one, the conditional probabilities of winning for any
j ∈ N ∪ i is ρj (N ∪ i, μ(+i)).
Note that, because all choices and electoral events are independent, the probability of
j ∈ N winning conditional on the event that i ∈ N does not win is equal to the probability of
j ∈ N winning when i does not run, which is μj ρj (N \ i, μ(−i)). This implies in particular
that E [y | (N , μ) , and i ∈ N does not win] = y N \i (μ(−i), σ). As a result, for i ∈ N , we
have
y N (μ, σ) = ρi (N , μ) y i (σ) + (1 − ρi (N , μ))y N \i (μ(−i), σ) .
(19)
The equilibrium conditions for mixed strategies generalize those for pure strategies.
Since the expected quality of governance is the same regardless of whether i runs and loses
or refrains from running, i’s decision is determined by a comparison between k (the cost
of running), and the probability of winning multiplied by i’s gains conditional on winning.
Analogous to (9), the willing-candidate constraints are thus:
∀i ∈ N :

 


ρi (N , μ) uG ai , hi | σ, s − (1 + ai )y N \i (μ(−i), σ) ≥ k,

(20)

with equality when μi < 1. Analogous to (10), the willing-bystander constraints are:
∀i ∈
/ N:



 
ρi (N ∪ i, μ(+i)) uG ai , hi | σ, s − (1 + ai )y N (μ, σ) ≤ k.

(21)

Since ρi (·, ·) does not depend on a candidate’s character, Lemma 3 continues to apply with the
obvious notational changes, so (21) holds if and only if it holds for Sell-Outs and Scoundrels.
35

Proof of Theorem 3. Fix any k > 0 and consider a sequence of restricted models, indexed by
m, such that in model m there are 2m insiders, consisting of m Sell-Outs and m Scoundrels.
For each restricted model in this sequence, the entry game is ﬁnite and hence a mixed-strategy
equilibrium exists. Fix any selection of equilibria in the sequence of restricted models.
Case 1: Suppose ﬁrst that, for some m, the equilibrium has at least one Sell-Out and at
least one Scoundrel entering with zero probability. Then (20) is satisﬁed for all insiders who
enter with strictly positive probability, and (21) is satisﬁed for all insiders who enter with
zero probability. This equilibrium remains an equilibrium when any number of Sell-Outs
and Scoundrels are added so long as they enter with zero probability: (20) is unaﬀected and
therefore still satisﬁed for those who enter with positive probability; while (21) is unaﬀected
and therefore still satisﬁed by the original insiders who enter with zero probability as well
as the new insiders. By Lemma 3, it follows that (21) is also satisﬁed for any new insiders
of other character types. Therefore, the equilibrium of model m is also an equilibrium of
the unrestricted model, featuring a ﬁnite number of candidates.
Case 2: Now suppose that, for all m restricted models, either all Sell-Outs or all
Scoundrels (or both) enter with non-zero probability. Let (N m , μm ) be the equilibrium in
m
the m-th restricted model; let 
θ be the associated vector of entry probabilities for Sell-Outs,
listed in non-increasing order; and let 
τ m denote the associated vector of entry probabilities
for Scoundrels, again listed in non-increasing order. Note that (20) implies that there must
be strictly positive lower bound on the probability of winning conditional on running, and
hence an upperbound, call it C max , on the expected number of candidates. Consequently,
m m
τm
≤ C max .
i
i=1 θ i + 

For each m, deﬁne countably-inﬁnite-dimensional vectors θm and τ m such that θm
i = θi
m
m
m
and τ m
τ i for i = 1, ..., m, and θi = τ m
and τ m belong to
i = 
i = 0 for i > m. For any m, θ
m


Θ :=

(θ1 , θ2 , ...) |

∞



θi ≤ C

max

, θi ≥ 0, and θi ≥ θi+1 for i = 1, 2, ... .

i=1

A key property is that

C max
,
(22)
for any θ ∈ Θ and any i, θi ≤
i

because the elements are in non-increasing order and i θi ≤ C max . Endow Θ with the
Chebyshev norm, D(·, ·), i.e for any θ , θ ∈ Θ, D (θ , θ ) := maxi |θi − θi |.38 One can verify
38

Because of (22), the max is well deﬁned even though Θ is inﬁnite-dimensional.

36

that Θ endowed with D(·, ·) is compact.39 Thus, there is a subsequence for which θm and
τ m converge respectively to limits θ∞ , τ ∞ ∈ Θ. A fortiori, in this subsequence, for any i,
∞
∞
m
∞
∞
θm
i → θ i and τ i → τ i . Also, θ i and τ i are each non-increasing in i. For the remainder
of the proof, restrict attention to the subsequence.
Now consider the unrestricted model, with the continuum of insiders. Let N be the
countable set consisting of Nso Sell-Outs and Nsc Scoundrels, where Nso := sup{i : θ∞
i > 0}
and Nsc := sup{i : τ ∞
i > 0} (either could be inﬁnite). Let μ assign the entry probability
∞
θi to the i-th Sell-Out in N , and the probability τ ∞
i to the i-th Scoundrel in N . We will
show that (N , μ) is a mixed-strategy equilibrium.
We ﬁrst verify the willing-candidate constraint (20). We provide the argument for any
Sell-Outs in N ; it is virtually identical for any Scoundrels. Pick any Sell-Out i ∈ N . Since
∞
m
θm
i → θ i > 0, we can focus without loss on only those large enough m such that θ i > 0.
The willing-candidate constraint for i implies that


m
ρi (N m , μm ) uG (1, 0 | σ, s) − 2y N \i (μm (−i), σ) ≥ k,

(23)

m
m
with equality when θm
i ∈ (0, 1). One can show that as m → ∞, ρi (N , μ ) → ρi (N , μ) and
m
m
y N (μm , σ) → y N (μ, σ),40 from which it also follows that y N \i (μm (−i), σ) → y N \i (μ(−i), σ).41


Thus, passing to limits in (23), we have ρi (N , μ) uG (1, 0 | σ, s) − 2y N \i (μ(−i), σ) ≥ k,
m
with equality whenever θ∞
i < 1 (because then we must have θ i ∈ (0, 1) for all large enough
m). We have thus veriﬁed that (20) holds any Sell-Out in N .

The proof is completed by showing that the willing-bystander constraints (21) hold.
By Lemma 3, it suﬃces to check incentives for Sell-Outs and Scoundrels. We will provide
39

To prove compactness, note that (22) implies that for any ε > 0, there is a some i such that for all
i ≥ i , any θ ∈ Θ has θi < ε, and hence for any θ, θ ∈ Θ, maxi<i |θi − θi | < ε implies D(θ, θ ) < ε. It
follows that Θ is totally bounded. It is routine to verify that Θ is complete.
m
40
A proof for the convergence of ρi (N m , μm ) goes as follows (the argument for convergence of y N (μm , σ)
is along the same lines): Let RiK (θ, τ ) be i’s probability of winning conditional on running when the ﬁrst
K Sell-Outs and Scoundrels running according to the probabilities given in (θ, τ ) ∈ Θ2 , while all others run
with probability zero. Let B K be some strict upper bound on the probability that one or more members
of N other than the ﬁrst K Sell-Outs and Scoundrels runs, given (θ∞ , τ ∞ ). Note that (22) implies that
by taking K suﬃciently large we can make B K arbitrarily small. Also note that B K bounds the same
probability for (θm , τ m ) when m is suﬃciently large. It follows that ρi (N , μ) − RiK (θ∞ , τ ∞ ) < B K and
ρi (N m , μm ) − RiK (θm , τ m ) < B K for large m. Moreover, because the probability of winning conditional
on running is continuous in the entry probabilities for any ﬁnite set of agents, RiK (θm , τ m ) → RiK (θ∞ , τ ∞ )
as m → ∞. Therefore, for any ε > 0, there exists M such that |ρi (N m , μm ) − ρi (N , μ)| < ε for m > M .
41

m

yN

m

−ρm y i

Note that y N \i = 1−ρmi
i
delivers the desired conclusion.

. Given the immediately preceding convergence statements, taking limits

37

the argument for Sell-Outs; Scoundrels can be treated mutatis mutandis.
We divide the argument into two cases. First suppose there exists a subsequence of the
restricted models such that for all large enough m, there is some Sell-Out im who does not
enter in the equilibrium of the m-th model. The willing-bystander constraint for im implies
that for any Sell-Out i who does not run in the equilibrium of model m:


m
ρi (N m ∪ i, μm (+i)) uG (1, 0 | σ, s) − 2y N (μm , σ) ≤ k.

(24)

One can show that ρi (N m ∪ i, μm (+i)) → ρi (N ∪ i, μ(+i)) as m → ∞.42 Thus,


passing to limits in (24), we have ρi (N ∪ i, μ(+i)) uG (1, 0 | σ, s) − 2y N (μ, σ) ≤ k, which
establishes that (21) holds for any Sell-Out i ∈
/ N.
Now consider the other possibility: in any subsequence of restricted models, it is inﬁnitely often the case that all Sell-Outs enter with positive probability in the model’s equilbirium. Then it is possible to ﬁnd a subsequence of m and a Sell-Out in each model, say
m
m
im , such that for all large m, θm
im ∈ (0, 1) and limm→∞ θ im = 0 (recall (22)). As θ im ∈ (0, 1),
the willing-candidate constraint (20) must hold with equality:


m m
ρim (N m , μm ) uG (1, 0 | σ, s) − 2y N \i (μm (−im ), σ) = k.

(25)

Pick any Sell-Out i ∈
/ N . The diﬀerence between ρim (N m , μm ) and ρi (N m ∪ i, μm (+i)) owes
m
N m \im
only to θm
(μm (−i), σ) and y N (μm , σ). Since
im ; similarly for the diﬀerence between y
limm→∞ θim (m) = 0, it follows that limm→∞ ρim (N m , μm ) = limm→∞ ρi (N m ∪ i, μm (+i)) and
m m
m
limm→∞ y N \i (μm (−im ), σ) = limm→∞ y N (μm , σ). Thus, passing to limits in (25) yields


m m
lim ρim (N m , μm ) uG (1, 0 | σ, s) − 2y N \i (μm (−im ), σ)
m→∞


m
= lim ρi (N m ∪ i, μ(+i)) uG (1, 0 | σ, s) − 2y N (μm , σ)
m→∞


= ρi (N ∪ i, μ(+i)) uG (1, 0 | σ, s) − 2y N (μ, σ) ,

k =

which establishes that (21) holds with equality for any Sell-Out i ∈
/ N.
Lemma 6. For any ε > 0, there exists k̂ (ε) such that for all k < k̂ (ε), every multiplecandidate equilibrium (N , μ) satisﬁes ρi (N , μ) < ε for all i ∈ N .
Proof. Suppose the claim is false.
42

Then for some ε > 0 there exists an inﬁnite sequence

The argument is analogous to that given in fn. 40.

38

of positive entry costs k m → 0, and a sequence of associated equilibria (N m , μm ) such that
each N m contains some im with ρim (N m , μm ) ≥ 2ε.
Letting C denote the realized set of candidates and c denote the realized number of
candidates, note that
|N m |
 1
ρim (N m , μm ) =
P m (c),
c
+
1
c=0
where
P m (c) := Pr [|C| = c | (N m , μm ), im ∈
/ C] .

(26)

For any i ∈
/ N m , we have
|N m |

ρi (N

m

∪ i, μ (+i)) = (1 −
m

m
m
μm
im )ρim (N , μ )

+

μm
im


c=0

1
P m (c)
c+2

m

|N |
 1
m
m
m
m 1
≥ (1 − μim )ρim (N , μ ) + μim
P m (c)
2 c=0 c + 1
m
m
m
= (1 − μm
im )ρim (N , μ ) + μim

≥

ρim (N m , μm )
2

ρim (N m , μm )
≥ ε.
2

In other words, any non-candidate who enters would win with expected probability at
least ε. For each equilibrium (N m , μm ), the willing-bystander constraint must be satisﬁed
for Sell-Outs and Scoundrels who are not members of N m :

and



m
ρi (N m ∪ i, μm (+i)) uG (0, 0 | σ, s) − y N (μm , σ) ≤ k m ,

(27)



m
ρi (N m ∪ i, μm (+i)) uG (1, 0 | σ, s) − 2y N (μm , σ) ≤ k m .

(28)

m

Given that ρi (N m ∪ i, μm (+i)) ≥ ε and y N (μm , σ) ≤ Y (1, 1), (27) and (28) imply:

 km
max uG (0, 0 | σ, s) − Y (1, 1), uG (1, 0 | σ, s) − 2Y (1, 1) ≤
.
ε

(29)

The left-hand side of (29) is independent of m, and by the hypothesis that single-candidate
don’t exist for suﬃciently small k—equivalently, by Lemma 5, that inequality (18) is violated—
it is also strictly positive. On the other hand, since ε > 0 is a constant and k m → 0, the
39

right-hand side of (29) converges to zero as m → ∞. Consequently, for m suﬃciently large
the right-hand side must be less than the left-hand side, a contradiction.
Proof of Theorem 4. Suppose the theorem does not hold for some ε > 0. Then it must be
possible to select a sequence of entry costs k m → 0 for which there is a corresponding sequence
of multi-candidate equilibria, (N m , μm ) with |N m | = N m , such that for each m the set N m
m
m
includes some im with (ai , hi ) ∈
/ Bε (1, 0) ∪ Bε (0, 0). The willing-candidate constraints (9)
m
for each i and the willing-bystander constraints (10) for Sell-Outs and Scoundrels who are
not in N m imply
 m m

m m
0 ≤ Δ ai , hi , y N \i (μm (−im , σ)
 



m
m
− Rm max Δ 0, 0, y N (μm , σ ), Δ 1, 0, y N (μm , σ ) ,

(30)

where Δ(·) was deﬁned in (16) and
ρi (N m ∪ i, μm (+i))
.
R :=
ρim (N m , μm )
m

(31)

m

Let ŷ := limm→∞ y N (μm , σ) (if necessary, focus on a subsequence that converges, which is
assured by compactness). The proof now proceeds in three steps.
Step 1: We claim lim y N
m→∞

m

y N (μm , σ) − y N

m \im

m \im

(μm (−im ), σ) = ŷ. To prove this, note that (19) implies

 m

m m
(μm (−im ), σ) = ρim (N m , μm ) y i − y N \i (μm (−im ), σ) .

The desired conclusion then follows from the facts that ρim (N m , μm ) → 0 (Lemma 6) whereas
the quality of governance is bounded.
Step 2: We claim that limm→∞ Rm = 1. We will prove this by showing limm→∞ R1m = 1.
Since ρim (N m , μm ) > ρi (N m ∪ i, μm (+i)), it suﬃces to show that the limit of R1m is no
greater than one. We can express
 Nm
 
−1
Nm
Nm
 1


1
1
1
P m (c) × (1 − μm
P m (c) + μm
P m (c)
=
,
im )
im
Rm
c
+
1
c
+
1
c
+
2
c=0
c=0
c=0
where P m (c) is given by (26). Now choose any integer K ≥ 1. Since all the terms in the

40

summations above are non-negative and the right-hand side is increasing in μm
im , we have
  Nm
−1
Nm

 1
1
1
P m (c) +
P m (c) ×
P m (c)
c
+
1
c
+
1
c
+
2
c=0
c=0
c=K
 K
  Nm
−1
m
N
 1
 1
 1
P m (c) +
P m (c) ×
P m (c)
≤
c
+
1
c
+
1
c
+
2
c=0
c=K
c=K
 K


−1
m
N
Nm
 1


K
+
1
1
1
P m (c) +
P m (c) ×
P m (c)
≤
c+1
c+1
K + 2 c=K c + 1
c=0
c=K
⎛



−1 ⎞
m


K
N
 1
 1
K +2 ⎝
⎠.
1+
P m (c) ×
P m (c)
=
K +1
c
+
1
c
+
1
c=0
c=K

1
≤
Rm



K


Suppose, as we will prove subsequently, that
⎛
∀K ∈ N :

lim ⎝

m→∞

K

c=0



1
P m (c) ×
c+1

 Nm

c=K

1
P m (c)
c+1

−1 ⎞
⎠ = 0.

, which implies that limm→∞
Then for any K ∈ N, limm→∞ R1m ≤ K+2
K+1
the proof of Step 2. Consequently, all that remains is to prove (32).
Observe that for any convergent sequences ζ m and ψ m , limm→∞
m
limm→∞ ζ mζ+ψm = 0. Thus, (32) holds if and only if for all K ∈ N,

1
Rm

ζm
ψm

(32)

≤ 1, completing

= 0 if and only if

K

1
m
c=0 c+1 P (c)
1
m
c=0 c+1 P (c)

lim N m

m→∞

With respect to the denominator in (33): since
m

N

c=0

1
P m (c) = Em
c+1



1
c+1

= 0.

1
c+1

is convex, Jensen’s inequality yields


≥

(33)

Em

1
,
(c) + 1

(34)

where Em (·) is the expectation using the distribution P m (c).
With respect to the numerator in (33), we note that
K

c=0


1
P m (c) ≤
P m (c).
c+1
c=0
K

41

(35)

The right-hand side of (35) represents the probability of having no more than K “successes” in |N m \ im | independent trials, where each trial i has a probability of success μm
i .
There are now two cases to consider.
Case 1: Suppose ﬁrst that there is some subsequence of m such that N m < ∞ for all
m in the subsequence. Then, Theorem 4 of Hoeﬀding (1956) implies that the right-hand
side of (35) is bounded above by the corresponding probability for a binomial distribution
with N m − 1 independent trials and a constant success probability μm := Em (c)/(N m − 1),
provided K ≤ Em (c) − 1. Thus, for m suﬃciently large (so that Em (c) > K, which Lemma 6
guarantees will occur), we have
K

c=0

P m (c) ≤

K




c=0

Nm − 1
c


(μm )c (1 − μm )N

m −1−c

.

(36)

Since the binomial distribution corresponding to the right-hand side of (36) is single-peaked
and has mode no smaller than Em (c) − 1, for suﬃciently large m (so that once again K <
Em (c)), the summand on the right-hand side of (36) is maximized for c = K, implying
K



P m (c) ≤ (K + 1)

c=0

Nm − 1
K


(μm )K (1 − μm )N

≤ (K + 1) (N m − 1)K (μm )K (1 − μm )N
= (K + 1) (Em (c))K (1 − μm )E

m −1−K

m −1−K

m (c)/μm −K

.

(37)

Combining (34), (35), and (37), we have


K

c=0

  Nm
−1
 1
m
m
1
P m (c) ×
P m (c)
≤ (Em (c) + 1) (K + 1) (Em (c))K (1 − μm )E (c)/μ −K
c+1
c+1
c=0
≤ (K + 1) (Em (c) + 1)K+1 (1 − μm )E

m (c)/μm −K

.

There are now two possibilities to consider. The ﬁrst is that there is some ξ ∈ (0, 1) such
that μm > 1 − ξ for m suﬃciently large. In that case, for large enough m,
(K + 1) (Em (c) + 1)K+1 (1 − μm )E
As m → ∞, Em (c) → ∞ and ξ E

m (c)/μm −K

m (c)−K

≤ (K + 1) (Em (c) + 1)K+1 ξ E

m (c)−K

.

(38)

dominates (Em (c) + 1)K+1 , so the expression on

42

right-hand side of (38) converges to zero. Thus, (33) follows immediately for this case.
The second possibility is that there is no such ξ. In that case, we can assume without
loss of generality that μm → 0 as m → ∞ (if necessary by restricting attention to a convergent


m
subsequence). We then have limm→∞ (1 − μm )1/μ = 1e . So ﬁxing some ξ ∈ 1 − 1e , 1 , for
m suﬃciently large we have
(K + 1) (Em (c) + 1)K (1 − μm )E

m (c)/μm −K

≤ (K + 1) (Em (c) + 1)K ξ E

m (c)

(1 − μm )−K . (39)

m

As m → ∞, Em (c) → ∞ and ξ E (c) dominates (Em (c) + 1)K , while (1 − μm )−K → 1,
so the expression on the right-hand side of (39) converges to zero. Thus, (33) again follows.
Case 2: Now suppose N m = ∞ eventually. Without loss, we can assume N m = ∞
m
for all m. We will use a subscript of n on Em
n (c) and Pn to denote the respective objects
m
when N m is restricted to a ﬁnite subset of the ﬁrst n candidates, and let μm
n := En (c)/n.
K

m
Then, because c=0 P m (c) ≤ K
c=0 Pn (c) for any n (adding individuals can only increase
the number of realized candidates), the same argument as in Case 1 can be applied to a large
enough subset of N m , allowing us to conclude that for large enough m and large enough n,
K


P m (c) ≤

c=0

K

c=0



n
c




c
m n−c
(μm
≤ (K + 1)
n ) (1 − μn )

n
K


K
m n−K
(μm
n ) (1 − μn )

K
m n−K
≤ (K + 1) (n)K (μm
n ) (1 − μn )

E m
n (c)
K
−K
m
m 1/μm
n
= (K + 1) (En (c)) (1 − μn )
(1 − μm
.
n)

(40)

m
For any ﬁxed m, as n → ∞, Em
n (c) → E (c) < ∞ (as was discussed in the proof of Them
m 1/μn
−K
orem 3), hence μm
→ 1e while (1 − μm
→ 1.
n → 0, which in turn implies that (1 − μn )
n)
Therefore, taking the limit as n → ∞ in (40) yields
K


P m (c) ≤ (K + 1) (Em (c))K e−E

m (c)

.

(41)

c=0

Combining (34), (35), and (41), we get


K

c=0

  Nm
−1
 1
1
m
P m (c) ×
P m (c)
≤ (Em (c) + 1) (K + 1) (Em (c))K e−E (c)
c+1
c+1
c=0
≤ (K + 1) (Em (c) + 1)K+1 e−E
43

m (c)

.

m

As m → ∞, Em (c) → ∞ and e−E (c) dominates (Em (c) + 1)K+1 , hence the expression
on the right-hand side above converges to zero. Thus, (33) follows.
Step 3: Suppose without loss of generality that the sequence hypothesized at the start
m
m
of the proof, (ai , hi ), converges to some limit (â, ĥ), if necessary choosing a subsequence
m
m
of the original sequence. Since (ai , hi ) ∈
/ Bε (1, 0) ∪ Bε (0, 0) for any m, it must also be
that (â, ĥ) ∈
/ Bε (1, 0) ∪ Bε (0, 0). Since (30) holds for all m, it follows that
  m m

m m
lim Δ ai , hi , y N \i (N m \im , μm (−im )
m→∞


 
 
m
m
− Rm max Δ 0, 0, y N (N m , μm ), Δ 1, 0, y N (N m , μm )
!
= Δ â, ĥ, ŷ − max {Δ (0, 0, ŷ) , Δ (1, 0, ŷ)} ,

0 ≤

where the equality uses the claims established in Steps 1 and 2 and the continuity
of
!
Δ(·). However, Lemma 3 implies that max {Δ (0, 0, ŷ) , Δ (1, 0, ŷ)} > Δ â, ĥ, ŷ for (â, ĥ) ∈
/
Bε (1, 0) ∪ Bε (0, 0), a contradiction.
Proof of Theorem 5. It is convenient to deﬁne
y"(σ) := max {Y (0, 0|σ), min{y ∗ (σ), Y (1, 0|σ)}} .

(42)

In words, y"(σ) truncates y ∗ (σ) below at the quality of a Scoundrel, and above at the quality
of a Sell-Out. We must show that for any ε > 0, there exists k  (ε) > 0 such that when
k < k  (ε), any multiple-candidate equilibrium, (N , μ), has y N (μ, σ) − y"(σ) ≤ ε.
Suppose the result is false for some ε > 0. Then it is possible to select a sequence of
entry costs k m → 0 for which there is a corresponding sequence of multi-candidate equilibria,
m
(N m , μm ), such that for each m, y N (N m , μm ) − y"(σ) > ε. Without loss of generality, we
m
can assume that y N (N m , μm ) converges to a limit point y∞ , with either (i) y∞ > y"(σ) + ε
m
for some ε > 0 and y N (N m , μm ) > y"(σ) + ε for all m, or (ii) y∞ < y"(σ) − ε for some ε > 0
m
and y N (N m , μm ) < y"(σ) − ε for all m. (If necessary, choose an appropriate subsequence of
the original sequence.) We will focus on case (i); the argument for case (ii) is symmetric
(replacing Sell-Outs with Scoundrels, and vice versa).
m

Because y N (N m , μm ) > y"(σ) + ε for all m, Theorem 4 implies that there must be
m
m
im ∈ N m for each m such that (ai , hi ) → (1, 0) (a Sell-Out) as m → ∞. Furthermore,
by Lemma 3, Scoundrels have the greatest incentive to run for oﬃce. According to (30),

44

equilibrium then requires



 m m
m m
m
0 ≤ Δ ai , hi , y N \i (N m \im , μm (−im ) − Rm Δ 0, 0, y N (N m , μm )
where Rm is deﬁned by (31). Taking limits as m → ∞ (and invoking the continuity of Δ(·),
the fact that |N m | grows without bound, and Step 2 of the proof of Theorem 4), we have
0 ≤ Δ (1, 0, y∞ ) − Δ (0, 0, y∞ ). But with y∞ > y"(σ), the right-hand side of the preceding
inequality is strictly negative by Lemma 3, a contradiction.
Proof of Theorem 6. The only portion of the result not proven by the discussion preceding
the theorem concerns the ambiguous comparative statics of the fraction of Scoundrels relative
to Sell-Outs in the limiting candidate pool. To establish that the comparative statics can go
either way, we will assume parameters are such that y ∗ (σ) ∈ (Y (0, 0 | σ), Y (1, 0 | σ)). Let
γ ∗ denote the limiting fraction of candidates who are Sell-Outs. Theorem 4 and Theorem 5
together imply that
y ∗ (σ) = γ ∗ Y (1, 0 | σ) + (1 − γ ∗ )Y (0, 0 | σ)
= γ ∗ [f (e∗ (1)) − q (1 − Φ (v ∗ (1, 0, σ)))] + (1 − γ ∗ ) [f (e∗ (0)) − q (1 − Φ (v ∗ (0, 0, σ)))] .
Solving this equation for γ ∗ and diﬀerentiating with respect to σ (using (15)) yields:
gσ (0, σ) (α [Φ(v ∗ (1, 0, σ)) − Φ(v ∗ (0, 0, σ))] − qφ (g(0, σ) + q))
dγ ∗
=
.
dσ
f (e∗ (1)) − f (e∗ (0))

(43)

Suppose the density φ(v) is constant, say equal to φ, on [v ∗ (0, 0, σ), v ∗ (1, 0, σ)]. Then
∗
(43) reduces to dγ
= fg(eσ∗(0,σ)q(α−1)φ
< 0, so long as α < 1. A fortiori, if the density φ(v) is
dσ
(1))−f (e∗ (0))
∗
∗
non-increasing on [v (0, 0, σ), v (1, 0, σ)], then in the limit as k → 0, raising σ generates an
unfavorable overall selection eﬀect with respect to public-spiritedness.43
On the other hand, it is evident from (43) that reasonable parameters can also yield
> 0, for example if the density φ(v) is suﬃciently increasing on the relevant interval. In
these cases, as k becomes vanishingly small, a stronger anti-corruption policy generates a
beneﬁcial overall selection eﬀect, because the indirect selection eﬀect through changes in the
number of candidates dominates the direct selection eﬀect for a given number of candidates.
dγ ∗
dσ

43

More generally, (43) implies that for any distribution Φ(v), there will be an unfavorable overall selection
eﬀect if α, the governor’s bargaining power, is suﬃciently small.

45

References
Banerjee, Abhijit V., Donald Green, Jennifer Green, and Rohini Pande, “Can
Voters be Primed to Choose Better Legislators? Experimental Evidence from Rural India,”
October 2010. mimeo, Harvard Universiy. 4, 27, 29
, Selvan Kumar, Rohini Pande, and Felix Su, “Do Informed Voters Make Better
Choices? Experimental Evidence from Urban India,” April 2011. mimeo, Harvard University. 4, 27, 29
Barro, Robert J. and Gary S. Becker, “Fertility Choice in a Model of Economic
Growth,” Econometrica, March 1989, 57 (2), 481–501. 8
Besley, Timothy, “Joseph Schumpeter Lecture: Paying Politicians: Theory and Evidence,”
Journal of the European Economic Association, 2004, 2 (2–3), 193–215. 4
and Stephen Coate, “An Economic Model of Representative Democracy,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, February 1997, 112 (1), 85–114. 1
and , “Lobbying and Welfare in a Representative Democracy,” Review of Economic
Studies, January 2001, 68 (1), 67–82. 5
Caselli, Francesco and Massimo Morelli, “Bad politicians,” 2001. NBER Working
Paper No. 8532. 4
and

, “Bad politicians,” Journal of Public Economics, March 2004, 88, 759–782. 1, 4

Chemin, Mattheiu, “Do Criminal Politicians Reduce Corruption? Evidence from India,”
June 2008. mimeo, UQAM. 29
Cho, In-Koo and David Kreps, “Signaling Games and Stable Equilibria,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 1987, 102 (2), 179–221. 28
Cooter, Robert, “Who Gets on Top in Democracy? Elections as Filters,” Supreme Court
Economic Review, 2003, 10, 127–141. 4, 27, 29
Dal Bó, Ernesto and Rafael Di Tella, “Capture by Threat,” Journal of Political Economy, October 2003, 111 (5), 1123–1152. 5

46

, Pedro Dal Bó, and Rafael Di Tella, ““Plata o Plomo?”: Bribe and Punishment in
a Theory of Political Inﬂuence,” American Politican Science Review, February 2006, 100
(1), 41–53. 1, 5
Ferraz, Claudio and Frederico Finan, “Exposing Corrupt Politicians: The eﬀects of
Brazil’s publicly released audits on electoral outcomes,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2008, 123 (2), 703–745. 4, 29
and , “Motivating Politicians: The impacts of monetary incentives on quality and
performance,” 2010. working paper. 4
Fisman, R. and E. Miguel, “Corruption, norms, and legal enforcement: Evidence from
diplomatic parking tickets,” Journal of Political Economy, 2007, 115 (6), 1020–1048. 5
Fisman, Raymond, Nikolaj A. Harmon, Emir Kamenica, and Inger Munk, “Labor
Supply of Politicians,” 2012. working paper. 4
Hoeﬀding, Wassily, “On the Distribution of the Number of Successes in Independent
Trials,” Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 1956, 27 (3), 713–721. 42
Kartik, Navin and R. Preston McAfee, “Signaling Character in Electoral Competition,”
American Economic Review, June 2007, 97 (3), 852–870. 9
Key, Vladimer Orlando Jr., The Responsible Electorate: Rationality in Presidential Voting 1936–1960., Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press, 1966. 1
Levine, David K., “Modeling Altruism and Spitefulness in Experiments,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 1998, 1 (3), 593–622. 8
Mattozzi, Andrea and Antonio Merlo, “Political careers or career politicians?,” Journal
of Public Economics, 2008, 92 (3–4), 597–608. 1, 4
and

, “Mediocracy,” 2010. mimeo, University of Pennsylvania. 1

Messner, Matthias and Mattias K. Polborn, “Paying Politicians,” Journal of Public
Economics, December 2004, 88 (12), 2423–2445. 1, 4
Myerson, Roger B., “Federalism and Incentives for Success of Democracy,” Quarterly
Journal of Political Science, January 2006, 1 (1), 3–23. 4, 27, 29

47

Osborne, Martin J. and Al Slivinski, “A Model of Political Competition with CitizenCandidates,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, February 1996, 111 (1), 65–96. 1
Poutvaara, Panu and Tuomas Takalo, “Candidate Quality,” International Tax and
Public Finance, February 2007, 14 (1), 7–27. 1
Reddy, Karthik, Moritz Schularick, and Vasiliki Skreta, “Immunity,” October 2012.
working paper. 5
Schmeidler, David, “Equilibrium points of nonatomic games,” Journal of Statistical
Physics, 1973, 7, 295–300. 24

48

