NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHAT DOES EQUITY SECTOR ORDERFLOW TELL US ABOUT THE ECONOMY?
Alessandro Beber
Michael W. Brandt
Kenneth A. Kavajecz
Working Paper 16534
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16534

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2010

We gratefully acknowledge the helpful comments from seminar participants at Arizona State University,
Boston College, Central Bank of Canada, CSEF-Igier symposium, Southern Methodist University,
Tilburg University, University of Texas, Vrije University of Amsterdam, Washington University in
St. Louis, and at the American Finance Association meetings, the Citi Quant Conference, the European
Finance Association meetings, and the NBER microstructure meeting. We have also benefited greatly
from the comments of an anonymous referee, Darrell Duffie, Burton Hollifield, Soeren Hvidkjaer,
Ralph Koijen, Mark Ready, Matt Spiegel, Shane Underwood and Luis Viceira. All remaining errors
are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Alessandro Beber, Michael W. Brandt, and Kenneth A. Kavajecz. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

What Does Equity Sector Orderflow Tell Us about the Economy?
Alessandro Beber, Michael W. Brandt, and Kenneth A. Kavajecz
NBER Working Paper No. 16534
November 2010
JEL No. G0,G10,G11,G12
ABSTRACT
Investors rebalance their portfolios as their views about expected returns and risk change. We use
empirical measures of portfolio rebalancing to back out investors’ views, specifically their views about
the state of the economy. We show that aggregate portfolio rebalancing across equity sectors is consistent
with sector rotation, an investment strategy that exploits perceived differences in the relative performance
of sectors at different stages of the business cycle. The empirical foot-print of sector rotation has predictive
power for the evolution of the economy and future bond market returns, even after controlling for
relative sector returns. Contrary to many theories of price formation, trading activity therefore contains
information that is not entirely revealed by resulting relative price changes.

Alessandro Beber
Faculty of Economics and Business
University of Amsterdam
Roetersstraat 11
1018WB Amsterdam
a.beber@uva.nl
Michael W. Brandt
Fuqua School of Business
Duke University
One Towerview Drive
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
mbrandt@duke.edu

Kenneth A. Kavajecz
Finance Department
University of Wisconsin- Madison
975 University Ave.
Madison, WI 53706
kkavajecz@bus.wisc.edu

1
1.

Introduction
It is well documented that asset prices and returns help forecast business cycles

(see Stock and Watson (2003) for a survey of this literature). The motivation behind this
literature is that the information about the current and future states of the economy
collected and processed by investors is revealed by the (change in) relative prices of the
securities traded in response to this new information. Asset prices are therefore a leading,
and often thought of as sufficient statistic, for the public or private information available
to agents.
Orderflow, the act of initiating the purchase or sale of securities, is the conduit
through which information about economic fundamentals are aggregated into asset
prices. Theoretical and empirical studies demonstrating the role of orderflow in price
formation include Glosten and Milgrom (1985), Kyle (1985) and Hasbrouck (1991) for
equities, Evans and Lyons (2002) for foreign exchange, and Brandt and Kavajecz (2004)
for fixed income.
Combining these two observations, that asset prices help forecast business cycles
and that orderflow is the mechanism by which asset prices change, raises the question of
how orderflow itself is related to current and future economic conditions. Does
orderflow forecast the state of the economy by itself and in conjunction with asset prices?
To the extent that orderflow has (marginal) predictive power, what is the exact nature of
this information?
Orderflow may contain less, the same, or more information than prices or returns.
Orderflow may contain less information if a substantial portion of the price formation
process is due to unambiguous public information resulting in instantaneous price

2
adjustments (absent contemporaneous or subsequent trade). Alternatively, orderflow
might simply pass through information to asset prices so that the information contained in
orderflow and returns is identical. Finally, orderflow may contain more or unique
information relative to prices in that investors’ trading behavior is not fully spanned by
asset prices. This possibility arises if standing between orderflow, (which reflects the
actions of investors) and returns (which reflect the consequences) is a trading process
with a number of potential frictions. A whole host of frictions can impact the mapping of
actions (orderflow) into consequences (returns), such as noise trading, non-strategic
liquidity providers (e.g. stale limit orders), multiple signals channeled through a single
price, decentralized trading venues, etc. Each of these frictions has the potential to
dampen or mask the transfer of a signal from orderflow to prices or returns; thus, it is
conceivable that orderflow may contain more or different information than is contained in
prices or returns. In the end, whether orderflow contains less, the same, or more
information about the macroeconomy than asset prices or returns is an empirical question
– one that we wish to answer in this paper.
It is important to note, however, that this last possibility does not hinge on the
nature of the information that prompted the orderflow, in particular, whether the
information is public or private. Both public information with heterogeneous beliefs
and/or heterogeneous decision processes (i.e., different investors using proprietary priors
or models to process public information) and private information in the traditional sense
have the potential to generate informative orderflow. As our empirical results do not
depend on this distinction, we do not model explicitly how or why market participants
decide to trade. We simply argue that agents are taking in information, some may be

3
private while other information is public, and they are processing it with their own beliefs
and models, to arrive at an orderflow action.
There are many different settings that could be used to investigate these questions
as there are numerous ways in which investors adjust their portfolios in response to
changes in their views about economic fundamentals – e.g., they change their
stock/bond/cash allocation, change their positions in real assets such as gold or inflationindexed Treasury securities, or change their relative equity allocation within different
sectors of the economy. We focus our analysis on the last case of sector rotation, a
highly publicized investment strategy that exploits perceived differences in the relative
performance of sectors at different stages of the business cycle. This setting allows us to
study a very common strategy that is implemented by institutional and retail traders alike
as well as utilize data within a single dataset. Specifically, we analyze the dynamics of
orderflow across ten U.S. equity sectors to investigate whether sector adjustments to
investor portfolios is related to the current and future state of the macro economy as well
as the aggregate stock and bond markets.
With regard to orderflow predictability, our results show that while sector
orderflow movements are inconsistent with naive portfolio rebalancing techniques, such
as buy-and-hold (no rebalancing) or a constant-mix strategy, it appears that market
participants shift funds between equity sectors according to their collective information
about changes in the macro economy as much as three months ahead. Our results show
that large-sized active orderflow into the material sector forecasts an expanding economy,
while large-sized active orderflow into consumer discretionary, financials, and

4
telecommunications forecasts a contracting economy.1 We also find that the cross-section
of sector orderflow contains information that predicts the evolution of bond markets,
even after controlling for relative sector returns and traditional low-frequency forecasting
variables. While it is interesting that orderflow predicts the macro economy and bond
market, what is most intriguing is that the linear combination of sector orderflow that best
predicts the evolution of the macro economy also contains the bulk of the explanatory
power for predicting the bond markets. Moreover, we demonstrate that our predictability
results become significantly stronger after conditioning on low dispersion of orderflow
within sectors indicating a true sector view as opposed to a view on a few stocks within
the sector. Together, these results suggest that the information contained in sector
orderflow is different than the information in returns; moreover, the information
contained therein has more to do with sector allocation than stock picking.
Our results also reveal three characteristics regarding the nature of information
contained in sector orderflow. First, we show that the information in sector orderflow is
directly related to the release of macroeconomic fundamentals, specifically the release of
the prominent non-farm payroll figures. Second, our results show that sector orderflow
movements are related to independent mutual fund flows, which suggests market
participants are making active decisions regarding their equity market allocations.
Lastly, sector orderflow movements are inherently defensive in nature. By constructing
an orderflow mimicking portfolio, whereby a well-diversified portfolio is tilted according
to sector orderflow movements, we are able to show that the resulting portfolio is focused
primarily on wealth preservation by investing in low risk stocks during difficult economic
1

Active sector orderflow refers to orderflow within a sector in excess of the proportion of total aggregate
orderflow into or out of the aggregate equity market based on the sector’s market capitalization.

5
times, albeit it enjoys superior risk and return properties relative to the traditional market
portfolio. Thus, taken together our results reveal that the information in aggregate sector
orderflow is directly related to macroeconomic fundamentals, is consistent with
deliberate reallocation strategies by market participants and is defensive in nature.
Section 2 discusses the related literature. Section 3 describes our data and
methodology. Section 4 investigates the predictive power of sector orderflow. Section 5
examines the nature of sector orderflow information and Section 6 concludes.
2.

Related literature
The role of orderflow in a trading environment has received a fair amount of

attention in the recent finance literature. Despite the growing number of papers that
analyze orderflow, each can be partitioned into two broad strands of the literature based
on their research focus. One strand of the literature takes a macro view of orderflow, by
investigating how aggregate orderflow is related to market-level variables. Chordia, Roll
and Subraymanyam (2000, 2001, and 2002) analyze the connection between orderflow
movements into and out of equities and market-wide liquidity, while Evans and Lyons
(2007) relate proprietary foreign exchange orderflow with output/money growth and
inflation. Lo and Wang (2000) and Cremers and Mei (2007) investigate the implications
of two-fund separation on aggregate share turnover, while Hasbrouck and Seppi (2001)
find that returns and orderflow in the equity market are characterized by common
factors. Finally, Bansal, Fang, and Yaron (2005) demonstrate that there appears to be no
relation between macroeconomic sectoral wealth and the return and volatility of sectoral
returns.

6
The other strand of the orderflow literature takes a micro view, by investigating
whether disaggregated (by individual security or mutual fund) orderflow can be used to
forecast subsequent asset returns. In particular, Albuquerque, Francisco and Marques
(2008) estimate the Easley, Kiefer, O’Hara, and Paperman (1996) structural model on a
set of stocks with international exposure to investigate the relation between orderflow and
exchange rates. Froot and Teo (2008) analyze institutional orderflow from State Street
Global Advisors to investigate whether orderflow movements are related to mutual fund
style returns. They find that fund flows appear to be related to styles and interestingly,
sector rotation is a specific investment style that they were able to identify. Campbell,
Ramadorai and Schwartz (2008) also investigate institutional orderflow; however, their
data source is a match of the TAQ database with the 13-F institutional ownership filings.
The latter two studies find that institutional orderflow has a significant effect on
subsequent asset returns.
Our paper is positioned between these two strands of the orderflow literature. The
focus of our orderflow analysis is distinct in that we investigate the extent to which the
dynamics of orderflow between sectors is related to the macro economy as well as broad
markets rather than less aggregate series related to liquidity, volatility or specific mutual
fund returns. Our aim is to understand whether trading activity contains information that
is not entirely captured by resulting relative price changes and then to understand the
nature of that information. Thus, our contribution to the literature rests importantly in the
paper’s focus being on the connection between market participants’ decisions about
sector orderflow and the larger macroeconomy and capital markets.

7

3.

Data and variable construction
At the center of our empirical analysis are equity orderflow data constructed using

the Trades and Quotes (TAQ) dataset over the sample period 1993 through 2005. Our
universe of common stock equities is generated from the stocks covered in the CRSP
dataset.
We construct our orderflow data through a number of steps. For each stock and
each day in the sample period, we apply the following procedure. First, to ensure data
integrity, we eliminate non-positive spreads, depths and trade prices as well as records
where the size of the quoted spread and/or effective spreads are large relative to the
median quoted for that specific stock. Second, we match the sequence of outstanding
quotes with the sequence of trades applying the standard 5-second rule.2 Third, we
aggregate all trades that are executed at the same price which do not have an intervening
quote change. Fourth, we utilize the Lee and Ready (1991) algorithm to sign each trade
as being initiated by a buyer or a seller which allows us to identify the liquidity provider
and liquidity demander. Lastly, each trade is assigned to a dollar size category whose
cutoffs are defined as follows: small (< $25,000), medium ($25,000 to $250,000) and
large (>$250,000).3 The rationale for using dollar orderflow is that by summing the net
dollar orderflow into sectors we are implicitly value-weighting, this is unlike stock
returns that are expressed on a homogeneous (scale-free) basis across size. This

2

This rule has been standard practice in the literature and was certainly applicable during the first part of
our sample; however, recent advances in technology and speed of transacting may call into question its use
(Bessembinder, 2003). In the interest of consistency, we apply it uniformly across the entire sample period.
3
Trades were also separated into size categories based on shares instead of dollars. We focus on dollars
throughout the analysis because partitioning by shares places a disproportionate fraction within the small
and medium categories.

8
procedure results in a set of daily orderflow series for each security: small, medium and
large buys and small, medium and large sells.4
We assign each stock to one of the ten sectors defined by the Global Industry
Classification Standard (GICS) developed by Morgan Stanley Capital International
(MSCI) and Standard & Poor’s (see the appendix for specific sector descriptions). We
then construct sector-level net orderflow by simply summing all orderflow for the
individual stocks included in each sector; net orderflow to the stock market as a whole is
the analogous sum of net orderflow of each sector. Likewise, we define sector level
capitalization as the sum of the capitalizations (shares outstanding multiplied by end of
month price) of the individual stocks in the sector. Throughout the paper/tables the
sectors are ordered with respect to their cyclicality with the U.S. business cycle. We use
as an objective sector ordering the MSCI/Barra partition of the ten sectors into three
groups: pro-cyclical (information technology, materials and industrials), neutral
(consumer discretionary, financials, energy and telecommunications), and countercyclical (utilities, consumer staples and health care).5 As a robustness check we also
conducted our own regressions regarding each sectors degree of cyclicality; our results
largely confirmed the MSCI ordering.

4

We acknowledge that breaking up orderflow by trade-size to identity the broad type of trader (institutional
vs. retail) can be difficult. In particular, while it is well understood that institutional traders do not trade
large quantities exclusively nor do retail traders solely trade small or medium trades; as a general rule we
believe the likelihood of large trades originating from institutions remains high. In addition, we are able to
provide evidence (upon request) that all our key results hold irrespective of whether we use large or all
trade orderflow.
5
For more information about the MSCI/Barra sector ordering see Using Sector Performance Across
Business Cycles, 2009, MSCI/BARRA Research Bulletin, November,
http://www.mscibarra.com/research/articles/2009/Sector_Performance_Across_Business_Cycles_Nov_200
9.pdf

9
Once the basic sector and stock market level net orderflow measures have been
constructed, it is possible to define our two key measures of net orderflow, active and
passive. Passive net orderflow for a given sector is defined as the total net orderflow to
the stock market multiplied by the weight of that sector in the market portfolio.
Effectively, the definition of passive net orderflow amounts to the null hypothesis that
orderflow entering the stock market is distributed across sectors by their weight in the
market portfolio. Active net orderflow for each sector is the difference between sectorlevel total net orderflow and passive net orderflow thereby measuring the excess or
shortfall in orderflow relative to a market capitalization weighted distribution of total
orderflow. We interpret active net orderflow as deliberate decisions/actions by market
participants about their capital allocation within the equity market.
Table 1 displays our total aggregate orderflow by sector and year expressed as a
percentage of the total net orderflow for the year. While the percentage of orderflow
across years remains fairly stable, there are certainly variation across years particularly,
leading up to, and during, the economic downturn in 1999 and 2000. In addition, these
shifts in the shares of orderflow across sectors appear more pronounced for large orders
(Panel B) relative to all orders (Panel A), suggesting that market participants placing
large orders may be more aggressive and/or savvy in positioning their portfolio ahead of
changes in the economy.
We supplement the equity sector orderflow with information about the current
state of the economy, stock and bond market performance (returns) as well as non-farm
payroll expectations and announcement information. For the non-farm Payroll
announcement we obtain the release dates, actual reported (announced) values and

10
median forecasts from Money Market Services. The performances of the stock and bond
markets are measured using the returns of the S&P500 index and the returns of the FamaBliss CRSP discount bonds. Finally, we measure the state of the economy using the
Chicago Federal Reserve Bank National Activity Index (CFNAI). The CFNAI index is a
weighted average of a number of monthly indicators of economic activity first developed
by Stock and Watson (1999).6 Note that an index value above (below) zero indicates
economic growth above (below) the trend. In contrast to the NBER expansion and
recession periods, the CFNAI index has the advantage of being a coincident indicator, a
measure of economic conditions available in real time. In addition, our sample covers a
relatively balanced period of economic growth and decline, with the former occurring in
58% of the months in our analysis. To provide a visual sense of our key variables, we
plot the active net orderflow of large and all orders along with the CFNAI index for each
individual sector in Figure 1.
4.

The Information in Equity Sector Orderflow

4.1

Preliminaries
As we have argued above, aggregate orderflow is a collection of all market

participants trading strategies and therefore embeds their preferences, expectations, and
information. Consequently, if we are interested in the information component of
orderflow as it relates to the macro economy it is important to disentangle, or control for,
any systematic portion of aggregate orderflow.
6

The CFNAI index is constructed to be a single summary measure (with mean zero and standard deviation
of one) of the activity in four broad categories of the economy: production and income; employment,
personal consumption which includes housing; and sales, orders, and inventories. For more detailed
information concerning the CFNAI index see
http://www.chicagofed.org/economic_research_and_data/cfnai.cfm

11
At the most fundamental level, the systematic portion of equity market orderflow
could simply be the result of movements into and out of the equity market as a whole.
We investigate this possibility by conducting a principal component decomposition of
sector orderflow. While our untabulated results reveal one dominant factor explaining
68% of orderflow movements, consistent with Hasbrouck and Seppi (2001), there are at
least five other significant factors that are important in explaining orderflow. Given this
result, we can quickly dispel the notion that aggregate equity orderflow simply blankets
the equity sectors uniformly.
As a further diagnostic along these lines, we also compute the cross-correlation of
sector orderflow within the cyclical and countercyclical sectors, where cyclicality is
defined by the MSCI/Barra classification. Aggressive sectors have a very low average
correlation of 0.03, while defensive sector orderflows are relatively more correlated, with
an average of 0.24. Overall, this is suggestive evidence that information in different
aggressive and defensive sector orderflow is quite heterogeneous. Furthermore, when we
compare the simple correlations between large active sector orderflow and the excess
sector returns, all of them are positive, significantly different from zero, and are on
average equal to 0.35. Similarly to the equity market evidence presented in Hasbrouck
and Seppi (2001), this is evidence that sector orderflow and returns have some degree of
commonality but also show different dynamics.
Portfolio rebalancing of sector positions is another common motive for trade. If
market participants engage in a buy-and-hold strategy (thereby effectively not
rebalancing their portfolios), we would expect to see no relation between aggregate sector
orderflow and the previous performance of the sector, while a negative relation between

12
sector orderflow and previous performance would be consistent with a constant mix
strategy. To investigate these possibilities, we analyze the temporal relation between
sector orderflow and the corresponding lagged sector returns at both a weekly and
monthly frequency. We suspect that the monthly aggregation may be more appropriate
as it is better able to cancel out components that are related to liquidity and inventory, yet
retain the components of orderflow that are related to long-lived information.
Specifically, we regress active net orderflow standardized by sector market capitalization
on the sector return in excess of the return of the market portfolio.
Our results for the weekly horizon (shown in Table 2, panel A) reject both the
buy-and-hold and defensive rebalancing (constant mix strategy) as market participants
appear extremely eager to increase the weight of a sector after a period of positive
performance (positive excess returns). One way of interpreting these results is that in
aggregate, market participants chase performance (or act as momentum traders) at the
industry level. When we repeat the same analysis using a monthly frequency (shown in
Table 2, panel B), the results on small and large orders are no longer significant while the
results for medium orders are less significant than at the weekly horizon. At this lower
frequency, orderflow simply does not appear to respond to previous excess returns. Thus,
at the sector level, neither defensive rebalancing nor momentum trading appear to be a
pervasive determinant of orderflow patterns at the monthly frequency.
These results show little evidence that in aggregate market participants
defensively rebalance their portfolios. If anything, orderflow seems to respond positively
to past sector returns, but only at a weekly frequency. These findings combined with the
evidence from the principal components analysis, suggest that orderflow is driven by

13
more than simple indiscriminant or defensive trading strategies and therefore, has the
potential to reveal aggregate investor information related to beliefs, expectations and risk
preferences.
4.2

Sector Orderflow and the Economy
In this section we explore whether the collective trades of market participants

across asset classes contain information about the expected state of the macro economy.
Our conjecture is that market participants are continually digesting news about the macro
economy; as they process this news, it impacts their preferences, expectations and risk
tolerances, which in turn induce them to trade.
Our analysis involves aggregating orderflow to the monthly frequency and testing
whether sector orderflow has predictive power for the CFNAI expansion indicator. In
particular, we regress the current CFNAI index on active net sector orderflow normalized
by the market capitalization of each sector and the lag of the CFNAI index.7 This
empirical specification has a number of advantages. First, our key variable reflects the
orderflow that is entering a sector in excess of new funds invested into the stock market.
Second, standardization by sector market capitalization enjoys the intuitive interpretation
of market share and also avoids the practical difficulty of overweighting the largest
sectors.8 Recall that the construction of dollar sector orderflow is comparable to value-

7

We repeat all the regressions in the paper including three lags of the explanatory variables and the key
results are confirmed. Therefore, in the interest of parsimony we keep the simpler specification without
lags. However, in the few marginal cases where the results differ, we mention the difference in the
exposition.
8

We measure the sector market capitalization using stock prices at the beginning of the month to avoid any
spurious effects of a given month’s return on the weight of a specific sector. As a robustness check we also
repeat our analysis using the sector market capitalization for each day of the month, obtaining the similar
results.

14
weighting sector returns. Lastly, we are careful to control for the current level of the
expansion indicator to ensure that coefficients on the orderflow do not pick up any
contemporaneous relation with the economy.
At the outset, we investigate whether active monthly orderflow, within each
separate sector, have predictive power for the expansion index one and three months into
the future. Our rationale for investigating each sector in isolation is to understand, in an
unconditional and unconstrained environment, which sector orderflow series are most
closely associated with economic expansions and contractions. The results, shown in
Table 3, formalize the individual sector comparison with the CFNAI index displayed
visually in the ten panels of Figure 1. As a reminder, note that the sectors are ordered by
their cyclicality, pro-cyclical sectors at the top of the table, neutral in the middle and
counter-cyclical at the bottom.
Intuition suggests that pro-cyclical sectors (top of the table) would have positive
coefficients and counter-cyclical sectors would have negative coefficients (bottom of the
table). While in general this intuition is bore out, it is certainly not universal, with
exceptions being more prevalent for small sized orderflow. In addition, Table 3 shows
that orderflow into a number of the sectors are able to forecast expansion/contractions in
the macro economy, particularly for large orders. Specifically, we find that active
orderflow of large orders into the material sector predict higher levels of the expansion
index both one and three months ahead, while active orderflow of large orders into
financials, telecommunications and consumer discretionary predict lower levels of the
expansion index at the one and three month horizons.

15
In order to be conservative in our interpretation of the results, we compute datamining robust critical values for the largest t-statistic across the thirty alternative
orderflow regressors (orderflow in ten sectors across three trading sizes) in the forecast of
the CFNAI indicator. In particular, we construct the finite-sample empirical distribution
of the largest t-statistic under the null hypothesis of no predictability from orderflow
using 100,000 bootstrap replications. Our methodology consists of a block bootstrap
approach which specifically accounts for both the cross-sectional correlation across
sectors as well as the autocorrelation within each sector by drawing sets of observations
across all sectors at a point in time as well as a time-series window within each sector.9
In choosing the block length we follow Politis and Romano (1994) for a random length,
and Hall, Horowitz and Jing (1995) for fixed optimal length; however, critical values are
similar in either case. For example, the 5% and 10% data-mining robust critical values for
the t-statistics in Table 3, Panel A, with a random block bootstrap are 2.93 and 2.64,
respectively and they are 3.01 and 2.68 with a fixed-length block bootstrap.
Of the large sector orderflow, materials, financials and telecoms are significant at
least at the 5% level across the one and three-month horizon, while small and medium sector
orderflow show utilities as significant at the 1% level. Further evidence of the information
contained in the orderflow series can be gleaned from comparing the baseline R2 absent the
orderflow series (shown in the last row of each panel within Table 3) to the R2 including the
respective orderflow series. An alternate way of digesting the result is that under the null
hypothesis of no predictability, there is a 5% and 2.5% probability to obtain six and eight
models, respectively, out of 30 with a t-statistic greater than two. In Table 3, Panel A, we

9

There is an average of 0.55 autocorrelation for the first lag of large orders across sectors.

16
obtain eight models with t-statistics greater than two, consequently we believe this is
strong evidence that our findings are robust to the number of regressions that we execute.
One last methodological concern is the bias that could arise in small samples
when regressors are persistent (e.g., Stambaugh, 1999), even though the degree of
persistence of active sector orderflow is much lower compared to the typical dividend
yield predictor extensively examined in the literature (e.g., the first order autocorrelation
on average across sector orderflow is 0.55). In any case, we use the block-bootstrap
technology described above to derive an empirical distribution for the R2. In Table 3
panel A, for example, we find that the hypothesis of no predictability implies an increase
in R2 over the AR(1) model below 4.5% in 95% of the cases. Empirically, large active
orderflow in materials, financials and telecoms all imply R2 increases that are above that
threshold. We thus conclude that in these cases the increase in explanatory power is
significant.
In addition to the coefficients being statistically significant, they are also
economically significant; as an example, a one-standard deviation shock to large
orderflow in the materials sector implies a 0.14 higher expansion index one month later,
and such a move is approximately 10% of the maximum value of the expansion index
within our sample. While the relation between sector orderflow and the macro economy
is quite compelling for the large orders, the forecasting power of the medium and smallsized orderflow is dramatically lower with only active orderflow into utilities being
consistently (negatively) associated with the expansion index. The contrast between the
large and small/medium orderflow results is interesting because it suggests the
information, expectations, preferences and risk tolerance of the market participants

17
behind the different size trades is dramatically different. Under the simple assumption
that large orders are more likely to originate from institutional investors, while small and
medium orders are more likely to originate from retail investors, our results suggest that
institutional investors are better able to position their trades in anticipation of changes in
the economy than are retail investors. Retail investors appear to have a very coarse
partition of the sectors with utilities showing up as the only defensive sector and no
significant expansion sectors being employed.10
After investigating the relation between the expansion index and sector orderflow
by individual industry, we now turn to an analysis of the cross-section of orderflow.
Specifically, we are interested in determining the orderflow factor (i.e., the set of sector
loadings) with the highest correlation to the state of the macro economy. As before, the
numerators of the active net orderflow variables represent deviations from passive
allocations, thus their sum is equal to zero. As a result, the ten sectors have orderflow
that are highly collinear and the coefficients in the multivariate regression are difficult to
interpret. Therefore, we refrain from showing the coefficients of the multivariate
regression and instead present the correlations between each sector orderflow and the best
linear combination of sector orderflow estimated in the multivariate regression. Lamont
(2001) encounters the same problem when using the returns of the base assets and
concludes that “the portfolio weights have no particular meaning”.
Table 4 presents the cross-sectional results. Consistent with intuition, the large
orderflow results display positive coefficients for pro-cyclical sectors which tend to

10

We acknowledge that with the increased importance of algorithmic trading recently, institutions can
optimally break up their trades to minimize price impact and disguise their actions. Therefore, it might not
be necessarily true that small trades correspond exclusively to retail investors. Despite this development,
large orders are still likely to originate from institutional investors.

18
negative coefficients as sectors become more counter-cyclical; the one exception being
consumer staples. We are puzzled by the results for consumer discretionary and
consumer staples and hypothesize that the categories are so large and heterogeneous that
it is difficult to get a clear signal about pure discretionary and necessity purchases.
However, the puzzle is consistent across both orderflow and return regressions, which
lends credibility to a feature that is systematic across various measures within our data.
Also, consistent with the individual sector results, the large orderflow results are
different from the small and medium results. Beginning with the three-month horizon,
there appears to be some stratification of orderflow among sectors based on the size of
the trades. For example, large orderflow show that materials, industrials, and consumer
staples are aggressive economic sectors, while energy, consumer discretionary,
financials, and telecommunications are all defensive sectors relative to the
expansion/contraction index. The small and medium sized orderflow show a sharp
contrast in their positioning with no clear pattern relative to the cyclicality of the sectors.
For example, the materials and industrial sectors for the medium orderflows are
aggressive (positive coefficients) but so are consumer staples and health care; on the
defensive side (negative coefficients), information technology, telecommunications and
utilities are significant.
Fewer sectors have significant correlations at the one-month horizon, which
suggests that one quarter ahead of an expansion (contraction) market participants perform
a broad portfolio reallocation (three-month results), while the final adjustments before a
turn in the economy appear to be concentrated into (out of) fewer sectors (one-month
results). At the one-month horizon, the materials sector is the most aggressive sector for

19
large orderflow, while health care and information technology are the most aggressive for
medium and small orderflow, respectively. Consumer discretionary, financials, and
telecommunications are the defensive sectors for large sized orderflow, while utilities
remain the one defensive sector for small and medium sized orderflow.
In summary, it is clear that the link between aggregate sector orderflow and the
macro economy is strong, with large-sized active orderflow in specific sectors able to
forecast expansions/contractions up to one quarter ahead. Both the univariate and
multivariate regression results show greater predictability (higher R2 in Table 3 and 4) the
longer the horizon, for all trade sizes. In addition, large-sized sector orderflow, which is
likely to originate from institutional investors, appears to contain the bulk of the
predictive power in aggregate orderflow. Finally, the target sectors in our results for
trading on the macro economy are consistent with common financial wisdom concerning
sector rotation and portfolio allocation tactics.
4.3

Sector Orderflow and Markets
To the extent that financial markets are tied to economic expansions and

contractions, it is an empirical question whether sector orderflow contains pertinent
information about the performance of the equity and bond markets and how that
information compares to the information that is useful for predicting the macro economy.
In this section, we regress equity market returns on individual sector orderflow in
order to understand whether market participants overweight/underweight sectors in
anticipation of higher/lower future stock market returns. Table 5 presents our results
which are presented in a manner consistent with Table 3 (and Table 6) for comparison
purposes. Clearly the predictive power for the equity market is much weaker than results

20
for the macro economy. For example, at the 1-month horizon, small sized orderflow into
utilities as well as medium and large-sized orderflow into the telecommunication sector
seems to predict lower future stock market returns. Moreover, the economic significance
is striking in that a one-standard deviation shock to the telecommunication sector predicts
a 1% monthly return. However interestingly, these results are not sustained at the 3month horizon with weak and sporadic significance displayed among the sectors.
Admittedly, the number of significant regressors for the stock market are in line with
chance. We also compute the correlations between each sector’s active orderflow and the
linear combination of ten sector factor loadings that best predict the stock market, similar
to the analysis presented in Table 4 for the macroeconomy. We find that the most
aggressive sector for large-sized orderflow is information technology and the most
defensive is the telecommunication sector, consistent with the univariate results (results
not reported).
We perform the same analysis on the bond market (1-year maturity), see Table 6.
Not surprisingly, the results are stronger than the corresponding results for the equity
market, which is consistent with the received wisdom that the macro economy and the
fixed income market may have more in common with each other than either has in
common with the equity market. For the medium and large sized orderflow, the materials
sector has a negative sign and the financials and utilities sectors have a positive sign,
which is exactly the opposite result found for the expansion indicator.11 Furthermore,
these results hold at both the 1 and 3-month horizons. As an example of the substantial
economic impact of these results consider that a one standard deviation shock to
11

Regressions were also run using the 3-year and 5-year bond returns. The results were similar and are
available upon request.

21
orderflow into the material sector predicts a 0.0005 lower monthly bond return (0.6%
lower annual return), which is about ten times the average one-year bond return in our
sample. Moreover, the analysis of the correlations between each sector’s active
orderflow and the linear combination of ten sector factor loadings that best predict the
bond market, confirms that the most aggressive sector for large-sized orderflow is
materials and the most defensive is the financial sector (results not reported).12
4.4

Relation between Orderflow Information within the Economy and Markets
To further investigate the predictability of sector orderflow, we consider whether

the orderflow factors which have the maximal correlation with economic expansions, the
stock market and the bond market each have predictive power over the other dependent
variables. For example, does the maximal linear combination of sector orderflow which
best predicts economic expansions have any ability to predict the stock and bond market
returns and vice versa? Specifically, Table 7 shows the explanatory power of regressing
future values of the expansion indicator, the stock market return, and the bond market
return on the current value of the dependent variable and a forecasting factor. The
forecasting factor is a linear combination of either active orderflow or excess sector
returns, where the loadings are computed as those with the maximal correlation with each
of the dependent variables, respectively.
12

Since the cross-section of orderflow across sectors contains information about the future evolution of the
economy and the bond market, one could also envision that it contains information about future
volatilities. Specifically, investors could re-allocate towards defensive sectors not only when they believe
the economy is transitioning into a recession, but also when they think the risk of such an event is higher.
We investigate this hypothesis using the same empirical specification adopted before to predict the
economy, where we replace the dependent variable with the logarithmic change in the volatility index
(VIX) (a model-free implied volatility of S&P500 options with one-month to maturity) and the change in
realized volatility obtained from S&P500 returns, one-month and one-quarter ahead. While we find that
orderflow has some predictive power, the results are far from substantial. For example, the active orderflow
across sectors only predict up to 6% of the variation in the VIX change in one month (results not reported).

22
Panels A, B and C of Table 7 display the results for the economic expansions,
stock and bond markets respectively. As one would intuit, the results show that own
orderflow and own returns have predictive power across the three panels. Beyond this,
Table 7 highlights four observations about the interaction among the three independent
variables that reveals much about the predictability of sector orderflow. First, the
orderflow factor with the maximal correlation with the expansion indicator has the ability
to predict not only the expansion index, but also the 1-year bond return and to a lesser
extent the stock market return (at least at the 1-month horizon). Specifically, at the onemonth horizon, the best linear combination of the cross-section of sector orderflow for
the expansion index is statistically significant and generates a R2 of 32%, 2% and 13% for
the expansion index, stock and bond markets respectively. The lower explanatory power
for the stock market is likely due to the relative importance of information about cash
flows and discount rates changing over time, as shown in Boyd et al. (2005). Second,
there is a high degree of reciprocity among factors; the combination of sector orderflow
which best predicts the stock market (bond market) also has predictive power over the
CFNAI index, with a statistically significant R2 of 22% (26%). Third, forecasting factors
based on linear combinations of excess returns appears to have little explanatory power
beyond their own market, which suggests that orderflow contains more cross market
information than returns. Fourth, the sector orderflow coefficients are relatively stable
across the three regressions (see Figure 2 for a summary of the orderflow coefficients
across select sectors). Thus, the reciprocity of orderflow’s predictive power across the
regressions coupled with the coefficients stability across sectors implies the existence of a
single orderflow forecasting factor, which is strongly related to macroeconomic

23
information and has the ability to forecast performance within the economy and capital
markets.
4.5

Orderflow versus Returns
While the predictive power of sector orderflow has been clearly established, it

remains to be seen whether prices/returns contain the same or potentially more or less
information than orderflow.
As a matter of background, there is an established literature which shows that low
frequency, market-level variables such as the dividend yield, the corporate default spread
(BAA less AAA yields) and the term spread (10-year less 3-month Treasury yields) have
predictive power for the economy as well as for equity and fixed income markets (see,
Keim and Stambaugh, 1986; Campbell and Shiller, 1988; Fama and French, 1988; among
others). Armed with these results, others have investigated whether returns have
incremental predictive power. Specifically, Lamont (2001) and Hong et al. (2007), show
that the cross-section of returns across sectors predicts the economy and the stock
market. Thus, when juxtaposing our orderflow results with results from the existing
literature, a natural question arises as to whether orderflow contains the same information
as returns. On one hand, returns and orderflow are related through the interaction of the
demand and supply of shares (orderflow) which generates the equilibrium price (returns)
and quantity (volume); on the other hand, the two series are distinct as orderflow is an
aggregation of market participant actions while returns are an aggregation of trading
consequences. Nonetheless, it remains an empirical question whether orderflow, returns
or both, contain information about the future of the economy and the various capital
markets, as well as what the specific nature of the respective information sets may be.

24
To formalize this comparison, we predict the expansion indicator CFNAI with
excess sector returns rather than orderflow, sector by sector. Table 8 displays our
results; for comparison we include the R2 from the large-sized orderflow results in Table
3. The R2 comparison reveals very little difference on average between the explanatory
power of orderflow and the explanatory power of returns. However, further inspection
reveals that the sector returns with predictive power are different than those for sector
orderflow. For example, within the return regression, consumer discretionary and
consumer staples, health care, financials and utilities are all negatively related to
economic expansion, which suggests that a negative excess return in these sectors
predicts an expansionary economy. In contrast, recall that the orderflow regression
showed that orderflow into the materials sector and orderflow out of the financial and
utility sectors are associated with an expanding economy.13 Thus, Table 8 suggests that
the information contained in orderflow and returns is at a minimum, different.
To complement the above analysis, we run two auxiliary sets of regressions on the
economic expansion index, the stock market return and the bond market return varying
the set of independent variables among the various orderflow and return series. Table 9
displays our results which compare the adjusted R2 across small, medium and large sized
active net orderflow predictors along with returns at the 3-month horizon. The first item
to note is that the cross-section of orderflow contains more explanatory power than
returns do for future economic expansions, specifically, adding orderflow to the current
level of the index generates a twofold increase in the explanatory power, while adding
returns alone only increases the R2 by about 2%. For the stock market return, not only is
13

As a robustness check, we also estimate a sector-by-sector regression where we include both returns and
orderflow as independent variables. The results that obtain are both quantitatively and qualitatively similar
and available upon request.

25
there less predictability, it is not clear whether orderflow dominate returns. Finally, like
the results for the economic expansion, the large-sized orderflow dominate returns in
predicting the one-year maturity bond returns. In summary, these results demonstrate that
orderflow encompasses more information than is contained in returns.
While Table 8 and 9 suggest that there appears to be more information in
orderflow and that information is materially different than information contained in
returns, it is possible that orderflow is merely proxying for low frequency variables such
as the dividend yield, the default spread (BAA less AAA yields) and the term spread (10year less 3-month), variables that the literature has already demonstrated has predictive
power for the economy and other capital markets. The final set of auxiliary regressions,
contained in Table 10, addresses this concern. The regressions compare the predictive
ability of nested sets of variables: Equations 1 and 2 provide the baseline regression,
Equations 3 and 4 add returns and active net orderflow respectively, and Equations 5 and
6 investigates if active net orderflow explains the residual of the return equation
(Equation 3) and vice versa.14 However, it is difficult to interpret the individual
coefficient estimates for two reasons. First, in equation 3 and 4 there is collinearity
induced by regressors expressed as deviations from a passive benchmark. Second, in
equation 5 and 6 the dependent variable is a residual and, as a result, the signs of the
explanatory variables are not meaningful. For these reasons, Table 10 simply displays the
number of significant regressors and the R2 in order to provide some sense of the
economic significance.

14

We also augment the set of low-frequency market-level predictors with the three-month Treasury bill and
the volatility index VIX in equation (2), (3) and (4). Our empirical findings are practically unchanged and
therefore we only report the results for the more parsimonious specifications.

26
As is evident from comparing the results in Equation 5 and 6, active net orderflow
explains more of the residual after controlling for returns and other low frequency
forecasting variables (Equation 3), than returns explain of the residual after controlling
for active net orderflow and the same low frequency forecasting variables (Equation 4)
for both the macroeconomy and to a lesser extent the bond market. Specifically, returns
have no additional explanatory power beyond market-level forecasting variables and
orderflow, whereas orderflow explains 12% and 5% of the variation of the economy and
the bond market respectively, left unexplained by market-level forecasting variables and
returns. Thus, the results contained in Table 10 suggest that active net orderflow provides
more and materially different information than that contained in returns and traditional
low frequency market variables.
5.

The Nature of Orderflow Information
Our results thus far show that orderflow contains different information than

returns, what remains is to better understand the exact nature of the information contained
therein. To that end, a number of questions come to mind. Is the composition of active
sector orderflow important to its ability to forecast? Can sector orderflow movements be
directly tied to the release of important macroeconomic information? Does sector
orderflow reflect the information of a particular category of institutional investors? Is the
information in orderflow economically relevant? The next subsections will address each
of these questions in turn.
5.1

Orderflow Dispersion within Sectors
We conjecture that, beyond the level, the composition of active sector orderflow

may also be important. Specifically, we hypothesize that the variability of orderflow

27
among stocks contained in the sector is related to the strength of the macroeconomic
signal.
To illustrate, consider that up to now, we have measured sector net orderflow as
the simple sum of all orderflow for the individual stocks included in that sector. Thus, a
large net orderflow in one sector could be the result of investors increasing the weight of
that sector in their portfolios or it could also be the result of a heavily traded single stock
within the sector for reasons unrelated to expected economic conditions (e.g., stock
picking based on private information). If our hypothesis is correct, the predictive power
of our results should be stronger whenever orderflow within one sector is more
homogeneous across stocks in that sector.15
In order to measure whether investors are trading the whole sector or just select
stocks, we calculate the standard deviation of active orderflow for each stock as a
measure of dispersion of orderflow within each sector.16 Next we average sector
orderflow dispersion at the market level using two different weighting schemes. The first
dispersion measure (σ1) uses weights corresponding to the monthly market capitalization
of each sector. This method gives more importance to the dispersion of orderflow within
large sectors. The second dispersion measure (σ2), weights orderflow dispersion by the
absolute value of the correlations reported in Table 4, normalized to sum to one. This
method gives more importance to the dispersion of orderflow within the sectors that
matter more for predicting the economy.

15

Beber, Brandt, and Kavajecz (2008) is another example of a conditional analysis of orderflow and
returns.
16
The results are very similar if we use the range between the maximum and minimum value of active
orderflow or the absolute value of the orderflow skewness.

28
In Table 11, we present the results of forecasting the expansion indicator, the
stock market and the bond market with the sector orderflow in high and low dispersion
states. In a given month, dispersion is high (low) when the aggregate standard deviation
is above (below) its median in the last 12 months.17 Our conjecture is clearly confirmed.
When orderflow has low dispersion weighted by market capitalization (σ1), the
explanatory power is between 1.47 and 1.83 times higher than with high dispersion. If we
give more weight to the sectors that are more relevant for predicting the economy and the
asset markets (σ2), the results are even more striking; in months with low dispersion the
average explanatory power of orderflow doubles.
In summary, the predictive power of active sector orderflow is much stronger
when we condition on low dispersion of orderflow within sectors. Moreover, the results
obtain no matter which weighting scheme is used or what market is analyzed.
5.2

Orderflow and Macroeconomic News
One potential concern is that our results could be driven by some latent variable

unrelated to economic news which alters market participants’ fundamentals views of, and
attitude toward, the macroeconomy, which in turn induces trade. To address this
concern, we investigate whether sector orderflow responds directly to important
macroeconomic announcements which we know are signals, albeit noisy, of the current
state of the economy. Thus, a significant relation between aggregate sector orderflow

17

The rolling threshold is preferred to a static threshold to avoid that conditional results pick up specific
subsample periods. The results are robust to the choice of the rolling span (from 12 months to 36 months)
and to the choice of the percentile (e.g., low dispersion as bottom quartile and high dispersion as top
quartile).

29
and macroeconomic announcements would be consistent with our hypothesis and
alleviate concerns that our results are driven by other latent factors.18
Our empirical design is to investigate the relation between orderflow factors with
the highest correlation with the macro economy, stock market and bond market with the
standardized non-farm payroll (NFP) announcement surprise, which is commonly
understood to be the first, and most influential, macro announcement within a given
month, (see, Andersen, Bollerslev, Diebold, and Vega, 2007).19 Orderflow is measured
over the week and the month following the non-farm payroll release. If active orderflow
is indeed capturing portfolio adjustments in response to changes in economic conditions,
then the release of NFP news should trigger active orderflow in the sectors that are linked
to the evolution of the economy. Our investigation encompasses two complimentary
approaches: measuring cumulative sector orderflow following non-farm payroll releases
(Figure 3) and a regression of the orderflow factors onto the non-farm payroll surprise.
Figure 3 cumulates orderflow by sector following non-farm payroll
announcements. We distinguish sectors in three groups according to a predictive
regression of the CFNAI indicator on sector orderflow (see Table 3, Panel A): financials,
consumer discretionary and telecom sectors act in a counter-cyclical fashion, materials
and consumer staples act in a pro-cyclical fashion, while the remainder of the sectors are
not significant. The cumulative orderflow series are further partitioned by whether the
announcement was a positive (Panel A) or negative (Panel B) surprise relative to

18

In this sense, our paper fits into the literature that uses the relation between macroeconomic
announcements and asset prices to provide real-time estimates of the current state of the economy (e.g.,
Evans, 2005).
19
We standardize the release by subtracting the announced figure from the median expectation and
dividing by the standard deviation of the surprise.

30
expectations. Consistent with having strong direct tie to macroeconomic news, the
orderflow results show that the financials, consumer discretionary and telecom sectors
shed (accumulate) orderflow after positive (negative) surprises, while materials and to a
lesser extent, consumer staples sectors have the opposite pattern.
Table 12 displays our complementary regression results.20 The dependent
variable is a linear combination of sector orderflow or returns in the period following the
NFP release, where the loadings are the ones with a maximal correlation with the CFNAI
index, stock returns, or bond returns. Panel A shows that both the orderflow factor for the
macro economy and the bond market are significantly related to the non-farm payroll
announcement, while the orderflow factor for the stock market appears to have no
relation. The positive sign on the CFNAI indicator regression suggests that the creation
of new jobs (increase in non-farm payroll) predicts orderflow into those sectors which are
associated with a macroeconomic expansion. The negative sign on the bond market is
consistent with new jobs being associated with orderflow from the bond market into more
risky assets, which in turn puts downward pressure on bond returns. Panel B replicates
the above analysis using returns instead of orderflow as the dependent variable. In
contrast to the orderflow results, the return factors are unrelated to the non-farm payroll
release. This suggests that not only do returns carry less pertinent information relative to
orderflow, the nature of the information within returns and orderflow appears to be
markedly different.
The remaining two sub-sections address the economic significance of our
findings. In particular, we study the sector orderflow behavior of an identifiable set of

20

Note that the t-statistics in Table 12 are determined using bootstrapped standard errors.

31
institutional investors as well as the profitability of trading on sector orderflow
movements.
5.3

Orderflow and Mutual Fund Flows
A drawback of the empirical measures of orderflow used in the literature and in

our paper is that the identity of the trader is unknown and thus it is not possible to
determine the category of investors that is primarily responsible for orderflow into a
group of stocks of the same sector. Mutual Funds, however, are one category of
institutional investors for which we can obtain low-frequency information on flows
invested in stocks of different sectors. The data we utilize for this portion of the analysis
is obtained from two mutual fund databases. The first database is the TFN/CDA
Spectrum database that contains quarterly portfolio holdings for all U.S. equity mutual
funds and the second mutual fund database is available from CRSP and contains detailed
information on the style of the fund provided by Lipper. While the Spectrum database
spans our sample period, unfortunately, the Lipper style categories data begins in 1998.
Thus, we backfill the style designations over the initial five years of our sample using the
first available styles in Lipper. We note that by backfilling data we are implicitly
assuming low mobility across fund categories in the first part of our sample. Additional
details on the two databases and the process to match funds are provided in Wermers
(2000).
Once the data is compiled, we apply a series of filters to make sure that we are
properly and timely measuring mutual fund flows. Specifically, we require the quarterly
reporting date to be within two months of the stock holding reporting date and not more
than a quarter away from the previous reporting date. We also exclude all funds that do

32
not exhibit positive stock holdings in all the ten sectors throughout our sample period.
This filter effectively excludes international funds, bond funds, gold funds, real estate
funds, and all other sector specific funds, which are unlikely to be responsible for the
orderflow patterns documented earlier in this paper.
For each of the style categories, we compute quarterly stock holding changes in
dollars broken down by the ten GICS sectors. According to the same logic used before to
compute the active component of orderflow, we calculate the active part of the sector
mutual fund flows. Specifically, we compute the passive part of flows in a sector within a
particular category of mutual funds as the sector allocation that would match a passive
market replication strategy. For example, if the total dollar flow in the category equity
income mutual funds is $100 in one specific quarter and the market cap weight of the
industrial sector at that time is 20%, we calculate that the passive dollar flows to
industrial is $20 and deviations from this level constitute active allocation strategies.
Similarly to the previous empirical analysis for orderflow, we standardize the active
flows by the market capitalization of each sector.
We aggregate sector orderflow data of large orders by quarters to match the
frequency of mutual fund holding data and we compute the correlation between the
standardized active components of sector orderflow and sector mutual fund flows. We do
not expect to find a significant correlation between sector orderflows and mutual fund
flows in an analysis of all mutual funds, because there would be plenty of confounding
effects, like passive index mutual funds or mutual funds that are constrained to invest in
only one sector. In contrast, we focus our attention on the Lipper ‘core’ category without
distinction for size because we assume that the categories of mutual funds that are most

33
likely to implement sector rotation strategies are those with an investment objective that
are not constrained to a particular category of stocks.
Table 13 shows the correlation results by sector for the mutual funds with the
‘core’ investment objective, i.e. a blend of value and growth. All ten sector flows in core
mutual funds exhibit a positive correlation with sector net orderflow of large orders. In
four of the sectors, this positive correlation is statistically significant, despite the small
sample (52 observations). This result is notable, given the number of confounding
influences on quarterly mutual fund holdings. This is strong evidence that our active net
orderflow variables are measuring the rebalancing strategies of within core funds. As
benchmark, we also include the correlation of sector net orderflow with a passive
replication strategy of the S&P500 index (labeled S&P500 in Table 13). By definition,
these correlations should be unrelated to sector rotation strategies. As expected, the
average correlation is close to zero with only six of ten sectors being positive correlations
and two cases of correlations that are significantly different from zero, one positive and
one negative.
5.4

The Orderflow Mimicking Portfolio
Thus far, our results are consistent with the notion that the magnitude, direction

and timing of orderflow across sectors reflect information about the risk preferences,
expectations and overall trading strategies of market participants.
If we continue this line of reasoning within an asset pricing framework, then the
result that market-wide sector orderflow reflects the aggregate preferences and
expectations within the entire market suggest that market participants must necessarily
hold portfolios that are different than the market portfolio. Therefore, as a capstone to

34
our analysis we investigate the practical nature of information contained in the movement
of orderflow across sectors by constructing an orderflow mimicking portfolio.
Specifically, we construct and analyze a portfolio that mirrors the aggregate
equity asset allocation of the investors initiating large trades, i.e. orderflow of large-sized
orders. The intuition behind our empirical strategy is that movements of orderflow across
the various sectors represent tilts to the market portfolio which define an orderflow
mimicking portfolio. These tilts define a market-wide portfolio that is potentially
different from the traditional CAPM market portfolio which will provide an evaluation of
the economic importance of the information contained in the cross-section of sector
orderflow.
To implement such an orderflow portfolio, we start at the beginning of our sample
with an equity portfolio where the allocations across sectors are determined by market
capitalization weights. As before, we compute the weekly net active orderflow of largesized orders in different sectors as the difference between total orderflow for each sector
and the passive orderflow, that is, orderflow expected given the market capitalization
weight of each sector the previous week. Thus, active orderflow represents the proportion
of the orderflow to the aggregate stock market that deviates from the current allocation
based on current portfolio weights. We translate dollar orderflow into percentage weight
changes through a simple normal cumulative density function transformation. Like most
other asset allocation techniques, our procedure has the potential to generate extreme and
unrealistic weights. For example, an extremely positive (negative) active orderflow in
one sector may translate into a 100% increase (decrease) in the weight of that sector in
the orderflow portfolio. Since we rebalance the portfolio weekly, we impose a reality

35
constraint of 1% on the maximum weekly adjustment, so that the largest possible change
in a sector weight is 1% every week. Economically, this constraint on the sector weights
might be interpreted as a transaction costs, implementation constraint, or even a risk
management technique.
The orderflow mimicking portfolio that we constructed has properties that are not
only interesting, but also consistent with our earlier results pertaining to the information
content of sector orderflow. For example, Figure 4, Panel A, shows the cumulative return
performance of investing $1 in the orderflow portfolio compared with the market
portfolio over our sample period. Clearly the orderflow portfolio outperforms the
traditional market portfolio by approximately 40% over the sample period ($3.50 versus
$2.50). Moreover, a closer examination of the figure reveals that the orderflow portfolio
does not suffer the 1999-2000 down-turn in the market portfolio, which is consistent with
the orderflow portfolio being largely a defensive allocation strategy. Panel B of Figure 4
confirms this intuition as the orderflow portfolio loads heavily on low beta stocks over
the course of the 1999-2000 recession. Furthermore, the orderflow portfolio enjoys
superior risk and return metrics compared to the market portfolio; the orderflow portfolio
has an annual return, standard deviation and Sharpe ratio of 19.7%, 14.5% and 1.36
respectively, compared to 11.8%, 15.7% and 0.75 for the market portfolio.21 Lastly, the
sector weights are well behaved ranging from a high of 30% to a low of 0% which argues
for the feasible implementation of the orderflow mimicking portfolio.

21

We have also examined the performance of the orderflow portfolio conditional on the dispersion of flows
within sector, i.e. the tilts to the market portfolio are implemented only when flows’ dispersion is low or
high. Consistent with previous results, the Sharpe ratio of the low dispersion strategy is higher than in the
case of the high dispersion strategy.

36
We acknowledge that a number of assumptions were made to generate these
results; however, our results are robust to a wide range of parametric permutations. For
example, the orderflow portfolio results still obtain (1) relaxing the dollar to percentage
transformation, (2) utilizing a 1% to 100% weekly threshold range, and (3) irrespective of
the timeframe analyzed (starting date).
Finally, it is important to be clear on what should be inferred from these results.
Certainly the reader should not be surprised to know that a portfolio can be constructed
that dominates the S&P500, this is just another manifestation of the Roll Critique. What
is remarkable though is that the information contained in orderflow across sectors has
striking economic implications as reflected through our orderflow mimicking portfolio
dominating the market portfolio. Moreover, the information contained in the orderflow
portfolio is directly related to the macro economy, tends to be defensive in nature, and
goes beyond the information captured by sector excess returns.22
6.

Conclusion
There is mounting evidence in the literature that the trade decisions of market

participants incorporate their risk preferences, expectations and actual or perceived
information. Armed with this evidence, we investigate what orderflow movements
among equity sectors are able to tell us about the macro economy as well as the near term
performance of the equity and bond markets.

22

A potential concern might be that the results are proxying for other factors known to be priced. One
specific concern might be the momentum factor at the industry level, which reflect information contained
in sector returns. However, our results show that the orderflow portfolio is different from the momentum
portfolio that has an annual return, standard deviation and Sharpe ratio of 22.4%, 25.1% and 0.89,
respectively. Therefore, even though the momentum factor has superior returns, on a risk adjusted basis the
orderflow portfolio produces superior performance and must therefore contain different information than
merely momentum.

37
We find that sector orderflow movements predict changes in the
expansion/contraction index and the future performance of the bond markets. In
comparing the various orderflow factors which predict the economic expansion, stock
and bond markets, we find that not only does orderflow contain more and different
information compared to returns and traditional low-frequency forecasting variables, but
the nature of the information is common across the three markets and explicitly linked to
information about the macro economy as seen through its relation to the non-farm payroll
announcement. In addition, our results are stronger when orderflow is less dispersed
within sectors, lending further support to our conjecture that the sector orderflow
measures indeed reflect the empirical foot-prints of sector rotation.
Finally, we investigate the nature and economic relevance of the information
contained in sector orderflow movements within a portfolio context. The correlation
between active sector orderflow and mutual fund flows in core categories suggests our
orderflow measures are indeed capturing institutional trader flows. Moreover, when we
translate sector orderflow movements into tilts to the market portfolio in order to produce
an orderflow mimicking portfolio, the result is that the orderflow portfolio enjoys
superior risk and return properties relative to the traditional market portfolio or industry
momentum portfolios. This suggests that orderflow contain asymmetric information in
that it is primarily defensive in nature and largely related to wealth preservation.

38
References
Albuquerque, R., E. de Francisco, and L. Marques, 2008, Marketwide private information
in stocks: Forecasting currency returns, Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
Andersen, T., T. Bollerslev, F. Diebold, and C. Vega., 2007, Real-time price discovery in
stock, bond and foreign exchange markets, Journal of International Economics
73, 251-277.
Bansal, R., E. Fang and A. Yaron, 2005, Equity capital: A puzzle, working paper, Duke
University.
Beber, A., M. W. Brandt and K. A. Kavajecz, 2008, Flight-to-Quality or Flight-toLiquidity? Evidence from the Euro-area bond market, Review of Financial
Studies, forthcoming.
Bessembinder, H., 2003, Issues in assessing trade execution costs, Journal of Financial
Markets 6, 233-257.
Boyd, J. H., J. Hu, and R. Jagannathan, 2005, The stock market's reaction to
unemployment news: Why bad news is usually good for stocks, Journal of
Finance 60, 649-672.
Brandt, M. W. and K. A. Kavajecz, 2004, Price discovery in the U.S. Treasury market:
The impact of order flow and liquidity on the yield curve, Journal of Finance 59,
2623-2654.
Campbell, J., T. Ramadorai and A. Schwartz, 2008, Caught on tape: Institutional trading,
stock returns, and earnings announcements, Journal of Financial Economics,
forthcoming.
Campbell, J. and R. Shiller, 1988, The dividend–price ratio and expectations of future
dividends and discount factors, Review of Financial Studies 1, 195-228.
Chordia, T., R. Roll, and A. Subrahmanyam, 2000, Commonality in liquidity, Journal of
Financial Economics 56, 3-28.
Chordia, T., R. Roll, and A. Subrahmanyam, 2001, Market liquidity and trading activity,
Journal of Finance 56, 501-530.
Chordia, T., R. Roll, and A. Subrahmanyam, 2002, Order imbalance, liquidity and market
returns, Journal of Financial Economics 65, 111-130.
Cremers, K. and J. Mei, 2007, Turning over turnover, Review of Financial Studies 20,
1749-1782.
Easley, D., N. M. Kiefer, M. O’Hara, and J. B. Paperman, 1996, Liquidity, information,
and infrequently traded stocks, Journal of Finance 51, 1405-1436.
Evans, M., 2005, Where are we now?: Real-time estimates of the macro economy, The
International Journal of Central Banking 1, 127-175.
Evans, M. and R. Lyons, 2002, Order flow and exchange rate dynamics, Journal of
Political Economy 110, 170-180.

39
Evans, M. and R. Lyons, 2007, Exchange rate fundamentals and order flow, working
paper, Georgetown University.
Fama, E.F. and K.R. French, 1988, Dividend yields and expected stock returns, Journal
of Financial Economics 22, 3-25.
Froot, K. and M. Teo, 2008, Style investing and institutional investors, Journal of
Financial and Quantitative Analysis, forthcoming.
Glosten, L. and P. Milgrom, 1985, Bid, ask, and transaction prices in a specialist market
with heterogeneously informed traders, Journal of Financial Economics 13, 71100.
Hall, P., H. L. Horowitz, and B. Y. Jing, 1995, Blocking rules for the bootstrap with
dependent data, Biometrika 82, 561-574.
Hasbrouck, J., 1991, Measuring the information content of stock trades, Journal of
Finance 46, 179-207.
Hasbrouck, J. and D. Seppi, 2001, Common factors in prices, orderflow and liquidity,
Journal of Financial Economics 59, 383-411.
Hong, H., W. Torous and R. Valkanov, 2007, Do industries lead stock markets?, Journal
of Financial Economics 83, 367-396.
Keim, D. B. and R. Stambaugh, 1986, Predicting returns in the stock and bond markets,
Journal of Financial Economics 17, 357-390.
Kyle, A., 1985, Continuous auctions and insider trading, Econometrica 53, 1315-1335.
Lamont, O. A., 2001, Economic tracking portfolios, Journal of Econometrics 105, 161184.
Lo, A. and J. Wang, 2000, Trading volume: Definitions, data analysis, and implications
of portfolio theory, Review of Financial Studies 13, 257-300.
Lee, C. and M. Ready, 1991, Inferring trade direction from intraday data, Journal of
Finance 46, 733-746.
MSCI BARRA, 2009, Using Sector Performance Across Business Cycles, Research
Bulletin, November,
http://www.mscibarra.com/research/articles/2009/Sector_Performance_Across_Business_Cycles_Nov_2009.pdf

Politis, D. N. and J. P. Romano, 1994, The stationary bootstrap, Journal of the American
Statistical Association 89, 1303-1313.
Stambaugh, R.F., 1999, Predictive Regressions, Journal of Financial Economics 54, 375421.
Stock, J. and M. Watson, 1999, Forecasting inflation, Journal of Monetary Economics
99, 293-335.
Stock, J. and M. Watson, 2003, Forecasting output and inflation: The role of asset prices,
Journal of Economic Literature 16, 788-829.

40
Wermers, R., 2000, Mutual fund performance: An empirical decomposition into stockpicking talent, style, transactions costs, and expenses, Journal of Finance 56,
1655-1695.

41
Appendix

Sector definitions
The sectors are defined according to the Global Industry Classification Standard (GICS). The GICS was
developed by Morgan Stanley Capital International and Standard & Poor’s. The GICS structure consists of
ten sectors, defined as follows.
[10] ENE: Energy Sector – The GICS Energy Sector comprises companies whose businesses are
dominated by either of the following activities: The construction or provision of oil rigs, drilling equipment
and other energy related service and equipment, including seismic data collection. Companies engaged in
the exploration, production, marketing, refining and/or transportation of oil and gas products, coal and
other consumable fuels.
[15] MAT: Materials Sector – The GICS Materials Sector encompasses a wide range of commodityrelated manufacturing industries. Included in this sector are companies that manufacture chemicals,
construction materials, glass, paper, forest products and related packaging products, and metals, minerals
and mining companies, including producers of steel.
[20] IND: Industrials Sector – The GICS Industrials Sector includes companies whose businesses are
dominated by one of the following activities: The manufacture and distribution of capital goods, including
aerospace & defense, construct ion, engineering & building products, electrical equipment and industrial
machinery, the provision of commercial services and supplies, including printing, employment,
environmental and office services and the provision of transportation services, including airlines, couriers,
marine, road & rail and transportation infrastructure.
[25] CD: Consumer Discretionary Sector – The GICS Consumer Discretionary Sector encompasses
those industries that tend to be the most sensitive to economic cycles. Its manufacturing segment includes
automotive, household durable goods, textiles & apparel and leisure equipment. The services segment
includes hotels, restaurants and other leisure facilities, media production and services, and consumer ret
ailing and services.
[30] CS: Consumer Staples Sector – The GICS Consumer Staples Sector comprises companies whose
businesses are less sensitive to economic cycles. It includes manufacturers and distributors of food,
beverages and tobacco and producers of non-durable household goods and personal products. It also
includes food & drug retailing companies as well as hypermarkets and consumer super centers.
[35] HC: Health Care Sector – The GICS Health Care Sector encompasses two main industry groups. The
first includes companies who manufacture health care equipment and supplies or provide health care
related services, including distributors of health care products, providers of basic health-care services, and
owners and operators of health care facilities and organizations. The second regroups companies primarily
involved in the research, development, production and marketing of pharmaceuticals and biotechnology
products.
[40] FIN: Financial Sector – The GICS Financial Sector contains companies involved in activities such
as banking, mortgage finance, consumer finance, specialized finance, investment banking and brokerage,
asset management and custody, corporate lending, insurance, and financial investment, and real estate,
including REITs.
[45] IT: Information Technology Sector – The GICS Information Technology Sector covers the
following general areas: firstly, Technology Software & Services, including companies that primarily
develop software in various fields such as the Internet, applications, systems, databases management and/or
home entertainment, and companies that provide information technology consulting and services, as well as
data processing and outsourced services; secondly Technology Hardware & Equipment, including
manufacturers and distributors of communications equipment, computers & peripherals, electronic
equipment and related instruments; and thirdly, Semiconductors & Semiconductor Equipment
Manufacturers.

42
[50] TEL: Telecommunications Services Sector – The GICS Telecommunications Services Sector
contains companies that provide communications services primarily through a fixed-line, cellular, wireless,
high bandwidth and/or fiber optic cable network.
[55] UTI: Utilities Sector – The GICS Utilities Sector encompasses those companies considered electric,
gas or water utilities, or companies that operate as independent producers and/or distributors of power.

Figure 1
Chicago Fed National Activity Index (CFNAI) and Sector Orderflow
We plot 3-month moving averages of the CFNAI index (bold line), active net orderflow of large orders
(continuous line) and active net orderflow of all orders (dashed line) for each sector. The CFNAI index is
constructed to be a single summary measure (with mean zero and standard deviation of one) of the activity
in four broad categories of the economy: production and income; employment, personal consumption
which includes housing; and sales, orders, and inventories. For more detailed information concerning the
CFNAI index see http://www.chicagofed.org/economic_research_and_data/cfnai.cfm . The active
orderflow series are constructed as the difference between sector total net orderflow and sector passive net
orderflow (stock market orderflow that would be allocated to the sector based on its market share) scaled
by the sector market capitalization and standardized to have mean equal to zero and standard deviation
equal to one.

10 - ENERGY

15 - MATERIALS

2

2

1

1

0

0

-1

-1

-2

-2

-3

-3

Ja
n9
Ju 3
l-9
Ja 3
n9
Ju 4
l-9
Ja 4
n9
Ju 5
l-9
Ja 5
n9
Ju 6
l-9
Ja 6
n9
Ju 7
l-9
Ja 7
n98
Ju
l-9
Ja 8
n9
Ju 9
l-9
Ja 9
n0
Ju 0
l-0
Ja 0
n0
Ju 1
l-0
Ja 1
n0
Ju 2
l-0
Ja 2
n0
Ju 3
l-0
Ja 3
n0
Ju 4
l-0
Ja 4
n0
Ju 5
l-0
5

3

Ja
n9
Ju 3
l-9
Ja 3
n9
Ju 4
l-9
Ja 4
n95
Ju
l-9
Ja 5
n9
Ju 6
l-9
Ja 6
n9
Ju 7
l-9
Ja 7
n9
Ju 8
l-9
Ja 8
n9
Ju 9
l-9
Ja 9
n0
Ju 0
l-0
Ja 0
n0
Ju 1
l-0
Ja 1
n0
Ju 2
l-0
Ja 2
n0
Ju 3
l-0
Ja 3
n04
Ju
l-0
Ja 4
n0
Ju 5
l-0
5

3

20 - INDUSTRIALS

25 - CONSUMER DISCRETIONARY

2

2

1

1

0

0

-1

-1

-2

-2

-3

-3

Ja
n9
Ju 3
l-9
Ja 3
n9
Ju 4
l-9
Ja 4
n9
Ju 5
l-9
Ja 5
n9
Ju 6
l-9
Ja 6
n9
Ju 7
l-9
Ja 7
n98
Ju
l-9
Ja 8
n9
Ju 9
l-9
Ja 9
n0
Ju 0
l-0
Ja 0
n0
Ju 1
l-0
Ja 1
n0
Ju 2
l-0
Ja 2
n0
Ju 3
l-0
Ja 3
n0
Ju 4
l-0
Ja 4
n0
Ju 5
l-0
5

3

Ja
n9
Ju 3
l-9
Ja 3
n9
Ju 4
l-9
Ja 4
n95
Ju
l-9
Ja 5
n9
Ju 6
l-9
Ja 6
n9
Ju 7
l-9
Ja 7
n9
Ju 8
l-9
Ja 8
n9
Ju 9
l-9
Ja 9
n0
Ju 0
l-0
Ja 0
n0
Ju 1
l-0
Ja 1
n0
Ju 2
l-0
Ja 2
n0
Ju 3
l-0
Ja 3
n04
Ju
l-0
Ja 4
n0
Ju 5
l-0
5

3

Ja
n9
Ju 3
l-9
Ja 3
n9
Ju 4
l-9
Ja 4
n9
Ju 5
l-9
Ja 5
n9
Ju 6
l-9
Ja 6
n9
Ju 7
l-9
Ja 7
n98
Ju
l-9
Ja 8
n9
Ju 9
l-9
Ja 9
n0
Ju 0
l-0
Ja 0
n0
Ju 1
l-0
Ja 1
n0
Ju 2
l-0
Ja 2
n0
Ju 3
l-0
Ja 3
n0
Ju 4
l-0
Ja 4
n0
Ju 5
l-0
5

Ja
n9
Ju 3
l-9
Ja 3
n9
Ju 4
l-9
Ja 4
n95
Ju
l-9
Ja 5
n9
Ju 6
l-9
Ja 6
n9
Ju 7
l-9
Ja 7
n9
Ju 8
l-9
Ja 8
n9
Ju 9
l-9
Ja 9
n0
Ju 0
l-0
Ja 0
n0
Ju 1
l-0
Ja 1
n0
Ju 2
l-0
Ja 2
n0
Ju 3
l-0
Ja 3
n04
Ju
l-0
Ja 4
n0
Ju 5
l-0
5

Ja
n9
Ju 3
l-9
Ja 3
n9
Ju 4
l-9
Ja 4
n9
Ju 5
l-9
Ja 5
n9
Ju 6
l-9
Ja 6
n9
Ju 7
l-9
Ja 7
n98
Ju
l-9
Ja 8
n9
Ju 9
l-9
Ja 9
n0
Ju 0
l-0
Ja 0
n0
Ju 1
l-0
Ja 1
n0
Ju 2
l-0
Ja 2
n0
Ju 3
l-0
Ja 3
n0
Ju 4
l-0
Ja 4
n0
Ju 5
l-0
5

Ja
n9
Ju 3
l-9
Ja 3
n9
Ju 4
l-9
Ja 4
n95
Ju
l-9
Ja 5
n9
Ju 6
l-9
Ja 6
n9
Ju 7
l-9
Ja 7
n9
Ju 8
l-9
Ja 8
n9
Ju 9
l-9
Ja 9
n0
Ju 0
l-0
Ja 0
n0
Ju 1
l-0
Ja 1
n0
Ju 2
l-0
Ja 2
n0
Ju 3
l-0
Ja 3
n04
Ju
l-0
Ja 4
n0
Ju 5
l-0
5

Ja
n9
Ju 3
l-9
Ja 3
n9
Ju 4
l-9
Ja 4
n9
Ju 5
l-9
Ja 5
n9
Ju 6
l-9
Ja 6
n9
Ju 7
l-9
Ja 7
n98
Ju
l-9
Ja 8
n9
Ju 9
l-9
Ja 9
n0
Ju 0
l-0
Ja 0
n0
Ju 1
l-0
Ja 1
n0
Ju 2
l-0
Ja 2
n0
Ju 3
l-0
Ja 3
n0
Ju 4
l-0
Ja 4
n0
Ju 5
l-0
5

Ja
n9
Ju 3
l-9
Ja 3
n9
Ju 4
l-9
Ja 4
n95
Ju
l-9
Ja 5
n9
Ju 6
l-9
Ja 6
n9
Ju 7
l-9
Ja 7
n9
Ju 8
l-9
Ja 8
n9
Ju 9
l-9
Ja 9
n0
Ju 0
l-0
Ja 0
n0
Ju 1
l-0
Ja 1
n0
Ju 2
l-0
Ja 2
n0
Ju 3
l-0
Ja 3
n04
Ju
l-0
Ja 4
n0
Ju 5
l-0
5

Figure 1 (continued)

3

30 - CONSUMER STAPLES
3

35 - HEALTH CARE

2
2

1
1

0
0

-1
-1

-2
-2

-3
-3

3

40 - FINANCIALS
3

45 - INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY

2
2

1
1

0
0

-1
-1

-2
-2

-3
-3

3

50 - TELECOM
3

55 - UTILITIES

2
2

1
1

0
0

-1
-1

-2
-2

-3
-3

Figure 2
Sector Coefficients from the Restricted Regressions
This figure shows the coefficients on the orderflow of the four most significant sectors, materials,
consumer discretionary, financials, telecommunications, predicting the expansion indicator
(CFNAI), the stock market, and 1-year bond returns multiplied by -1, for the one and three month
horizons.
1-MONTH

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1
CFNAI

0

SP500
- BOND 1Y

-0.1

-0.2

-0.3

-0.4
MAT

CD

FIN

TEL

Figure 3

Cumulative Active Orderflow after Non-Farm Payroll Surprises
Panels A and B of this figure show the cumulative active orderflow following the release of the
Non-Farm payroll data for positive and negative surprises respectively. Triangles denote procyclical sectors, squares denote counter-cyclical sectors, the remainder are non-significant
sectors, as defined by regressing the expansion indicator on sector orderflow (see Table 3, Panel
A, for details).

Cumulative Active Order Flow

Panel A: Positive NFP Surprise

3

2

1

0

-1

-2

-3
0

5

10

15

20

25

20

25

30

Days from NFP release

Cumulative Active Order Flow

Panel B: Negative NFP Surprise

3

2

1

0

-1

-2

-3
0

5
Energy
Health Care

10
Materials
Financials

15
Industrials
days from
NFP release
Inform Tech

Consumer Discr.
Telecom

30
Consumer Stap
Utilities

Figure 4
Characteristics of the orderflow portfolio
Panel A of this figure shows the cumulative return performance of investing $1 in the orderflow
portfolio compared with the market portfolio during our sample period. Panel B displays the
rolling betas of the orderflow portfolio. Panel C graphs the sector weights of the orderflow
portfolio.

Panel A

$3.50

Sector Mimicking
Market

$3.00

$2.50

$2.00

$1.50

Jan-03

Jan-04

Jan-05

Jan-03

Jan-04

Jan-05

Jan-02

Jan-01

Jan-00

Jan-99

Jan-98

Jan-97

Jan-96

Jan-95

Jan-94

Jan-93

$1.00

Panel B
1.2
1.1
1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5

Jan-02

Jan-01

Jan-00

Jan-99

Jan-98

Jan-97

Jan-96

Jan-95

Jan-94

Jan-93

0.4

Table 1
Aggregate Orderflow Summary Statistics
This table displays aggregate net orderflow figures by sector and year expressed as a percentage of the total dollar net orderflow expressed in
millions of dollars. Sectors are ordered down the column from pro-cyclical to neutral to counter-cyclical.
Panel A: All Orders
Sector
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
Information Tech
Industrials
Materials
Consumer Discr.
Financials
Energy
Telecom
Utilities
Consumer Staples
Health Care

%
$
Sector
Information Tech
Industrials
Materials
Consumer Discr.
Financials
Energy
Telecom
Utilities
Consumer Staples
Health Care

%
$

11%
15%
9%
20%
11%
12%
5%
9%
4%
3%
100%
1,031

23%
9%
12%
11%
4%
7%
4%
3%
11%
14%
100%
1,076

19%
11%
6%
11%
13%
6%
4%
6%
11%
13%
100%
2,009

17%
10%
7%
13%
12%
10%
3%
5%
12%
11%
100%
2,662

20%
9%
5%
11%
15%
9%
5%
4%
10%
11%
100%
3,619

1993

1994

1995

1996

17%
10%
6%
9%
12%
7%
5%
8%
13%
14%
100%
1,317

18%
9%
7%
11%
10%
11%
4%
7%
13%
10%
100%
1,957

8%
16%
8%
22%
10%
15%
5%
13%
3%
0%
100%
622

20%
8%
12%
8%
3%
8%
5%
5%
14%
16%
100%
829

24%
9%
4%
13%
13%
7%
4%
4%
9%
13%
100%
5,398

21%
10%
3%
16%
16%
9%
5%
3%
6%
12%
100%
12,255

18%
9%
4%
18%
18%
7%
3%
4%
6%
13%
100%
12,301

17%
9%
5%
19%
18%
7%
3%
4%
6%
13%
100%
12,282

14%
10%
6%
19%
17%
9%
3%
4%
6%
13%
100%
14,047

12%
9%
6%
18%
18%
14%
4%
3%
6%
11%
100%
13,583

Panel B: Large Orders
1997
1998
1999
2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

20%
8%
5%
10%
15%
9%
5%
6%
11%
11%
100%
2,436

20%
10%
2%
15%
16%
9%
6%
3%
6%
13%
100%
7,648

19%
9%
3%
16%
18%
6%
4%
3%
7%
15%
100%
6,803

17%
10%
4%
19%
18%
6%
3%
4%
6%
14%
100%
5,963

14%
10%
4%
18%
17%
8%
4%
4%
6%
14%
100%
6,444

10%
8%
4%
18%
19%
12%
6%
3%
6%
13%
100%
5,157

23%
9%
3%
12%
13%
7%
5%
5%
10%
13%
100%
3,765

27%
8%
6%
15%
14%
9%
6%
3%
5%
7%
100%
6,622

24%
8%
7%
16%
14%
10%
6%
4%
5%
7%
100%
4,491

20%
7%
3%
12%
16%
10%
7%
4%
7%
15%
100%
10,261

15%
7%
2%
12%
17%
10%
9%
4%
7%
16%
100%
7,027

Table 2
Unconditional Relation between Active Net Order Flow and Lagged Excess Returns
This table contains the results of the following unconditional regression:

Net Orderflow j ,t − Passive Net Orderflow j ,t
Capsectorj,t

= α + β (Ret j ,t −1 − Ret mkt ,t −1 ) + ε j ,t

Net Orderflowj,t, Passive Net Orderflowj,t , Retj,t represent the actual net orderflow, the passive net
orderflow, and the value-weighted return within sector j over week/month t. Retmkt,t represents
the value-weighted return on the stock market index. We compute the passive net orderflow for
sector j as the total net orderflow to the stock market multiplied by the weight of sector j in the
market. Panel A shows the results for orderflow and returns cumulated over a week, while Panel
B shows the results for orderflow and returns cumulated over a month. T-statistics in parenthesis
are calculated using White heteroschedastic consistent standard errors..
Panel A: Weekly
Order Size
Small
Medium
Large
All Orders

α
-1.1408
(-0.0762)
-9.3829
(-0.1787)
-32.2700
(-0.3836)
-42.7918
(-0.3134)

β
749.906
(1.5594)
6168.042
(3.0328)
21213.430
(4.7967)
28130.200
(4.5692)

R2
0.0002

Obs.
6760

0.0011

6760

0.0050

6760

0.0033

6760

R2
0.0001

Obs.
1550

0.0002

1550

0.0001

1550

0.0001

1550

Panel B: Monthly
Order Size
Small
Medium
Large
All Orders

α
-4.6312
(-0.0057)
-31.5317
(-0.0082)
12.5099
(0.0025)
-23.6266
(0.0025)

β
730.6475
(0.4728)
4974.594
(2.1643)
-1973.620
(-0.1285)
3727.440
(0.2199)

Table 3
Relation between Expansions and past Active Net Orderflow
This table contains the results of the following unconditional regression:

CFNAI t = α + β

( Net Orderflow

j ,t −1

− Passive Net Orderflow j ,t −1 )

Capsector j ,t −1

+ ϕ CFNAI t −1 + ε j ,t

where Net Orderflowj,t, Passive Net Orderflowj,t , Capsectorj,t represent the actual net orderflow,
the passive net orderflow, the capitalization of sector j over month t. We compute the passive net
orderflow for sector j as the total net orderflow to the stock market multiplied by the weight of
sector j in the market portfolio. T-statistics are calculated using White heteroschedastic
consistent standard errors. Sectors are grouped by cyclicality as per the MSCI ranking in three
broad groups, pro-cyclical, neutral and counter-cyclical respectively.

Sector
Inform. Tech
Industrials
Materials
Consumer Discr.
Financials
Energy
Telecom
Utilities
Consumer Stap.
Health Care
Lagged CFNAI

Sector
Inform. Tech
Industrials
Materials
Consumer Discr.
Financials
Energy
Telecom
Utilities
Consumer Stap.
Health Care
Lagged CFNAI

β
0.0646
-0.0593
0.0042
0.0141
-0.0277
-0.0197
0.0461
-0.2032
-0.0345
0.0166

β
0.0664
-0.0908
0.0459
0.0574
-0.0281
-0.0021
0.0663
-0.1491
-0.0743
-0.0158

Small
T-stats
1.1247
-1.5358
0.0823
0.3241
-0.6915
-0.3754
1.1100
-4.2848
-0.8267
0.3583

Small
T-stats
1.3308
-1.7857
0.9055
1.2011
-0.6384
-0.0393
1.4682
-3.1334
-1.4955
-0.3604

Panel A: One-Month Lead
Medium
2
R
T-stats
β
0.1927
0.1911
0.1821
0.1825
0.1840
0.1830
0.1876
0.2796
0.1851
0.1827
0.1820

-0.0065
0.0688
0.0203
-0.0691
-0.0988
-0.0014
-0.1250
-0.2080
0.0503
0.0800

-0.1450
1.5199
0.4458
-1.4798
-2.2222
-0.0273
-2.4950
-4.9156
1.0792
1.4162

Panel B: Three-Month Lead
Medium
R2
T-stats
β
0.2622
0.2697
0.2558
0.2587
0.2529
0.2511
0.2625
0.3028
0.2635
0.2517
0.2511

-0.0387
0.0811
0.0324
-0.0181
-0.0356
0.0095
-0.1071
-0.2057
0.0246
0.0552

-0.9881
1.7976
0.7157
-0.3880
-0.7363
0.1924
-2.1602
-4.9160
0.4110
1.0268

2

R

0.1821
0.1937
0.1831
0.1938
0.2060
0.1820
0.2181
0.2894
0.1882
0.1963
0.1820

R2
0.2549
0.2668
0.2536
0.2519
0.2539
0.2513
0.2778
0.3495
0.2521
0.2577
0.2511

β
0.0498
0.0385
0.1423
-0.0971
-0.1599
0.0012
-0.1675
-0.0256
0.0878
-0.0033

β
0.0236
0.0670
0.1741
-0.0837
-0.1117
-0.0517
-0.2112
-0.0391
0.0909
-0.0021

Large
T-stats
1.1136
0.9007
2.2909
-2.0532
-3.9209
0.0265
-3.4458
-0.5760
1.7793
-0.0682

Large
T-stats
0.5326
1.8251
4.1176
-1.8146
-2.5986
-1.3129
-4.7493
-0.8518
1.9063
-0.0510

R2
0.1885
0.1859
0.2317
0.2042
0.2439
0.1820
0.2427
0.1837
0.2002
0.1821
0.1820

R2
0.2525
0.2629
0.3261
0.2675
0.2811
0.2581
0.3484
0.2549
0.2706
0.2511
0.2511

Table 4
Relation between Expansions and past Active Net Orderflow
This table contains pairwise correlations between the best linear combination of active orderflow
that predicts the economy (CFNAI) and each specific sector’s active orderflow:

( Net Orderflow

j ,t −1

− Passive Net Orderflow j ,t −1 )

Capsector j ,t −1
where Net Orderflowj,t, Passive Net Orderflowj,t , Capsectorj,t represent the actual net orderflow,
the passive net orderflow, the capitalization of sector j over month t. We compute the passive net
orderflow for sector j as the total net orderflow to the stock market multiplied by the weight of
sector j in the market portfolio. *, **, *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level,
respectively. At the bottom of each panel, we also report the R2 of the multivariate regression of
the expansion indicator on the active orderflow in all ten sectors that we use to obtain the best
linear combination. Sectors are grouped by cyclicality as per the MSCI ranking in three broad
groups, pro-cyclical, neutral and counter-cyclical respectively.

Sector
Inform. Tech
Industrials
Materials
Consumer Discr.
Financials
Energy
Telecom
Utilities
Consumer Stap.
Health Care

R2

Sector
Inform. Tech
Industrials
Materials
Consumer Discr.
Financials
Energy
Telecom
Utilities
Consumer Stap.
Health Care

R2

Panel A: One-Month Lead
Small
Medium
Correlations
0.2524 ***
-0.2385 ***
0.0042
0.0351
-0.1013
-0.0638
0.1762 **
-0.8188 ***
-0.128
0.0867
0.3354

-0.0617
0.3101 ***
0.0617
-0.3198 ***
-0.4105 ***
0.0215
-0.5173 ***
-0.7569 ***
0.2541 ***
0.3786 ***
0.3720

Panel B: Three-Month Lead
Small
Medium
Correlations
0.2682 ***
-0.4256 ***
0.2305 ***
0.2807 ***
-0.0494
0.0380
0.3148 ***
-0.6879 ***
-0.3541 ***
-0.095
0.3707

-0.1882 **
0.2970 ***
0.1454 **
-0.1111
-0.1246 *
0.0863
-0.4473 ***
-0.7697 ***
0.1005
0.2476 ***
0.4289

Large
0.2197 ***
0.1786 **
0.6146 ***
-0.4624 ***
-0.6781 ***
-0.0059
-0.6997 ***
-0.0275
0.4311
0.0985
0.3304

Large
0.0974
0.2417 ***
0.6232 ***
-0.3583 ***
-0.4274 ***
-0.1777 **
-0.7255 ***
-0.0584
0.3833 ***
0.1066
0.4666

Table 5
Relation between Stock Market and past Active Net Orderflow
This table contains the results of the following unconditional regression:

SP500 t = α + β

( Net Orderflow

j ,t −1

− Passive Net Orderflow j ,t −1 )

capsector j ,t −1

+ ϕ SP500t −1 + ε j ,t

where Net Orderflowj,t, Passive Net Orderflowj,t , Capsectorj,t represent the actual net orderflow,
the passive net orderflow, the capitalization of sector j over month t. We compute the passive net
orderflow for sector j as the total net orderflow to the stock market multiplied by the weight of
sector j in the market. T-statistics are calculated using White heteroschedastic consistent
standard errors. Sectors are grouped by cyclicality as per the MSCI ranking in three broad
groups, pro-cyclical, neutral and counter-cyclical respectively.

Sector
Inform. Tech
Industrials
Materials
Consumer Discr.
Financials
Energy
Telecom
Utilities
Consumer Stap.
Health Care
Lagged SP500

Sector
Inform. Tech
Industrials
Materials
Consumer Discr.
Financials
Energy
Telecom
Utilities
Consumer Stap.
Health Care
Lagged SP500

β
0.0040
0.0003
-0.0035
-0.0014
-0.0012
-0.0002
-0.0025
-0.0070
0.0015
0.0022

β
0.0045
-0.0001
-0.0015
-0.0020
-0.0050
0.0020
-0.0009
-0.0054
0.0021
0.0004

Small
T-stats
1.7011
0.1098
-1.4185
-0.5168
-0.3986
-0.1052
-0.9325
-1.9101
0.5953
0.7962

Small
T-stats
1.8921
-0.0175
-0.5567
-0.7643
-1.4934
0.8063
-0.3126
-1.4662
0.7387
0.1491

Panel A: One-Month Lead
Medium
R2
T-stats
β
0.0090
-0.0019 -0.5644
0.0005
0.0048 1.6526
0.0071
-0.0043 -1.4475
0.0017
-0.0037 -1.0781
0.0013
-0.0020 -0.6093
0.0005
-0.0010 -0.2898
0.0042
-0.0075 -2.0155
0.0274
-0.0039 -1.1756
0.0018
0.0048 1.4463
0.0033
0.0067 1.8686
0.0005

R
0.0024
0.0143
0.0107
0.0085
0.0028
0.0010
0.0327
0.0080
0.0137
0.0266
0.0005

β
0.0037
0.0032
0.0016
-0.0060
-0.0042
-0.0024
-0.0097
0.0051
0.0047
0.0013

Panel B: Three-Month Lead
Medium
R2
T-stats
β
0.0159
-0.0033 -1.0524
0.0050
0.0036 1.1828
0.0062
-0.0024 -0.7781
0.0072
-0.0036 -1.1870
0.0181
-0.0031 -0.9516
0.0070
-0.0014 -0.4109
0.0055
-0.0049 -1.3619
0.0203
0.0022 0.6038
0.0071
0.0056 1.6100
0.0051
0.0056 1.6539
0.0050

R2
0.0108
0.0123
0.0081
0.0123
0.0100
0.0061
0.0190
0.0072
0.0228
0.0229
0.0050

β
0.0007
0.0048
-0.0010
-0.0063
-0.0038
-0.0009
-0.0061
0.0026
0.0063
0.0037

2

Large
T-stats
1.2528
1.1078
0.4200
-1.6626
-1.3889
-0.7133
-2.7412
1.5191
1.3520
0.4139

Large
T-stats
0.2240
1.3937
-0.3263
-1.8845
-1.1888
-0.2525
-1.5447
0.6435
1.7041
1.1876

R2
0.0082
0.0063
0.0019
0.0210
0.0109
0.0038
0.0547
0.0156
0.0131
0.0014
0.0005

R2
0.0053
0.0188
0.0056
0.0277
0.0135
0.0055
0.0263
0.0089
0.0282
0.0128
0.0050

Table 6
Relation between Bond returns and past Active Net Orderflow
This table contains the results of the following unconditional regression:

1yBondRet t = α + β

( Net Orderflow

j ,t −1

− Passive Net Orderflow j ,t −1 )

capsector j ,t −1

+ ϕ BondRet t −1 + ε j ,t

where Net Orderflowj,t, Passive Net Orderflowj,t , Capsectorj,t represent the actual net orderflow,
the passive net orderflow, the capitalization of sector j over month t. We compute the passive net
orderflow for sector j as the total net orderflow to the stock market multiplied by the weight of
sector j in the market portfolio. T-statistics are calculated using White heteroschedastic
consistent standard errors. Sectors are grouped by cyclicality as per the MSCI ranking in three
broad groups, pro-cyclical, neutral and counter-cyclical respectively.

Sector
Inform. Tech
Industrials
Materials
Consumer Discr.
Financials
Energy
Telecom
Utilities
Consumer Stap.
Health Care
Lagged BondRet

Sector
Inform. Tech
Industrials
Materials
Consumer Discr.
Financials
Energy
Telecom
Utilities
Consumer Stap.
Health Care
Lagged BondRet

β
-0.0001
0.0004
-0.0003
-0.0002
0.0001
-0.0001
-0.0005
0.0004
0.0003
0.0001

β
0.0001
0.0004
-0.0003
-0.0003
-0.0002
-0.0001
-0.0004
0.0003
0.0004
0.0002

Small
T-stats
-0.3451
2.1830
-1.6734
-1.2885
0.1717
-0.5052
-2.8804
1.8333
1.8381
0.7986

Small
T-stats
0.0019
2.1005
-2.1676
-2.0157
-1.3154
-0.8528
-2.2341
1.5359
2.3708
1.3968

Panel A: One-Month Lead
Medium
2
R
T-stats
β
0.0828
-0.0001 -0.0308
0.1067
0.0001 0.1181
0.0925
-0.0004 -2.3860
0.0885
-0.0001 -0.2959
0.0823
0.0005 2.5622
0.0834
-0.0002 -1.1487
0.1189
0.0001 0.7865
0.1042
0.0007 3.6760
0.0970
0.0001 0.6670
0.0842
0.0001 0.0350
0.0821
Panel B: Three-Month Lead
Medium
2
R
T-stats
β
0.0321
0.0001 0.1593
0.0546
-0.0001 -0.3248
0.0490
-0.0004 -2.4886
0.0471
-0.0001 -0.4597
0.0402
0.0003 1.4831
0.0344
-0.0001 -0.5152
0.0568
0.0001 0.6948
0.0433
0.0008 4.0032
0.0544
0.0001 0.7571
0.0395
-0.0001 -0.2693
0.0321

2

R
0.0821
0.0822
0.1073
0.0825
0.1266
0.0890
0.0855
0.1497
0.0844
0.0821
0.0821

2

R
0.0323
0.0327
0.0608
0.0331
0.0475
0.0337
0.0354
0.1248
0.0350
0.0328
0.0321

β
-0.0002
0.0001
-0.0005
-0.0001
0.0005
-0.0001
0.0003
0.0003
0.0001
0.0001

β
-0.0002
-0.0001
-0.0008
0.0001
0.0006
0.0003
0.0004
0.0002
0.0001
-0.0001

Large
T-stats
-0.8172
0.3301
-2.5736
-0.1026
2.1213
-0.1161
1.6272
1.5880
0.1463
-0.4790

Large
T-stats
-0.7581
-0.6320
-4.2266
0.2012
2.5323
1.6374
1.4338
0.8089
0.0555
-0.1612

R2
0.0866
0.0827
0.1250
0.0822
0.1165
0.0822
0.0988
0.0942
0.0822
0.0835
0.0821

R2
0.0367
0.0342
0.1277
0.0324
0.0860
0.0482
0.0542
0.0386
0.0321
0.0324
0.0321

Table 7
Relation between orderflow information within the economy and markets
This table shows the explanatory power of regressing future values of the CFNAI expansion
indicator, the stock market return, and the bond market return on the current value of the
dependent variable and a forecasting factor. The forecasting factor is a linear combination of
either active sector orderflows or excess sector returns. The loadings in the linear combination are
the ones with the maximal correlation with each of the dependent variables in turn.
We report only the adjusted-R2. *, **, *** denote a significant coefficient on the factor at the
10%, 5%, and 1% level, with White heteroschedastic consistent standard errors.
Panel A: Dependent Variable CFNAI

Regressor
Current CFNAI
Active orderflow

Excess returns

Loadings with
maximal
correlation on
CFNAI
SP500
1-y Bond
CFNAI
SP500
1-y Bond

1-mo ahead
Adj-R2
0.18 ***
0.32 ***
0.22 ***
0.26 ***
0.29 ***
0.18
0.26 ***

3-mo ahead
Adj-R2
0.25 ***
0.46 ***
0.27 ***
0.39 ***
0.31 ***
0.25
0.29 ***

Panel B: Dependent Variable S&P500

Regressor
Current CFNAI
Active orderflow

Excess returns

Loadings with
maximal
correlation on
CFNAI
SP500
1-y Bond
CFNAI
SP500
1-y Bond

1-mo ahead
Adj-R2
0.00
0.02 **
0.07 ***
0.00
-0.01
0.05 ***
-0.01

3-mo ahead
Adj-R2
0.01
0.00
0.03 **
-0.01
0.00
0.08 ***
-0.01

Panel C: Dependent Variable 1-y bond returns

Regressor
Current CFNAI
Active orderflow

Excess returns

Loadings with
maximal
correlation on
CFNAI
SP500
1-y Bond
CFNAI
SP500
1-y Bond

1-mo ahead
Adj-R2
0.08 ***
0.13 ***
0.08
0.18 ***
0.13 ***
0.07
0.15 ***

3-mo ahead
Adj-R2
0.03 ***
0.14 ***
0.02
0.19 ***
0.05 **
0.02
0.06 ***

Table 8
Relation between Expansions and past excess sector returns
This table contains the results of the following bivariate unconditional regression:

CFNAI t = α + β (Ret j ,t − Ret mkt ,t ) + φCFNAI t −1 + ε j ,t
where Retj,t represent the value-weighted return of sector j over month t, Retmkt,t represents the
value-weighted return on the stock market index, and CFNAI is the expansion indicator.
We report the R2 of the regressions together with R2ofl, which is the R2 of the large orderflow
regressions reported in Table 3. The excess return regressor is standardized.
*, **, *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level with White heteroschedastic
consistent standard errors. Sectors are grouped by cyclicality as per the MSCI ranking in three
broad groups, pro-cyclical, neutral and counter-cyclical respectively.

One-month lead
Sector
Inform. Tech

β

R2

Three-month lead
R2ofl

β

R2

R2ofl

0.0747

0.1966 0.1885

0.0383

0.2549 0.2525

Industrials

-0.0520

0.1891 0.1859

-0.0236

0.2525 0.2629

Materials

-0.0468

0.1877 0.2317

-0.0055

0.2512 0.3261

Consumer Discr.

-0.0857 **

0.2012 0.2042

-0.0841 **

0.2697 0.2675

Financials

-0.0822 *

0.1997 0.2439

-0.0923 **

0.2733 0.2811

Energy

-0.0586

0.1910 0.1820

-0.0217

0.2523 0.2581

Telecom

0.0359

0.1854 0.2427

0.0232

0.2525 0.3484

Utilities

-0.1618 ***

0.2507 0.1837

-0.0998 **

0.2773 0.2549

Consumer Stap.

-0.1191 ***

0.2192 0.2002

-0.1004 **

0.2776 0.2706

Health Care

-0.1317 ***

0.2273 0.1821

-0.0849 **

0.2699 0.2511

Average

0.2047 0.2045

0.2631 0.2773

Table 9
Relation between Business Cycle, Stock Market Returns, Bond Market Returns
and past Active Net Orderflow and returns
This table contains the results of the following unconditional regression:

Yt+2 = α +

( Net Orderflow

10

∑β
j =1

j

j ,t −1

− Passive Net Orderflow j ,t −1 )

capsector j ,t −1

10

+ ∑ δ j (Ret j ,t −1 − Ret mkt ,t −1 ) + ϕYt −1 + ε j ,t
j =1

where Yt is either the CFNAI indicator, the S&P500 return, or the 1-year bond return, Net
Orderflowj,t, Passive Net Orderflowj,t , Capsectorj,t , Retj,t represent the actual net orderflow, the
passive net orderflow, the capitalization, the value-weighted return, of sector j over month t.
Retmkt,t represents the value-weighted return on the stock market index. We compute the passive
net orderflow for sector j as the total net orderflow to the stock market multiplied by the weight of
sector j in the market.

Regressors
Only Yt-1
Small Active NOF
Medium Active NOF
Large Active NOF
Excess Returns
Large Active NOF +
excess returns

CFNAI
0.2461
0.3216
0.3844
0.4250
0.2708
0.4396

Adjusted-R2
(3-months ahead)
S&P500 Return
-0.0016
0.0121
-0.0058
-0.0319
0.0178
-0.0006

1-Year Bond Return
0.0258
0.0334
0.1178
0.1433
0.0159
0.1341

Table 10
Relation between Business Cycle, Stock Market Returns, Bond Market Returns, past Large
Active Net Orderflow, past excess returns and other predictors
This table contains the adjusted R2 of estimating the following six specifications in turn:

(1) Yt+2 = α1 + ϕ11Yt −1 + ε t +2,1
( 2 ) Yt+2 = α 2 + ϕ12Yt −1 + ϕ 22 DIVt −1 + ϕ 32 DEFt −1 + ϕ 42TERM t −1 + ε t +2,2
( 3)

10

Yt+2 = α 3 + ϕ13Yt −1 + ϕ 23 DIVt −1 + ϕ 33 DEFt −1 + ϕ 43TERM t −1 + ∑ δ j (Ret j ,t −1 − Ret mkt ,t −1 ) + ε t + 2,RET
j =1

(4)

10

Yt+2 = α 4 + ϕ14Yt −1 + ϕ 24 DIVt −1 + ϕ 34 DEFt −1 + ϕ 44TERM t −1 + ∑ β j

( Net Orderflow

10

( Net Orderflow

10

j =1

− Passive Net Orderflow j ,t −1 )

capsector j ,t −1

j =1

( 6 ) ε t +2,NOF = α 6 + ∑ δ j

j ,t −1

− Passive Net Orderflow j ,t −1 )

capsector j ,t −1

j =1

( 5) ε t +2,RET = α5 + ∑ β j

j ,t −1

+ ε t + 2,5

(Ret j ,t −1 − Ret mkt ,t −1 ) + ε t + 2,6

where Yt is either the CFNAI indicator, the S&P500 return, or the 1-year bond return, DIVt; DEFt,
TERMt represent the dividend yield, the default spread (difference between corporate BAA and
AAA yields) and term spread (difference between Treasury 10-year and 3-months), respectively.
Net Orderflowj,t, Passive Net Orderflowj,t , Capsectorj,t , Retj,t represent the actual large net
orderflow, the passive large net orderflow, the capitalization, the value-weighted return, of sector
j over month t. Retmkt,t represents the value-weighted return on the stock market index. We
compute the passive net orderflow for sector j as the total net orderflow to the stock market
multiplied by the weight of sector j in the market.

Equation

CFNAI
No. signif.
Adj-R2
Regressors
(3-mo ahead)

S&P 500 Return
No. signif.
Adj-R2
Regressors
(3-mo ahead)

1-Yr Bond Return
No. signif.
Adj-R2
Regressors
(3-mo ahead)

(1)

1 of 1

0.25

0 of 1

-0.00

1 of 1

0.03

(2)

1 of 4

0.27

0 of 4

0.01

1 of 4

0.04

(3)

1 of 14

0.28

2 of 14

0.02

0 of 14

0.02

(4)

10 of 14

0.42

0 of 14

-0.04

5 of 14

0.14

(5)

4 of 10

0.12

0 of 10

-0.04

2 of 10

0.05

(6)

1 of 10

0.00

2 of 10

0.00

0 of 10

-0.03

+ ε t + 2, NOF

Table 11
Relation between economy, financial markets and orderflow with low/high dispersion
This table contains the R2 of the following regression:

Yt = α +

( Net Orderflow

10

∑β
j=1

j

j ,t −1

− Passive Net Orderflow j ,t −1 )

Capsector j ,t −1

+ ϕYt −1 + ε j ,t

where Yt is either the CFNAI indicator, stock market returns, or bond market returns. Net
Orderflowj,t, Passive Net Orderflowj,t , Capsectorj,t represent the actual net orderflow, the passive
net orderflow, the capitalization of sector j over month t. We compute the passive net orderflow
for sector j as the total net orderflow to the stock market multiplied by the weight of sector j in the
market portfolio.
The regression is estimated conditional on low or high dispersion of orderflow within sectors. We
measure dispersion as the standard deviation of active flows within each sector. We aggregate
dispersion at the market level using either the market capitalization of each sector (σ1) or the
absolute value of the correlations reported in Table 4 and normalized to sum up to one (σ2). In a
given month, dispersion is high (low) when the standard deviation is above (below) its median in
the last 12 months.

CFNAI

Comparison of R2
Stock Market

Bond Market 1y

Low dispersion
High dispersion
Ratio (Low/High)

Dispersion with Market Cap Weights (σ1)
0.54
0.22
0.28
0.34
0.12
0.19
1.59
1.83
1.47

Low dispersion
High dispersion
Ratio (Low/High)

0.47
0.28
1.68

Dispersion with Correlation Weights (σ2)
0.20
0.31
0.08
0.16
2.50
1.94

Table 12
Relation between equity flows and non-farm Payroll surprises
This table shows the results of estimating the following regression:

Ft ,t +τ = α + β

(NFP

ACT , t

− NFPEXP ,t )

σS

+ε

where F is a linear combination of sector flows or returns in the period τ following the non-farm
Payroll release at t, NFPACT,t is the actual NFP release, NFPEXP,t is the median forecast, and σs is
the standard deviation of the NFP surprise. τ is either one week or one month. The loadings in
the linear combination are the ones with maximal correlation with changes in the expansion index
(CFNAI), stock market returns (SP500), or 1-year bond returns. T-statistics are calculated using
bootstrapped standard errors.

Weekly
Dependent
variable

β

T-stat

Monthly
R2

β

T-stat

R2

Panel A: Flows
CFNAI

0.0439

1.78

0.02

0.0453

2.74

0.03

SP500

-0.0004

-0.28

0.00

0.0003

0.29

0.00

Bond

-0.0002

-2.12

0.03

-0.0001 -1.40

0.01

Panel B: Returns
CFNAI

-0.0191

-1.35

0.01

-0.0077 -0.46

0.00

SP500

-0.0004

-0.40

0.00

-0.0002 -0.22

0.00

Bond

0.0001

1.49

0.01

0.0001

0.41

0.00

Table 13
Relation between Active Net Order Flow and Mutual Fund Flows
This table contains pairwise sector correlations between active net orderflow and active mutual
fund flows. Active net orderflow is defined as

Net Orderflow j ,t − Passive Net Orderflow j ,t
Capsectorj,t

,

where Net Orderflowj,t, and Passive Net Orderflowj,t , represent the actual net orderflow and the
passive net orderflow, within sector j over quarter t. We compute the passive net orderflow for
sector j as the total net orderflow to the stock market multiplied by the weight of sector j in the
market. Active mutual fund flow is defined as

Net Flow j ,t ,L − Passive Net Flow j ,t ,L
Capsectorj,t

where Net Flowj,t, and Passive Net Flowj,t , represent the actual flow and the passive flow, within
sector j over quarter t in the mutual fund category L. We compute the passive net flow for sector
j in mutual fund category L as the total flows to the category L multiplied by the weight of sector
j in the market. *, **, *** denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level. The Core
investment objective represents a blend of the value and growth styles, while the S&P investment
objective represents the passive style of replicating the S&P 500 index. Sectors are grouped by
cyclicality as per the MSCI ranking in three broad groups, pro-cyclical, neutral and countercyclical respectively.

Sector
Inform. Tech
Industrials
Materials
Consumer Discr.
Financials
Energy
Telecom
Utilities
Consumer Stap.
Health Care
Average
Median

Core
Correlation
0.16
0.06
0.18
0.25 *
0.03
0.27 **
0.04
0.14
0.30 **
0.30 **
0.17
0.17

S&P
Correlation
0.24 *
0.10
0.04
-0.03
0.05
-0.07
-0.19
-0.36 **
0.19
0.15
0.01
0.04

Obs.
52
52
52
52
52
52
52
52
52
52

