                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            ANALYZING COMPENSATION METHODS IN MANUFACTURING:
                 PIECE RATES, TIME RATES, OR GAIN-SHARING?

                                          Susan Helper
                                         Morris M. Kleiner
                                         Yingchun Wang

                                       Working Paper 16540
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w16540


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2010




For their helpful comments, we thank Wei Chi, Colleen Manchester, Yijiang Wang, and participants
in seminars at the University of Minnesota and the Labor and Employment Relations Association meetings
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Susan Helper, Morris M. Kleiner, and Yingchun Wang. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Analyzing Compensation Methods in Manufacturing: Piece Rates, Time Rates, or Gain-Sharing?
Susan Helper, Morris M. Kleiner, and Yingchun Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 16540
November 2010
JEL No. J3,J31,L1,L2,L23,L6

                                              ABSTRACT

Economists have often argued that "pay for performance" is the optimal compensation scheme. However,
use of the simplest form of pay for performance, the piece rate, has been in decline in manufacturing
in recent decades. We show both theoretically and empirically that these changes are due to adoption
of "modern manufacturing" in which firms produce a greater variety of products to a more demanding
quality and delivery standard.

We further develop a theory of the type of compensation system appropriate for this kind of production,
in which there is a high return to “multi-tasking”, where the same workers perform both easy-to-observe
and hard-to-observe tasks and to “just-in-time” production, which entails a high cost of holding inventory.

We test these predictions using detailed monthly information on firm outcomes and employee surveys
from four plants in two companies that adopted modern manufacturing methods and changed their
method of compensation from piece rates to either time rates or value-added gain-sharing. We find
that time rates and gain-sharing are associated with reduced employee performance on easy-to-observe
tasks, enhanced performance on hard-to-observe tasks, and improved firm profitability. Our analysis
shows the importance of distinguishing types of incentive pay: we find that modern manufacturing
is consistent with either group incentive pay (such as gain-sharing), or no incentives (such as hourly
pay), but inconsistent with individual incentive pay (piece rates).


Susan Helper                                         Yingchun Wang
Weatherhead School of Management                     8QLYHUVLW\RI+RXVWRQ'RZQWRZQ
Case Western Reserve University                      One Main Street
11119 Bellflower Rd                                  Houston, Texas 77002
Cleveland, OH 44106-7235                             wangy@uhd.edu
and NBER
susan.helper@weatherhead.cwru.edu

Morris M. Kleiner
University of Minnesota
Humphrey Institute of Public Affairs
260 Humphrey Center
301 19th Street South
Minneapolis, MN 55455
and NBER
kleiner@umn.edu
I. Introduction

         Economists have often argued that "pay for performance" is the optimal compensation

scheme (e.g., Lazear and Shaw, 2007, Shaw, 2009). However, use of the simplest form of pay for

performance, the piece rate, has been in decline in manufacturing in recent decades. We show

both theoretically and empirically that these changes are due to the adoption of "modern

manufacturing" (Milgrom and Roberts, 1990), in which firms produce a greater variety of

products to a more demanding quality and delivery standard.

         The economic theory of optimal incentives suggests that changes in production

environments should coincide with changes in the method of pay for workers (Lazear and Shaw,

2007). If workers produce one easy-to-monitor product and are supervised by an owner who

both monitors and receives profits, the optimal incentive system is a piece rate (Seiler, 1984,

Brown, 1990, Paarsch, and Shearer, 2000). Under this form of compensation, workers are paid

based on the quantity and quality of the output produced. If markets are competitive, workers

will receive their marginal product and owners will receive normal profits (Lazear, 2000, Halley,

2003).

         However in the United States, use of piece rate systems has been systematically

declining. In the later part of the 19th century a majority of factory workers were paid piece rates,

and about 30 percent of manufacturers used piece rate systems in the 1930s (Brown & Philips,

1986). Yet by the 1980s only 14 percent of employees in manufacturing worked under piece rate

systems (Jacobsen & Skillman, 2004). By 2003, less than 5 percent of workers were paid under a

piece rate compensation system (Schildkraut, 2003). In shoe manufacturing, for example, 90

percent of workers were paid by piece rates in the 1940s, but by the late 1990s, less than 25




                                                  1
percent were paid by this method (Bureau of Labor Statistics, 1997)1. Other industrialized

nations such as Britain have been experiencing similar declines in the use of piece rates in

manufacturing (Marginson, 2010)

         We suggest that the reason for the decline in use of piece rates is the introduction of

manufacturing methods that emphasize quality, rapid introduction of new products, and “just-in

time” production methods. These changes have a big effect on the optimal method of pay

because they increase the return to

         a) “multi-tasking” (Holmstrom and Milgrom, 1990), in which the same workers do both

easy-to-observe tasks (such as production) and hard-to-observe tasks (such as process

improvement) and

         b) producing exact quantities of output (no more, no less).

         In this paper, we model the impact of the changes of compensation method in such

production environments. We consider the following methods of pay: piece rates, time rates, and

gain sharing, in which workers receive time rates plus a (usually small) bonus linked to the

productivity of the establishment or work group.

         We also provide evidence from six plants belonging to two firms that changed from a

piece rate method of pay to either time rates or gain sharing. Our empirical analysis examines

how compensation influenced productivity, profitability, and the attitudes of the workers in these

organizations.

         Both our theory and evidence suggest that for firms with production processes with a

high return to multi-tasking and to producing exact levels of output, time rate pay or time rates

1
 Our analysis differs from that of Shaw (2009), who writes, “Our knowledge of how to use HR practices evolves
and improves over time. Thirty years ago, hourly pay was common; today, variable pay has been added.” We agree
that group-based variable pay has been increasing (Osterman,2000), while individual-based incentives have been
disappearing. Our paper shows that this distinction is critical: while group-based incentive pay is indeed compatible
with modern production methods, individual incentives (piece rates) are not.

                                                          2
with low-powered incentives are the optimal form of compensation. These findings may have

implications for other industries, such as finance and health care, where firms have based pay on

types of performance that are easily observable, even when important dimensions of

performance are hard to observe and measure.

II. Background, Theory and Model

        A. Traditional manufacturing: mass production and large-batch production

        In the later part of the 19th century a majority of factory workers were paid piece rates

(Brown & Philips, 1986). However, over the course of the 20th century, many employers moved

toward time rates. Some employers (such as Henry Ford) adopted “transfer lines,” in which work

was transferred between stations either by machines or by a moving conveyor (assembly line). In

either case, time rates are more advantageous than piece rates. The reason is that managers can

obtain high effort from workers on observable tasks by noticing where the inventory piles up

between stations,2 without incurring the costs of piece rates we discuss below.

        Many firms did not switch to transfer lines, however, because such lines placed severe

constraints on the variety of products that could be produced, especially before the advent of

innovations such as flexible automation (Best, 1990; Lazonick, 1991). Instead, many firms

(including the two we study here) used batch production methods. For example, in the 1980s the

firm we call “Small Parts” had a variety of products (mostly parts for cars or boats) for which

there was continuing demand for an unchanging design. However, the products required

operations on different machines, performed in different orders. Setting up fixed paths for work

to travel would have made low effort in production more observable, but would have made the

production process very inflexible. Therefore, managers put each person in charge of a machine


2
  Thus, workers can work together on assembly lines (“teamwork” in some definitions), yet still have observable
individual contributions to total output (Lazonick, 1993, chapter 5).

                                                        3
that could do several jobs (each with a negotiated rate), and encouraged workers to do each job

quickly via piece rates. Since there was recurring demand for each product for a long time,

management did not have to negotiate new piece rates very often3. At any one time the firm

made an intermediate number of products that did not change very often—more than 1 or 2,

which would have made an assembly line pay off, and fewer than 50 products which would

change in the next year, thereby requiring lots of renegotiation. Similarly, the shoe-maker we call

Big Foot (BF) for decades had employees working on individually-paced machines being paid

piece rates.

         B. Modern manufacturing: quality, variety, and just-in-time production.

         In the 1990s, both Small Parts and Big Foot changed numerous aspects of their

operations strategy, moving toward a broader product line with frequent product introductions,

greater attention to quality and efforts to minimize inventory.

       Milgrom and Roberts (1995) call this cluster of policies “modern manufacturing”, and
explain why these policies all changed at once:

        “We have argued in this paper that this clustering [of policies] is no accident. Rather, it is
a result of the adoption by profit-maximizing firms of a coherent business strategy that exploits
complementarities, and the trend to adopt this strategy is the result of identifiable changes in
technology and demand.”

         In this paper, we extend the Milgrom and Roberts model to examine the impact on

compensation methods of the changes in manufacturing that they and others describe. 4


3
  As described below (also see Helper and Kleiner 2009), piece rates were negotiated with workers even though the
firm was non-union. If rates were too low, workers objected to working on the new products. Management in
principle had the right to assign workers to work on such products, but feared the loss of firm-specific human capital
if workers quit.
4
  Others have noted similar changes in manufacturing strategy, and given them different names: “flexible
specialization” (Piore and Sabel 1984), “lean manufacturing” (Womack, Jones, and Roos 1990). The clusters
identified by the author above are broadly similar, yet the authors disagree about the causes of the change. Milgrom
and Roberts focus on declining costs of computers and flexible automation as driving the change (because this new
technology lowered the cost of product variety by reducing set-up costs). Piore and Sabel state that fragmentation of
product demand (leading to greater benefits of product variety) was the initial cause, and Womack, Jones and Roos
argue that the initial driver was Toyota’s innovative efforts to adapt US production methods to 1950s Japan, in

                                                          4
         Figure 1 describes how the features of modern manufacturing affect the returns to

different production strategies, and how these in turn affect the optimal compensation system (in

particular, the efficacy of piece rates)5.

         The first feature we examine is increased attention to product quality. A desired increase

in product quality increases the return to effort on hard-to-observe tasks, such as suggestions for

process improvement, and avoiding hard-to-detect shortcuts. Why is quality control a hard to

observe task? While in principle, management could only pay for good pieces under piece rates,

this is problematic in practice, for several reasons. First, if standards for quality are high, and

affect workers' pay, management and workers will devote costly resources to allocating (and

avoiding) blame for quality problems rather than seeking their root causes. Second, workers are

less likely to make suggestions to improve the product that require teamwork or cross job

boundaries, because this would involve particularly complex rate renegotiations, not to mention

take time away from production, which costs the worker heavily in lost piece-rate income. If

workers do not make good suggestions, it is hard for management to know if this was because

potential improvements do not exist, or because workers were insufficiently motivated to make

such suggestions.

         Holmstrom and Milgrom (1991) point out that the multitask problem arises only if the

two tasks are complementary. If they are not, then managers should design the observable tasks

(e.g., production) to be done by one group of employees, and the unobservable tasks (e.g.,




which demand was fragmented and cash was scarce. In any case, as we show below, complementarity means that
increased returns to one of these practices leads to increased returns for the others. So, for our purposes, it does not
matter which practice was the driving force.
5
  Because the changes in production and in method of pay have complementary effects on firm performance, these
practices will usually be adopted together, making it difficult to separately identify their impacts. Our goal instead is
to explore the impact of these clusters of practices taken together.

                                                            5
making improvements to production, fixing problems) to be done by another group with a

different compensation scheme.

        In older methods of production, observable and unobservable tasks were separated.

Production workers focused on producing output, and were paid a piece rate. Quality was the

responsibility of other workers, such as inspectors (who identified defective parts) and engineers

(who attempted to design less defect-prone products and processes); these workers were paid

time rates.

        In contrast, proponents of “modern manufacturing” hold that multitask complementarities

are significant. For example, while a worker is producing output, she is also observing the

process and gaining a local knowledge available to engineers only at great cost. Thus, knowing

how to do production gives a worker knowledge about how to improve the process (Womack,

Jones, and Roos, 1990). However, piece rates incentivize workers to over perform on observable

tasks such as production, and underperform on hard to observe tasks such as process

improvement, as we show below.

        The second feature of modern manufacturing described in Table 1 is increased product

variety.6 Increased variety also yields increased payoff to production worker effort on hard-to-

observe tasks, such as making suggestions on how to debug the production process for new

products, yielding a quick ramp-up to full production speed. Piece rates are problematic because

there are significant risks for both sides in establishing rates on new products. All else equal, the

lower the rates per piece, the higher are profits and the lower are wages. If high-seniority

workers are risk-averse and have the ability to choose which products they work on (as at Big

6
  In their model, Milgrom and Roberts distinguish between the number of products and product improvements, and
find that the number of products is not necessarily complementary to other features of modern manufacturing,
because if there is a constant rate of redesign per product, having more products increases cost. Since both a new
product and a redesigned product usually require a new piece rate, we lump them together under the heading
“product variety”, a feature which is complementary with other characteristics of modern manufacturing.

                                                         6
Foot), experienced workers will avoid working on new products, depriving the firm of precisely

those workers who would be most efficient at de-bugging the new process (Freeman and Kleiner,

2005). As Coase (1937) pointed out, establishing prices is a significant cost of using markets. As

the frequency of product change increases, the fixed cost of haggling over the rate is spread out

over fewer units, making a piece-rate system increasingly costly.

       The third feature we examine is just-in-time production (JIT). Proponents of JIT argue

that holding inventory is very costly, due not just to product carrying costs, but also to costs of

obsolescence and the impact of long lead times on quality improvement activities. (That is, if a

long time passes between when a product is made and the discovery that it is defective, it will be

harder to determine conditions under which it was made that might have led to the defect (e.g.,

the day was hot, the worker running the machine was inexperienced) (Womack, Jones and Roos,

1990). JIT is complementary not only to quality, but also to product variety, in that short set-up

times allow a firm to produce a wider variety of products without excessive downtime or

inventory carrying costs. Thus, the philosophy of JIT is to produce exactly the quantity

demanded, meaning that there is a low return to the extra production incentivized by piece rates.

JIT also increases the return to multi-tasking (since low inventory increases the return to speedy

problem-solving).

        To summarize, implementing modern manufacturing practices makes piece rates a less

desirable form of compensation in two ways. First, modern manufacturing increases the return to

multi-tasking (having the same workers perform both tasks whose output is hard to observe and

tasks whose output is easy to observe). Specifically, workers’ responsibilities expand from

simple physical execution of work in manufacturing to activities such as planning, decision-

making, teamwork, and problem solving (Shaw, Gupta, and Delery, 2001; Snell and Dean, 1994).



                                                  7
Performance on these tasks is difficult to observe. As we show below, piece rates lead to the

crowding out of effort on such tasks. Second, the extra effort on observable tasks (like

production) that piece rates produce has low (sometimes negative) value in modern

manufacturing, because of the high cost assigned to carrying inventory.

Model of multi-tasking and just-in-time

         In order to analyze the situations discussed in the empirical section below, it is useful to

formally model the effects of switching from piece-rates to time-rates (Big Foot) and from piece-

rates to gain-sharing (Small Parts)7. Proofs of all propositions are provided in the appendix.

         Define e to be the performance level of the hard-to-observe tasks and q to be the

quantity of output produced. e and q are determined by both employee effort ( t e and t q ) and

                                                   e       e    q       q
employee ability ( Ae and Aq ). Naturally,              0     0      0      0 . The firms’ profit
                                                   t e    Ae    t q    Aq

functions are given by

                                                   B (e, q )  L

where B is production technology and L is labor costs. Naturally, B1  0 . By contrast, B2

varies depending on whether q exceeds or falls short of the optimal production quantities, q̂ .

Specifically, B22  0 , and  is maximized when the quantity produced matches the optimal

production quantity, that is, q  qˆ . The reason behind this specification is that producing exactly

the optimal quantity is highly important in modern manufacturing. Both over-production and

under-production are costly, because holding very little inventory (just-in-time production) is

highly valued (i.e. (qˆ )  (q ) for q  qˆ . On the one hand, if the quantity produced exceeds



7
 Consistent with the practice at most firms (and in contrast to Thiele, 2010), we assume the firms are constrained to
offer the same contract to all production workers.

                                                          8
the optimal quantity, q̂ , the firm incurs costs associated with holding inventory and the

uncertainty of being able to sell the inventory because of frequent product design changes. Thus,

when q  qˆ , B 2 becomes smaller. And profit becomes negative, when q exceeds q̂ by large

amounts. On the other hand, modern manufacturers also value meeting clients’ needs quickly. If

output falls short of the optimal quantity, it could lead to client dissatisfaction. Thus, when q  qˆ ,

it pays to produce more quickly ( B2  0 ).

                                                                                 p
        Under piece rates, employees’ utility functions are U p  p (e)(             q )  D (t e , t q ) , with

                                                                                 p
D being the monetary value of the disutility associated with additional effort,  being the

baseline salary under piece rates,  being the piece-rate for each unit produced, and p (e) being

the probability of keeping the job based on a worker’s performance on hard-to-observe tasks,

with the performance e being determined by effort, te, and ability, Ae. Under gain-sharing,

                                                             B(e, q)
employees’ utility functions become U g  p(e)(                   )  D(t e , t q ) , with  being the
                                                               N

baseline salary, N being the number of employees included in the group bonus, and  being the

income percentage that the employer agrees to share with the workers ex ante. Under time rates,

employees’ utility functions become U t  p (e)   D(t e , t q ) .

        Proposition 1: When a firm switches from piece rates to gain-sharing or time-rates, the

        gap between optimal output and actual output, | q  qˆ | , is smaller.

        Time-rates and gain-sharing pay employees based on obedience rather than on production

quantity. If the employees keep the pace that the firms determine, they are paid. If not, they risk

being fired. By contrast, under piece-rates, to make employees produce exactly the optimal

quantities, employers need to set piece-rates such that the marginal benefit to the worker just

equals her marginal disutility when she produces the optimal output. To the extent that optimal

                                                     9
output and product designs change frequently, and employers lack information regarding

employee utility functions, piece rates lead actual output to deviate from optimal output.

       Proposition 2. When firms switch from piece rates to gain sharing or time rates, effort

       devoted to hard-to-observe tasks, t e , increases.

       The intuition behind Proposition 2 is that since workers’ effort is limited, the more effort

they devote to observable tasks, the less effort they are able to devote to hard-to-observe tasks.

           t q
That is,           0 . Gain-sharing rewards employees for doing hard-to-observe tasks by sharing
           t e

the gains, so workers have more incentive to devote effort to such tasks. Although time-rates do

not reward employees for effort devoted to hard-to-observe tasks, the firm could still instruct the

workers to do some hard-to-observe tasks or risk being fired, and since unlike piece rates

workers are not rewarded for producing more output, they will follow the firm’s instruction and

                                                                                             t q
devote more effort to the hard-to-observe task than under piece-rates, by the amount              .
                                                                                             t e

       Proposition 3. When the firms switch from piece rates to gain sharing or time rates, the

       average ability of the workforce to produce higher quantity of output, Aq , decreases.

       When a firm switches from piece rates to gain sharing, the average ability of the

       workforce on hard-to-observe tasks, Ae , increases. When a firm switches from piece-

       rates to time-rates, the average ability of the workforce on hard-to-observe tasks, Ae ,

       does not change.

       The intuition behind this proposition is that the average ability of a firm’s employees to

do observable tasks decreases, because gain-sharing and time-rates do not reward employees for

producing large quantities. Since gain-sharing rewards employees for their performance on hard-


                                                   10
to-observe tasks, workers with greater ability to perform these tasks are attracted to the firm.

Workers on time-rates do not get extra pay for performing well on these tasks, so employees’

ability to do hard-to-observe tasks will not change if a firm switches from time- to piece-rates.

       Proposition 4 Batch manufacturing with piece rates generates more production than does

       modern manufacturing with time rates or gain sharing.

       The intuition behind this proposition is that excessive production volume makes profits

drop more quickly for modern manufacturers than for batch manufacturers, so the optimal

production volume will be larger for batch manufactures than for modern manufactures.

       Proposition 5: If Just-In-Time and hard-to-observe tasks are valuable to a firm, when the

       firm switches from piece rates to gain-sharing or time-rates, the expected benefits

       increase. That is, E[ Bt* (e t , qˆ )]  E[ B *p (e p , q~ )]  0 , E[ B g* (e g , qˆ )]  E[ B *p (e p , q~ )]  0 .

       This proposition is derived from Proposition 1 to Proposition 3. Proposition 1 states that

time-rates and gain-sharing are better at making employees meet production targets than are

piece-rates. The possible excessive or insufficient production volume due to piece-rates is very

expensive for modern manufacturers. In addition, Propositions 2 and 3 suggest that employee

performance of hard-to-observe tasks, determined by abilities and effort, increases after switches

from piece-rates to gain-sharing or time rates. Thus, with hard-to-observe task performance and

Just-In-Time being valuable to modern manufactures, the production benefit function’s value

will increase after switching away from piece rates.

       Proposition 6: When firms switch from piece rates to gain-sharing or time-rates, their

       labor costs remain the same or decrease.

       Under piece-rates, employers set the rate according to agents’ marginal monetary value

of the disutility of producing the employer’s desired amount of output. That is, if the employer


                                                              11
wants q̂ amount of output, she will set the rate as   D2 (tˆe , tˆq ) . So the total pay under piece-rate

is L p  D2 (tˆe , tˆq )qˆ . But under time-rates and gain-sharing, to minimize costs, employers will set

the labor cost as about equivalent with the agent’s monetary value of the total disutility of

producing q̂ . So the labor cost is Lt  L g  D(tˆe , tˆq ) .

         The above rationale indicates that labor costs of time-rates or gain-sharing are not larger

than that of piece-rates, because time-rates and gain-sharing are determined by worker’s total

disutility, while piece rates are determined by worker’s marginal disutility, which is an

increasing function of the amount of output. For example, suppose an agent’s disutility of

producing the first piece of output is worth one dollar, and the disutility of producing the second

piece is worth more, say two dollars. To make the worker produce two pieces, managers using

time-rates and gain-sharing need to pay the agent only 1+2=3 dollars, but those using piece-rates

will need to pay the worker 2 dollars per piece, for a total of 2*2=4 dollars. The rent the worker

gains from time rates and gain sharing is 0, but the worker’s rent is strictly larger than zero, one

dollar in this example, under piece-rates.

         Proposition 7: If Just-In-Time and hard-to-observe tasks are valuable to a firm, when

         firms switch from piece-rates to gain-sharing or time-rates, profits increase.

         Profits are determined by benefits and labor costs. According to Proposition 5, if JIT and

hard-to-observe tasks are valuable to a firm, when the firm switches from piece rates to gain-

sharing or time-rates, the expected benefits increase E[ Bt* (e t , qˆ )]  E[ B *p (e p , q~ )]  0 ,

E[ B g* (e g , qˆ )]  E[ B *p (e p , q~ )]  0 . And according to Proposition 6, labor costs will not decrease

when firms switches from piece rates to time rates, L p  Lg and L p  Lt . Thus, it is straight




                                                         12
forward to conclude that if JIT and hard-to-observe tasks are valuable, profits will increase after

switching away from piece-rates E ( *t   *p )  0 and E ( *g   *p )  0 .

III. Empirical Analysis

   Data Collection and Methods

           In collecting our data, our method was consistent with the 5 steps of the “Insider

Econometrics” approach described by Shaw (2009, p.615). First, we conducted multiple plant

visits. At Big Foot we visited at least a dozen times between 1996 and 1998, and talked with at

least 100 people, including top management, union presidents, and many workers on the

assembly line. For Small Parts, we visited its Massachusetts plants in 1995, 1998, 2000, and

2002. We also visited the Ohio and Florida plants each 3 times in 2002 and the UK plant in 2002

and 2003. At each visit we spoke with managers and toured the plant. In 2002, we conducted

focus groups in each of these plants with workers (without management present). (See Freeman

and Kleiner 2005 and Helper and Kleiner 2009 for more detail). Second, as a result of our plant

visits, we identified the object of study as the impact on performance of changing methods of

compensation. We treat the change in method of pay as exogenous to the workers, and identify

variation in response based on worker ability and timing of the change in incentive systems

(similar to Franceschelli, et al, 2010). Management did not implement gain-sharing in all of its

plants at once. We suggest that the implementation process can be thought of as a quasi-natural

experiment that can allow us to estimate the impacts of gain-sharing on both productivity and

worker satisfaction. Third, we obtained detailed data from both companies, on financial reporting

of what happened before, during, and after the change in the method of pay. Fourth, we used this

data to test the predictions in our model. Fifth, we collected additional information from the

workers themselves. At Big Foot, management gave us access to worker satisfaction surveys


                                                   13
conducted before and after the change in the method of pay. At Small Parts, we conducted

anonymous surveys of employee attitudes. Management allowed us to conduct these surveys

during work time (workers went to a separate training room where no managers were present);

the response rates exceeded 90% in each plant. We also presented our findings to the

management of each plant, and learned from their responses.

           In this section, we use our data to test predictions from the models specified above.8

The two firms in our sample consisted of one with labor-intensive products (shoes) and one with

capital-intensive products (auto parts). Figure 1 panel A, gives the time line for the change from

the piece rate to the time rate method of pay for Big Foot, (BF) the labor-intensive firm in our

analysis. In panel B we show the implementation of the policies for Small Parts using the same

metrics.

           The BF Shoe Company produces men’s work shoes and sports boots in two unionized

plants in a small mid-western city. The firm sells much of its product through its own retail

outlets, which makes it sensitive to service at the point of purchase and direct consumer response

to its products. However, in 2003 the company agreed with Sears to sell its men’s work boots in

all Sears retail outlets in the U.S., and it has agreements with national and international

companies like J. Crew, to widely market its shoe and boot products.

        In the mid 1980s the firm identified several problems that risked its survival in the face of

foreign competition that was influencing the whole industry. The firm faced an inflexible

production process; a huge work in-process and storage expenses and a demoralized piece rate

compensation system. Consultants hired by the firm recommended that the firm try to create a

niche market and introduce teamwork and continuous flow methods of production that required


8
  Both firms in our analysis agreed to let us use confidential internal documents if we did not use the name of the
firm in our publications. Replication is allowed if a nondisclosure agreement is signed.

                                                          14
employees to know many different tasks, warning that unless the firm lowered its costs, most of

which were labor costs, it was unlikely to survive. Management thought that the company’s

piece rate system was a barrier to making the necessary changes in production. The union was

willing to go along with these policies so that the firm could remain viable.

        The system of production made it difficult to introduce more styles and produce the

higher quality products that offered a chance of survival in the face of low wage foreign

competition. BF introduced a continuous flow mode of manufacturing (CFM) and changed from

a piece rate to a time rate mode of compensation. The firm developed many new lines of shoes

based on market demand, a modular form of production in which workers were cross-trained to

cut days in-process, used a just-in time method of supplying materials to the lines, and thus was

able to deliver “hot sellers” in a more rapid manner. The firm began to implement the new

process in April 1990 in one factory, but it took roughly two and one-half years before all the

plant’s lines shifted to the continuous flow mode.

       Making the transformation was difficult. Many supervisors did not support the CFM

initiative and some actively worked against it because it meant a reduction in supervisory and

inspection jobs. In fact, the firm eliminated six intermediate inspector jobs in each plant when it

went to Continuous Flow Manufacturing. Thirty-three percent of the company’s supervisors

and a number of senior managers took early retirement. Many production workers feared the

loss of seniority, job rights, and reduced pay. Big Foot negotiated a lower hourly wage system

for new hires but agreed to “red circle” the wages of all current production workers. That is, the

firm would base current workers’ new hourly wage on their piece rate earnings in the future

based on output for the 26 weeks previous to their department’s shift to CFM.




                                                15
       The firm had other problems in making the transition to continuous flow manufacturing.

Failing to anticipate that productivity would fall sharply with the move to time rates,

management had to schedule its production workers for as much as 10 hours’overtime work per

week. On the other hand, following the transition in managerial policies, there was a dramatic

drop in union grievances and in worker compensation costs. And BF increased the number of

shoe styles from 106 in 1985 to 187 in 1996, more than doubling the number of new styles

introduced per year from six during the piece rate regime to 13 in the time rate regime. From

1990 to 1997, the percentage of shoe sales due to the top 10 styles dropped by 20% as new styles

took a larger part of sales. Thus, by the end of the 1990s, Big Foot’s managerial operations and

pay for workers were different than at the outset of the decade. Labor costs were considerably

lower. Thus the impact of Big Foot’s change in compensation policy cannot be determined in

isolation from the firm’s other policies.

       The other firm in our sample, Small Parts (SP), produces switches and actuators for firms

in the auto industry. SP initially was a low-volume operation where quality requirements were

not high, and where designs were generally dictated by the customer and did not change often.

The older jobs were individually paced, and consisted of a single worker sitting at a machine.

She would add one or more pieces to a small assembly and then press a button or foot pedal to

fasten the piece via welding or crimping. She would then place the partially-completed product

in a box; when the box was full, material handlers would move it to workers who would do the

next stage. During our 1995 visit we watched several of these piece-rate workers, and were

impressed by the workers’ speed and intensity of focus.

       In 1987, the firm began a major change in its product market strategy, and by the late

1990s it designed almost all of its own products (which are complex assemblies of plastic and



                                                16
electronic parts) and modified them frequently (50 in a typical year under the new strategy),

rather than producing individual electronic components to customer blueprints. The company

also increased its quality levels and reduced its inventory..These changes were common in the

industry, and resulted from pressure from the firm’s major customers, such as Ford and General

Motors.

       As a result of these product-market changes, the firm introduced changes in its

operations. Management gradually brought in more automated assembly, eliminating

individually-paced jobs. Instead, 6-8 workers sat around a circular work cell. Some stations were

completely automated; at most stations a worker assisted the machine in assembling the part.

When the part was finished, it would be moved (automatically or manually) to the next station.

At the last station, the operator would pack the fully-completed part into a box to be shipped

directly to the customer. The cell was paced by the slowest worker. At many of the cells, a

lighted overhead sign kept track of the pieces made, and compared it to the pieces that should be

made to meet the day’s quota. Since there was no buffer between operators, inventory in the

cells was dramatically lower (and lead times faster) than under piece rates.

       By 2000, these assembly jobs employed the bulk of the work force in a highly capital-

intensive method of production (Helper & Kleiner, 2009). Labor costs were less than 10 percent

of total production costs. The move in this firm was to modern manufacturing from batch

production. The firm’s new strategy was not consistent with SP’s existing pay practices, which

involved piece rates for operators and assemblers. As our theory suggests, piece rates led to

problems with hard to observe tasks such as minimizing inventory, difficulty in changing to new

products, and problems in encouraging teamwork. A particular problem was new product

introduction. As SP’s controller put it in a document she wrote for us in 2000,



                                                17
         “New product development became a hurdle with the piecework system. Employees did
not want to work on new product [because they would have to learn a new job, with the risk of
lower pay while they figured out shortcuts]…There were no good standards for new product and
there was no way to introduce new products unless we wanted to throw loose rates on them. This
restricted us from doing new products.”


       As this quote illustrates, setting the rate on a new product took a long time and was

fraught with conflict and risk for both parties, even in a nonunion setting such as SP.

       SP Managers were concerned that time rates alone would not provide enough incentive to

avoid wasteful inventory, prevent defects, or promote incremental improvement. As a result, the

firm implemented a gain-sharing method of pay. The principle behind the value-added gain-

sharing program was to give workers as a group a stake in their plant’s performance. The details

of the plan changed over the years; initially, the size of the bonus pool was a function only of

factors that management felt workers could influence: productivity increases, defect rates, and

customer satisfaction. In the plants formerly on piece rates, most, production workers’

compensation fell significantly (though workers’ reported effort also fell); in some former time-

rate plants compensation increased slightly. We present information on the dates of the

movement away from piece rates and the introduction of the value-added gain sharing plan

(VAG) in Figure 2 in panel B.

Empirical Results

       In Table 1 we show summary statistics for the two firms in our sample. Our efforts to

isolate the impact of gain sharing on productivity and satisfaction involve two types of tests. We

examine the direct impact of the transformation on performance, using measures of productivity,

costs, and profitability. Next, we measure the impact of the changes away from piece rates on

employee attitudes toward performing hard-to-observe tasks at work.

       Our basic models for estimation are of the following form:

                                                18
(A) Q = f(K, Change, X`, ε), where

Q is productivity as measured by output or value added per worker,

Change is 0 for each month until the VAG or time rate program is introduced in that plant, and 1

afterward, X` is a set of controls for plant and individual characteristics, and ε is the error term,

with the usual ordinary least squares (OLS) assumptions on its structure.

         In table 2, we estimate the impact of the switch away from piece rates on performance

for both observable tasks (production) and hard-to-observe tasks (minimizing material costs). In

panel A, we look at the impact for BF, controlling for 1) the transition period during which some

but not all lines, had changed away from piece rates (“transition effect”), 2) the 26-week period

during which employees could lock in a future time wage that depended on their piece-rate

earnings during this period, an arrangement which created a powerful incentive for BF workers

to work very hard during the period (“full effort effect”).9 We control for headcount, and also for

time trend. We use material costs as a proxy for firms’ success in incentivizing workers to

perform hard to observe tasks. Our rationale is that the main ways to reduce material costs for a

given amount of output are to improve quality and reduce inventory—both hard to observe

activities, as we argued above.

         In Panel B, we look at the same outcomes for SP. Our control variables are slightly

different, as SP moved away from piece rates without a transition or ‘full effort” period. In this

table we include data only at the Boston plant, which is the only SP plant for which we have data

before and after a move from piece rates to VAG. Our measure of productivity for SP is Value



9
  The dummy variable used to proxy for full effort isolates the period when the firm told workers that their
productivity would determine pay for the duration of their employment; the implication is that under normal piece
rates, productivity is below the productivity that workers reach by giving their full effort. Our ability to talk to
managers and workers in each plant allowed us to identify the dates of the implementation of the transition and full
effort periods. (Helper, 2000).

                                                         19
Added = Net Sales – Material Cost – Labor Cost. We also include production worker headcount,

a monthly time trend.

         Our estimates in Table 2, column 1, show that the coefficient on “change”, the variable

capturing the move away from piece rates, is negative and significant in each of the productivity

regressions. That is, overall output per person declined in both companies after the move away

from piece rates. This result is consistent with our Proposition 4, that a move away from piece

rates should lead to reduced performance on observable tasks. The result is also consistent with

previous work on piece rates that examines only performance on observable tasks, such as

Lazear and Franceschelli et al (2010). However, consistent with our multitask model; our data

suggests that effort on hard-to-observe tasks increased. For example, material use declined; this

suggests workers worked harder to minimize waste. In contrast, under piece rates, workers want

to have as much material as possible available in order to produce additional units of output and

maximize pay10.

         Data from BF in Table 3 allow us to analyze Proposition 1, that planned output is closer

to actual output when the firm moves away from piece rates.11 Planned output was estimated on

a monthly basis by the engineers, with input from the sales force usually one year in advance.

Using Equation (A), we examine the difference in planned output relative to actual output, before

and after the change to time rates. The focal independent variable “change” is coded as 0 before

switching from time rates and 1 after the changes. Similar to Table 2, we also controlled for total

headcount, plant fixed effects, transition effect, and full effort effect in the estimation. We find

that the transition to time rates was associated with a significant reduction in the gap between

10
   Note that although it is possible for the econometrician (and thus also the manager) to measure material costs in
aggregate, that does not mean it is possible to construct an individual incentive to minimize material costs. For
example, if extra material is used due to poor quality, there may be fights about whose fault the defect was.
Alternatively, teamwork may be necessary to identify causes and propose solutions that lead to reduced scrap rates.
11
   Unfortunately, no such metric existed for SP.

                                                         20
actual production and planned production, which allowed the firm to better meet its production

targets. The data in Appendix B also shows that planned production volume declined after the

change to time rates.

           In Table 4 we show the determinants of workers’ self-reported productivity and effort on

hard-to-observe tasks. The analysis examines Proposition 3, which analyzes the selection effects

of the transformation away from piece rates. Our basic model is :

(B) Coop =f (VAG, X`, ε),

where employee attitudes toward cooperation with management goals ( Coop) is a function of

whether the employee was hired after the implementation of value added gain sharing (VAG) and

plant characteristics X`, and the ε is the error term.

           As measures of employee attitudes, we asked workers about meeting production targets,

teamwork, suggestions, and overall satisfaction. We used a standard survey instrument, the

Minnesota Satisfaction Survey (MSS) to examine employee satisfaction. The MSS has been used

by industrial psychologists for more than 50 years to gauge employee satisfaction in American

industry. The questions were of a Likert-type 5-point scale. We also asked the employees about

their tenure with the company, type of job, and pay policies.

           At the Boston plant, we were able to gather more detailed information on the

characteristics of employees. A high percentage of the employees were immigrants from

Vietnam and Cape Verde, and were not proficient in English. Consequently, we translated our

questionnaire into Vietnamese and Portuguese;12 respondents chose the language in which they

wanted to take the survey. Thus, we are able to differentiate individuals in the plant by their

degree of assimilation to English.



12
     The Cape Verdeans spoke several dialects of Portuguese.

                                                         21
         The estimates are shown in Table 4 for SP, and although the results are not significant,

the coefficients’ directions are consistent with Proposition 3, that a transformation in the method

of pay leads to the selection of workers with different characteristics, consistent with Lazear

(2000).13 For example, workers hired after the transition occurred at their plant perceive

themselves as being less productive, which is consistent with the findings in Table 2 that show

productivity going down in SP following the transformation, and with Proposition 4, which

shows that part of the reason for the productivity decline is that new workers are less able to

perform easy to observe tasks. By contrast, the effects on teamwork, suggestions, and overall

satisfaction are all positive although not precisely estimated. The estimates are consistent with

Proposition 3, that new workers will have higher aptitude for teamwork and unobservable tasks

relative to employees that were hired during the piece-rate era. Since satisfaction is closely

linked in the human resource literature to turnover and other measures of firm performance,

maintaining satisfaction when large changes occur in the firm is an important concern for

employers (Judge, Thoresen, Bono, & Patton, 2001).

         As both Tables 3 and 4 show, the transition away from piece rates significantly improved

the ability of the firm to hit its target production rather than just produce more units.

         Tables 5 shows a test of Proposition 6 that labor should be reduced or remain the same

when the transition occurs away from piece rates. The results for both firms are consistent with

the prediction. These results suggest that the wage-effort bargain for production workers in these

two plants shifted from a focus on a large amount of output at high total effort to providing more




13
  In Appendix Table, we also show the overall satisfaction changes in BF before, during, and after the change to
time rates. The results show initial high levels of satisfaction, and then a decline as the firm changed, and then a
return to a level similar to that which occurred prior to the change (the last measure was taken by another firm which
used a different survey instrument and measure of satisfaction).

                                                         22
hard-to-observe input and working together to produce what was required at a point in time, with

lower total effort required.

      Finally, Figure 3 and Table 6 tests Proposition 7 on profitability for both firms separately

and together with controls for firm fixed effects. Figure 3 shows the before and after changes in

compensation and profitability in both BF and SP. In both cases there is a trend upward

following the transformation. In the left part of panel A, we show the influence of the change in

method of pay on profitability at BF. The results show that the change enhanced profitability at

BF by a statistically significant 18 percent. In the right part of panel A, we show only the results

for the Boston plant of SP, which moved from piece rates to gain sharing. This plant most

closely resembles BF. Consistent with our other findings we show a significant increase in

profits of about 21 percent as a result of the change to gain-sharing from piece rates.

         Next, in order to provide a sensitivity analysis we included all of the plants of Small Parts

to show the influence of being in either a gain-sharing or time rates method of pay for SP and

BF, , on profits. In contrast to the previous estimation, now we include all of the four SP plants,

some of which did not change their compensation methods. During the period of our study, the

Boston plant shifted from piece rates to gain sharing, the Florida plant shifted from time rates to

gain sharing, the Ohio plant remained on time rates, and the UK plant remained on piece rates.

This specification allows us to use the plants as controls for each other.14 We used two

estimation methods to test the effects of time rates and gain sharing: one is the same as the

specification in Table 2 and Table 6, Panel A15; the other is to include the lagged value of profits



14
   The four plants had remarkably similar production processes during the period of our study. However, Boston also
had a large product design function, which designed products for other plants as well. To control for this difference,
we included the percent of non-production employees in the plant.
15
   We did not include the interaction terms between time trend and compensation method, because this represents a
different meaning from the interaction terms between time trend and changes, which capture s the changes in the
slopes of the estimates.

                                                         23
(i.e. the lagged value of the dependent variable) to capture the time effect. The results of both

estimation approaches are similar. In Table 6 panel B we show the results of the latter

specification. Having gain-sharing raises profitability by about 39 percent and it is precisely

estimated relative to piece rates. Paying by time rates is also associated with higher profitability

by a marginally significant 34 percent relative to piece rates.

       Although wed do not present the estimates in the Tables,, we also combined these data

for SP and BF, and found that moving away from piece rates to a method of compensation where

individual based incentive is substantially reduced, along with other changes consistent with

“modern manufacturing,” substantially enhanced the profitability of the firms in our sample. The

change in the method of compensation was associated with an increase in profitability of

approximately 16 percent.

IV. Conclusions

       The economics of optimal incentives suggest that methods of pay should be different in

different production environments. Following Lazear, we initially develop the case where

workers produce one product and an owner monitors and receives profits; in this case the optimal

incentive system is piece rates. Under this form of compensation, workers receive pay based on

the quantity and quality of the output produced. Assuming an efficient allocation of the wages

and profits, workers will receive their marginal product and owners will receive normal profits.

       In modern manufacturing, hard-to-observe tasks like teamwork, planning, decision

making, and problem solving are required, which result in other types of compensation systems

being potentially optimal. For example, time rates and gain sharing, where no or only a small

amount of pay is variable, may result in optimal output and satisfaction for the workforce. We

provide evidence from six establishments within two firms who changed from a piece rate



                                                 24
method of pay to either time rates or gain sharing. Both our theoretical and empirical analyses

suggest that moving away from piece-rate methods of pay for performance may enhance profits

in both of the cases we examined. Further, changes for production workers away from piece rates

enhance the new workers’ attitudes toward teamwork and collaboration. These results suggest

one reason why firms may have chosen over the past 50 years to largely abandon piece rate

methods of pay in favor of time rates or gain sharing. Our analysis thus shows the importance of

distinguishing types of incentive pay: we find that firm profitability under modern manufacturing

is consistent with either group incentive pay (such as gain-sharing), or no incentives (such as

hourly pay), but inconsistent with individual incentive pay (piece rates).




                                                25
                                 References

    Best, Michael H. 1990. New Competition: Institutions of Industrial Restructuring, Cambridge.
    Ma,. Harvard University Press.

,   Brown, Charles. “Firms’ Choice of Method of Pay.”1990. Industrial and Labor Relations
    Review, Vol. 43, Special Issue (February), pp.165-82,

    Brown, Martin, & Peter Philips. 1986. The Decline of the Piece-Rate System in California
    Canning: Technological Innovation, Labor Management, and Union Pressure, 1890–1947.
    Business History Review 60(4), 564–601.

    Bureau of Labor Statistics. 1997. Industry Wage Survey. U.S. Department of Labor, GPO.

    Franceschelli, I., S. Galiani, and E. Gulmez. 2010. “Performance pay and productivity of low-
    and high-ability workers.” Labour Economics 17(2): 317–322.

    Freeman, Richard B., & Morris M. Kleiner. 2005. The Last American Shoe Manufacturers:
    Decreasing Productivity and Increasing Profits in the Shift from Piece Rates to Continuous Flow
    Production. Industrial Relations, 44(2), 307–330.

    Gibbs, Michael, 1998. “Lincoln Electric.” Personnel Economics for Managers: Instructors
    Manual, pp. 4-5, New York: John Wiley and Sons.

    Griffith, Rachel, & Andy Neely. 2006. Incentives and Managerial Experience in Multi-Task
    Teams: Evidence from Within a Firm. Working paper, Institute for Fiscal Studies, London.

    Halley, M. Ryan, 2003 “The Response of Worker Effort to Piece Rates :Evidence from the
    Midwest Logging Industry”. Journal of Human Resources 38I(4):881‐890

    Helper, Susan. 2000. Economists and Field Research: "You Can Observe a Lot Just by
    Watching.” American Economic Review, 90(2), 228–232.

    Helper, Susan, & Morris M. Kleiner. 2009. International Differences in Lean Production,
    Productivity, and Employee Attitudes. In R. B. Freeman and K. Shaw (eds.), International
    Differences in Business Practices and Productivity. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

    Holmstrom, Bengt, & Paul Milgrom. 1991. Multitask Principal-Agent Analyses: Incentive
    Contracts, Asset Ownership, and Job Design. Journal of Law, Economics and Organization,
    7(0), 24–52, Special I.

    Jacobsen, Joyce P., & Gilbert L. Skillman. 2004. Labor Markets and Employment Relationships:
    A Comprehensive Approach. London: Blackwell Publishers.




                                                  26
Judge, Timothy A., Carl J. Thoresen, Joyce E. Bono, & Gregory K. Patton. 2001. The Job
Satisfaction–Job Performance Relationship: A Qualitative and Quantitative Review.
Psychological Bulletin, 127(3), 376–407.

Lazear, Edward. 2000. Performance Pay and Productivity. American Economic Review, 90(5),
1346–1361.

Lazear, Edward and Kathryn Shaw, 2007. “Personnel Economics: The Economist’s View of
Human Resources,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21, no. 4:91-114.

Lazonick, W. 1991. Business Organization and the Myth of the Market Economy. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.

______, 1993. “Industry Clusters and Global Webs: Organizational Capabilities in the U.S.
Economy,” Industrial and Corporate Change, 2 1-24;

Marginson, Paul 2010. "The Decline of Incentive Pay in British Manufacturing"
Industrial Relations Journal, Vol. 41, Issue 4, pp. 289-311, July.

Milgrom, Paul, & John Roberts. 1995. “Complementarities and Fit Strategy, Structure, and
Organizational Change in Manufacturing”. Journal of Accounting and Economics, 19(2–3), 179–
208.

Osterman, P. 2000. “Work reorganization in an era of restructuring: Trends in diffusion and
effects on employee welfare.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 53(2): 179–196.

Paarsch, Harry J. and Bruce Shearer, 2000 ``Piece Rates, Fixed Wages and Incentive Effects:
Statistical Evidence from Payroll Records.'' International Economic Review, 41(1): 59-92.

Roy, Donald. 1952. “Quota Restriction and Goldbricking in a Machine Shop” American Journal
of Sociology, pp. 427- 442.

Schildkraut, Jeffrey L. 2003. NCS Reviews the Effectiveness of Variable Pay Collection. U.S.
Bureau of Labor Statistics.Available at http://www.bls.gov/opub/cwc/cm20030324ar01p1.htm.

Seiler, Eric.“Piece Rate v. Time Rate: The Effect of Incentives on Earnings.” 1984. Review of
Economics and Statistics, Vol. 66, no. 3 (August), pp. 363-76,

Shaw, Jason, Nina Gupta, & John Delery. 2001. Congruence Between Technology and
Compensation Systems: Implications for Strategy Implementation. Strategic Management
Journal, 22(4), 379–386.

Shaw, K. 2009. “Insider econometrics: A roadmap with stops along the way.” Labour Economics
16(6): 607–617.




                                               27
Snell, Scott, & James Dean. 1994. Strategic Compensation for Integrated Manufacturing: The
Moderating Effects of Jobs and Organizational Inertia. Academy of Management Journal, 37,
1109–1140.

Thiele, V. 2010. “Task-specific abilities in multi-task principal-agent relationships.” Labour
Economics. 17, 4 (August), pp. 690-698.




                                                28
          Figure 1. Impacts of modern manufacturing on optimal compensation

Feature of modern impact on production function         desirability of piece rates
manufacturing 
Increased emphasis Increased return to:                  Reduced due to:
on:
Quality            effort on hard-to-observe tasks,      low motivation to develop,
                   such as suggestions for process       share ideas that cross job
                   improvement                           boundaries, require
                                                         teamwork

                   multi-tasking
                   (workers use observation gained
                   while producing to improve
                   process)

Product Variety    effort on hard-to-observe tasks       fights, risk in establishing
                   such as de-bugging process for        rates on new products
                   new products

                   multi-tasking (complex scheduling     difficulty of establishing
                   increases return to workers who       rate that gives workers an
                   can produce multiple products, do     incentive to switch to the
                   both set-ups and production)          task that is most highly
                                                         valued at that moment

JIT production     producing exact quantity              low return to extra
                   demanded                              production incentivized by
                                                         piece rate

                   multi-tasking due to increased        low effort on hard to
                   return to speedy problem-solving;     observe tasks that increase
                   Lack of space on line; lack of time   quality
                   for specialized workers to learn
                   about problems                        difficulty in valuing
                                                         individual contribution to
                                                         process improvements,
                                                         training at any point in time




                                              29
Figure 2: The timing of the movement away from piece rates in the manufacturing

establishments

                                      Panel A Big Foot




                                     Panel B Small Parts




                                             30
Figure 3: Profits over time

                                                                  Panel A Big Foot
  Log(Revenue-Material Costs-Labor Costs)
    16
                                            Piece Rates                                                                Time Rates

  15. 5

                                                                                       Actual Value
    15



  14. 5
                                                                                                           Predicted Value

    14



  13. 5



    13
          1   6   11    16   21   26   31    36   41    46   51   56   61    66   71   76   81   86   91   96   101 106 111 116 121 126 131 136
                                                                            Time Series


                                                                  Panel B Small Parts
  Log(Revenue-Material Costs-Labor Costs)
     9
                              Piece Rates                                                             Gain Sharing
  8. 8

  8. 6

  8. 4

  8. 2                                                 Actual Value
                                                                                             Predicted Value
     8

  7. 8

  7. 6

  7. 4

  7. 2

     7
          1   4   7    10 13 16 19 22 25 28 31 34 37 40 43 46 49 52 55 58 61 64 67 70 73 76 79 82 85 88 91 94 97
                                                                        Time Series
Note: The estimation specification of the predicted value is log_grossprofit =f(log_assets, time,
vag, vag*time, log_headcount, fixed effects)


                                                                                  31
Table 1 Descriptive Statistics and Explanation of Variables

                                 Big Foot                                        Small Parts
                       Mean                    SD                     Mean                       SD
Headcount             364.98                  93.13                  702.95                    243.76
Asset per
production              N/A                    N/A                 $106898.1                   8554.96
worker
Labor cost
per
                     $2075.44                 539.10               $649.7428                   103.38
production
worker
Material cost
per
                     $5221.37                1449.33                $6131.57                   2408.71
production
worker
Net sales per
production           $13524.3                3412.752              $14042.16                   3730.19
worker
Production
                    $255,994.7               101286.3              $10,896,330                 5965891
volumes
Pairs of
shoes                4052.875                1095.514                 N/A                       N/A
produced
Planned
pairs of             4107.038                1076.775                 N/A                       N/A
shoes
Value added
                    $2,324,016               1058492               $5,878,878                  2478649
profit
Number of
                                    290                                             127
Observations
                Notes: net sales, labor cost, material cost and total asset are in dollars; Monthly data;

Change          Coded as zero when the data points’ periods are under piece rates; coded as 1 when the
                data points’ periods are under gain sharing or time rates.
Headcount       Number of manufacturing workers
Asset           Asset of Small Part
Labor Cost      Compensation costs
Material        Variable production costs
Costs
Transition      It is a period at Big Foot prior to the complete transformation. In the period, part of the
Effects         plants changed to time rates, while other part of the plants remains in piece rates.
Full Effort     It is period at Big Foot during the transition where workers maximized their effort
Effects         hoping for a higher time rate during their entire employment at BF.
Time            Time trend: 1, 2, 3,…, n for monthly data. For Small Parts, n = 98, and Time = 47 is the
                implementation of gain sharing. For Big Foot, n = 140, and Time = 102 is the full
                implementation of time rates for Plant 1, Time = 90 is the full implementation of time
                rates for Plant 2.

                                                  32
Sales        Income from sales
Production   Production volumes in thousands of dollars for Small Parts
Pairs        For BF, pairs of shoes produced
Gap          The difference between the planned pairs of shoes to be produced and the actual pairs of
             shoes produced
Self-ranking From the employee survey of Small Parts: “I meet production targets.”
in terms of
meeting
production
targets
Frequency    From the employee survey of Small Parts: “I talk with my co-workers about work
of           issues.”
teamwork
Frequency    From the employee survey of Small Parts: “I make suggestions to improve the way the
of making    factory runs.”
suggestions
General      From the employee survey of Small Parts: “Considering everything, how satisfied are
satisfaction you with your job?”
Value-       sales-material costs- labor costs
added
profit




                                              33
Table 2 Analyzing observable and unobservable tasks in manufacturing

Panel A. Big Foot (BF); change from piece rates to time rates
                           Production Volume                 Hard-to–Observe Tasks
   Dependent                                          Ln(material cost    Ln(material
                      Ln (pairs           Ln (pairs
    Variable                                              per pair of    cost/price per
                      produced)      produced*price)
                                                             shoes)      pair of shoes)
Change              -.20** (.02)       -.23** (.06)      -.19** (.07)      -.16* (.08)
Change*time        .0008 (.0007)      .0004 (.0016)      -.001 (.002)     -.003 (.002)
Time               .0002 (.0002)      .005** (.001)      .007 (.0008)    .002* (.0009)
Log headcount        .92** (.02)        .91** (.05)        .03 (.06)        .04 (.07)
Transition
                    -.07** (.02)         -.07 (.05)       -.004 (.06)       .02 (.07)
effect
Full effort
                     .0003 (.02)         .008 (.04)        .06 (.05)        .02 (.06)
effect
Constant            2.82** (.12)       9.65** (.28)      5.49** (.36)     1.69** (.41)
Adjusted R-
                         .94                .81                .48             .06
squared
Number of
                         240                247               240              238
observation

Panel B. Small Parts (SP); change from piece rates to gain sharing
                             Sales Volume                    Hard-to–Observe Tasks
   Dependent
                                                        Ln(percentage of material cost in
    Variable                Ln(production)
                                                                    production)
Change                         -.62** (.16)                          -.14* (.07)
Change*time                   .01** (.003)                          .003 (.002)
Time                         -.010** (.003)                         -.002 (.002)
Log headcount                 1.46** (.25)                         1.05** (.12)
Log asset                     1.42** (.40)                           -.35† (.20)
Constant                    -15.34** (3.69)                        -3.68* (1.83)
Adjusted R-
                                   .96                                   .88
squared
Number of
                                    98                                    98
observation
Empirical Test of Proposition 4 and Proposition 2-3
Source: Based on company’s data. Standard errors are in parentheses.
Notes: Time is a monthly time trend. The results are similar with or without polynomial
time trend. Big Foot regressions include a plant dummy.† p<.10, * p<.05, ** p<.01




                                               34
Table 3

Big Foot: Effect of compensation system changes on the gap between planned output and
actual output

              Change                                    -.03** (.01)
          Total headcount                              .0001* (.00005)

          Transition effect                              -.03** (.01)

          Full Effort effect                              .06** (.01)

              Constant                                    -.04* (.02)
        Adjusted R-squared                                  0.13
                 N                                          240
Empirical Test of Proposition 1
Source: Based on company’s data. Standard errors are in parentheses.
Notes: Regression includes a plant dummy to account for fixed effects.
† p<.10, * p<.05, ** p<.01




                                              35
Table 4

Small Parts: Comparing employee perceptions on work for those hired before and after gain sharing Small

                          Production Volume                 Hard-to-Observe Tasks
                                                                                               General
     Dependent
                       Self-ranking of success at Frequency       Frequency of making             job
     Variables
                       meeting production targets     of              suggestions            satisfaction
                                                  Teamwork
 Hired after gain-                  -.11                                     .26                  .18
                                                       .28†
 sharingsharingsharing             (.11)               (.16)               (.16)                 (.12)
 Vietnamese                        -.23†                .13                  .13                .38**
                                   (.13)               (.19)               (.19)                 (.14)
 Cape Verde                        -.35**               .03                 -.13                  .17
                                     (.13)             (.19)               (.19)                 (.14)
 Constant                         3.60**              3.26**              3.00**               3.04**
                                     (.10)             (.15)               (.16)                 (.12)
 Adjusted R-                         0.02              .002                 .005                  .02
 N                                428                   439               422                     478
Empirical Test of Proposition 3
Source: Based on survey data. Standard errors are in parentheses.
Notes: † p<.10, * p<.05, ** p<.01




                                                 36
Table 5

Labor costs and changes in compensation
Regression estimates of the effects of compensation method changes on labor costs

   Dependent Variable:
    Ln (labor costs per                 Big Foot                     Small Parts
        employee)
Change                                  -.24 (.23)                    -.71* (.28)
Change*time                           -.002 (.002)                    .007 (.004)
Time                                 .006** (.001)                   -.007 (.004)
Log asset                                  N/A                       1.49** (.40)
Transition effect                       -.10 (.06)                       N/A
Full effort effect                    .17** (.05)                        N/A
Constant                               7.33 (.33)                   -16.86 (4.42)
R-squared                                  0.33                          0.27
Number of Observation                      247                            99
Empirical test of Proposition 6
Source: Based on company data. Standard errors are in parentheses.
Notes: † p<.10, * p<.05, ** p<.01
* Big Foot regression includes a plant dummy to separately account for the performance
of each of BF’s two plants.




                                              37
Table 6

Panel A: Profitability and changes in compensation
Regression estimates of the effects of compensation method changes on profitability

  Dependent Variable:
  Ln (gross profit per                Big Foot                       Small Parts
       employee)
Change                                .18** (.07)                       .21* (.11)
Change*time                         .005** (.002)                   -.003** (.001)
Time                                -.003** (.001)                   .002* (.001)
Log headcount                         -.04 (.058)                     -.76** (.09)
Log asset                                 N/A                          .26† (.15)
Transition effect                      .03 (.06)                           N/A
Full effort effect                     -.07 (.05)                          N/A
Constant                               -.47 (.33)                      1.24 (1.37)
R-squared                                 0.26                             0.87
Number of Observation                     247                               98

Panel B: Effects of time rates and gain sharing
Regression estimates of the effects of compensation methods in profitability

   Dependent Variable:
   Ln (gross profit per                  Big Foot                     Small Parts
        employee)
Gain Sharing                               N/A                        .39** (.06)
Time Rates                             .18** (.05)                    .34** (.14)
Log asset per employee                     N/A                         -.02 (.04)
DV of the previous
                                        .11† (.06)                    .22** (.06)
month
Percentage of non-
                                           N/A                        .06** (.01)
production employees
Transition effect                        .03 (.07)                        N/A
Full effort effect                      -.04 (.07)                        N/A
Constant                               7.57** (.55)                   -.62* (.27)
R-squared                                  0.24                           0.85
Number of Observation                      245                            263
Empirical test of Proposition 7
Source: Based on company data. Standard errors are in parentheses.
Notes: Gross profit is equal to the income that the companies have after subtracting
material cost and labor cost.. † p<.10, * p<.05, ** p<.01
* Big Foot regression includes a plant dummy to separately account for the performance
of each of BF’s two plants.
* Small Parts regression in Panel B includes dummies to account for the fixed effects of
different plants located in Boston, Ohio, Florida, and U.K.

                                               38
Appendix A: Trends in job satisfaction at Big Foot



Employee Satisfaction Before, During and After the Transition from Piece Rates to Time Rates

                                   1992                                     1993                                         1995                     1997
                             Before the Change                        During the Change                            After the Change               After
                                                                                                                                                   the
                                                                                                                                                 Change
Yes%           (1)               (2)             (3)        (1)           (2)             (3)        (1)              (2)             (3)
               Good              Too many        The        Good          Too many        The        Good             Too many        The
               cooperation       problems        longer I   cooperation   problems        longer I   cooperation      problems        longer I
               between           between         work       between       between         work       between          between         work
               departments       coworkers       here the   departments   coworkers       here the   coworkers        coworkers       here the
                                                 more I                                   more I                                      more I
                                                 enjoy it                                 enjoy it                                    enjoy it
   Yes%             53                30             69          27            70             30          42               50             49
   No%              47                70             31          73            30             70          58               48             51

Satisfied or
   very                                                                                                                                            51
 Satisfied
    (%)
Dissatisfied                                                                                                                                       18
    (%)
  Neither                                                                                                                                          32
    (%)




                                                                          39
Appendix B: Descriptive statistics of before and after changes in compensation methods
                                             Big Foot                                            Small Parts
                                Before                    After                 Before                           After

                             Mean          SD          Mean          SD         Mean          SD          Mean             SD
            Headcount      346.53       71.47   415.32**     127.66   488.31                 70.23       946.48**         93.70
            Asset per
            production      N/A          N/A      N/A         N/A   $106977.1              5310.07      $106808.4        11214.84
            worker
            Labor Cost
            per
                          $2115.10     573.73  $1960.12*     404.78  $624.32                 99.16      $672.72**         102.64
            production
            worker
            Material
            Cost per
                          $5143.31    1449.23 $5448.37†     1436.67  $4067.79               825.83      $7957.23**       1786.94
            production
            worker
            Net Sales
            per
                         $13235.48 3102.74    $14354.63*    4093.29 $11,086.78             2074.03     $17054.38**       2379.13
            production
            worker
            Production
                         $239,494.3 91871.22 $307,202.9** 112347 $5,606,849                1653921    $16,287,540**      3328595
            volume
            Pairs of
            shoes         4090.297 1095.125    3935.448    1097.912    N/A                   N/A           N/A             N/A
            produced
            Planned
            pairs of      4110.396 1063.508      4096.5    1126.854    N/A                   N/A           N/A             N/A
            shoes
            Profit       $2,143,315 962667.6 $2,851,777    1153345 $3,499,478              792340.7    $7,983,731**      1227749
            Number of
                                  169                   96                   75                                   52
            Observations
Notes: net sales, labor cost, material cost and total asset are in dollars; Monthly data; † p<.10, * p<.05, ** p<.01, two-tailed.


                                                                    40
Appendix C:

        Proof of Proposition 1:

        Since we are not dealing with the hard-to-observe tasks here, we will simplify the

firms’ problem to   B (q )  L for convenience.

        Time Rates and Gain Sharing

        The firm asks the agent to produce the optimal volume q̂ . If output consistently

falls short of the principal’s expectation, the principal will hire extra workers or replace

the low-performance worker with a new worker to make sure the workforce will always

produce the desired output. Thus we have | q  qˆ | 0 .

        Piece Rates. In contrast to time rates or gain sharing, the principal does not

directly tell the agent how many to produce, but instead announces a piece rate,  , to the

agent who chooses q to maximize his utility,  * q  D ( q ,  ) . The term D ( q,  ) is the

monetary value of the agent’s disutility of producing q pieces, with D1 ( q,  )  0

and D11 (q,  )  0 . The variable  is a random variable representing the uncertainty of the

disutility function with the expectation of its distribution being zero. The variable 

comes from the information asymmetry between the principal and agent and frequent

changes of product design. The more frequently the product designs change, the more

uncertain the principal is about how much effort the agent needs to make to produce the

commodity. Thus, the standard deviation of the distribution of  is large.

        The agent’s maximization yields the first-order condition   D1 (q~,  ) from

which we deduce a reaction function h ( ,  ) . This satisfies   D1 (h(~,  ),  ) .

        The optimal piece rate announcement to the agent is obtained from maximizing



                                                41
           Max E[ B (h( , ))   * h( ,  )]
             


          i.e.

           E[ B1 (h(~,  ))h1 (~,  )]  E[h(~,  )  ~h1 (~,  )] .

                          E[ B1 (h(~, ))h1 (~,  )  h(~, )]
          We obtain: ~                                          , and the agent will respond with
                                      E[h1 (~, )]

q~  h(~ ,  ) , which is transmitted to the principal. Notice that q~ is a function of the

random variable  both directly and indirectly via ~ . Thus, q~ deviates from its optimal

value E (q~) , i.e., | q~  E (q~) || q~  qˆ || f ( ) | 0 .

          Transition from piece-rates to time-rates and gain-sharing: Switching from piece-

rates makes the firms better able to produce the exact optimal volume, because

| q  qˆ | 0 | q~  qˆ | .



          Proof of Proposition 2

          To investigate how piece-rates affect the agent’s effort, we set the agent’s utility

                                          B (e, q)
function as U  p(t e )(   t q                    )  D(t e , t q ) . To maximize the utility function,
                                              N

the agent chooses t e * and t q * to satisfy the first order condition:

U                                   B (e, q)                t q           t q              t q
      f 1  p' (t e *)(  t q *            )  p(t e *)(      ( B1  B2      ))  D1  D2      0
t e                                    N                     t e N          t e              t e


The above equations imply that under piece rates, the workers’ effort must satisfy:

                                            t q          t q
D1  p' (t e *)(  t q *)  p(t e *)
    p
                                                    D2          . But if a firm uses time rates, the workers’
                                            t e          t e




                                                          42
                                             t q
effort becomes D1 t  p' (t e *)  D2              . If a firm uses gain-sharing, the workers’ effort
                                             t e

                                 B (e, q)                                         t q            t q
becomes D1 g  p' (t e *)(                 )  p(t e *)         ( B1  B2                )  D2          .
                                       N                      N                     t e            t e

Switching from piece-rates to time-rates

        By contrasting the disutility functions, we can contrast the effort allocation under

the compensation schemes:

                                             t q                        t q
D1  D1   p ' (t e *)t q *  p (t e *)
   t      p                                               p          t
                                                     ( D2  D2 )
                                             t e                            t e

        The firm will set the piece rate as ˆ  D2 (tˆe , tˆq ) , so that the workers will devote

the desired amount of effort tˆq and produce the exact quantity of q̂ . Under time-rates and

gain-sharing, the firms simply require the workers to produce q̂ . Since it is an observable

task, the workers will risk being laid off if they consistently do not reach the target q̂ .

              p    t       p       g
Thus, D2  D2  D2  D2  0

        The above equation indicates that workers’ effort on hard-to-observe tasks are

determined by the piece rate (  ), the extent to which a worker’s effort can be observed

                                                                                                               t q
( p' (te *) and p(te *) ), and the trade-off between the effort dedicated to the two tasks (                          )
                                                                                                               te

which is negative. When the effort on hard-to-observe tasks is very hard to observe,

(i.e. p ' (t e )  0 , p(t e )  1 ) and  is large, D1  D1  0 becomes positive, which
                                                              t          p




indicate that the effort on observable tasks decreases and the effort on hard-to-observe

tasks increases.




                                                        43
Switching from piece-rates to gain-sharing

                        B(e, q )                               t q                                        t q                   t q
                                                                        )  p ' (t e *)t q *  p (t e *)
   g      p                                                                                                              p     g
D1  D1  p ' (t e *)                p(t e *)       ( B1  B2                                                       ( D2  D2 )
                           N                     N               t e                                        t e                   t e


        Similar to the situation of switching to time-rates, when tasks become hard to

                                                          g         p
observe, (i.e. p ' (t e )  0 and p(t e )  1 ), D1  D1  0 is positive, which indicates that

the effort devoted to hard-to-observe tasks increases when a firm switches from piece

rates to time rates.



        Proof of Proposition 3

        For simplicity, we assume hard-to-observe tasks are completely unobservable

(i.e. p(t e )  1 ) hereafter, unless otherwise mentioned.

        Piece Rates. An agent’s utility under piece rates is U p     q q  D (t e , t q ) .

                 dU * p U * p q U * p t * q       q D * p t * q
Thus, we have                    *             q                  , which is greater
                  dAq    q Aq    t q Aq          Aq t * q Aq

                        t * q
than zero, because              0 . The equation shows that two components contribute to the
                        Aq

benefit of being fast in producing commodities under piece-rates: higher incomes and

lower disutility.

                                                dU * p
        But for the unobservable tasks, we have        0.
                                                 dAe




                                                         44
               Gain Sharing. An agent’s utility under gain sharing is

                     B(e, q )
Ug                         D(t e , t q ) . The variables e and q are functions of the agent’s ability
                       N

(denoted as Ae and Aq ) and effort (denoted as t e and t q ). e  e(t e , Ae ) q  q (t q , Aq ) .

               As before, since q ’s outcome can be easily measured, the principal imposes a rule

of q  qˆ to agents.16 To minimize the pain associated with effort, an agent will produce a

volume of commodities such that q *  qˆ , with t q* being the optimal level of effort

devoted to the simple tasks. Given the implicit functions, it is clear

                     qˆ
       t q*               Aq                   U * g         t * q
that                             0 . Since           0 and         0 with U * g being the optimal utility
       Aq           qˆ                         t q
                                                   *
                                                               Aq
                           t q*

                                                                  dU * g U * g t * q   D * g t * q
level of an agent under gain sharing, we have                            *             *            0 .
                                                                   dAq    t q Aq       t q Aq

                                                                                         U * g       B *
               As for the hard-to-observe tasks, e is hard to measure. Since                     0 ,       0,
                                                                                          B *        e *

       e *                          dU * g U * g B * e
                                                           *

and              0 , we have                                0.
       Ae                            dAe    B * e * Ae

               Time Rates. An agent’s utility under gain sharing is U t    D(t e , t q ) . Similar to

the case of gain sharing, there is a weak sorting effect in terms of simple tasks because to

minimize the pain associated with effort devoted to simple tasks, an agent will produce an

outcome such that q *  qˆ , so q * (t q* , Aq )  qˆ with t q* being the optimal level of effort

devoted to produce the required quantities of commodities. Given this implicit function, it


16
  Zero is the minimum performance standard required by the principal for the observable tasks. If the
agents cannot meet the standard, they will be dismissed.

                                                             45
                              eq*
                 t q*               Aq                     U * t         t * q
is clear that                              0 . Since             0 and         0 with U *t being the
                 Aq          eq*                          t q
                                                              *
                                                                           Aq
                                     t q*

optimal utility level of an agent under gain sharing, we have

dU * t U * t t * q   D * t t * q
       *             *            0 .
 dAq   t q Aq        t q Aq

           Because the wage under time rates does not depend on the ability to perform hard-

to-observe tasks, and the ability to perform hard-to-observe tasks does not influence an

                                           dU * t
agent’s utility under time rates, we have:        0
                                            dAe

           Transition from Piece Rates to Time Rates/Gain Sharing. From these results, we

can see that all of the compensation schemes have sorting effects in terms of abilities to

produce certain volumes of commodities quickly. But the sorting effect of piece-rates is

stronger than that of time-rates or gain-sharing:

dU * p       q D * p t * qp dU * g dU * t    D * t t * q ( g / t )                q
        q     *                          *                       , because  q     0
 dAq        Aq t qp Aq       dAq    dAq     t q ( g / t ) Aq                     Aq

    D * p D * g D * t
and         *  *                          17
                                                 . The intuition behind this is that under piece rates, in
    t * q  t q  t q

                                                    D * t * q
addition to saving the pain associated with work (  *          ), agents can get returns
                                                    t q Aq

       q
(q        ) from being competent to produce more.
       Aq


17
     To prove this inequality: according to Proposition 1a,          t * qp  t * qg  t * qt . Since D ' '  0 , we have
D * p D * g D * t
         *  *
t * qp  t qg t qt

                                                                46
            For the hard-to-observe tasks, switching to gain sharing will reward higher

           dU * g dU * p
abilities:               0 , but the sorting effects will remain the same if the firm
            dAe    dAe

                                dU * t dU * p
switches to time-rates:                      0
                                 dAe    dAe



            Proof of Proposition 4

            For simplicity, we assume that agent’s abilities are the same under the three

compensation schemes.18

            In the batch manufacturing mode with a piece-rate compensation scheme, a

simplified profit function of a firm is   B batch (e, q)    q , subject to the

maximization of a worker’s utility function U    q  D(t e , t q ) and the constraint

  q  D(t e , t q )  0 , which makes the worker willing to join the firm. Substituting the

constraint to the profit function yields   B batch (e, q )  D(t e , t q ) , with the first order

                                                 t q
condition being            ( B2batch (q*)  D2 )       0 . The maximization of the worker’s utility
                                                

function yields the first order condition D2   . The two first order conditions imply that

  B2batch (q*) . Thus D2 (q*)  B2batch (q*) . Suppose B22batch  0 to be a constant.

B2batch  B2batch (0)  B22
                         batch
                               q . For simplicity, we assume D22  0 as a constant. The optimal

                                              B2batch (0)
production volume satisfies q*                              .
                                             D22  B22 batch




18
     Note that if we include the change in abilities (i.e. sorting effects), the results of Proposition 4 and
                                                                                              p       t
Proposition 2 will be strengthened. For Proposition 2, D22 and for Proposition 4,          D2  D2 and
      p        p
D2  D2 characterize how sorting effects help strengthen the results of the two propositions.

                                                          47
           In the modern manufacturing mode with time rates and gain sharing, the firm’s

profit function is   (1   ) B mod (e, q)   . The maximization of the profit function

          
yields        (1   ) B2mod  0 . Since the percentage of benefit shared with workers is less
          q

than 100% (i.e.   1 ), the optimal production volume satisfies B2mod (qˆ )  0 , with q̂

being the optimal production volume in modern manufacturing. Since B22mod  0 is a

                                                                                         B2mod (0)
constant, Taylor series indicate that B2 (qˆ )  B2mod (0)  B22mod qˆ . Thus,. qˆ  
                                                                                          B22mod

                      B2batch (0)      B2mod (0)
           q * qˆ                  
                     D22  B22 batch
                                        B22mod

           Because of the frequent change in product designs and the costs associated with

excessive inventory, one characteristic of modern manufacturing is that B22mod  0 is much

              batch
smaller than B22     0 , because excessive production volume makes profits drop more

quickly for modern manufacturers than for batch manufacturers. Specifically, when

           B2mod (0) batch
B   mod
    22     batch   ( B22  D22 ) , the production volume under batch manufacturing and
           B2 (0)

piece rates is larger than under modern manufacturing with time rates or gain-sharing.



           Proof of Proposition 5:

           Following the proof for Proposition 1, to obtain analytical results, we

approximate costs and benefits with a quadratic approximation around q̂ .

                                                  B' ' (qˆ ) ~
            B(q~)  B(qˆ )  B' (qˆ )(q~  qˆ )            (q  qˆ ) 2
                                                     2



                                                            48
         After some manipulation, we

                                                       B22
have E ( Bt*  B *p )  E ( B g*  B *p )  (               ) E[(q~  qˆ ) 2 ]
                                                        2

Notice that the two parts consist of the difference between the quantity produced in piece

rates and the quantity produced in time rates/gain sharing: q~  qˆ  [q~  E (q~)]  [ E (q~)  qˆ ] .

         The gap between the actual production and the optimal production volume will be

influenced by the uncertainty,  , i.e., q~  E (q~)   ( ) with E[ ( )]  0 . Let us denote:

s 2  E[ ( ) 2 ] . Then we have:

                                                          B22 2
          E ( Bt*  B *p )  E ( B g*  B *p )  (            )[ s  E ( E (q~ )  qˆ ) 2 ]
                                                           2

                                                                                  B22 2
         The crucial expression in the above results is (                             ) s , which is greater than zero
                                                                                   2

( B 22  0 ) and thus means that switching to time rates or gain sharing will always cause

the firm’s actual output to be closer to its optimal output.

         Following the proof for Proposition 2 and 3, we conclude that the outcomes of

hard-to-observe tasks, determined by te and Ae, are strictly larger under gain sharing and

time rates than under piece rates, because

  t      p       t        p           t       t                 p        p
t e  t e & Ae  Ae => e t (t e , Ae )  e p (t e , Ae ) and

  g       p          g        p           t       t                 p        p
t e  t e & Ae  Ae => e t (t e , Ae )  e p (t e , Ae ) . Also, although piece rates produce

                                                                         t       p     t      p
increased performance on the observable task t q  t q & Aq  Aq and

  g       p          g        p
t q  t q & Aq  Aq , these increased abilities and effort at observable tasks brings no

additional income when they exceed the optimal quantity q̂ (i.e. B2 (e, q )  0 for q  qˆ ).

Thus, the net income of gain sharing/time rates will be strictly larger than the net income

                                                                    49
under piece rates (i.e., B g  B p and Bt  B p ), because time rates and gain-sharing
                                    *         *             *         *




yield increased performance on the hard-to-observe task (i.e. B1 (e, q )  0 for all e). The

combination of this result and the above result of Proposition 1 indicates that

          E[ Bt* (e t , qˆ )]  E[ B *p (e p , q~ )]  0

          E[ B g* (e g , qˆ )]  E[ B *p (e p , q~ )]  0

         Proof of Proposition 6:

         To minimize costs, the compensation paid byfirms under gain sharing and time

rates (i.e. Lt and Lg ) will be set equal to the disutility of effort, that is,

Lt  L g  D (tˆe , tˆq ) , and tˆe  tˆp  T , with T being the total time at work. By contrast, to

motivate the employees to devote the desired level of effort, the piece rate is set as the

marginal disutility of effort, that is,   D2 (tˆe , tˆq ) . Since the marginal disutility increases

as the firms’ required effort increases, (i.e. D22  0 ), piece rates generate more pay for

                                        tˆq                     tˆq

the agent, because D2 tˆq   D2 (tˆe , tˆq )dt q   D2 (tˆe , t q )dt q  D(tˆq ) , with D2 (tˆe , tˆq ) being a
                                        0                       0



constant while D2 (tˆe , t q ) being an increasing function of t q . This indicates that the labor

cost for doing observable tasks under piece rates is higher than that of time rates and gain

sharing. In other words, if we only consider simple and observable tasks, time-rates and

gain-sharing provide employees with minimal rents, while piece-rates provide more rents

for employees.

         For the hard-to-observe tasks, suppose w to be the total income under any of the

compensation schemes. To make workers devote tˆe amount of effort to hard-to-observe



                                                                 50
                                                                                                        t q
                                                                    D1 (tˆe , tˆq )  D2 (tˆe , tˆq )
                                                                                                        t e
tasks, total worker income must satisfy w                                                                     . The equation
                                                                                   p ' (tˆe )

indicates that the workers’ total income depends on the marginal disutility of the optimal

effort allocation and the observability of the hard-to-observe task p ' (tˆe ) . The harder it is

to observe and the higher the desired level of effort on the hard to observe task, which

depends on its marginal contribution to the firm’s benefit function, the higher the

worker’s total income is.

                                                        t q
                    D1 (tˆe , tˆq )  D2 (tˆe , tˆq )
                                                        t e
        If w                                                   D2 tˆq , the labor costs will be equal under the
                                   p ' (tˆe )

three compensation schemes L p  Lg  Lt . Because to induce workers to devote large

amount of effort to hard-to-observe tasks (i.e. a higher D1 (tˆe , tˆq ) ), the firms need to pay

large amount of total compensation, which exceeds the rent from piece-rate and makes

the total wages of the three compensation schemes equal. But if

                                         t q
     D1 (tˆe , tˆq )  D2 (tˆe , tˆq )
                                         t e
w                                               D2 tˆq , which indicates that the required level of hard-to-
                    p ' (tˆe )

observe tasks is low (i.e. a lower D1 (tˆe , tˆq ) ), the labor costs of piece rates will be strictly

higher than those of time rates or gain sharing (i.e. L p  Lg and L p  Lt ).

        In conclusion, the labor costs of piece rates are no less than the labor costs of time

rates or gain sharing. L p  Lg and L p  Lt .




                                                                  51
          Proof of Proposition 7:

          To contrast profits under the different compensation schemes, we need to examine

the following:

          E ( *t   *p )  E ( Bt* (qˆ )  B *p (q~ ))  E ( L p  Lt )

          E ( *g   *p )  E (( B g* (qˆ )  B *p (q~ ))  E ( L p  Lg ) .

          Proposition 5 indicates that if Just-In-Time and hard-to-observe tasks are valuable

to a firm, E[ Bt* (e t , qˆ )]  E[ B *p (e p , q~ )]  0 and E[ B g* (e g , qˆ )]  E[ B *p (e p , q~ )]  0 .

Proposition 6 indicates that L p  Lg and L p  Lt . In conclusion, Proposition 5 and

Proposition 6 imply that E ( *t   *p )  0 and E ( *g   *p )  0 .




                                                            52
