NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TAXATION AND INTERNATIONAL MIGRATION OF SUPERSTARS:
EVIDENCE FROM THE EUROPEAN FOOTBALL MARKET
Henrik Kleven
Camille Landais
Emmanuel Saez
Working Paper 16545
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16545
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2010

We would like to thank Raj Chetty, Caroline Hoxby, Lawrence Katz, Wojciech Kopczuk, Claus Kreiner,
Thomas Piketty, James Poterba, Guttorm Schjelderup, Dan Silverman, Joel Slemrod, three anonymous
referees, and numerous seminar participants for helpful comments and discussions. We thank Jori
Pinje for sharing the individual football earnings data he collected for his Ph.D. research. We are also
grateful to Filip Rozsypal, Ben Eisenpress and Emily Tian for outstanding research assistance. Financial
support from the Center for Equitable Growth at UC Berkeley, the European Tax Policy Forum, and
NSF Grant SES-0850631 is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Henrik Kleven, Camille Landais, and Emmanuel Saez. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Taxation and International Migration of Superstars: Evidence from the European Football
Market
Henrik Kleven, Camille Landais, and Emmanuel Saez
NBER Working Paper No. 16545
November 2010, Revised May 2012
JEL No. H24,H73,J61
ABSTRACT
This paper analyzes the effects of top earnings tax rates on the international migration of football players
in Europe. We construct a panel dataset of top earnings tax rates, football player careers, and club
performances in the first leagues of 14 Western European countries since 1985. We identify the effects
of top earnings tax rates on migration using a number of tax and institutional changes: (a) the 1995
Bosman ruling which liberalized the European football market, (b) top tax rate reforms within countries,
and (c) special tax schemes offering preferential tax rates to immigrant football players. We start by
presenting reduced-form graphical evidence showing large and compelling migration responses to
country-specific tax reforms and labor market regulation. We then develop a multinomial regression
framework to exploit all sources of tax variation simultaneously. Our results show that (i) the overall
location responses to the net-of-tax rate is positive and large, with an elasticity of the number of foreign
players to the net-of-tax rate around one (and an elasticity of the number of domestic players around
.15), (ii) location elasticities are even larger at the top of the ability distribution, but negative at the
bottom due to ability sorting effects, and (iii) cross-tax effects of foreign players on domestic players
(and vice versa) are negative and quite strong due to displacement effects. Those results can be rationalized
in a simple model of migration and taxation with rigid labor demand.
Henrik Kleven
Department of Economics & STICERD
LSE
Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE
United Kingdom
H.J.kleven@lse.ac.uk
Camille Landais
Stanford University
SIEPR
366 Galvez Street
Stanford, CA 94305-6015
landais@stanford.edu

Emmanuel Saez
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
530 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
saez@econ.berkeley.edu

1

Introduction

Tax-induced international mobility of talent is a crucial public policy issue when tax rates differ
substantially across countries and migration barriers are low as in the case of the European
Union. High tax rates on highly paid workers may induce such workers to migrate to countries
where the tax burden is lower, hence limiting the ability of governments to redistribute income
using progressive taxation. In fact, mobility responses to taxation often loom larger in the
policy debate on tax progressivity than traditional within-country labor supply responses.
There are vast empirical literatures on labor supply and taxable income responses to taxation
within countries (see surveys by Blundell and MaCurdy 1999; Saez, Slemrod, and Giertz 2012).
There are also many studies on the effects of capital taxation on multinational corporations
and international capital mobility that find substantial mobility effects (as surveyed by Gordon
and Hines 2002; Devereux and Griffith 2002; Griffith, Hines, and Sørensen 2010). But there
is very little empirical work on the effect of taxation on the spatial mobility of individuals,
especially among high-skilled workers. While a small literature has considered the mobility of
people across local jurisdictions within countries,1 empirical work on the effect of taxation on
international mobility appears to be virtually non-existent partly due to lack of micro data
with citizenship information and challenges in identifying causal tax effects on migration.2 This
paper takes a first step to fill this gap in the literature by focusing on the specific labor market
for professional football players in Europe.
The European football market offers three important advantages for the study of mobility
and taxation. First, international mobility is high in the professional football market, making
it a valuable and visible laboratory to study tax-induced mobility across countries. Hence,
this study likely provides an upper bound on the migration response to taxation for the labor
market as a whole.3 Obtaining an upper bound is crucial to gauge the potential importance of
this policy question, especially as labor markets become more internationally integrated.
1

See Kirchgassner and Pommerehne (1996) and Liebig et al. (2007) on mobility across Swiss Cantons in
response to Canton taxes; Feldstein and Wrobel (1998), Bakija and Slemrod (2004), and Young and Varner
(2011) on mobility across US states in response to state income taxes; Day and Winer (2006) on tax-induced
mobility across Canadian provinces and Meyer (2000) on mobility across US states in response to state welfare
programs.
2
While there is almost no work tax-induced international migration, there is a large literature on the effects
of wage differentials and welfare benefit differentials on international migration (see Borjas 1999 for a survey).
3
Using Danish administrative data from Kleven et al. (2011), this paper provides direct evidence that mobility
in the football market represents an upper bound on mobility for the labor market as a whole.

1

Second, extensive data on the careers and mobility of professional football players can be
gathered for most countries over long time periods.4 For this project, we have gathered exhaustive data on the career paths of all first-league football players (top 20 or so teams in each
country) for 14 Western European countries from 1985 to 2008. We have also collected top earnings tax rate data across countries and over time, taking into account special tax rules applying
to immigrant workers and sometimes to athletes specifically. As we show using actual individual
earnings data for a large subset of players, because top football players are very highly paid,
their average tax rate is well approximated by the top marginal tax rate when combining (a) the
top individual income tax rate, (b) uncapped social security contributions, and (c) value-added
taxes. As a result, empirical estimates are quite similar when using the top marginal tax rate
vs. using the estimated average tax rate.
Third, we can exploit many sources of variation in both tax policy and labor market regulation to identify the effect of taxation on mobility in the football market: (a) Top tax rates vary
across countries and over time. (b) Some countries have introduced preferential tax schemes
to immigrant workers.5 (c) The so-called Bosman ruling by the European Court of Justice in
1995 lifted pre-existing restrictions on player mobility, facilitating an analysis of the interaction
between taxes and regulation on mobility. Together, these policy changes create compelling
quasi-experimental variation to identify causal impacts of taxation on location choice.
We first set out a theoretical model of taxation and migration where we allow for rigid
labor demand as both the number of professional football teams and the number of players
per team are fairly rigid within each country. As countries can choose differential tax rates on
domestic vs. foreign players, our model naturally defines two elasticity parameters of interest:
(a) the elasticity of the number of foreign players with respect to the net-of-tax rate on foreign
players, (b) the elasticity of the number of domestic players with respect to the net-of-tax rate
on domestic players. In a standard flexible-demand model, cutting taxes on foreigners increases
the number of foreign players at all ability levels and has no cross effect on the number of
domestic players in equilibrium. By contrast, with rigid-demand, equilibrium employment is
fixed in each country and therefore tax policy affects only the sorting of players across countries
4

By contrast, it is not possible to do a multi-country analysis of tax-induced international migration for all top
earners in the labor market as administrative data with migration information is not shared between countries.
Hence, the football market offers a unique opportunity for multi-country micro-data analysis of migration.
5
For example, preferential tax schemes to foreigners have been implemented in the Netherlands (1980s),
Denmark (1991), Belgium (2002), Spain (2004), and France (2008).

2

in equilibrium. We show that a tax cut to foreigners has two effects in equilibrium: (i ) it attracts
foreign players at high ability levels but crowds out foreign players at low ability levels (“ability
sorting effect”), (ii ) the total number of foreigners increases and this leads to displacement of
domestic players (“displacement effect”).
Next, we present reduced-form graphical evidence showing clear effects of taxation on migration. We start by considering cross-country correlations between (a) the tax rate on foreign
players and the fraction of foreigners in the national league, (b) the tax rate on domestic players
and the fraction of native players playing in their home league, and (c) the average tax rate on
foreign and domestic players and the performance of first-league teams in the country. We find
strong negative correlations in all three cases, but only for the post-Bosman era when mobility
was set free. Those correlations translate into large and significant elasticities. The elasticity
of the fraction of foreign players with respect to the net-of-tax rate for foreign players is above
one while the elasticity of the fraction of domestic players with respect to the net-of-tax rate
for domestic players is around .2. We then turn to quasi-experimental evidence from preferential tax schemes to foreigners in Spain and Denmark. Using the synthetic control method
of Abadie et al. (2010), we show clear graphical evidence that international mobility responds
to taxation. For example, the fraction of foreigners in the Spanish league diverges from the
synthetic comparison country quickly after the introduction of a preferential rate for foreigners.
Consistent with our rigid-demand theoretical model, those effects are stronger for top-quality
football players. The corresponding estimated elasticities of the fraction of foreign players with
respect to the net-of-tax rate for foreign players are also above one.
Finally, we present results from multinomial micro-level regressions using all sources of variation in top earnings tax rates across countries and years in the post-Bosman era. The coefficients
from the multinomial regression models allow us to estimate location elasticities for foreign players and domestic players. We can also test for differential responses among high vs. low quality
players (ability sorting effects) and for cross-effects of the net-of-tax rate for foreign (domestic)
players on the location of domestic (foreign) players (displacement effects). We obtain three
main findings. First, the elasticity of the number of foreign players with respect to the net-of-tax
rate for foreigners we estimate is around one, consistent with our reduced form results. The
elasticity of the number of domestic players with respect to net-of-tax rate for domestic players
is much smaller (but still significant), around .15 because on average about 90% of players still

3

play at home. Second, we provide evidence on ability sorting effects by showing that location
elasticities are negative at the bottom of the ability distribution and strongly positive at the
top. Third, we provide evidence on displacement effects by showing that the cross elasticity
of the number of domestic players with respect to the net-of-tax rate on foreigners is negative.
We outline in conclusion why such displacement effects are important for determining revenue
maximizing tax policy on foreign players.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the European football market and data,
section 3 sets out a theoretical model guiding the empirical analysis, section 3 shows reducedform graphical evidence, section 4 presents multinomial regression estimates, and section 5
concludes. Additional material is collected in appendix.

2

Context and Data

2.1

The European Football Labor Market

Football clubs are attached to a local city and stadium, and each club has about 25-40 players
in its first team.6 Within each country, there is a top national league including between 12 and
22 national clubs.7 The year-t season runs from August/September of year t to May/June of
year t + 1. In contrast, taxes are typically assessed on an annual calendar basis. Because the
composition of the team for the year-t season is determined mostly before the beginning of the
season, we assume that the relevant tax rate for the year-t season is the calendar year t tax rate.
Football players and clubs sign contracts, which specify a duration (typically 2-4 years) and
an annual salary. If a player under contract in club A wants to move to club B before the end
of his contract, the two clubs can negotiate a transfer fee from club B to club A. This transfer
is between clubs and is not paid by the player or to the player, and is therefore not part of the
taxable compensation of the player. In addition to their salaries, the most famous players also
obtain a share of club revenue from the sale of items carrying their image (“image rights”).
Before the so-called Bosman ruling in 1995, the market for football players was heavily
regulated. Two rules are particularly important for our analysis. First, the three-player rule
stipulated that no more than three foreign players could be aligned in any game in the Euro6

The game itself is played by 11 players, but the full team is much larger to allow for rotation of players.
On top of these national championships, there are currently two European-wide competitions gathering a
select number of the best clubs from each national league.
7

4

pean Football Association (UEFA) club competitions.8 This rule sharply limited international
mobility. Second, the transfer-fee rule allowed clubs to require a transfer fee when a player
wanted to move to another club even at the end of the player’s contract. Hence, out-of-contract
players were not allowed to sign a contract with a new club until a transfer fee had been paid or
a free transfer had been granted by the original club.9 This rule limited mobility—within and
across countries—as any surplus resulting from a move had to be shared with the initial club.
The European Court of Justice made the landmark Bosman ruling in December 1995,10
which eliminated the three-player rule and the transfer-fee rule for European clubs (where
“European” is here defined as being a UEFA member). Foreign-player quotas still apply to
non-European (e.g., South-American) players playing in European clubs. The first season for
which the Bosman ruling can have an effect is the 1996 season. As the ruling applied only when
existing contracts came to an end, it took a few years to reach its full impact. The existence
of multi-year contracts also implies that we should expect gradual mobility responses to tax
changes as it is less costly to move at the end of a contract than in the middle of a contract.

2.2

European Football Data

We have collected data on the universe of first-league football players and first-league clubs in
14 European countries since 1985 from online sources.11 The countries are Austria, Belgium,
Denmark, England, France, Germany, Greece, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain,
Sweden, and Switzerland. This sample of countries includes all the top football leagues in
Western Europe according to the official UEFA rankings. We have excluded Eastern Europe,
Russia, Turkey, and Scotland (the only top-15 Western European football nation we exclude)
because of lack of data before the late-1990s. For robustness checks, we have also collected data
on the second leagues of the five top countries (England, France, Germany, Italy, and Spain),
which may be of similar or higher quality than the first leagues of the smallest countries.
Individual player information in the data include name, nationality, date of birth, club
affiliation, and national team selection of each person in each first-league club in all 14 countries
from 1985 to present. The data therefore allow us to trace mobility patterns of players across
countries over a long time period. Furthermore, we have obtained information on individual
8

The three-player rule was also imposed in most national competitions.
A few countries such as France and Spain prohibited these out-of-contract transfer fees.
10
Bosman was a Belgian player who sued his club, which was refusing to let him go at the end of his contract.
11
The main online source is the website playerhistory.com, with detailed information available since the 1970s.
9

5

player salaries for about half of our sample for the years 1999-2000 and 2004-2008.12 We use
those actual earnings to impute individual earnings and calculate average tax rates in our full
sample for years 1996-2008.
We further restrict our sample to players who are citizens of one of the above-mentioned 14
countries and have played at least once in a first league of one of these countries. We exclude
all other players (primarily from Africa, Eastern Europe, and South America), because tracking
their careers prior to arrival and subsequent to departure from the countries in our sample is
difficult, and we cannot compute proper counterfactual alternatives for their location choices
and top earnings tax rates.13 In the data analysis, we retain solely year×player observations
when the player was playing in one of the first leagues of the 14 countries we consider (i.e., we
discard years when individuals are playing in another country or a lower league).
The appendix provides additional details on our player and club data, including how we
develop performance measures for clubs and players using official UEFA rankings. Descriptive
statistics are presented in Appendix Table A1.

2.3

Top Marginal and Average Tax Rate Data

In contrast to many other sports, football players cannot live far away from their club as they
have to train almost daily with their teammates. As income and social security taxes on labor
earnings are generally assessed on a residence basis, professional football players almost always
face the tax systems of the countries in which they work. For migration decisions, the relevant
tax rate is the average tax rate on earnings.14 Using the actual average tax rate is problematic
for two reasons. First, the average tax rate depends on individual earnings since income taxes
are nonlinear, creating an endogeneity issue. Second, the computation of average tax rates faces
the issue that we only observe individual salaries for years 1999-2000 and 2004-2008, and only
for 54% of our sample in those years.
However, because professional football players in top leagues earn very high salaries (relative
12

We thank Jori Pinje for sharing this data collected from various sources.
Migration by non-European players into the European football market is in any case severely constrained,
because such players are still subject to the foreign-player quotas that were imposed on all players in the preBosman era. We also exclude players with multiple nationalities. The reason is that a number of scandals
(especially in Italy) revealed that some players listed with multiple nationalities had fake European passports
in order to get around the quotas applying to non-European players.
14
For decisions to enter a football career vs. an alternative career, the relevant tax rate is the marginal tax
rate on the difference in earnings between the two careers.
13

6

to the top bracket thresholds of income and payroll taxes), the average tax rate on their earnings
is closely approximated by the top marginal tax rate on labor income, which we label the top
earnings tax rate below. The top marginal tax rate has the double advantage of being easy
to compute and exogenous to earnings. The similarity between average and top marginal tax
rates for top football players is verified in Appendix Table A1, where average tax rates have
been computed using our data on actual and imputed individual earnings for the post-Bosman
era 1996-2008 along with OECD Taxing Wages tax calculators.15 Our main empirical analysis
therefore assumes equality between the average and top marginal tax rate.16 As a robustness
check, we also consider specifications using the average tax rates presented in Table A1 in order
to verify that estimates are similar when using the top marginal vs. the actual average tax rate.
As we shall discuss, endogeneity problem of the average tax rate is resolved by using a grouping
estimator and estimating average tax rates by cells of country×year×foreign status×quality.
The top marginal tax rate is computed including all taxes on labor income: individual income
taxes at the national and local level, uncapped payroll taxes (social security contributions on
both employees and employers that do not have an earnings ceiling), and value-added taxes
(VAT). We have computed such top earnings tax rates since 1985 in our 14 sample countries.
Importantly, as several countries have special schemes offering preferential tax treatment to
immigrant workers, we have also computed alternative series of top earnings tax rates on foreign
players. We provide details on our sources and computations in appendix.
A fully documented excel database of these top earnings tax rates is available online. Appendix figures A1-A3 plot tax rates for the five largest European countries, the Scandinavian
countries, and six smaller European countries, respectively. In each case, we depict tax rates in
two panels: the top panel is for domestic players and the bottom panel is for foreign players. As
already discussed, most of our analysis does not use individual salary data as such information
is not available for most players and years. But our empirical analysis controls for potential nontax differences in salary levels across countries, due for example to the different sizes of football
markets and fan bases across countries. As we will show, our empirical strategy captures the
reduced-form elasticity of migration with respect to the tax rate, which could be different from
15

Before Bosman, salaries were lower and tax systems had more brackets, so that our approximation is probably
not as accurate, an important caveat to keep in mind in the specific instances where we use pre-Bosman data.
16
Using the top marginal tax rate amounts to estimating the reduced-form effect of the top marginal tax rate
on migration, which is slightly smaller than the actual effect of the average tax rate on migration as the average
tax rate moves slightly less than one-for-one with the top marginal tax rate.

7

the elasticity of migration with respect to the net-salary if tax rates impact wages. As we will
discuss, under some assumptions, our reduced-form elasticity is the relevant one for tax policy.

3

Theoretical Framework

This section develops a simple model of taxation and migration allowing for potentially rigid
labor demand. The importance of demand rigidities in the football market is an open question
a priori. On the one hand, the number of teams per league tends to be fixed and the number
of players per team is constrained by the fact that the game involves exactly 11 players on the
field and a maximum of 3 substitutions per game (although picked from a pool of potential
substitutes that can be larger). This suggests that demand may be very rigid. On the other
hand, clubs play many games over a season, and therefore require a much larger number of
players to insure themselves against injuries and fluctuations in player performance over time.
This implies that adding players does have value for the club, and therefore squad size may
be flexible and respond to tax incentives. Indeed, Appendix Figure A4 shows that the average
squad size is weakly negatively associated with top tax rates across countries and only in the
post-Bosman period.
Based on these arguments, we first set out a classical baseline model with flexible demand
and then extend the analysis to account for rigid demand. The two models lead to different
theoretical predictions that we will test empirically. Because our models adopt a very simple
and admittedly unrealistic wage determination process to simplify the exposition, we discuss
generalizations and their empirical implications at the end of the section.

3.1

A Baseline Model with Flexible Demand

There are N small countries n = 1, ..., N . Each country has a continuum population of native
potential football players, each of whom is endowed with football ability a ≥ 0. If an individual
with ability a plays football, he generates value a for his club. Total production in each club
is given by the sum of abilities of all players in the club, i.e. we work with a linear perfect
substitution technology as in the standard Mirrlees (1982) model of taxation and migration.
Under this technology and assuming perfect competition, the before-tax wage of each player is

8

equal to ability a (horizontal demand).17
Besides ability a, a football player is characterized by a country of origin m and preference
parameters µm = (µ1m , ..., µN m ) associated with each possible location 1, ..., N . A player characterized by (a, m, µm ) playing in country n obtains utility u (a (1 − τnm )) + µnm , where u(.) is
increasing and τnm is the tax rate in country n on a player from country m. The player therefore
plays in country n iff
u (a (1 − τnm )) + µnm ≥ max
{u (a (1 − τn0 m )) + µn0 m } .
0
n

(1)

Among players from country m, there is a joint distribution of (µm , a) described by a smooth
density function gm (µm , a) on the domain D = (0, ∞)N +1 . The density distribution gm (µm , a)
together with the condition for optimal location choice (1) determine the total number (measure)
of players with ability a from native country m playing in country n. We denote this player
supply function by pnma .
In general, pnma depends on the entire vector of net-of-tax wages (a (1 − τ1m ) , ..., a (1 − τN m ))
and hence on the tax rates in all countries on players from country m. As each country is small
(i.e., N is large), the effect on pnma of a tax change in another country n0 6= n will be negligible.
This is because a tax change in country n0 6= n affects pnma only through migration between
n and n0 by a small measure of people at the point of indifference between these two (small)
countries. On the other hand, the effect on pnma of changing the tax rate in country n itself
will be non-negligible as this affects pnma through migration between country n and every other
country. Hence, under our small-country assumption, we may write pnma = pnma (a (1 − τnm ))
where pnma is increasing in a(1−τnm ). We define the total number (measure) of players in country
R∞
n native of country m across all ability levels as pnm (1 − τnm ) ≡ 0 pnma (a (1 − τnm )) da.
Consistent with real-world tax policy, we allow each country to set separate tax rates on
domestic and foreign players, i.e. tax rates in country n are given by τnn = τnd and τnm = τnf for
all m 6= n. In this case, the number of domestic and foreign players in country n at ability a are
P
given by pnda (a (1 − τnd )) = pnna (a (1 − τnn )) and pnf a (a (1 − τnf )) = m6=n pnma (a (1 − τnm )).
The total number of domestic and foreign players in country n across all ability levels equal
R∞
R∞
pnd (1−τnd ) ≡ 0 pnda (a (1 − τnd )) da and pnf (1−τnf ) ≡ 0 pnf a (a (1 − τnf )) da. In this simple
baseline model, we can immediately state the following:
17

We discuss in section 3.3 the implications of generalizing the production technology to allow for decreasing
returns (downward-sloping demand), imperfect substitutability, and productivity spillovers across players.

9

Proposition 1 (Comparative Statics) Assuming that the density gm (µm , a) is smooth and
positive everywhere on its domain D, we have pnda , pnf a > 0 for all n, a and
(a) pnda is decreasing in τnd and unaffected by τnf ,
(b) pnf a is decreasing in τnf and unaffected by τnd .
Hence, in this baseline model with flexible demand, the own-tax effect on the number of domestic
and foreign players locating in country n is negative at all ability levels, while the cross-tax effect
between domestic and foreign players is zero. This model naturally leads to the definition of
two key elasticities of interest
εnf =

dpnf
1 − τnf
d(1 − τnf ) pnf

and εnd =

dpnd 1 − τnd
,
d(1 − τnd ) pnd

(2)

where εnf (εnd ) is the elasticity of the number of foreign (domestic) players in country n with
respect to the net-of-tax rate on foreign (domestic) players in country n. Those elasticities
can also be defined at each ability level a. As about 85 to 90% of players play at home, it is
natural to expect that εnf  εnd . Hence, cutting tax rates only on foreign players may attract
a relatively large number of new players with very small revenue losses on infra-marginal (preexisting) foreign players. We show formally in appendix A.4 that revenue-maximizing tax rates
τnf , τnd take the standard inverse elasticity form 1/(1 + εnf ), 1/(1 + εnd ).

3.2

Accounting for Rigid Demand

Starting from the framework above, rigid labor demand is incorporated by assuming that the
football market in each country hires a continuum of measure one of players. Players are hired
by a continuum of clubs of measure one (e.g., each club hires a single player), and importantly
there is no entry of new clubs. It is further assumed that the population of potential native
football players in country n has measure Pn > 1, so that not all potential football players
will be able to play in equilibrium. Those who do not play football work in a regular labor
market, and we normalize the regular wage outside football to zero.18 As before, if a club hires
a football player of ability a, this player generates total value added a in the club. The presence
of rigid demand allows the club to extract positive surplus in equilibrium. We show that the
value added a of a player-club relationship is divided between the player and the club in the
following way:
18

This normalization is without loss of generality. The normalization of the regular wage to zero was implicit
in the previous section as we assumed that all players with a > 0 were willing to play football.

10

Lemma 1 (Club Surplus and Wages) In any equilibrium, within any given country n, the
surplus sn ≥ 0 captured by each club is constant across all clubs and players in country n.
Hence, the before-tax wage paid out to a player of ability a in country n is a − sn . No player of
ability below sn plays in country n.
Proof: Suppose the surplus is not equalized across clubs within a given country n. Then a
low-surplus club can increase its surplus by hiring a player from a high-surplus club at a slightly
higher wage, and the player would accept this job offer as his tax rate and location-specific utility
are the same within country n. Hence, in equilibrium, the club surplus must be equalized within
country n. As the total value of the player-club relationship is a, if the club gets surplus sn ,
then the salary to the player equals a − sn . The surplus sn has to be non-negative, because
otherwise clubs would not operate. No player of ability below sn plays as he would be better
off working in the regular labor market at a wage equal to zero. 
The characterization of preferences and optimization follows the earlier model, except that
the before-tax salary is now a − sn instead of previously a. From above, assuming that countries are small, the number of domestic and foreign players in country n at ability a can be
written as pnda ((a − sn ) (1 − τnd )) and pnf a ((a − sn ) (1 − τnf )), where both functions are increasing in their argument. The total number of domestic and foreign players in country n
R∞
across all ability levels are obtained as pnd (sn , 1 − τnd ) ≡ sn pnda ((a − sn ) (1 − τnd )) da and
R∞
pnf (sn , 1 − τnf ) ≡ sn pnf a ((a − sn ) (1 − τnf )) da. Both functions pnd , pnf are decreasing in sn ,
while pnd is increasing in 1 − τnd and pnf is increasing in 1 − τnf .
While the effects of taxes in partial equilibrium (i.e., given sn ) are qualitatively similar to
the previous model, the general equilibrium will be different due to rigid demand. In the rigiddemand model, the equilibrium has to satisfy pnd (sn , 1 − τnd ) + pnf (sn , 1 − τnf ) = 1, which pins
down the club surplus as sn = sn (1 − τnd , 1 − τnf ). By inserting equilibrium surplus into the
player supply functions pnda , pnf a , pnd and pnf , we obtain general equilibrium relationships that
are functions of (1 − τnd , 1 − τnf ). In the following, we work with these equilibrium relationships
and contrast the results we obtain with those of the previously presented flexible demand model.
Proposition 2 (Comparative Statics) Assume that countries are small and that the density
gm (µm , a) is smooth and positive everywhere on its domain D. Then pnda , pnf a > 0 for all
a > sn , and we have:
11

(a) sn (1 − τnd , 1 − τnf ) decreases with τnd and τnf ,
(b) pnda (1 − τnd , 1 − τnf ) decreases with τnd at high abilities, increases with τnd at low abilities,
and increases with τnf at all abilities,
(c) pnf a (1 − τnd , 1 − τnf ) decreases with τnf at high abilities, increases with τnf at low abilities,
and increases with τnd at all abilities,
(d ) pnd (1 − τnd , 1 − τnf ) decreases with τnd and increases with τnf ,
(e) pnf (1 − τnd , 1 − τnf ) decreases with τnf and increases with τnd .
Proof: (a) If τnd (alternatively, τnf ) increases, then pnd (sn , 1 − τnd ) (alternatively, pnf (sn , 1 − τnf ))
falls, which leads to excess demand in country n. The only way equilibrium can be restored is
by having sn fall. As country n is small, this does not affect the equilibrium in other countries.
(b) Consider first the effect of τnd . As τnd increases and sn falls as a consequence (part (a)),
we have that the net-of-tax salary (1 − τnd ) (a − sn ) increases for low-ability domestic players
(a slightly above sn ) and decreases for high-ability domestic players (a sufficiently above sn ).
Hence, country n attracts fewer high-ability domestic players and more low-ability domestic
players in equilibrium. Consider then the effect of τnf . An increase in τnf affects domestic
players only through sn , which falls from part (a). The fall in sn increases salaries of domestic
players at any ability level, and hence attracts more domestic players at all abilities.
(c) Follows from a similar argument as in part (b).
(d, e) Consider first the effects of τnd . From part (c), we know that pnf a increases with τnd at
all abilities, and hence pnf is necessarily increasing in τnd . From the rigid-demand equilibrium
condition pnd + pnf = 1, we then have that pnd must be decreasing in τnd . The effects of τnf
follows from a similar argument. 
Compared to the flexible demand model, we have two new sorting effects relating to the
own-tax and the cross-tax effects, respectively. First, taxing foreign players no longer reduces
the number of foreign players at all ability levels. In equilibrium, the effect is positive at low
ability levels and negative at high ability levels, with the total effect being negative. Hence, the
type of preferential tax schemes to foreigners discussed earlier will attract high-ability foreigners
but push out low-ability foreigners, with the total amount of foreigners increasing. Second, due
to equilibrium sorting, there is now a cross-effect from taxing one group of players on the other
group of players. For example, if a country lowers the tax on foreigners and hence increases
12

the total amount of foreign players, domestic players will be displaced (at all ability levels).
Displaced domestic players will either drop out of the football sector and take a regular job, or
move and play in another country. We will present empirical evidence of both types of sorting.
Notice finally that, as high-ability players have a  sn and therefore a − sn ' a, their
equilibrium response to taxation in the rigid-demand case is close to the response in the flexibledemand case. Hence, the mobility elasticity for high-ability individuals is the relevant upper
bound that should apply to other high-income occupations where labor demand is flexible. We
come back to this important point when interpreting our results.

3.3

Robustness to Generalizations

We have considered two simple benchmark models of wage determination in the football market:
(i) assuming a linear production technology and flexible demand, before-tax salary is given by
player ability a, (ii) adding a constraint on the number of players in each league, the before-tax
salary is given by player ability minus club surplus a − sn . While neither case is descriptively
realistic, they demonstrate the sharply different effects of taxation on migration in markets
where migration can affect overall employment compared to markets where migration can affect
only sorting. As argued in the beginning, the football market is likely to be a mix of those two
settings, but we focus on the polar models for simplicity.
Two generalizations of the linear production technology can be incorporated and will be
allowed for in the empirical analysis. First, we may consider a concave production function that
depends on the sum of abilities of all players. This would introduce downward-sloping demand,
but maintain the assumption of perfect substitutability between players of different ability. In
this case, it is easy to see that the equilibrium salary in country n of a player with ability a can be
written as wna = a · wn , where wn reflects the overall wage level in country n and is endogenous
to taxes. It is straightforward to incorporate this generalization into the theoretical analysis.
Second, we may specify production as a general function of the number of players at each ability
level, thereby allowing in a flexible way for imperfect substitution between different skill levels.
This would include situations with skill complementarity in production such that tax-induced
migration of high-quality players to one country may induce more high-quality players to move
to the same country. In this general setting, the equilibrium salary wna is no longer separable in
ability as above, and taxes may affect not only the overall wage level but the wage distribution

13

in a country. This would be a general equilibrium model with many labor markets (one for each
skill) that may interact depending on technological complementarities across skill levels, and
it is extremely difficult to obtain analytical results on tax incidence in such general settings.
While we do not pursue this general formulation analytically, the empirical analysis will in fact
allow for a wage setting processes of this kind by including rich and flexible controls for wages
varying by country and ability level.
Finally, another possibility is the presence of productivity spillovers across teammates. For
example, in-migration of high-ability foreign players may raise the performance of pre-existing
players in the country. In this case, a player’s salary depends not only on his own ability, but on
the abilities of all his teammates. With positive spillovers, an influx of high-ability foreigners
may benefit domestic players, and hence lead to positive cross-effects between the two groups.
This is in contrast to the negative cross-effect driven by displacement emphasized in the previous
section. In the empirical section, we find a negative cross-effect between domestic and foreign
players. If there are positive productivity spillovers between the two groups, the effect of such
spillovers would be captured by our estimate and work against the negative effect we find.

4

Reduced-Form Graphical Evidence

We start the analysis by showing reduced-form graphical evidence of the impact of taxation
on international migration. First, we study cross-country correlations between top earnings tax
rates and location, using the pre-Bosman period (when regulation severely hindered tax-induced
migration) to establish a counterfactual cross-country correlation with limited tax effects. This
part provides suggestive evidence that taxes matter for country location in the long-run. Second,
we consider country-specific tax reforms that create compelling identifying variation and provide
conclusive evidence of the relationship between taxes and migration in the medium-run. For
convenience, elasticities estimated from those case studies are presented in Table 1.

4.1

Cross-Country Correlations: Bosman Ruling

Figure 1 provides cross-country evidence on the relationship between the top earnings tax rate
and in-migration of foreign players (Panel A), out-migration of domestic players (Panel B),
and club performance (Panel C). Each panel consists of two graphs, with the pre-Bosman era
(1985-1995) on the left and the post-Bosman era (1996-2008) on the right.
14

Panel A of Figure 1 plots the average fraction of foreign players in the first league against
the average top earnings tax rate on foreigners in each country. There is a striking contrast
between Panel A1 and Panel A2. In the pre-Bosman era, the fraction of foreigners is generally
very low (5% or less for almost all countries), and there is no correlation between the fraction
of foreigners and tax rates. In the post-Bosman era, the fraction of foreigners is much higher
in every country (between 5% and 25%), and there is a significant negative correlation with the
top earnings tax rate.19 As shown in the figure and in Table 1 (Panel A), the implied elasticity
of the fraction of foreigners with respect to the net-of-tax rate is zero in the pre-Bosman era,
but very large at 1.22 (.45) in the post-Bosman era. The table also shows that using average tax
rates (instead of top tax rates) generates a very similar elasticity of 1.33 (.37). Those elasticities
are particularly large because the fraction of foreigners is small to start with.
Panel B of Figure 1 plots the average fraction of players of a given nationality playing in
their home league against the average top earnings tax rate on domestic residents. In the preBosman era, the fraction of players playing at home is very high in all countries (between 90%
and 100% across the entire sample).20 After Bosman, the fraction playing at home drops in
almost all countries, and the negative correlation with tax rates becomes much stronger. As
shown in the figure and in Table 1 (Panel A), the implied elasticity of the fraction playing at
home with respect to the net-of-tax rate was modest pre-Bosman at .1 (.04) and much larger
post-Bosman at .32 (.10). The post-Bosman elasticity for domestic players is much smaller than
for foreign players, because the fraction playing at home is substantial to start with.
Panel C of Figure 1 explores whether tax-induced migration translates into an effect on
club performance. It plots average club performance against the average top earnings tax rate
(including both foreigners and locals) in each country before and after the Bosman ruling. As
described in the appendix, country-level club performance is measured by the total number of
points earned by all clubs in a given country in the UEFA competitions. In the pre-Bosman
period, the correlation between tax rates and club performance is close to zero and insignificant,
but becomes strongly negative and significant in the post-Bosman period. This suggests that
19

Recall that we only include nationals from the 14 European countries in the sample, and so the fraction of
foreigners does not include nationals from outside this set of countries.
20
The relatively low fraction of Dutch players playing at home may be due to the mandatory defined contributions Pension Fund System for football players instituted in 1972 (CFK), which requires compulsory pension
contributions of 50% of earnings (and 100% of bonuses) above a relatively low threshold. Although contributions
earn market rates of return, they may be perceived as forced savings and heavily discounted by players, which
have indeed traditionally complained about the system.

15

low-tax countries experienced an improvement of club performance by being better able to
attract good foreign players and keep good domestic players at home.
Although elasticities become much larger and strongly significant after the Bosman ruling,
the standard errors are too large to detect a significant difference in estimates between the preBosman and post-Bosman periods. The identifying assumption in this cross-country analysis
is that the post-Bosman correlation between top earnings tax rates and mobility/performance
is causal. Although the pre-Bosman period—when mobility was restricted—offers a successful
placebo test of this causal interpretation, there are two threats to identification. First, the
Bosman ruling could have had differential impacts on low-tax and high-tax countries for non-tax
reasons. For example, taxation levels display some correlation with country size and therefore
league quality, and if better leagues benefit more from the Bosman ruling than poorer leagues
this would contribute to a spurious correlation between migration/performance and tax rates.
Second, other factors could have changed from the pre-Bosman to the post-Bosman era that
impacted low-tax and high-tax countries differentially.21 Next, we consider quasi-experimental
variation created by tax reforms, which allows us to fully control for these identification threats
and provide conclusive evidence of a link between taxation and migration.

4.2

Country Case Studies: Tax Reforms

This section analyzes country-specific tax reforms in Spain and Denmark, which introduced
preferential tax schemes for foreign residents creating sharp variation in the location incentives
of football players.22 In each case, we compare the treatment country to a synthetic control
country using the method by Abadie et al. (2010). In the synthetic control approach, the
weights on different countries in the construction of a synthetic control country are non-negative
and chosen to minimize the pre-reform distance between treatment and control in terms of the
outcome of interest and indexes of football league quality. Appendix Table A2 provides complete
details and description of those weights. For each country event study, Table 1 presents elasticity
estimates using a difference-in-differences comparison of the treatment country and the synthetic
21

One such factor is the ban on all English clubs from international competitions in the period 1985-1990 as
a result of the 1985 Heysel Stadium disaster where a riot by English fans killed 39 people and injured 600. This
biases down migration to and from England in the pre-Bosman era. However, eliminating England from the
sample leaves those elasticity estimates virtually unchanged (results not reported).
22
We provide further evidence on tax-induced mobility using a cohort-based payroll tax reform in Greece in
appendix Figure A7.

16

control country before and after the reform. Those estimates capture medium-term responses
as we are comparing outcomes a few years before the reform to a few years after the reform.
Spanish reform in 2004: “Beckham Law”. The “Beckham Law” (Royal Decree 687/2005)
is a special tax scheme passed in 2005, applicable to foreign workers (not just football players)
moving to Spain after January 1st, 2004.23 The special tax scheme is a flat tax of 24% in lieu of
the regular progressive income tax with a top rate of 43% in 2008 (45% when the Beckham Law
was passed). Eligibility requires not having been a tax resident in Spain at any point during the
preceding 10 years. Given the career span of football players, the scheme is primarily relevant
for foreign players making their first move to Spain (after 2004).
Graphical evidence is presented in Figure 2. Panel A1 considers top-ability players and Panel
A2 lower-ability players. Top-ability players are here defined as those who have been selected
at least once for the national team of their home country, while lower-quality players are those
who have not.24 Each panel shows the evolution over time of the fraction of foreign players
in the total number of players in Spain (treatment) and the synthetic control country on the
left y-axis along with the top tax rate differential between Spain and the synthetic control on
the right y-axis. This top tax rate differential is defined as τspain /τsynthetic − 1. As shown in
appendix Table A2, the synthetic Spain is mostly Italy. The two vertical lines in each panel
denote the Bosman ruling in 1996 and the Beckham Law in 2004.25 The figure shows that the
top tax rates were about the same in Spain and the synthetic country in the period 1990 to
2003, but that a large 25% gap opened up when the Beckham law became effective in 2004.
For top-quality players in Panel A1, two findings are worth noting. First, there is a surge
in the fraction of foreign players in both Spain and the synthetic control country immediately
following the Bosman ruling. Spain experiences a larger surge but starts from a smaller base,
so that the two countries have about the same post-Bosman fraction of foreigners. After the
Bosman ruling and before the Beckham law, the fraction of foreigners evolve almost identically
in Spain and the synthetic country (they both fall slightly). Second and most important,
coinciding with the Beckham law, the two series diverge as the fraction of foreigners starts to
23

The scheme got its nickname after the superstar footballer David Beckham moved from Manchester United
to Real Madrid, and became one of the first foreigners to take advantage of it.
24
In the empirical estimation in section 5, we construct a more sophisticated continuous ability index using
our exhaustive data on player careers.
25
Although the Beckham Law was not passed until 2005 (but applying retroactively from 2004), the reform
appears to have been anticipated earlier than this. Hence, the reform may have had an impact already from the
2004/2005 season, and we therefore define 2004 as the reform year.

17

increase in Spain while it continues to fall in the synthetic country. The gap stops increasing in
2007 and closes somewhat in 2008, suggesting that responses are relatively fast.
For lower-quality players in Panel A2, the effect is not as clear and strong as the effect on
higher-quality players, which suggests that the scheme may have had different effects on different
parts of the ability distribution, consistent with the rigid labor demand model presented in
section 3. We come back to this question in much more detail in the following section.
As shown in the figure and in Table 1 (Panel B1), the difference-in-differences elasticity for
top players is very large and significant (1.49(.33) when using top tax rates, 1.83(.57) when
using average tax rates). For lower-quality players, the elasticity is smaller and insignificant.
The elasticity estimates above are based on the standard parallel-trends identifying assumption for difference-in-differences analysis.26 We can relax this assumption by exploiting the
10-year eligibility rule in the Beckham Law. If our results are confounded by a differential
change in non-reform related trends in the two countries, this would show up in the migration patterns of foreigners not eligible for the Beckham scheme. The bottom panels of Figure
2 test this hypothesis by considering foreigners eligible for the Beckham scheme in Panel B1
and foreigners not eligible for the Beckham scheme in Panel B2. Specifically, Panel B1 plots
the fraction of foreigners playing in Spain (the synthetic country) in year t among those who
never played in Spain (the synthetic country) before year t. Hence, Panel B1 captures the flow
of foreigners starting to play in Spain in year t. By contrast, Panel B2 plots the fraction of
foreigners playing in Spain (the synthetic country) in year t among those who played in Spain
(the synthetic country) 5-10 years earlier.27 Two points are worth noting. First, among players
ineligible for the Beckham scheme, the fraction of foreigners playing in Spain and the synthetic
country, respectively, evolve in parallel throughout the period and there is no visible indication
of anything different happening around the 2004 reform. Second, among those who are eligible
for the Beckham scheme, the fraction of foreigners playing in the two countries evolve in parallel until the introduction of the Beckham scheme and then starts to diverge. Following the
Beckham Law, the fraction playing in Spain increases by about 50% while the fraction playing
26

Note that the graphs allow us to relax the parallel-trends assumption by controlling for potential differences
in pre-trends (only relevant for lower-ability players), as in a triple-difference approach using a pre-reform placebo
difference-in-differences. In that case, the identifying assumption would be that there is no contemporaneous
change in the differential trend between Spain and the synthetic control country.
27
The 5-10 year window in Panel B2 is chosen to ensure that we include only ineligible people even for the
most recent years. If we considered the full 1-10 year window, we would include some people who arrived in
Spain for the first time after 2004 and hence were eligible for the scheme.

18

in the synthetic country stays constant. As shown in the figure and in Table 1 (Panel B1), the
corresponding difference-in-differences elasticity for eligible players is large and significant. The
placebo elasticity for ineligible players is small and insignificant.28 Due to large standard errors
however, the difference between those two estimates is not statistically significant.
Additional evidence, presented in appendix Figure A5, shows that the influx of foreign
players in Spain following the Beckham law did led to a displacement of domestic players,
consistent with our rigid demand model.
Danish reform in 1992: “Tax Scheme for Foreign Researchers and Key Employees”.
In 1992, Denmark enacted a preferential tax scheme for foreign researchers and high-income
foreigners in all other professions, who sign contracts for employment in Denmark after June
1st, 1991. The scheme is commonly known as the “Researchers’ Tax Scheme.” Under this
scheme, a flat tax of 25% (30% from 1991 to 1995) is imposed in lieu of the regular progressive
income tax with a top rate above 60% (68% when the scheme was introduced). The scheme
can be used for a maximum period of 36 months after which the taxpayer becomes subject
to the ordinary income tax schedule. There are two key requirements to become eligible for
the preferential tax scheme. First, the taxpayer cannot have been tax liable in Denmark in
the 3 years prior to going on the scheme. Second, for non-researchers, eligibility requires an
annual income of at least 765,600 Danish kroner—about 103,000 Euros—as of 2009, where the
threshold is indexed to average nominal wage growth in Denmark.
Figure 3 provides evidence on the effects of this scheme on migration into Denmark, using
again the synthetic control method. As shown in appendix Table A2, the synthetic comparison is
mainly Sweden with a smaller weight on Norway. The figure is constructed as the corresponding
figure for the Spanish tax scheme: we split the sample into top-ability players (Panel A) and
lower-ability players (Panel B), and show in each panel the evolution over time in the fraction of
foreign players in the total number of players in Denmark and in the synthetic control country
along with the top tax rate differential on foreigners between these two countries. The two
vertical lines mark the Danish tax reform and the 1996 Bosman ruling. The Danish tax reform
widened significantly the tax differential by about 25%. When interpreting the results, it is
important to keep in mind that the Danish tax scheme (unlike the Beckham scheme considered
28

This placebo elasticity is estimated using the same tax differential as for eligible players in Panel B1 of
Figure 2.

19

above) was introduced before the deregulation of player migration following the Bosman ruling.
For top players in Panel A, there are three main findings. First, until the reform in 1991, there
are very few top foreigners in Denmark and only slightly more in the synthetic country. Second,
immediately following the reform, the fraction of top foreigners in the Danish league increases
while the fraction of top foreigners in the synthetic league falls, so that Denmark overtakes the
synthetic country in terms of attracting foreign players. But the short-run effect is not very
large as the pre-Bosman rules imposes tight bounds on the potential migration impact of the
Danish tax scheme. Third, after the Bosman ruling, the gap in the fraction of foreigners in the
two countries substantially widens. By 2008, the fraction of top foreigners is about four times
as large in Denmark as in the synthetic country.
In sharp contrast, for lower-ability players in Panel B, there is no visible evidence of a
migration effect in Denmark. If anything, the share of lower-ability foreigners in Denmark dips
below that of Sweden once the Bosman ruling allows the tax mechanism to take full impact.
Panels A and B together therefore suggest that the tax cut to foreigners in Denmark did two
things: (i) it increased the total share of foreign players in the Danish league, (ii) it changed
the ability composition of foreigners in favor of higher-ability players consistent with our model
of rigid labor demand. We specifically estimate such sorting effects in section 5. As shown
in the figure and in Table 1 (Panel B2), the implied difference-in-differences elasticity of the
number of foreigners with respect to the net-of-tax rate is very large and highly significant for
top players, 3.1 (0.75). It is negative, but insignificant for lower-quality players. The elasticity
for top foreigners is particularly large in Denmark because the initial number of foreigners was
extremely low before 1991.
Overall, the graphical evidence in this section shows that the Researchers’ Tax Scheme has
increased migration of football players into Denmark. We also show in appendix Figure A6 that
the three-year duration limit in the Danish tax scheme had an impact on the intensive duration
margin with excess bunching at a duration of three years (relative to the synthetic control).
Footballers are more mobile: Evidence from the Danish 1992 reform. It was argued
in the introduction that football players are more mobile than the rest of the high-skilled labor
market, so that our results provide an upper bound on tax-induced mobility. We can actually
verify this hypothesis for the Danish tax scheme, using full population data from Denmark and
comparing the migration response of football players to highly-paid workers in other sectors. The
20

exhaustive analysis of the Danish scheme is presented in Kleven et al. (2011). Figure 4 extends
their main graphical evidence by splitting the full sample into the “Sports & Entertainment”
industry in Panel A (the small industrial classification that includes football players) and all
other industries in Panel B. Each panel plots the number of foreign workers from 1980 to 2005
(normalized to one in 1990, just before the scheme introduction) for foreigners with earnings
above the scheme eligibility threshold (treatment) and foreigners with earnings between 80%
and 99.5% of the scheme eligibility threshold (control). The figure shows very compellingly that
the response in the Sports & Entertainment sector is much larger than in other sectors, and
that the larger response in sports starts only after the Bosman rule came into effect in 1996.
These conclusions are corroborated by anecdotal evidence and popular opinion among Danish
policy makers, debaters, and football managers. Indeed, the impact of the scheme on the football
sector has been the subject of much public debate over the past 10-15 years (coinciding with the
scheme taking full impact as shown in Figure 3). The view is that the scheme has been the key
driver of the influx of high-ability foreign players into the Danish league over this period, with
the point of contention being whether football players are worthy recipients of a scheme intended
to attract foreign experts and scientists and whether the influx of foreign players creates new
jobs or simply displaces domestic players. Moreover, Swedish clubs have frequently complained
that they cannot compete with Danish clubs because of the scheme. It is also worth noting
that the widespread use of the scheme by football players was an unintended consequence of
the reform that has been criticized subsequently by some of the political parties responsible
for passing the law in the first place.29 This suggests that the reform could not have been an
endogenous response to migration patterns in the football market.

5

Regression-Based Empirical Analysis

This section presents results based on a multinomial regression framework. As opposed to the
graphical evidence presented above, the analysis here exploits all sources of variation in top
earnings tax rates in all 14 countries over time (as shown in appendix Figures A1-A3). We
focus primarily on the post-Bosman era (1996-2008) where mobility in the football market is
29

Recently, the Danish Minister of Taxation has been working on a reform proposal that would abolish the
tax scheme specifically for athletes. The manager of FC Copenhagen, currently the highest-ranked football club
in Denmark, has said that this would be “a disaster for the Danish Superleague.” (see “A bomb under the
Superleague”, www.sporten.dk, 14 July 2010).

21

not constrained by regulation and where we can estimate average tax rates using actual and
imputed individual earnings data. Appendix Table A1 provides summary statistics for the
estimation sample. We first present baseline estimates ignoring labor demand rigidity and then
turn to potential ability sorting and displacement effects arising from demand rigidity.

5.1

Baseline Model without Sorting and Displacement Effects

Multinomial model. We consider a multinomial discrete-choice model adopting the additive
random-utility specification of the theoretical framework in section 3. Player i playing in country
n at time t obtains utility
i
i
i
) + µint
)wnt
= u((1 − τnt
Unt


i
i
i
= α log(1 − τnt
) + α log wnt
+ homein + βn xit + γn + νnt
,

(3)

i
i
where τnt
is the average tax rate on player i in country n at time t, wnt
is the before-tax wage

of player i in country n at time t, and µint is the idiosyncratic preference for country n at time
t. Equation (3) specifies u (.) as a log-function such that the tax and wage terms are additively
separable. We allow the following factors to influence the idiosyncratic preference term µint : (a)
a preference for home country captured by the dummy variable homein equal to one if country
n is the native country of player i, (b) individual characteristics xit such as age and age-squared,
the effect of which we allow to vary by country, and (c) unobservable characteristics of country
n captured by a country fixed effect γn .
We first consider a specification that includes only the net-of-tax rate and the home dummy
as explanatory variables in Table 2, column (1). The subsequent columns then consider specifications that include additional individual and country controls, and importantly investigate
i
different strategies to control for variation in the wage variable wnt
. Although we observe ac-

tual individual wages for a large subsample and impute wages when we do not, we still cannot
observe counterfactual wages in the countries where the individual does not play. For the
flexible-demand model, we may distinguish between three cases.
First, in the simplest version of the model, there is a linear perfect substitution technology
i
and the before-tax wage is then determined directly by player ability, i.e. wnt
= ait where ait

is the ability of player i at time t. In this case, wages are fully controlled for by including in
equation (3) a vector Ait of non-parametric controls for player ability, the effect of which we
allow to vary by country. This specification corresponds to column (2) of Table 2.
22

Second, with a concave transformation of the perfect substitution technology, labor demand
i
will be downward-sloping and wages will be given by wnt
= ait · wnt , where wnt captures the

overall wage level in equilibrium in the football market of country n at time t. This specification also captures cross-country wage differences driven by differences in demand for football
(some countries have a richer and bigger fan base than other countries due to heterogeneity in
country size and preferences). Although we do not observe the wage level wnt , any variation
in this variable can be fully controlled for by including country×year fixed effects ηnt in the
log-specification (3).30 This specification corresponds to column (3) of Table 2.
Third, if the assumption of perfect substitution between ability levels is not satisfied (e.g.,
because of skill complementarity), the effect of taxes on individual wages is not simply channeled
through a common wage term wnt , but will be heterogeneous across individuals with different
ability levels. To control for this type of wage variation, we further add country×year×ability
fixed effects in equation (3). Such a specification is considered in column (4) of Table 2.
To implement those specifications, we construct a quality index described in appendix. Importantly, the quality index for individual i in year t is based solely on career outcomes up to
year t − 1 so as to avoid endogeneity with current location choices. We include a set of 4 dummy
variables corresponding to each quartile of the quality distribution in the current year.
All specifications of our additive random-utility model in equation (3) can be estimated as a
i
i
i
multinomial discrete choice model. Let Pnt
= P r(Unt
≥ Umt
, ∀m) be the probability that player
i
is type I extreme value distributed, the
i locates in country n at time t. If the error term νnt

multinomial logit model can be estimated by maximum likelihood.
i
Finally, we consider two measures of the tax rate τnt
. First, we use the top marginal tax rate,

which has the advantage of being well-measured and independent of earnings. The drawback
is that it provides only an imperfect measure of the actual average tax rate. Second, we use
the average tax rate computed based on observed and imputed individual earnings, assuming
that counterfactual wages are equal to actual wages using PPP exchange rates. As individuals
are more likely to select countries offering the best wages, we likely overestimate counterfactual
wages, and hence overestimate counterfactual average tax rates (as tax systems are progressive
30

Notice that a failure to control for unobserved wage variation through country×year fixed effects creates a
downward bias on the estimated elasticity of location. Because an increase in the net-of-tax rate in country n
leads to higher supply and therefore lower salaries in equilibrium, the variation in net-of-tax salaries is always
smaller than the variation in net-of-tax rates alone. Without controlling for salary variation, we would overstate
variation in incentives and hence understate elasticities.

23

and average tax rates grow with income). The simplest way to circumvent this endogeneity issue
is to adopt a grouping estimator using the average tax rate by cells of year×country×foreign
status×quality.31 As the expected average tax rate is estimated at the group level, the bias due
to self-selection into countries that offer better wages is greatly attenuated.32 As we shall see,
estimates based on top marginal and average tax rates are quantitatively fairly close.
Elasticities. The utility coefficient α determines mobility responses to the net-of-tax rate. A
positive α implies that an increase in the net-of-tax rate in a given country has a positive effect
on the probability of a player locating in this country. From α, we can derive the elasticity of
i
of locating in country n with respect to the individual net-of-tax
the individual probability Pnt
i
i
i
i
i
rate in country n. In the multinomial model where Unt
= α log(1 − τnt
) + Xnt
γ + νnt
and νnt
is

type I extreme value distributed, we have the standard formula
i

i
Pnt

i

eα log(1−τnt )+Xnt γ
= P α log(1−τ i )+X i γ
mt
mt
me

and εint ≡

i
d log Pnt
i
= α · (1 − Pnt
),
i
d log(1 − τnt
)

i
i
.
with respect to 1 − τnt
where εint is the individual elasticity of Pnt

Denoting by In (resp. InC ) the set of all natives (resp. non-natives) from country n, we can
define the country n level elasticities εndomestic and εnforeign from section 3, equation (2) as
εndomestic

P
P
P
i
i
i
i
)
d log( i∈In Pnt
i∈In α · (1 − Pnt )Pnt
i∈In dPnt /d log(1 − τnd )
P
P
=
=
= α·(1− P̄nd ),
=
i
i
d log(1 − τnd )
i∈In Pnt
i∈In Pnt

i
where P̄nd is the average probability (weighted by Pnt
) of natives to play at home.
P
P
P
i
i
i
i
)
d log( i∈InC Pnt
i∈InC α · (1 − Pnt )Pnt
i∈InC dPnt /d log(1 − τnf )
n
P
P
εf oreign =
=
=
= α·(1−P̄nf ),
i
i
d log(1 − τnf )
i∈InC Pnt
i∈InC Pnt
i
where P̄nf is the average probability (weighted by Pnt
) of non-natives to play in country n.

Globally, as summary statistics, we can define εdomestic and εf oreign as the weighted average
elasticities across all countries.33 In Table 2, we report both α and the two average elasticities
i
εdomestic and εf oreign . As most players play at home, Pnt
is small for foreign countries and
i
therefore εf oreigner ≈ α. By contrast, Pnt
is large for home countries (around 90% as shown in

appendix Table A1, column (2)) and therefore εdomestic ≈ α/10  α.
31

More precisely, the cell is chosen so that the top marginal tax rate is constant within a cell so that foreign
status also captures eligibility of any special scheme affecting the top marginal tax rate.
32
Such grouping procedures are commonly used in the labor supply literature to overcome measurement error
or missing data in wage rates (see e.g., Blau and Kahn, 2007).
P
P
33
i
i
To be precise, the country n weight for εndomestic (resp. εnforeign ) is i∈In Pnt
(resp. i∈InC Pnt
).

24

Empirical results. Table 2 presents estimation results using the top marginal net-of-tax rate
log (1 − M T R) in Panel A and the average net-of-tax rate log (1 − AT R) in Panel B. Column
(1) shows results for a basic specification without country fixed effects. This specification is
similar in spirit to the cross-country correlations presented in Figure 1 for the post-Bosman
era, and obviously does not control rigorously for non-tax characteristics of countries that may
affect location decisions. The utility coefficient on log (1 − M T R) in Panel A is very large and
strongly significant at 1.32(.07). This translates into an equally large elasticity for foreigners,
εf oreigner = 1.31(.07), and a more modest elasticity for domestic players, εdomestic = .16(.01).
The estimates are slightly higher when using the average tax rate in Panel B with εf oreigner =
1.60(.08) and εdomestic = .18(.01). These estimates are roughly comparable to the reduced-form
estimates in Table 1, Panel A, and represent long-term migration responses to taxation under
the strong identification assumption made by this specification.
Column (2) introduces country fixed effects as well as rich controls for ability and other
individual characteristics whose effects are allowed to vary by country. This specification controls for all unobserved time-invariant country characteristics that affect location choice, and
exploits primarily differential variation over time in the net-of-tax rates on different players
across countries. This is the type of difference-in-differences approach exemplified by Figure
2, Panel A and Figure 3, which represent medium-term migration responses to taxation. The
estimates are still large and strongly significant, but unsurprisingly somewhat smaller than in
column (1). The utility coefficient on log(1 − M T R) in Panel A is 0.73(.12) while the coefficient
on log (1 − AT R) in Panel B is 0.93(.14). The corresponding elasticities are a bit below 1 for
foreigners and around .1 for locals.
The specification in column (3) introduces country×year fixed effects, and therefore exploits
variation within country and year in the net-of-tax rates on different players. This strategy
is exemplified by Figure 2, Panel B (eligibility rule in the Beckham Law), appendix Figure
A6 (duration rule in the Danish scheme), and appendix Figure A7 (cohort-based payroll tax
reform in Greece). Controlling for unobserved time-varying country characteristics ensures that
even if tax reforms were endogenous, this does not necessarily pose a threat to identification.34
34

Note though that this does not deal with every possible endogenous reform story. For example, it would still
pose a threat to identification if the Spanish Beckham law was implemented in response to differential migration
patterns between those types of foreigners who were made eligible for the scheme and those who were not made
eligible.

25

Furthermore, as explained above, this specification also controls for potential general equilibrium
effects of taxation on the wage level of football players in country n. As can be seen in column (3),
the estimated coefficients when using either the top marginal or average net-of-tax rate become
larger than the coefficients in column (2). Elasticities are now greater than 1 for foreigners
and around 0.1-0.2 for locals. This suggests that general equilibrium effects do occur and is
consistent with the earlier hypothesis that not taking them into account leads to downward bias
in the estimated mobility response.
Column (4) adds controls for country×year fixed effects interacted with ability variables in
order to test for potential general equilibrium effects on wages that vary by ability, as in a model
with imperfect substitution across different ability levels. This reduces somewhat the estimated
coefficients, although they are still large and strongly significant. For example, the mobility
elasticity of foreigners equals .62(.13) when using top marginal tax rates and 1.10(.16) when
using average tax rates.
Columns (5)-(6) provide robustness checks of the specification in column (3). Column (5)
considers an alternative measure of player quality based on the average quality of a player’s
clubs over just the three preceding seasons, as opposed to over all preceding years. This does
not have a large effect on the estimated coefficients. Column (6) relaxes the constraint we
have imposed on the dynamics of location decisions. So far, we have taken a very myopic view
on migration choices, implicitly assuming that a player makes a new location decision each
year independently of previous choices. In such a setting, the only reason for path-dependence
in choices is through serial correlation in the error terms, which we control for by clustering
standard errors by player. But in practice, there will be path-dependence in location choice
arising from factors such as costs of breaking long contracts, moving costs, and investments
in location-specific human capital (such as language). To allow for such effects, column (6)
shows results from a specification that controls for past choices by adding a dummy variable
countryt−1 equal to 1 for the country of location in the previous year, interacted with dummies
for foreign and domestic country of the player. Results (not reported) show that past choices
do matter for current location with large positive coefficients on countryt−1 × f oreign and
countryt−1 × domestic, and those variables absorb part of the effect of home bias (home).
Finally, column (7) considers the pre-Bosman era (1985-1995) using the specification in

26

column (2).35 The coefficient on the top marginal net-of-tax rate is still positive, but the estimate
is much lower than for the post-Bosman era and not statistically significant. Consistent with
our results in Table 1, Panel A, the lower estimate reflects the limited mobility permitted by
UEFA legislation before the Bosman ruling.36

5.2

Rigid-Demand: Estimation of Ability Sorting and Displacement

As shown theoretically in section 3, rigid labor demand can create ability sorting and displacement effects. Because of the ability sorting effect, the impact of the net-of-tax rate in a given
country on the probability of locating in this country is positive at high ability levels, but negative at low ability levels. Because of the displacement effect, an increase in the net-of-tax rate on
foreign (domestic) players has a negative cross-effect on domestic (foreign) players. This section
investigates the empirical importance of such effects. Importantly, sorting and displacement
effects occur in the full professional football market and might be masked when focusing solely
on the top leagues as we have done so far. In the largest countries, the second leagues are also
professional and can be of similar or higher quality than the top leagues of the smallest countries.
Hence, in this section, we add the second leagues from the top-five countries (England, France,
Germany, Italy, and Spain) to our sample of interest. Because information on second leagues is
only available since 1999, we will restrict our analysis to the 1999-2008 period. We will compare
results when using only top leagues to results when including second leagues as well. We will
use only top marginal tax rates because of lack of data on the earnings of second-league players.
To begin with, note that the model of individual location choice underlying the rigid-demand
model is the same as the one underlying the flexible-demand model. As shown in section 3, the
difference in the predictions of the two models is created entirely by general equilibrium effects on
player salaries driven by the rigid-demand constraint. We therefore consider specifications that
do not control for country×year fixed effects since such controls would absorb the equilibrium
wage variation driving the effect we are trying to identify. For ability sorting, we allow the effect
of the net-of-tax rate to vary with ability and test if the effect is positive at high ability levels and
35

In the pre-Bosman period, there is substantially less within-country variation in the net-of-tax rate, and so
we cannot implement the specifications in columns (3) or (4) allowing for country, year, and quality fixed effects
interacted.
36
In addition, the top marginal tax rate is a less accurate proxy for the average tax rate in the pre-Bosman
era where football wages were generally lower, which may create downward bias. We cannot use average tax
rates for the pre-Bosman era due to a lack of individual earnings data for that period.

27

negative at low abilities. Notice that in the perfectly flexible demand model, the effect would
always be positive at all ability levels even when including general equilibrium wage effects in
the estimates. For displacement, we include in the specification both the net-of-tax rate on
player i and the net-of-tax rate on the “opposite group” (foreign players if player i is domestic,
and vice versa), and test if the cross-effect is negative.
The results are reported in Table 3. Panel A considers the first-league sample for the period
1999-2008, while Panel B adds the top-five second leagues to the sample. Columns (1)-(3)
consider the same specifications as in the first three columns of Table 2. Two conclusions
emerge. First, the results in Panel A show that the 1999-2008 period delivers results that are
fairly similar (somewhat larger) to those obtained in Table 2 for the full period 1996-2008.
Second, the results in Panel B show that including the five best second leagues has only a
modest downward effect on the estimated coefficients, which is reassuring.
Starting from column (2) specification without country×year fixed effects, column (4) tests
for ability sorting effects by interacting the net-of-tax rate variable with an indicator variable
low (top) for the quality index being below (above) a given threshold. The threshold is the same
in absolute value in Panels A and B (and corresponds roughly to the 25th and 50th percentiles
of the quality distributions in Panel A and Panel B, respectively). Column (4) shows strong
positive effects for top-quality players and significantly negative effects for lower-quality players.
The results are similar when adding the second leagues in Panel B. Importantly, in the presence
of rigid demand, the larger estimate for top-quality players is the one that should be used as the
upper bound for top earners in other occupations where labor demand is likely to be flexible.
Starting from the specification in column (4) with ability sorting effects, column (5) tests
for displacement effects by adding the net-of-tax rate on foreign players in player i’s country of

citizenship (log 1 − τ f × domestic) and the net-of-tax rate on domestic players in all countries

where player i is not a citizen (log 1 − τ d × f oreign). Two points are worth noting. First, the
coefficients interacted with quality dummies remain virtually unchanged relative to column (4).
Second, consistent with the presence of displacement effects, we find negative cross-tax effects.
The coefficient on log (1 − τf ) × domestic is large in absolute value and strongly significant,
while the coefficient on log (1 − τd ) × f oreign is smaller and statistically insignificant.37 Again,
37

Notice that we have much more power in the estimation of cross-effects of τf than in the estimation of
cross-effects of τd , because the strongest variation in the data comes from special tax schemes to foreigners that
reduce τf without affecting τd . Hence, there may also be significant displacement effects of domestic players on

28

those displacement effects are very similar across Panels A and B.
To conclude, Table 3 provides strong evidence of ability sorting and displacement effects
consistent with the rigid labor demand model in section 3. Reassuringly, the results are robust
to the inclusion of lower leagues.

6

Conclusion and Policy Implications

This paper has analyzed the effects of top earnings tax rates on the international migration of top
football players in Europe. The effects are identified using a number of tax and institutional
changes: The 1995 Bosman ruling which liberalized the European football market, top tax
rate reforms within countries, and special tax schemes offering preferential rates to immigrant
workers. These variations create compelling sources of identification for the causal impact of
taxation on location choice. We provide reduced-form graphical evidence showing transparent
and significant migration responses to country-specific tax reforms and labor market regulation.
Multinomial regression analysis using all sources of variation in the post-Bosman period confirms
that the mobility response to tax rates is large. The elasticity of the number of foreign players
with respect to the net-of-tax rate on foreigners is around one, and even larger for the highestquality players. Hence, a country can successfully attract foreign players by providing foreignerspecific tax breaks. The elasticity of the number of domestic players with respect to the netof-tax rate on domestic players is smaller, around .15, because the base of domestic players is
much larger as most players play at home. Hence, cutting taxes on all players (foreigners and
locals) is much less cost effective than cutting taxes on foreign players only. Consistent with our
rigid labor demand theory, we find that location elasticities are largest at the top of the ability
distribution and negative at the bottom due to ability sorting effects, and that cross-tax location
elasticities between foreign and domestic players are negative due to displacement effects. To our
knowledge, the paper provides for the first time compelling evidence of a link between taxation
and international migration. As shown in the case of Denmark, football players are likely to be
a particularly mobile segment of the labor market, and our study therefore provides an upper
bound on the migration response for the labor market as a whole. The upper bound we find is
large, suggesting that mobility could be an important constraint on tax progressivity.
Our estimates combined with our theoretical model can be used to estimate revenue maxforeigners that we do not have sufficient power to estimate.

29

imizing tax rates (Laffer rates) and draw policy conclusions, especially with respect to the
aggressive use in several countries of preferential tax schemes to foreigners. We propose such an
analysis in appendix section A.4 that yields three main findings (appendix Table A3). First, in
the baseline model with flexible demand, a uniform revenue-maximizing tax rate on all players
(foreign and domestic) follows a classic inverse elasticity rule as in the Mirrlees (1982) model of
optimal taxation with migration. It is around 81%, higher than actual top tax rates. This high
tax rate is obtained because about 90% of players still play at home and the elasticity for home
players is relatively small. Second, in the rigid-demand model, this uniform revenue maximizing
tax rate on all players is even higher than in the baseline. This is driven by ability sorting: any
in-migration of high-ability players comes with an offsetting out-migration of lower ability players, which reduces the ability-weighted average location elasticity in the rigid-demand setting
compared to the baseline. Third, the selective revenue-maximizing tax rate on foreign players
is lower than the uniform revenue maximizing tax rate and sometimes significantly so.
Importantly, these results are based on uncoordinated tax setting across countries. While
our empirical results provide some normative support for preferential tax schemes to foreigners
within this setting, these are beggar-thy-neighbor policies that are not optimal from the global
perspective.38 Another important rationale put forward by advocates of preferential tax rates
for highly-paid foreigners is that high-skill workers generate positive externalities on their coworkers and the economy at large. If such spillovers exist, they would naturally further reduce
the optimal tax rate on foreign workers. Such spillovers also typically benefit one country at
the expense of others and hence cannot justify low tax rates from a coordinated tax setting
perspective. We leave the estimation of such spillovers for future work.
From a methodological perspective, we hope that the combination of graphical evidence using
tax reforms along with systematic multinomial regressions could be fruitfully used in other tax
mobility contexts and in particular in the case of mobility of firms as richer international micro
data on firms’ locations become available.

38

Moreover, in the case of football players, even within the uncoordinated setting and despite the large
migration responses we estimate, the Laffer rates are still quite high due to displacement effects driven by rigid
demand in the football market.

30

References
Abadie Alberto, Alexis Diamond, and Jens Hainmueller (2010). “Synthetic Control
Methods for Comparative Case Studies: Estimating the Effect of California’s Tobacco Control
Program,” Journal of the American Statistical Association 105, 493-505.
Bakija, Jonathan M., and Joel B. Slemrod (2004). “Do the Rich Flee from High State
Taxes? Evidence from Federal Estate Tax Returns,” NBER Working Paper No. 10645.
Blau, Francine D. and Lawrence M. Kahn (2007). “Changes in the Labor Supply Behavior
of Married Women: 19802000,” Journal of Labor Economics 25, 393-438.
Blundell, Richard and Thomas MaCurdy (1999). “Labor Supply: A Review of Alternative
Approaches,” in O. Ashenfelter and D. Card (eds.), Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 3A,
North-Holland, Amsterdam.
Borjas, George J. (1999). “The economic analysis of immigration,” in O. Ashenfelter and D.
Card (eds.), Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 3A, North-Holland, Amsterdam.
Day, Kathleen and Stanley Winer (2006). “Policy-Induced Internal Migration: An Empirical Investigation of the Canadian Case,” International Tax and Public Finance 13, 535–564.
Devereux, Michael P. and Rachel Griffith (2002). “Evaluating Tax Policy for Location
Decisions,” International Tax and Public Finance 10, 107–126.
Feldstein, Martin and Marion V. Wrobel (1998). “Can state taxes redistribute income?”
Journal of Public Economics 68, 369-396.
Gordon, Roger H. and James R. Hines (2002). “International taxation,” in A. Auerbach
and M. Feldstein (eds.), Handbook of Public Economics, Volume 4, North-Holland, Amsterdam.
Griffith, Racher, James Hines, and Peter B. Sørensen (2010). “International Capital
Taxation,” Chapter 10 in Dimension of Tax Design: The Mirrlees Review, Institute for Fiscal
Studies, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Kirchgassner, Gebhard and Werner Pommerehne (1996). “Tax harmonization and tax
competition in the European Union: Lessons from Switzerland,” Journal of Public Economics
60, 351-371.
Kleven, Henrik J., Camille Landais, Emmanuel Saez, and Esben A. Schultz (2011).
“Taxation and International Migration of Top Earners: Evidence from the Foreigner Tax Scheme
in Denmark,” LSE Working Paper November 2011.
Liebig, Thomas, Patrick A. Puhani, and Alfonso Sousa-Poza (2007). “Taxation and Internal Migration: Evidence from the Swiss Census using Community-Level Variation in Income
Tax Rates,” Journal of Regional Science 47, 807–836.
Meyer, Bruce (2000). “Do the Poor Move to Receive Higher Welfare Benefits?”, Working
Paper.
Mirrlees, James A. (1982). “Migration and Optimal Income Taxes.” Journal of Public Economics 18, 319-41.
OECD (annual). Taxing wages, OECD, Paris.
Saez, Emmanuel, Joel Slemrod, and Seth Giertz (2012). “The Elasticity of Taxable
Income with Respect to Marginal Tax Rates: A Critical Review,”Journal of Economic Literature
50, 3-50.
Young, C. and C. Varner (2011). “Millionaire Migration and State Taxation of Top Incomes:
Evidence from a Natural Experiment,” National Tax Journal 64, 255-284.

31

1. Before Bosman ruling
1985-1995

2. After Bosman ruling
1996-2008
.3

BE
CH

DE
IT AT PT
UK
NO
ES
GR DK

DE

NL

CH

BE
ES

IT

AT
GR

NOPT

DK

FR

FR

SE
0

SE

0

NL

Elasticity= 1.22 (.45)

UK

.15

Fraction of foreigners

Elasticity= 0 (.86)

.15

Fraction of foreigners

.3

A. In-migration of foreign players

.4

.6

.8

.4

Top earnings tax rate on foreign players

.6

.8

Top earnings tax rate on foreign players

1

1

B. Out-migration of domestic players
IT
AT
DE

PT
BE

FR
UK
SE

NO
DK

NL
.85

Fraction playing home

UK

Elasticity= .1 (.04)

GR
IT
ES

DE
AT

NO

CH
.85

GR
ES

Fraction playing home

CH

NLPT
BE

DK
SE

Elasticity= .32 (.1)

.7

.7

FR

.5

.65

.8

.5

Top earnings tax rate on local players

.65

.8

Top earnings tax rate on local players

50

DE
ES
FR
BE
PT
NL
CH UK GR

AT
DK

SE

100

UK
IT

Elasticity= 2.475 (1.07)
DE

FR

NL

PT

GR
CH

BE
AT

NO

DK

SE

0

NO

ES

50

IT

Points in European competitions

100

Elasticity= .518 (.93)

0

Points in European competitions

C. Club performance

.5

.65

Top earnings tax rate

.8

.5

.65

.8

Top earnings tax rate

Figure 1: Cross-country correlation between tax rates, migration, and performance
Notes: Each dot stands for one country. AT=Austria, BE=Belgium, DK=Denmark, UK=England, FR=France,
DE=Germany, GR=Greece, IT=Italy, NL=Netherlands, NO=Norway, PT=Portugal, ES=Spain, SE=Sweden,
CH=Switzerland. Left panels (1) depict country averages for years 1985 to 1995 and right panels (2) for years
1996 to 2008 after the Bosman ruling on free mobility was enacted. Panel A (top) depicts the fraction of foreign
players in the total number of players playing in the top league of a country against the average top earnings
tax rate for foreign players in that country. Panel B (middle) depicts the fraction of all top league professional
players nationals of a given country playing in the first league of their home country against the average top
earnings tax rate for domestic players in that country. Panel C (bottom) plots the total number of points
earned by all clubs in a given country in all European competitions against the weighted top earnings tax rate
(computed as the weighted sum of the top earnings tax rate on foreign and domestic players weighted by the
fraction of foreign and domestic players in the league). Total points are calculated according to UEFA’s formula
(see appendix for details). The regression line is depicted. Elasticity coefficients from the OLS regression of the
log-outcome on log(1 − τ ) (where τ is top tax rate on the x-axis) are reported with standard errors.

0

1995
Spain

2000
Year
Synthetic Spain

2005

.05
−.15
−.1
−.05
0
Top tax rate differential
1990

∆ top tax rate

Spain

1995
Spain

2000
Year
Synthetic Spain

2005
∆ top tax rate

Synthetic Spain

2005
∆ top tax rate

1

−.2

−.1
0
Top tax rate differential

Share playing in the country
.25
.5
.75

Placebo elasticity= .458 (.487)

0

−.2

−.1
0
Top tax rate differential

Share playing in the country
.005
.01
0
1990

2000
Year

B2. Non-eligible foreign players
.1

.015

B1. Eligible foreign players
DD elasticity= 1.243 (.213)

1995

.1

1990

DD elasticity= .976 (.85)

−.2

−.2

−.1
0
Top tax rate differential

Share of top−quality foreign players
.05
.1

DD elasticity= 1.495 (.333)

Share of lower−quality quality foreign players
0
.05
.1
.15

A2. Lower-quality players
.1

.15

A1. Top-quality players

1990

1995
Spain

2000
Year
Synthetic Spain

2005
∆ top tax rate

Figure 2: Effects of the 2004 Beckham Law in Spain
Notes: The 2004 “Beckham Law” tax reform, depicted by a vertical line, introduced a preferential tax treatment for foreign players in Spain (the 1995
dashed vertical line denotes the Bosman ruling). Each panel depicts the fraction of foreign players in the first league of Spain and in the synthetic control
country average. The synthetic country weights are constructed to match Spain on pre-reform 1990-2004 variables (see text for details and appendix Table
A2 for the composition of the synthetic country). Panel A1 displays the fraction of foreign top players, with top player defined as having played at least
once over the career in the national team of one’s home country. Panel A2 displays the fraction of non-top foreign players. Panel B1 displays the fraction
of top foreign players who never played in the country before year t and are therefore eligible for the Beckham tax regime in Spain after 2004. Panel B2
displays the fraction of foreign players who did played in the country in the window 5 to 10 years before year t and are therefore ineligible for the Beckham
tax regime in Spain after 2004. The top earnings tax rate differential between Spain and the synthetic control (defined as τSpain /τSynthetic − 1) is reported
on right y-axis. The Diff-in-Diff elasticity estimates reported are the Wald estimators, using years 1990-2003 (pre-reform) and 2004-2008 (post-reform).

0

.2
−.4

DD elasticity= 3.103 (.754)

−.2
0
Top tax rate differential

After reform
After Bosman

After reform
Before Bosman

Before reform

Share of top−quality foreign players
.025
.05
.075
.1

.125

A. Top-quality players

1985

1990
Denmark

1995
Year

2000

2005

Synthetic Denmark

∆ top tax rate

.2
−.4

DD elasticity= −.717 (.523)

−.2
0
Top tax rate differential

After reform
After Bosman

After reform
Before Bosman

Before reform

0

Share of lower−quality foreign players
.025
.05
.075
.1
.125

B. Lower-quality quality players

1985

1990
Denmark

1995
Year

2000

Synthetic Denmark

2005
∆ top tax rate

Figure 3: Effects of the Danish Foreigner Tax Scheme
Notes: The 1992 Danish tax reform, depicted by a vertical line, introduced a preferential flat tax scheme for
highly-paid foreign workers arriving in Denmark in 1991 or after (the 1995 dashed vertical line denotes the
Bosman ruling). Each panel depicts the fraction of foreign players in the first league of Denmark and in the
synthetic control country average. The synthetic country weights are constructed to match Denmark on prereform 1985-1990 variables (see text for details and appendix Table A2 for the composition of the synthetic
country). Panel A1 displays the fraction of foreign top players, with top player defined as having played at least
once over the career in the national team of one’s home country. The top earnings tax rate differential between
Spain and the synthetic control (defined as τDenmark /τSynthetic − 1) is reported on right y-axis. The Diff-inDiff elasticity estimates reported are the Wald estimators, using years 1985-1990 (pre-reform) and 1991-2008
(post-reform).

Before reform

After reform
Before Bosman

After reform
After Bosman

1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005

0

Number of foreign workers (basis 1=1990)
2
4
6
8
10

A. Sports & Entertainment

Control

Treatment

Before reform

After reform
Before Bosman

After reform
After Bosman

1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005

0

Number of foreign workers (basis 1=1990)
2
4
6
8
10

B. All other industries

Control

Treatment

Figure 4: Effects of the Danish Foreigner Tax Scheme by Industry
Notes: The 1992 Danish tax reform, depicted by a vertical line, introduced a preferential flat tax scheme for
highly-paid foreign workers arriving in Denmark in 1991 or after (annualized earnings above 103,000 Euros as
of 2009). The 1995 dashed vertical line denotes the Bosman ruling. Each panel reports the number of foreign
workers in Denmark with earnings above the scheme eligibility threshold (treatment series) from 1980 to 2005.
As a control group, it reports the number of foreigners in Denmark with earnings between 80% and 99.5% of
the threshold (control series). Panel A is for workers in the Sports & Entertainment sector (smallest industrial
classification including football players). Panel B is for workers in all other industries. Treatment and control
series are normalized to one in 1990 the year before the scheme was first implemented. All numbers are weighted
by duration of stay during the year for part-year foreign residents and earnings are also annualized for part-year
residents. Data based on full population provided by Statistics Denmark.

Table 1: Reduced Form Elasticity Estimates
Description

Elasticity
w.r.t (1- MTR)
(1)

Elasticity
w.r.t (1-ATR)
(2)

A. Bosman ruling
Bosman ruling removed barriers to
migration in the football labor
market from 1996 on. Estimates
capture cross-country correlation
between top earnings tax rate and
location decisions before and after
the Bosman ruling as in Figure 1
(no control for country fixed
effects).

Pre-Bosman
Post-Bosman

Pre-Bosman
Post-Bosman

A1. Foreign players
.00
(.86)
1.22
1.33
(.45)
(.37)
A2. Domestic players
.10
(.04)
.32
.17
(.10)
(.07)

B. Country case studies
B1. Spanish 2004 “Beckham law”
Flat tax rate for foreign players
Top-quality players
1.49
arriving in Spain on or after 2004.
(.33)
DD estimation using the synthetic
Lower-quality players
.98
control approach of Abadie et al.
(.85)
(2010) and comparing 1990-2003
Eligible players
1.24
(1996-2003 for average tax rates) to
(.21)
2004-2008. Identification relies on a Non-eligible (placebo)
.46
parallel trend assumption as in
(.49)
Figure 2.
B2. Danish tax scheme for foreigners
Flat tax rate for foreign players
arriving in Denmark on or after
1991. DD estimation comparing
1985-1990 to 1991-2008.
Identification relies on a parallel
trend assumption as in Figure 3.

Top-quality players
Lower-quality players

1.83
(.57)
1.10
(.78)
1.45
(.31)
.45
(.72)

3.10
(.75)
-.71
(.52)

Notes: The table presents elasticity estimates from the reduced form case studies presented in Section 4.
Column (1) presents elasticity estimates using the top marginal tax rate while column (2) presents elasticity
estimates using the actual average tax rate (calculated using individual earnings data available or imputed for
the period 1996-2008). Panel A presents elasticity estimates based on cross-country comparisons before and
after the Bosman ruling of 1996 from Figure 1. Panel A1 presents the elasticity of the fraction of foreign players
with respect to the net-of-tax rate applicable to foreign players (assuming eligibility for preferential treatment
when applicable) while Panel A2 presents the elasticity of the fraction of domestic players with respect to the
net-of-tax rate applicable to domestic players. Panels B1 and B2 present elasticity estimates from the country
case studies tax preferential schemes introduced in Spain in 2004 and Denmark in 1991 (corresponding to Figures
2 and 3). Those elasticities are always for foreign players. Average tax rate elasticities are not presented for
the pre-Bosman period and the Danish case studies because of lack of individual earnings data before 1996.
Similarly, the average tax rate elasticity for Spain is based on the 1996-2003 vs. 2004-2008 comparison.

Table 2: Discrete Choice Model Estimates
Post-Bosman (1996-2008)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Pre-Bosman

Alternate

Control

quality index

past choices

(5)

(6)

(7)

A. Specifications with top marginal tax rates
1.323∗∗∗
(0.0732)

log(1 − M T R)

εdomestic

.156
(.009)
1.308
(.072)

εf oreigner

0.729∗∗∗
(0.116)

.074
(.012)
.704
(.112)

Utility parameter estimates
1.089∗∗∗ 0.634∗∗∗
1.034∗∗∗
1.311∗∗∗
(0.159)
(0.132)
(0.156)
(0.139)

.121
(.018)
1.057
(.154)

Implied elasticities
.07
.112
(.015)
(.017)
.621
.991
(.13)
(.15)

.089
(.009)
.747
(.079)

0.202
(0.160)

.011
(.009)
.199
(.158)

B. Specifications with grouped average tax rates
1.599∗∗∗
(0.0787)

log(1 − AT R)

εdomestic

0.931∗∗∗
(0.138)

Utility parameter estimates
1.721∗∗∗ 1.123∗∗∗
1.772∗∗∗
1.746∗∗∗
(0.197)
(0.161)
(0.192)
(0.172)
Implied elasticities
.122
.19
(.017)
(.021)
1.1
1.698
(.157)
(.184)

.184
(.009)
1.582
(.078)

.093
(.014)
.9
(.133)

.184
(.021)
1.654
(.19)

Country F-E

NO

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

Age, age squared, exp., and
quality dummies interacted
with country F-E

NO

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

YES

Year×country F-E

NO

NO

YES

YES

YES

YES

NO

NO

NO

NO

YES

NO

NO

NO

55225

55225

55225

55225

55225

45577

εf oreigner

Age, age squared,
quality
interacted
year×country F-E
Observations

exp.,
with

55225

.116
(.011)
.989
(.098)

Notes: Multinomial Logit regressions. Robust s.e. clustered at individual level in parentheses. ∗ p < 0.05,
∗∗
p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001. Regression based on 1996-2008 individual micro-data described in appendix Table
A1. The data include players in 14 countries: Austria, Belgium, Denmark, England, France, Germany, Greece,
Italy, Portugal, Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, Spain, and Switzerland. All regressions include a home country
dummy. Specification in column (1) refers to the identification strategy with no country fixed-effect as in Figure
1. Specification in column (2) refers to the identification with country fixed-effects, i.e., Difference-in-Differences
strategy as in Figures 2A, and 3. Specification in column (3) refers to the identification with country×year
fixed-effects and therefore exploits within country×year variation in tax rates as in Figures 2B, A6, and A7.
Column (4) introduces country×year×ability fixed effects, to account for possible variations in the shape of the
wage distribution by country over time. Column (5) repeats the specification of column (3) with an alternative
quality index. Column (6) repeats the specification of column (3) but adds a dummy for country of play in year
t − 1 interacted with foreign status. Column (7) estimates the model of column (2) on pre-Bosman years (1985 to
1995). The top Panel A uses the top marginal tax rate while Panel B uses the average tax rate. The average tax
rate is estimated based on actual and imputed individual earnings and averaged at the country×year×foreign
status×quality level to avoid endogeneity issues. The first row in each panel reports the coefficient α from the
multinomial regression. The next two rows report the corresponding elasticities. The first is the elasticity of
domestic players with respect to a change in the domestic net-of-tax rate. The second is the elasticity of foreign
players with respect to a change in the foreign net-of-tax rate.

Table 3: Sorting Effects, Cross-effects, and Second Leagues
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

log(1 − τ ) × low

-0.512∗∗∗
(0.149)

-0.529∗∗∗
(0.145)

log(1 − τ ) × top

1.409∗∗∗
(0.136)

1.301∗∗∗
(0.132)

A. Top leagues (1999-2008)
1.795∗∗∗
(0.0647)

log(1 − τ )

1.138∗∗∗
(0.118)

1.433∗∗∗
(0.155)

log(1 − τ f ) × domestic

-0.618∗∗∗
(0.119)

log(1 − τ d ) × f oreign

-0.149
(0.178)

B. Adding the five best second leagues (1999-2008)
log(1 − τ )

1.334∗∗∗
(0.0771)

0.995∗∗∗
(0.128)

1.226∗∗∗
(0.169)

log(1 − τ ) × low

-0.391∗
(0.158)

-0.448∗∗
(0.154)

log(1 − τ ) × top

1.494∗∗∗
(0.136)

1.409∗∗∗
(0.133)

log(1 − τ f ) × domestic

-0.635∗∗∗
(0.134)

log(1 − τ d ) × f oreign

-0.201
(0.192)

Country F-E

NO

YES

YES

YES

YES

Age, age squared, exp., and
quality dummies interacted
with country F-E

NO

YES

YES

YES

YES

Year×country F-E

NO

NO

YES

NO

NO

Notes: Multinomial Logit regressions. Robust s.e. clustered at individual level in parentheses. ∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗
p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001. Panel A includes all top leagues from the 14 countries for years 1999-2008 (sample
size is 47,727). Panel B adds the second leagues from the top five countries–England, France, Germany, Italy,
and Spain–for years 1999-2008 (sample size is 70,703). Compared to Table 2, years 1996-1998 are excluded
in both panels because of lack of second league data for those years. Columns (1), (2), and (3) correspond
to the specifications of columns (1), (2), and (3) of Table 2. Column (4) uses the specification of column (2)
and adds the interaction of the log-net-of-tax rate with indicators of players’ quality (based on prior years of
each individual career, see text for details). top (low) is an indicator variable for quality index above (below)
a given threshold of the quality index. The threshold is the same in both panels A and B (and corresponds to
the 25th percentile of the quality distribution in Panel A, and approximately the 50th percentile of the quality
distribution in Panel B). Higher coefficients for top quality players is evidence of sorting effects. Column (5)
further adds interactions of foreign vs. domestic dummy. domestic (f oreign) is a dummy equal to one if the
individual plays (does not play) in his home country. τ f is the tax rate that applies in country c to foreign
players and τ d is the tax rate on local players in country c. Those coefficients capture the displacement effects
that arise in the rigid labor demand model.

A
A.1

Appendix (not for publication)
Top and Average Tax Rate Computations

Individual Income Tax. For the individual income tax, we use the top statutory marginal
income tax rate taking into account all the tax rules and deductions that may apply in the calculation of the top income tax rate. In cases where local income taxes apply (Belgium, Denmark,
Portugal, and Switzerland), we have used the average top local income tax rate. We have used
as sources OECD (annual): Taxing wages for the period 1980-present, OECD (1986): Personal
income tax systems for the period 1975-1983, PriceWaterhouseCoopers (annual): Worldwide
Tax Summaries, and International Bureau of Fiscal Documentation (2008): The International
Guide to the Taxation of Sportsmen and Sportswomen. The latter source is particularly helpful for determining specific rules applying to foreign football players. Because tax rules are
complex, it is essential to cross-validate various sources to create an error-free database. In
particular, we investigated thoroughly situations where discrepancies arose between our sources
and used additional country-specific data obtained directly from domestic sources to resolve
such discrepancies.
Payroll Taxes. Payroll tax rates include uncapped social security contributions both at the
employer and employee level as well as some additional specific taxes on wage earnings. For
payroll tax rates, we have used as sources OECD (annual): Taxing wages, MISSOC (annual): La
protection sociale dans les Etats membres de l’Union européenne, along with direct information
from the Social Security administrations covering football players in different countries (e.g.,
IKA in Greece and ENPALS in Italy). For our analysis, the critical aspect of such social security
taxes is whether they apply only up to a cap, in which case we assume that the relevant payroll
tax rate is zero (as the amount of earnings below the cap is small relative to the very large
football players earnings).
Valued Added Taxes. Finally, we include VAT rates in our computations, using the standard
VAT rate applying to the broadest set of goods. Our source for VAT rates is the European Commission (2009): Taux de TVA appliqués dans les Etats membres de la Communauté européenne.
If players consume most of their income in the country in which they live and play, then it is
correct to include the VAT rate in the tax calculation. On the other hand, if players consume
most of their income abroad or save most of it for future consumption outside the country in
which they play, then the VAT rate should not be included. Whether or not the VAT rate is
included does not significantly impact our findings, because VAT rates are fairly similar across
European countries and because VAT variation is national and therefore fully controlled for in
specifications using country×year fixed effects.
Top Marginal Tax Rate. We combine all three types of taxes into a single tax rate τ
capturing the total tax wedge: when the employer labor cost increases by 1 Euro, the employee
can increase his consumption by 1 − τ Euros. Denoting by τi , τpw , τpf , and τV AT , the top tax
39

rates on earnings due to the income tax, the employee (worker) portion of the payroll tax, the
employer (firm) portion of the payroll tax, and the VAT, respectively, we have
(1 − τi )(1 − τpw )
,
(1 + τV AT )(1 + τpf )
in the most typical case where the employer and employee payroll taxes apply to earnings net
of the employer payroll tax but before the employee payroll tax has been deducted, and where
the income tax applies to earnings net of all payroll taxes. We have adapted the computation
for each country to capture exactly the rules in that country.
The top marginal tax rates for years 1985-2008 are depicted in Figures A1-A3 in all 14
countries. Each figure has two panels. The top panel depicts top tax rates applying to domestic
players and the bottom planel depicts top tax rates applying to foreign players when they are
eligible for a preferential tax scheme.
1−τ =

Individual Earnings: Actual Data and Imputations. Individual earnings information for
football players have been collected by Jori Pinge at the Copenhagen University for his Ph.D.
research. We are very grateful to him for sharing his data with us. The data were provided to
Jori Pinge by Sports Interactive, a company that created the game Football Manager and still
owns all property rights on the individual earnings dataset that they have gathered from various
undisclosed sources. Analysis of the data shows that the numbers are reasonable and very highly
correlated with league and club quality suggesting that the data quality is reasonably high. The
earnings data cover years 1999-2000 and 2004-2008. For those years, the earnings data cover
54% of our main sample of top league players in our 14 European countries (Table A1, column
(7)).
For players in our main dataset for whom we do not have direct earnings information, we
impute individual earnings using a simple one-to-one propensity score matching as follows. First,
we estimate a probability model of having a wage record in our dataset on a set of observable
characteristics (experience, age, country fixed effects, various quality indexes and a linear time
trend). Second, we impute earnings of individual j using the earnings of individual i (with non
missing earnings) that has the closest score Xi β̂ to the score Xj β̂ of individual j. We have tried
various other matching methods (kernel, radius, Mahalanobis) without loss of robustness.
Note that the imputation of individual earnings does introduce measurement error. As a
result, our individual earnings data would not be suited to evaluate tax incidence. However,
they are precise enough to evaluate average tax rates and to understand how average earnings
tax rates depart from top earnings tax rates. Using the top individual tax rate as instrument
for the average tax rate, we can eliminate the bias that arise from measurement error.
Note also that we can only observe earnings where the individual plays. We cannot observe
counterfactual earnings that the player would have if he played in another country. Hence, to
compute average tax rates counterfactuals that the player would face in other countries, we need
to make an assumption on counterfactual earnings. The simplest assumption is that counterfactual earnings are the same as actual earnings using PPP exchange rates across countries. This
40

assumption further introduces measurement error in our average tax rate measurement but our
grouping strategy can eliminate this bias.
Average Tax Rate Computations. We have computed average tax rates using the OECD
Taxing Wages simulators available online at http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/52/52/42629461.zip.
Those programs are only available for 2001 and after. We have used the publications OECD
Taxing Wages for 1996-2000 to extend the simulators back to year 1996. Our average tax
rate calculation includes the individual income tax both at the central and local level, payroll
taxes, as well as the Value-Added-Tax as described above. We have also created alternative
tax calculators to take into account all the special tax schemes for foreigners that we described
above.
We assume in the average tax rate calculation that the player salary is his only source of
income and that football players are single filers with no dependents.39
Table A1 reports the top marginal and average tax rates for domestic and foreign players in
each country (averaged over the period 1996-2008) in columns (8)-(11). The top row displays
the 14 country average (weighted by sample size). The average tax rate is slightly lower than
the top marginal tax rate. The average tax rate differs by more than 10% of the top marginal
tax rate in about 32% of cases with significant variation across countries depending on the
progressivity of their tax structure and the level of football players salaries. Switzerland is the
country with the largest discrepancy at it has a slowly progressive income tax schedule combined
with low football salaries. In contrast, Italy has a very small gap between the average tax rate
and the marginal tax rate as the top bracket is reached at a relatively low income level and
football salaries are high.

A.2

Performance Measures

Club Level Performance. Results from European competitions are used by UEFA to develop
official rankings of all European clubs each year.40 Our club data include results from all games
played in European competitions since 1975, along with results from the National Leagues of
the 14 countries in the data set. These data allow us to construct the so-called UEFA team
and country coefficients that form the basis for UEFA’s official rankings, along with alternative
ranking measures based on different formulas. Our analysis below will be based on the following
measure of club performance in a country: total points earned by all clubs in a given country
and year in all European competitions, where total points are calculated according to UEFA’s
formula and gives 2 points for each win, 1 point for each draw, and bonus points for advancing
39

Most European income tax systems are individual based (instead of family based), so that the marital
assumption does not affect the average tax rate in most countries.
40
In the period we consider, there are three major European championships: the Champions League, the
UEFA Cup, and the Cup Winners Cup.

41

to various tournament stages.41 Using total points for ranking is different than using UEFA’s
country coefficient, which is based on the average amount of points earned by clubs participating
in the European competitions in a given year.42 Our results, presented in Figure 1, Panel C,
are very robust to using different ranking measures.
Individual Quality Index. The empirical estimation of section 5 uses an individual player
quality index. The computation of this index requires the following three steps.
(i ) For each club k in country n in year t, we compute a club quality measure (Qk,n,t ) based
on the ranking of the club in the national league of country n (league rankk,n,t ) combined with
a country coefficient measuring the international standing of the league (country coefn,t ). As
described above, the country coefficient is equal to the total number of points earned by all
clubs in the country in a given year in all UEFA competitions. Club quality is then measured
as
2

maxk (league rankk,n,t ) − league rankk,n,t + 1
(4)
× country coefn,t
Qk,n,t =
maxk (league rankk,n,t )
The term in brackets term runs from 1 for the best club to 1/ maxk (league rankk,n,t ) for the
worst club in the league. We square this term to account for skewness in the distribution of club
quality within countries. We have checked that our results are robust to a club-quality index
that does not square the league ranking term.
(ii ) We then assign to each player in year t a value Vti given by the average quality of
all the clubs he has played for from the beginning of his professional career until year t − 1.
Importantly, the quality index depends only on prior years performance (and not current or
future years) so that it is not endogenous to current mobility decisions. For robustness, we also
construct a measure of Vti equal to the average quality of the clubs he has played for during
the three preceding seasons t − 3, t − 2, and t − 1. We include club points only until year t − 1
to avoid correlation between the quality index Vti of player i in year t and the migration choice
of this player in year t. Notice also that averaging club quality over a career of course does
not eradicate a correlation between our player quality index and age, because players tend to
advance to better clubs over the career path. This is the reason why we always control directly
for age and experience in our regressions.
(iii ) We finally rank all players in year t according to Vti , and assign to each player his quantile
position in the distribution of Vti . As mentioned earlier, we have data on player salaries for a
large subset of players. Hence, we can check the correlation between our ability index and
actual salaries. Even without controlling for the other quality measures (age, experience, and
41

Points earned in qualification stages are weighted by 0.5. This weighting scheme has been used by UEFA
only since 1999. For comparability of performance over time, we use this weighting throughout the period.
42
The UEFA country coefficient is conceptually problematic, because successful leagues get more teams into
the European competitions. Thus, the UEFA measure effectively compares top teams in weak leagues to uppermiddle and top teams in strong leagues, which biases down performance differences across countries.

42

national team selection), our quality index is strongly positively correlated with player salaries,
suggesting that we measure player ability quite well.

A.3

Additional Reduced Form Empirical Evidence

Rigid Labor Demand: Team Size and League Size. Figure A4 provides some descriptive
cross-country evidence on whether labor demand in the football market is flexible or rigid. Panel
A plots the average number of players per team against the top earnings tax rate across different
countries. The left-hand-side panel is for the pre-Bosman period while the right-hand-side panel
is for the post-Bosman period. The figure shows that team size does vary across countries (from
about 25 to 40 players across the entire sample). Team size is uncorrelated with tax rates in
the pre-Bosman period. It is weakly negatively correlated with tax rates in post-Bosman period
but the coefficient is not significant. A caveat is that this result is strongly affected by England,
where the number of players per team is much higher than elsewhere and taxes are relatively low.
If we exclude England, the variation is between 25 and 35 players and is no longer correlated
with tax rates. Panel B plots the average number of teams per league in each country against
the tax rate. There is considerable variation, which is also weakly negatively correlated with tax
rates in post-Bosman period. However, the variation is also strongly correlated with country
size, with large countries having more teams than small countries. The number of teams does
not vary much for any given country over time.
Overall, this evidence is mixed: there is clearly some flexibility in demand, mainly because
the number of players per club can vary, but this variation is not very large and therefore demand
rigidities may be important. That is why in section 3, we first set out a classical baseline model
with flexible demand, and then we extended the analysis to account for rigid demand.
Importantly, because our empirical analysis focuses on the effect of taxation on migration,
and does not explicitly incorporate salary levels, the goal of the theoretical models is to link
tax rates and migration rather than providing a realistic theory of salary determination. Therefore, our models adopt a very simple and admittedly unrealistic wage determination process.
The models can be generalized to a more complex wage determination process, although this
would come at the cost of complicating the theoretical exposition. We discuss the implications of different generalizations of the theory in section 3.3, and the empirical specifications
in section 5 are robust to such generalizations. In particular, the empirical analysis includes
rich non-parametric controls for unobserved wage variation that allow for a very general wage
determination process. A more elaborate theory of the effects of taxes on wages along with an
empirical estimation using actual wage data is left for future work.43
Displacement Effects Following the Spanish Beckham Law. Figure A5 analyzes whether
tax-induced migration of foreign players leads to displacement of domestic players. The figure
43

Ross and Dunn (2007) propose a useful first step in this direction in the case of the US baseball players,
where individual earnings data are available, using tax rate variation across states.

43

shows the evolution over time in the total number of foreign and domestic players in the Spanish
league. There are three points to note about this figure. First, in the years leading up to the
Beckham Law, the number of domestic players is increasing while the number of foreigners
is falling. Then around the time of the Beckham Law, the two series break: the number of
foreign players starts to increase and the number of domestic players starts to fall. These
observations suggest that there is scheme-induced displacement of domestic players by foreign
players. Second, the fall in domestic players after the Beckham law is larger than the increase in
foreign players, which would seem to suggest that not all of the effect can be driven by schemeinduced displacement. However, it is important to keep in mind that our dataset includes only
players from 14 European countries. The Beckham scheme may have attracted players from
all over the world, and in particular the Spanish league tend to attract many top players from
South-America. Hence, the relatively large drop in domestic players could have been driven
entirely by tax-induced displacement. Third, across the entire period since the mid-1980s, there
is a negative covariance between the number of domestic and foreign players, with the number of
domestic players over-adjusting somewhat as discussed above. This suggests that labor demand
may be quite rigid in the football sector.
Duration of Stay of Foreign Players in Denmark. Figure A6 provides evidence on the
effects of the tax scheme on duration of stay in Denmark, using again a synthetic control
country. Recall that the Danish tax scheme for foreigners applies only for first three years
(36 months), after which the foreigner is subject to regular Danish taxes. The figure shows
the density distribution of duration among foreign players arriving between the 1992 and 2002
seasons in Denmark and the synthetic control. Two points are worth noting. First and most
important, the graph shows that there is excess of duration at three years in Denmark (relative
to the synthetic control), evidence of a behavioral response to the preferential tax scheme along
the intensive margin. Second, fewer foreign players stay in Denmark (relative to the synthetic
control) beyond year 3 when the preferential tax treatment ceases to apply.44 As shown on the
figure, the difference between Denmark and other the synthetic country in the probability in
staying more than three years is significant.
Greek Reform in 1993: A Cohort-Based Tax Change. A cohort-based reform of the
payroll tax system in Greece allows us to analyze the mobility of Greek players.45 Payroll taxes
are high in Greece. In the 1990s the combined payroll tax wedge including both employer and
employee payroll was about 22.5% of labor costs for football players46 (labor costs are earnings
44

Those intensive duration responses to the tax scheme are confirmed by Kleven et al. (2011), Figures 11-12,
for the full population of foreigners in Denmark. There is a clear bunching spike in the density of durations
exactly at 36 months among eligible foreigners (relative to a control of foreigners slightly below the eligibility
threshold).
45
This reform has been analyzed by Saez, Matsaganis, and Tsakloglou (2012) for the full Greek population.
46
The combined payroll tax wedge including both employer and employee payroll tax has been about 35% for
regular workers, and for football players since 1999. Before 1999, football players were only covered for pension

44

inclusive of both employer and employee payroll taxes). Before 1993, these payroll taxes applied
only up to a cap and therefore did not affect the top earnings tax rate. In late 1992, Greece
passed a reform removing the cap on payroll taxes, but only for workers entering the system (i.e.,
starting to have covered earnings) after January 1, 1993. There were no changes for workers
already in the system.47 As a result, cohorts of Greek football players who started their career
before 1993 face much lower top earnings tax rates than the cohorts that entered on or shortly
after 1993 (as those players faced uncapped payroll taxes during most of their careers). When
analyzing this reform, it is important to keep in mind that the performance of a typical football
player peaks at an age from the mid-20s to about 30 (5-10 years into a typical professional
career), and this is the time when players are most likely to get attractive offers from abroad.
Figure A7 depicts, by entry date on the professional football market from 1981 to 2000, the
probability that the football player will ever play abroad by the eighth year of his professional
football career. The graph depicts such series for Greek players and all 13 other nationalities in
our sample separately. Each dot combines two annual cohorts to smooth out noise.
For players entering the labor market before 1993, the trends in Greece versus other countries
are very parallel–both are flat, and the fraction of players ever playing abroad is almost exactly
the same in Greece as in the rest of Europe (roughly 10%). In the Greek series however, there
is a clear jump upward exactly after the reform kicks in for cohorts entering the profession on
or after January 1st, 1993. The fraction ever playing abroad almost doubles immediately. The
divergence between Greece and other countries grows even further in subsequent years. For
1999-2000 cohorts, 33% of Greek players will play abroad while only 15% of players from other
countries will. The basic Difference-in-Differences estimate comparing Greece to other countries
before and after the reform generates a 10 percentage point estimate, which translates into a
.44 elasticity of the probability of ever playing abroad with respect to the net of tax rate, that
is highly significant. Therefore, this evidence suggests that the top earnings tax rate within a
country has a significant and negative impact on the migration of domestic football players.
Note also that in principle, the cohort based reform in Greece should have discouraged
foreigners to start playing in Greece from years 1993 to 2003 (relative to 1992 and before).
Unfortunately, the number of foreign players in Greece in the early 1990s is too small to detect
a significant drop after 1992.
purposes and not for sickness and unemployment, hence a lower wedge of 22.5%.
47
In 2004, the cap was re-introduced for all workers having entered the system since January 1993. The new
cap for the post-1993 entrants was set at a level 2.3 times higher than the cap for pre-1993 entrants, but even
the higher cap is small compared to the income levels at the top of the distribution and therefore does not affect
the top earnings tax rate of first-league football players.

45

A.4
A.4.1

Tax Revenue Maximizing Laffer Rates and Policy Implications
Theoretical Revenue Maximizing Tax Rates

Flexible Labor Demand.
In the flexible labor demand model, we obtain the following revenue-maximizing tax rates
(Laffer rates) on domestic and foreign football players given by the standard inverse elasticity
rule.
Proposition 3 (Laffer Rates) (a) For a uniform tax system (τnd = τnf = τn ), the Laffer rate
τn∗ is given by
1
,
(5)
τn∗ =
1 + εn
where εn is the ability-weighted average elasticity of the total number of players in country n
with respect to 1 − τn .

∗
∗
(b) For a selective tax system (τnd , τnf ), the Laffer rates τnd
, τnf
are given by
1
,
1 + εnd

∗
τnd
=

∗
τnf
=

1
,
1 + εnf

(6)

where εnd (resp. εnf ) is the ability-weighted average elasticity of the total number domestic (resp.
foreign) players in country n with respect to 1 − τnd (resp. 1 − τnf ).
Proof:
(a) Total revenue is given by
Z

∞

Rn = τn

apna da,
0

where pna = pna (a (1 − τn )) ≡ pnda (a (1 − τn )) + pnf a (a (1 − τn )). The Laffer rate τn∗ satisfies
Z ∞
Z ∞
dRn
τn∗
=
apna da −
apna εna da = 0,
dτn
1 − τn∗ 0
0
where εna ≡

where εn ≡

∂pna 1−τn
.
∂(1−τn ) pna

R∞
0R apna εna da
.
∞
0 apna da

Hence,
τn∗
1
= ,
∗
1 − τn
εn
This corresponds to eq. (5).

(b) Total revenue is given by
Z
Rn = τnd

∞

Z
apnda da + τnf

0

∞

apnf a da,
0

∗
where pnda = pnda (a (1 − τnd )) and pnf a = pnf a (a (1 − τnf )). For the Laffer rate τnd
, we get
Z ∞
Z ∞
∗
dRn
τnd
=
apnda da −
apnda εnda da = 0,
∗
dτnd
1 − τnd
0
0

46

where εnda ≡

∂pnda 1−τnd
.
∂(1−τnd ) pnda

R∞

ap

ε

Hence,
∗
τnd
1
=
,
∗
1 − τnd
εnd

da

nda nda
∗
where εnd ≡ 0 R ∞ ap
. This corresponds to the first part of eq. (6). The proof for τnf
nda da
0
follows symmetrically. 

Rigid Labor Demand.
We now turn to the tax revenue maximizing Laffer rates in the rigid-demand model. We
obtain the following results:
Proposition 4 (Laffer Rates) Assuming that the tax rate on club surplus sn equals the (average) tax rate on player salaries (so that there are no mechanical revenue effects of a change
in sn ). In this case,
(a) For a uniform tax system (τnd = τnf = τn ), the Laffer rate τn∗ is given by
τn∗ =

1
,
1 + εn

(7)

where εn is the ability-weighted average elasticity in general equilibrium of the total number of
players in country n with respect to 1 − τn .
∗
(b) For a selective tax system (τnd , τnf ), the Laffer rate on foreigners τnf
given the tax rate on
locals τnd is given by



1
znd
∗
1 − τnd σnd
,
(8)
τnf =
1 + εnf
znf
where εnf ≥ 0 (resp. σnd ≤ 0) is the ability-weighted average elasticity in general equilibrium
of the number of foreign (resp. domestic) players in country n with respect to 1 − τnf , and
znd , znf denote total value-added from domestic and foreign players respectively. The Laffer rate
∗
on locals τnd
at a given tax rate on foreigners τnf is given by a symmetric condition. The two

∗
∗
conditions together describe a fully optimized tax system τnd
, τnf
.
Proof:
(a) Given the presence of positive club surpluses, we have to make an assumption about the
taxation of these surpluses. We assume that club surplus is taxed at the same rate as player
earnings, so that the division of value added into club surplus sn and player earnings a − sn
has no mechanical impact on government revenue (note though that changes in sn does have
a behavioral revenue effect from changed migration). Under this simplifying assumption, total
tax revenue collected from the football sector is given by
Z ∞
Rn = τn
apna da,
sn

47

where pna = pna (1 − τn ) = pnda (1 − τn ) + pnf a (1 − τn ). We work with general equilibrium
relationships, which is why sn does not appear as an argument in pna (.). The Laffer rate τn∗
satisfies
Z ∞
Z ∞
τn∗
dRn
apna da −
=
apna εna da = 0,
dτn
1 − τn∗ sn
sn
where εna ≡

where εn ≡

∂pna 1−τn
.
∂(1−τn ) pna

R∞
apna εna da
sR
n
.
∞
sn apna da

Hence,
τn∗
1
= ,
∗
1 − τn
εn
This corresponds to eq. (7).

(b) As above, we eliminate mechanical revenue effects of changes in sn by assuming that the
tax rate on club surplus corresponds to the (average) tax rate on earnings. For the case of
a selective tax system (τnd , τnf ) and denoting the tax rate on club surplus by tn , we assume
tn = τnd · pnd + τnf · pnf . Under this simplifying assumption, total tax revenue collected from
the football sector can be written as
Z ∞
Z ∞
Rn = τnd
apnda da + τnf
apnf a da,
sn

sn

where pnda = pnda (1 − τnd , 1 − τnf ) and pnf a = pnf a (1 − τnd , 1 − τnf ). Consider the Laffer rate
∗
on foreigners τnf
given the tax rate on locals τnd . We can write the first-order condition as
Z ∞
Z ∞
Z ∞
∗
τnf
τnd
apnf a da −
apnf a εnf a da −
apnda σnda da = 0,
∗
∗
1 − τnf
1 − τnf
sn
sn
sn
where εnf a ≡
elasticities

∂pnf a 1−τnf
∂(1−τnf ) pnf a

≥ 0 and σnda ≡
R∞

εnf ≡

sn

∂pnda 1−τnf
∂(1−τnf ) pnda

apnf a εnf a da

R∞
sn

apnf a da

≤ 0. Defining ability-weighted average
R∞

σnd ≡

,

apnda σnda da
R∞
,
apnda da
sn

sn

as well as total value-added generated by domestic and foreign players
Z ∞
Z ∞
znd ≡
apnda da, znf ≡
apnf a da,
sn

sn

we obtain the following expression
∗
τnf
τnd znd
1−
ε −
σnd = 0,
∗ nf
∗
1 − τnf
1 − τnf
znf

which can be rewritten to
∗
τnf

1
=
1 + εnf




znd
1 − τnd σnd
,
znf

∗
as in eq. (8). The proof for τnd
follows symmetrically. 

Consider first the uniform tax system in part (a). This result is relevant for countries
introducing special schemes for all football players, not distinguishing between domestic and
48

foreign tax residency status. For a uniform tax system, the Laffer rate is given by the same
formula under rigid and flexible demand, but with the important qualification that the result
in eq. (7) is based on a general equilibrium elasticity. This general equilibrium elasticity is
different from the partial equilibrium elasticity because of general equilibrium effects due to
changing club surplus under rigid demand.
Consider then a selective tax system in part (b), in particular the Laffer rate on foreigners in
eq. (8) taking as given the tax rate on domestic residents. This result is relevant for countries
such as Spain, Denmark and Belgium, which have introduced preferential tax schemes to foreign
residents (specifically foreign footballers in the Belgian case) without changing the taxation of
domestic residents. The terms outside the brackets in eq. (8) correspond to the result for
the flexible-demand model (except that elasticities includes general equilibrium effects), while
the bracketed term is a new effect that captures displacement of local players. As σnd ≤ 0,
the bracketed term is always larger than 1 and therefore this effect raises the Laffer rate on
foreigners. For example, if country n attracts more foreign players by lowering their tax rate,
this will displace some domestic players and thereby reduce revenue collected from domestic
residents. For a given σnd , the displacement effect is larger in countries where the domestic
tax rate is large and where the value-added share of foreigners is relatively low. This captures
roughly the situation in a country such as Denmark. Hence, despite the large migration into
Denmark documented graphically in section 4, the special tax scheme for foreigners is not
necessarily revenue raising. Finally, we may combine eq. (8) with the symmetric equation for
∗
τnd
to get two simultaneous equations determining separate Laffer rates on foreign and domestic
football players. This type of result would be relevant for countries combining a separate tax
treatment for football players (regardless of nationality) with a Spain/Denmark/Belgium-style
policy (separate tax treatment for foreign vs. domestic residents), but we are not aware of any
country currently implementing such a policy.
A.4.2

Calibration

Next, we calibrate revenue-maximizing tax rates (Laffer rates) based on our estimated location
elasticities and the theoretical framework presented above. Laffer rates are central to the policy
implications of our study because they represent an upper bound on the optimal tax rates on
football players, and corresponds to the actual optimum if policy makers puts a zero weight on
the marginal consumption of (top) football players. Results are shown in Table A3 for all 14
countries in our sample. Columns (1)-(2) display the actual top earnings tax rates in 2008 on
domestic and foreign players, respectively. Column (3) considers the flexible demand model and
shows Laffer rates under uniform tax treatment of domestic and foreign players. These results
are based on the empirical specification in column (2) of Table 2 and the theoretical result in
Proposition 3, equation (5). Columns (4)-(5) turns to the rigid-demand model, and show Laffer
rates on all players (uniform taxation) and on foreign players only (selective taxation) taking as

49

given the tax rate on domestic players. These results are based on the empirical specification
in column (5) of Table 3 and the theoretical results in Proposition 4, equations (7)-(8).
There are three main findings in the table. First, in the baseline model with flexible demand
where the location elasticity is around 0.2 on the whole sample (a weighted average of a domestic
elasticity of around .1 and a foreign elasticity of 1 with 90% domestic weight), the Laffer rate
on all players falls in the interval 70-90% across all countries. This is higher than the current
top earnings tax rates on both domestic and foreign players in every country. Second, in the
rigid-demand model, the Laffer rate on all players is higher than in the baseline and falls in the
interval of 84-98% across all countries. This is driven by ability sorting: any in-migration of
high-ability players comes with an offsetting out-migration of low-ability players, which reduces
the ability-weighted average location elasticity in the rigid-demand setting compared to the
baseline. But even under completely rigid demand, the total revenue effect of these offsetting
migration responses is not zero as the in-migration and out-migration occur at different ability
levels, and therefore Laffer rates are always below one. Third, the selective Laffer rate on foreign
players tends to be lower than the uniform Laffer rate (sometimes significantly so).
The difference between the uniform Laffer rate and the foreigner Laffer rate reflects a tension
between ability sorting and displacement effects. On the one hand, lowering the tax rate on
foreign players leads to displacement of domestic players, which raises the Laffer rate ceteris
paribus. On the other hand, the ability-weighted elasticity for foreigners is higher than for
the whole population for two reasons. First, foreign players tend to be of higher ability than
domestic players in any country, and so the positive sorting effect at the top has much more
force for foreign players. Second, the stock of foreigners is much lower than the stock of locals
in any country (due to home bias), and therefore a given estimated parameter on the net-of-tax
rate converts into a larger elasticity for foreigners. For those two reasons, the ability-weighted
location elasticity for foreigners is typically much higher than for the whole population, and
this effect dominates the displacement effect in most countries and makes Laffer rates lower.
This explains why the foreigner Laffer rate is particularly low in countries such as England,
Germany, Italy and Spain. These are countries with an ability distribution among foreigners
that is strongly skewed towards the top, and therefore the positive sorting effect at the top has
a large effect in those countries.

50

Appendix References
European Commission (2009). Taux de TVA appliqués dans les Etats membres de la Communauté européenne.
International Bureau of Fiscal Documentation (2008). The International Guide to the
Taxation of Sportsmen and Sportswomen.
MISSOC (annual). La protection sociale dans les etats membres de l’union europeenne.
OECD (annual). Taxing wages, OECD, Paris.
OECD (1986). Personal income tax systems, OECD, Paris.
PriceWaterhouseCoopers (annual). Worldwide Tax Summaries.
Ross, Justin M. and Robert R. Dunn (2007). “The Income Tax Responsiveness of the
Rich: Evidence from Free-Agent Major League Baseball All-Stars,” Contemporary Economic
Policy 25(4), 639-648.
Saez, Emmanuel, Manos Matsaganis, and Panos Tsakloglou (2012). “Earnings Determination and Taxes: Evidence from a Cohort Based Payroll Tax Reform in Greece.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 127(1), 493-533.

51

.2

Top earnings tax rate on local players
.3
.4
.5
.6
.7
.8
.9

A. Local players

1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008
Year
Germany
Spain

France
England

Italy

.2

Top earnings tax rate on foreign players
.3
.4
.5
.6
.7
.8
.9

B. Foreign players

1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008
Year
Germany
Spain

France
England

Italy

Figure A1: Top Earnings Tax Rates in the Top 5 European Leagues
Notes: Statutory top earnings tax rates on earned income of year t for a player entering the football market
on year t. Top tax rates include central and local individual income taxes, all uncapped payroll taxes (both
employer and employee contributions), and the Value Added Tax (normal rate). When preferential tax regimes
apply for foreign players, the statutory rate is the rate for a foreigner who is eligible for the preferential tax
treatment.
52

.2

Top earnings tax rate on local players
.3
.4
.5
.6
.7
.8

.9

A. Local players

1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008
Year
Denmark

Norway

Sweden

.2

Top earnings tax rate on foreign players
.3
.4
.5
.6
.7
.8
.9

B. Foreign players

1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008
Year
Denmark

Norway

Sweden

Figure A2: Top Earnings Tax Rates in Nordic Countries
Notes: Statutory top earnings tax rates on earned income of year t for a player entering the football market
on year t. Top tax rates include central and local individual income taxes, all uncapped payroll taxes (both
employer and employee contributions), and the Value Added Tax (normal rate). When preferential tax regimes
apply for foreign players, the statutory rate is the rate for a foreigner who is eligible for the preferential tax
treatment.
53

.2

Top earnings tax rate on local players
.3
.4
.5
.6
.7
.8
.9

A. Local players

1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008
Year
Austria
Netherlands

Belgium
Portugal

Greece
Switzerland

.2

Top earnings tax rate on foreign players
.3
.4
.5
.6
.7
.8
.9

B. Foreign players

1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008
Year
Austria
Netherlands

Belgium
Portugal

Greece
Switzerland

Figure A3: Top Earnings Tax Rates in the Smaller European Leagues
Notes: Statutory top earnings tax rates on earned income of year t for a player entering the football market
on year t. Top tax rates include central and local individual income taxes, all uncapped payroll taxes (both
employer and employee contributions), and the Value Added Tax (normal rate). When preferential tax regimes
apply for foreign players, the statutory rate is the rate for a foreigner who is eligible for the preferential tax
treatment.
54

UK

40
Slope= −3.38 (23.87)

UK

DK

DE
IT
ES

SE FR

NL
NO
BE
CH

PT

Average number of players by team
20
25
30
35

Average number of players by team
20
25
30
35

40

A. Average number of players per team and top earnings tax rates
Before Bosman ruling
After Bosman ruling

Slope= −22.53 (16.91)

DE
IT
NL

DK

BE

ES

AT

CH
GR

FR

NO
PT

SE

15

15

GR
AT

.55

.6

.65
Top earnings tax rate

.7

.75

.55

.6

.65
Top earnings tax rate

.7

.75

B. Average number of teams per league and top earnings tax rates
Before Bosman ruling
After Bosman ruling
20

UK

PT
GRNL DE

IT

BESlope=

−13.82 (17.58)

NO

SE

UK
IT

NL

BE

GR

.6

.65
Top earnings tax rate

.7

.75

SE

NO

DK
CH

10

10

.55

Slope= −19.03 (14.86)

DE
PT

DK

AT

CH

ES

FR

FR

Average number of teams by country
12
14
16
18

Average number of teams by country
12
14
16
18
20

ES

AT

.55

.6

.65
Top earnings tax rate

.7

.75

Figure A4: Decreasing Labor Demand for Football Players
Notes: Each dot represents a country (see Figure 1 for list of acronyms). Panel A shows the average number of players per team (in the top league
of each country) and the weighted average of top earnings tax rate for local and foreign players for years 1985-1995 (before Bosman ruling) on the
left-panel and for years 1996-2008 (after Bosman ruling) on the right-panel. In Panel B shows the average number of teams per top league in each country
and the weighted average of top earnings tax rate for local and foreign players for years 1985-1995 (before Bosman ruling) on the left-panel and for
years 1996-2008 (after Bosman ruling) on the right-panel. The red line in each graph displays the regression fit. Coefficients and standard errors are reported.

250
50
100
150
200
Number of foreign players

450
Number of domestic players
250
300
350
400

0

200
1990

1995

2000
Year

2005

Number of domestic players in Spain
Number of foreign players in Spain

Figure A5: Displacement Effects of the Beckham Law in Spain
Notes: The dataset is restricted to all players from our 14 countries of interest. A 2005 tax reform (“Beckham
law”), depicted by a vertical line, introduced a preferential tax treatment for foreign players in Spain arriving
in 2004 or after. The Bosman ruling is also depicted by a vertical dashed line. Year t is for season running from
September year t to July year t + 1. The graph displays the total number of local players who play in the first
league of Spain and also the total number of foreign players (from the 14 European countries of interest) playing
in the first league in Spain. Consistent with the existence of labor demand rigidity creating displacement effects,
the total number of Spanish players decreases after the Bosman ruling, and then after the introduction of the
Beckham Law in 2004, while the total number of foreign player increases. The Bosman Ruling and the Beckham
Law have attracted foreign players who have partially crowded-out local players. In 1995 and 1996, the Spanish
League had 22 teams instead of the traditional 20 teams. To control for this variation in the size of the League,
we removed from the sample the 2 lowest ranked teams in Spain in 1995 and 1996, that would not have been
part of the League had the number of teams remained the same.

56

.5
Fraction of foreign players
.1
.2
.3
.4
0

d Pr(Duration=3) / d(Denm=1) = .79 (.15)
Duration elasticity ≈ .3

0

2

4
6
Duration of stay in years
Denmark

8

10

Synthetic Denmark

Figure A6: Duration of Stay in Denmark
Notes: The 1991 Danish tax reform introduced a preferential flat tax scheme for highly-paid foreign workers
in Denmark. Foreign workers are eligible for the scheme for a maximum duration of three years, after which
the tax rate jumps back to the regular progressive Danish tax schedule. The graph depicts the density of
durations of stay of foreign players in Denmark (resp. the synthetic control country) for foreign players starting
to play in Denmark (resp. the synthetic control country) in 1992 to 2002. The synthetic country weights are
constructed to match Denmark on pre-reform 1985-1990 variables (see text for details and appendix Table A2 for
the composition of the synthetic country). The maximum 3 year duration of eligibility is depicted by the vertical
line. The graph shows that there is excess of duration at three years in Denmark, evidence of a behavioral
response to the preferential tax scheme along the intensive duration margin.

57

Fraction ever playing abroad
.1
.2
.3
.4

0

8

99
−0
19

6

97
−9
19

4

95
−9
19

93
−9

2
19

91
−9

0
19

8

89
−9
19

6

87
−8
19

4

85
−8
19

83
−8
19

19

81
−8

2

0

DD elasticity= .439 (.121)

Year of entry in professional football
Greek

All other nationalities

Figure A7: Fraction of Greek Players Ever Playing Abroad by Cohort
Notes: The graph displays the fraction of top league players who are Greek nationals playing abroad by eighth
year of professional career. As a control, it also displays the fraction of top leagues players who are nationals
from the other 13 nationalities of our sample playing abroad by eighth year of professional career. In Greece,
cohorts entering the professional football market before 1993 face lower top earnings tax rates because of an
earnings cap on the payroll tax base. Cohorts entering the professional football market after 1993 face a much
higher top earnings tax rates because the payroll tax cap was removed from 1993 to 2003 for all workers starting
their career on or after 1993 (in 2004, a cap was re-introduced so that cohorts entering the labor market at the
beginning of the 2000s face again lower top earnings tax rates at earlier stages of their career). The discontinuity
of 1993 in top tax rates is depicted by a vertical line. The DD elasticity estimate is reported comparing 1981-1992
cohorts to 1993-2000 cohorts.

58

Table A1: Descriptive statistics, estimation sample
N

Foreigner
(%)

Age

Experience
(years)

Quality
index

Earnings
(2008 £)

% with
observed
earnings

Top MTR

Average tax rate

τdomestic τf oreigner tdomestic

tf oreigner

Fraction with
τ −t
τ > .1

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

All countries

55225

.11

25

6.1

.25

211,341

.54

.62

.58

.56

.54

.32

Austria
Belgium
Denmark
England
France
Germany
Greece
Italy
Netherlands
Norway
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland

2125
3845
3473
6610
4212
4319
3311
5359
4845
3938
2926
4951
3182
2129

.11
.13
.05
.18
.07
.17
.09
.09
.15
.07
.09
.1
.05
.18

25
24.4
24.6
24.1
24.8
27.1
25.5
25.4
24.5
25.2
25.5
25.7
24.6
24.1

5.8
5.8
5.1
5.8
6.8
7.3
5.5
7.7
5.5
5.6
6.5
6.8
5.6
5.9

.13
.14
.11
.41
.36
.42
.15
.49
.24
.11
.2
.57
.1
.03

140,346
162,319
143,310
370,450
234,645
328,288
149,400
347,652
222,981
144,796
159,530
316,012
149,988
89,060

.5
.61
.57
.56
.68
.63
.44
.69
.54
.53
.37
.43
.63
.43

.61
.64
.69
.55
.69
.62
.57
.55
.62
.66
.64
.55
.74
.56

.62
.49
.52
.56
.68
.62
.57
.55
.52
.61
.64
.51
.71
.56

.59
.55
.6
.49
.66
.53
.54
.55
.6
.56
.61
.51
.69
.39

.61
.45
.5
.52
.66
.55
.55
.55
.52
.55
.61
.47
.68
.4

.12
.48
.53
.39
.04
.32
.19
0
.1
.66
.21
.3
.22
.84

Notes: This table reports summary statistics for our multinomial regression sample covering years 1996 to 2008. The sample includes all top league players
of those 14 countries who are also citizens of those 14 countries. Column (1) reports the number of player×year observations. Column (2) reports the
fraction playing in a foreign country. Columns (3) and (4) report age and professional football experience in years. Column (5) reports the quality index
(see appendix for complete details). Column (6) reports average earnings in 2008 British pounds. Earnings are imputed for the full sample based on actual
earnings collected for years 1999-2000 and 2004-2008 for a subsample. Column (7) reports the fraction of players in those years with observed earnings.
Columns (8) and (9) report the top earnings marginal tax rate for home players and foreign players in each country. Columns (10) and (11) report the
average earnings tax rate for home players and foreign players in each country. Column (12) reports the fraction of players for whom the applicable average
tax rate differs by more than 10% from the applicable top marginal tax rate.

Table A2: Weights for the Synthetic Control for Each Event Study

Country
Fig 3A
Austria
Belgium
Denmark
England
France
Germany
Greece
Italy
Netherlands
Norway
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland

Denmark
Fig 3B Fig A6

Fig 2A1

Spain
Fig 2A2 Fig 2B1

Fig 2B2

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

0
0
.
0
0
0
0
0
0
.227
0
0
.773
0

0
0
.
.2
0
0
0
0
0
.169
0
0
.63
0

0
0
.
0
0
0
.67
0
0
.263
0
.01
.05
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
.784
0
0
.216
.
0
0

0
0
0
0
.124
0
0
.876
0
0
0
.
0
0

0
0
0
.276
0
0
0
.724
0
0
0
.
0
0

0
0
0
.053
.288
0
0
.659
0
0
0
.
0
0

Notes: We follow Abadie and al. (2010) to construct synthetic country weights. Weights are estimated
by minimizing the following distance ||X1 − X0 W ||V where X1 = (Z10 , Y¯1 ) is a (k × 1) vector of pre-reform
characteristics of the treated country. More precisely, Z10 is a vector of pre-reform characteristics of the treated
country and Y¯1 is the average outcome of interest for the treated country in the pre-reform period. We include
in Z10 the yearly average quality index of the players playing in the country, and two different indexes of league
quality: the first one is the UEFA country coefficient, and the second is the sum of the relative points earned
by all the clubs of the League in all UEFA competitions for a given year. X0 is the (k × n) vector of the same
pre-reform characteristics for all countries in the comparison pool (where n is the number of countries in the
comparison pool). The weights obtained from this procedure for all case studies analysis are reported in the
table. Each column corresponds to a specific event study. The fact that the synthetic country includes only a
small number of countries (2-4) is standard (see Abadie and al., 2010).

60

Table A3: Revenue Maximizing Tax Rates on Football Players

Top Earnings
Tax Rates
(2008)

Revenue Maximizing
Tax Rates
Flexible
Labor
Demand

Rigid
Labor
Demand

Domestic

Foreign

τ∗

τ∗

τf∗

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Austria
Belgium
Denmark
England
France
Germany
Greece
Italy
Netherlands
Norway
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland

.612
.616
.698
.552
.611
.593
.496
.534
.597
.608
.654
.509
.738
.561

.612
.322
.448
.552
.524
.593
.496
.534
.364
.582
.654
.345
.738
.561

.765
.764
.741
.855
.865
.874
.805
.888
.859
.747
.828
.873
.799
.713

.961
.942
.949
.966
.913
.964
.975
.956
.953
.978
.94
.956
.955
.844

.765
.704
.797
.622
.917
.647
.623
.707
.664
.718
.802
.716
.839
.613

All countries

.598

.523

.813

.947

.724

Notes: Columns (1) and (2) report the top earnings tax rate in each country in 2008 that apply to domestic
and foreign players respectively. Column (3) computes the revenue maximizing tax rate on all football players
(where both domestic and foreign players face the same tax rate) in the case of perfectly elastic labor demand.
In this case, as shown in Proposition 3, the standard inverse supply elasticity rule applies. We compute the
wage weighted supply elasticity according to our baseline estimates in column (2) of Table 2. The aggregate
elasticity is the weighted average of the elasticity for the different quality groups. Column (4) computes the
revenue maximizing tax rate on all football players (where both domestic and foreign players face the same tax
rate) taking into account displacement and sorting effects, following the formula presented in Proposition 4.
The aggregate elasticity is the wage weighted average of the elasticity of foreigners and domestic players taking
into account sorting effects and displacement effect estimates of column (5) of Table 3 (and assuming that tax
rates in other countries stay the same). Column (5) computes the revenue maximizing tax rate on foreign
players specifically (and assuming that the tax rate on domestic players stays the same as it is in 2008 in each
country) taking into account displacement and sorting effects, following the formula presented in Proposition 4.
The elasticities of foreign and domestic players w.r.t foreigner tax rates are also wage weighted, and computed
according to estimates of column (5) of Table 3.

61

