NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE EFFECT OF UNCERTAINTY ON INVESTMENT:
EVIDENCE FROM TEXAS OIL DRILLING
Ryan Kellogg
Working Paper 16541
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16541

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2010

I am grateful for financial support from the OpenLink Fund at the Coleman Fung Risk Management
Center. I thank Maximilian Auffhammer, Ruediger Bachmann, Robert Barsky, Severin Borenstein,
Lutz Kilian, Kai-Uwe Kühn, Jeffrey Perloff, Robert Pindyck, Matthew Shapiro, and Catherine Wolfram
for helpful comments, and I am also grateful for suggestions from numerous seminar and conference
participants. I thank Reid Dorsey-Palmateer, Tay Feder, and Haili Pang for excellent research assistance.
The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Ryan Kellogg. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

The Effect of Uncertainty on Investment: Evidence from Texas Oil Drilling
Ryan Kellogg
NBER Working Paper No. 16541
November 2010
JEL No. D21,D81,E22,L21,L71,Q41
ABSTRACT
Despite widespread application of real options theory in the literature, the extent to which firms actually
delay irreversible investments following an increase in the uncertainty of their environment is not
empirically well-known. This paper estimates firms’ responsiveness to changes in uncertainty using
detailed data on oil well drilling in Texas and expectations of future oil price volatility derived from
the NYMEX futures options market. Using a dynamic model of firms’ investment problem, I find
that oil companies respond to changes in expected price volatility by adjusting their drilling activity
by a magnitude consistent with the optimal response prescribed by theory.

Ryan Kellogg
University of Michigan
Department of Economics
238 Lorch Hall
611 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
and NBER
kelloggr@umich.edu

1. Introduction
How do firms make decisions regarding irreversible investments in uncertain economic
environments? Such situations are common in a variety of industries: American Electric Power
must commence construction of new plants before knowing future demand for electricity,
Boeing must sink costs into new airplane designs before orders from customers are realized, and
ExxonMobil must drill wells in the midst of a fluctuating price of oil. Each of these investments
is at least partially irreversible because the assets created cannot be fully appropriated to an
alternative use. In other words, these investments, once complete, become sunk costs.
The real options literature, beginning with Marschak (1949) and Arrow (1968) and
developed in Bernanke (1983), Pindyck (1991), and Dixit and Pindyck (1994), explains how
firms should time such investments. Real options theory views an irreversible investment as an
option in that, at any point in time, a firm may choose to either invest immediately or delay and
observe the evolution of the investment’s payoff. A key insight is that the option to delay has
value when future states of the world with positive returns to investing and states with negative
returns are both possible, even holding the expected future return constant at its current level.
Thus, in the presence of irreversibility and uncertainty, a naïve investment timing rule—proceed
with an investment if its expected benefit even slightly exceeds its cost—is suboptimal because it
does not account for the value of continuing to hold the option. Instead, firms should delay
irreversible investments until a significant gap develops between the investments’ expected
benefits and costs. Moreover, as uncertainty increases, real options theory tells us that the
incentive to delay should grow stronger and the gap between the expected benefit and cost
necessary to trigger investment should widen.
While real options theory therefore prescribes how firms should carry out irreversible
investments in uncertain environments, it is not empirically well-known how firms actually
proceed in such situations. In particular, the theory’s central prediction that firms should be more
likely to delay investment if uncertainty increases, all else equal, has received only limited
empirical scrutiny. The primary aim of this paper is therefore to assess the extent to which firms’
1

responses to changes in uncertainty align with the theory, using data on oil drilling activity in
Texas coupled with market expectations of the volatility of the future price of oil.
The need for empirical work in the real options literature is underscored by the existence
of numerous applications that assume firms optimally make decisions in the presence of
uncertainty. In industrial organization, Pakes (1986), Dixit (1989), Grenadier (2002),
Aguerrevere (2003), and Collard-Wexler (2008) model the implications of uncertainty and sunk
costs for investment, entry, and research and development in several settings and under various
forms of competition. The general dynamic oligopoly model of Ericson and Pakes (1995) is built
on a framework in which firms treat many decisions as options. In macroeconomics, Bernanke
(1983), Hassler (1996), Bloom (2009), and Bloom et al. (2007, 2009) construct models that
emphasize the importance of changes in economy-wide uncertainty in determining the level of
aggregate investment. Finally, in the environmental and resource economics literature, Arrow
and Fisher (1974), among others, discuss the role of uncertainty in dictating when “green”
investments should be undertaken.
I empirically examine the extent to which investments in oil wells respond to changes in
uncertainty using a unique dataset of well-level drilling activity in Texas. I combine these
drilling data with information from the New York Mercantile Exchange (NYMEX) on the
expected future price of oil and the expected future price volatility. The expected volatility is
derived from the NYMEX futures options market, in which volatility is implicitly traded and
priced. Under a hypothesis that the market is an efficient aggregator of information, the implied
volatility from futures options will incorporate more information than an expected volatility
measure derived from price histories alone.
I conduct my analysis using an econometric model of firms’ optimal drilling investment
in the presence of time-varying uncertainty. The model is based on Rust’s (1987) nested fixed
point approach but allows the volatility of the process governing state transitions to vary over
time. The use of this model allows me to do more than carry out a simple “yes/no” test of

2

whether or not firms respond to changes in expected oil price volatility: I can also compare the
magnitude of firms’ responses in the data to the magnitude prescribed by the model.
I find that the response of investment to changes in implied volatility is broadly
consistent with optimal decision-making. In the reference case specification, in which the
model’s auxiliary parameters and assumptions most closely match the data and institutional
setting, I find that the magnitude of firms’ collective response to volatility shocks aligns very
closely with theory. Alternative specifications and assumptions lead to estimates of different
magnitudes, though these estimates remain qualitatively similar to the optimal response so long
as volatility expectations are measured using implied volatility from futures options. When I
instead measure expectations using historical price volatility, the estimated response of
investment to changes in volatility is attenuated and imprecise, reflecting the relatively weak
forecasting power of this measure.
There exist previous studies that have empirically examined whether investments respond
to changes in uncertainty, though without linking the magnitudes of the estimated effects to
theory. Several of these studies, like this one, focus on natural resource industries. Hurn and
Wright (1994), Moel and Tufano (2002), and Dunne and Mu (2010) examine the impact of
resource price volatility on offshore oil field investments, gold mine openings and closings, and
refinery investments, respectively. None of these papers uses implied volatility to measure
expected price volatility—the uncertainty measure is the historic realized variance of commodity
prices—and they collectively find mixed evidence on whether increases in volatility reduce
investment. Paddock, Siegel, and Smith (1988) shows that option pricing techniques yield more
accurate predictions of oil lease valuations than do traditional net present value calculations,
though without investigating the impact of changes in uncertainty over time. Other microempirical work includes Guiso and Parigi (1999), which finds evidence from a cross-sectional
survey that Italian firms whose managers subjectively report high levels of expected demand
uncertainty tend to have relatively low levels of investment. List and Haigh (2010) meanwhile

3

provides experimental evidence that investment timing decisions of agents (drawn from student
and professional trader subject pools) are generally responsive to changes in payoff uncertainty.
Another set of papers in the macroeconomics literature measures the response of
aggregate output and investment to changes in economy-wide uncertainty, as measured by the
volatility of stock market returns or interest rates (Hassler 2001, Alexopoulos and Cohen 2009,
Fernandez-Villaverde et al. 2009, and Bloom 2009). A related work is Leahy and Whited (1996),
which examines firm-level investment and stock return volatilities. These papers generally find
that increases in volatility are associated with decreases in output or investment. However,
factors that influence the level of investments’ expected payoffs are difficult to proxy for in this
literature, and Bachmann et al. (2010) argues that a negative correlation between first and second
moment shocks can lead to downward-biased estimates of the effects of an increase in
uncertainty. Leahy and Whited (1996) also note that fluctuations in stock returns likely reflect
the volatility of factors beyond those impacting the future revenues associated with new,
marginal investment opportunities.
This paper’s focus on the Texas onshore drilling industry as its object of study, combined
with the econometric modeling of the firms’ investment timing problem, confers valuable
advantages relative to previous work. First, I possess data at the level of each individual
investment—the drilling of each well—and need not rely on aggregate data or accounting data.
Second, the NYMEX futures and futures options markets provide measures of the expected level
and volatility of each investment’s expected return that, in principle, incorporate all available
information at the time of the investment. Such measures are not available in most industry
settings, and here they allow for a separation of first and second moment shocks. Finally, I take
advantage of the fact that oil production is a highly competitive industry, with no one firm able
to influence the price of oil, and I focus on oil fields in which common pool issues are not a
concern. I am therefore able to treat each firm’s investment decision as a single-agent dynamic
investment problem. This approach, which would be questionable in most other industries,

4

allows me to measure the magnitude of firms’ response to uncertainty relative to the theoretical
optimum, going beyond a simple test of whether or not firms respond to volatility shocks at all.
In what follows, I first discuss relevant institutional details of the Texas onshore drilling
industry and the datasets I use. Section 3 follows with a descriptive analysis of the data. The
remainder of the paper focuses on the estimation of a structural model of the drilling investment
problem with time-varying uncertainty: section 4 presents the model, section 5 discusses the
estimation procedure, and section 6 follows with the estimation results. Section 7 provides
concluding remarks.

2. Institutional Setting and Data
2.1 Drilling description, types of wells used in this study, and drilling data
Oil and gas reserves are found in geologic formations known as fields that lie beneath the
earth’s surface, and the mission of an oil production company is to extract these reserves for
processing and sale. To recover the reserves, the firm needs to drill wells into the field. Drilling
is an up-front investment in future production; if a drilled well is successful in finding reserves, it
will then produce oil for a period of several years, requiring relatively small operating expenses
for maintenance and pumping. The firm does not know in advance how much oil will be
produced (if any) from a newly drilled well, though it will form an expectation of this quantity
based on available information, such as seismic surveys and the production outcomes of
previously drilled wells. The price that the firm will receive for the produced oil is also not
known with certainty at the time of drilling. Conversations with industry participants have
indicated that some, though not all, firms use the NYMEX market to hedge at least some of their
price risk. This use of the NYMEX indicates that risk aversion over future oil prices is unlikely
to influence drilling decisions, since any firm that is risk averse can hedge the price risk away.
Drilling costs range from a few hundred thousand dollars for a relatively shallow well
that is a few thousand feet deep to millions of dollars for a very deep well (as much as 20,000

5

feet deep). Once drilled, these costs are almost completely sunk: the labor and drilling rig rental
costs expended during drilling cannot be recovered, nor can the expensive steel well casing and
cement that run down the length of the hole. Drilling can therefore be modeled as a fully
irreversible investment.
Wells can be one of three types: exploratory, development, or infill. Exploratory wells are
drilled into new prospective fields, and if successful they can not only be productive themselves
but also lead to additional drilling activity. Development wells are those that follow the
exploratory well: they increase the number of penetrations into a recently discovered field in
order to drain its reserves. Finally, infill wells are drilled late in a field’s life to enhance an oil
field’s production by “filling in” areas of the reservoir that have not been fully exploited by the
pre-existing well stock.
In this paper, I exclude exploratory and development wells and analyze only the subset of
data corresponding to infill wells. This exclusion facilitates this study in two important ways.
First, examining only infill wells constrains the set of available drilling options to those that exist
within a finite, known set of fields. Thus, I need not be concerned with the creation of new
options through new field discoveries or leasing activity. Second, the majority of production
from a typical infill well takes place within the first year or two of the well’s life: because infill
wells tap only small isolated pools of oil that have been left behind by older wells in a field, their
productive life is quite short. Thus, I may rely on liquid near-term futures to provide expected
prices and volatilities that are relevant for these wells rather than less liquid long-term futures.
I also distinguish wells drilled in fields operated by a single firm from wells drilled in
fields operated by multiple firms. The process by which production companies acquire leases—
rights to drill on particular plots of land—often leads to situations in which several firms have
the right to drill in and produce from a single field (see Wiggins and Libecap 1985). This
division of operating rights leads to a common pool problem to the extent that each firm’s
actions leads to informational and extraction externalities for its neighbors, suggesting that in
such situations a dynamic game is needed to model firms’ drilling problem. This paper avoids
6

this substantial complication by focusing exclusively on wells drilled in sole-operated fields, for
which a single-agent model is sufficient to model drilling behavior.1
I obtained drilling data from the Texas Railroad Commission (TRRC), yielding
information regarding every well drilled in Texas from 1977 through 2003.2 These data identify
when each well was drilled, which field it was drilled in, whether it was drilled for oil or for gas,
and the identity of the production company that drilled it. During the 1993-2003 period for which
I also observe data on drilling costs and expected oil prices, I observe a total of 23,279 oil wells.3
Of these, 17,456 are infill wells and 1,150 are infill wells drilled in sole-operated fields.4
The time series of Texas-wide drilling activity is depicted in figure 1 as the number of
wells drilled per month. These data appear to be noisy because they are integer count data
ranging from 2 to 19 wells per month. The time series of drilling activity in a larger sample that
includes wells drilled in common pool fields does not exhibit this noisiness, confirming that it is
due to the integer count nature of the data rather than a systematic feature of the industry.
The drilled wells are spread over 663 sole-operated fields and 453 firms. The mean
number of wells per field is 1.73, and I observe only one well drilled in the majority of fields in
the data. The maximum number of wells I observe in any field is 31. In addition to the 663 fields

1

Industry participants have suggested that the degree of strategic interaction amongst firms drilling infill wells in
common pool fields may be limited in practice because infill drilling targets tend to be small pools that are
geologically isolated from other parts of the field. In addition, the TRRC regulates the minimum distance from a
neighbor’s lease at which a well may be drilled. Correspondingly, the time series of infill drilling in common pools
is very similar to that shown for sole-operated fields in figure 1. I nonetheless focus my analysis on sole-operated
fields to be conservative, though estimating the model using the full sample of infill wells yields similar results to
those presented here (the estimate of β is 1.033).
2
While drilling data exist beyond 2003, industry participants have indicated that the dramatic increase in oil and
natural gas prices that began in 2004 increased drilling activity to the extent that the rig market became extremely
tight. Long wait lists developed when large production companies locked up rigs on long-term contracts so that the
spot rental market could not allocate rigs based on price. Because these unobservable wait lists disconnect drilling
decisions from observed drilling, I only use data through 2003.
3
I define an oil well as a well that is marked as a well for oil (rather than for “gas” or “both”) on its TRRC drilling
permit and is drilled into a field for which average oil production exceeds average natural gas production on an
energy equivalence basis (1 barrel of oil is equivalent to 5.8 thousand cubic feet of gas).
4
I define infill wells as those that are drilled into fields discovered prior to 1 January, 1990. I define a sole-operated
field as one for which, in every year from 1993-2003, only a single firm is listed as a leaseholder in the field’s
annual production data. This definition allows a field to be traded from one firm to another but disallows fields in
which several firms operate simultaneously on different leases.

7

in which I observe drilling, I also observe 6,637 sole-operated oilfields in which no infill wells
are drilled. The median number of wells per firm is 1, the mean is 2.54, and the maximum is 31.
Thus, the majority of wells in the dataset can be characterized as having been drilled by small
firms in relatively small, old fields with few remaining drilling opportunities.

2.2 Oil production
I acquired oil production data from the TRRC to assess the production that resulted from
the observed drilling activity. The TRRC records monthly oil production at the lease-level, not
the well-level, because individual wells are not flow-metered. I am therefore only able to identify
the production from those wells that are drilled on leases on which there exist no other producing
wells and there is no subsequent drilling: this is the case for 162 of the 1,150 drilled wells. For
these wells, I tabulate the total production of each for the three years subsequent to drilling: the
median well produces 8,625 barrels (bbl), and the mean produces 15,794 bbl. 4.3% of the wells
are dry holes and produce nothing; the maximum production is 164,544 bbl.
Figure 2 displays the average monthly production profile of a drilled well in the sample.
Production begins immediately subsequent to drilling, and depletion of the oil pool results in a
fairly steep production decline so that a typical well’s monthly production falls to one-half of its
initial level only 7 months into the well’s life. In addition, firms do not appear to alter production
rates or delay the start of production due to oil price changes; the shape of the production profile
is consistent throughout the data, including the 1998-1999 period when the price of oil was very
low. This profile is consistent with a production technology in which production rates are
constrained by geologic characteristics of the oil reservoir such as its pressure, the remaining
volume of oil near the well, and rock permeability. It is also consistent with low operating
expenses, so that the probability that the oil price will fall below the point at which revenues
equal operating costs is extremely low. Thus, the option value represented by the ability to adjust
a well’s production rate in response to price changes is negligible, implying that drilling and
production do not need to be modeled as a compound option.
8

2.3 Expected oil prices
I obtained data on the expected oil price from the prices of NYMEX crude oil futures
contracts. With risk neutral traders and efficient aggregation of information by the market, the
futures price is in theory the best predictor of the future price of oil. In practice, while futures
prices have been found to provide slightly more precise predictions than the current spot price
(i.e., a no-change forecast) during the 1993-2003 period I study here (Chernenko et al. 2004), the
improvement is not statistically significant. Moreover, when data through 2007 are used, spot
prices actually slightly outperform futures prices, though again the difference is not statistically
significant (Alquist and Kilian 2010). Given the slightly superior performance of NYMEX
futures during the sample period of this paper and the fact that a majority of producers claim to
use futures prices in making their own price projections (SPEE 1995), I will use futures prices as
the measure of firms’ expected price of oil. In a secondary specification, I explore how the use of
spot prices impacts the results.
I focus on the prices of futures contracts with 18 months to maturity.5 This maturity is the
longest time horizon for which NYMEX futures are traded regularly (on 84% of all possible
trading days over 1993-2003). In addition, the typical production profile of drilled infill wells
suggests that 18 months might be a reasonable forecast horizon for a firm to use when evaluating
a drilling prospect, since approximately one-half the well’s total expected production is likely to
be exhausted at this time.6 In an alternative specification, I use the 12-month contract.
Futures prices are generally consistent with mean-reverting expectations about the future
price of oil, as shown in figure 3. When the front-month (nearest delivery month) oil price
exceeds approximately $20/bbl (real $2003), the price of an 18-month futures contract tends to
5

In reality, it is rare that a NYMEX futures contract has a time to maturity of exactly 18 months (548 days) since the
available contracts that can be traded have maturities that are either one full month or one full quarter apart. On any
given trading date, I therefore treat contracts with a time to maturity that is within 46 days of 18 months as having a
maturity of 18 months. When more than one such contract is traded on any given trading date, I average the prices
across the contracts.
6
This half-life is derived by fitting a hyperbolic curve to the average production data (figure 2) and extrapolating
production beyond 3 years. Based on this curve and a 9.9% real discount rate (see section 5.1), half of a typical
well’s expected discounted production is exhausted in 19.2 months.

9

be lower than the front-month price, and the reverse holds when the front-month price is below
$20/bbl. The prices of 12-month futures are usually near those of 18-month futures, indicating
that the market generally believes that most mean reversion will occur within a year of the
trading date.

2.4 Expected oil price volatility
I derive my primary measure of firms’ expected future price volatility from the volatility
implied by NYMEX futures options prices. Across numerous commodity and financial contracts,
implied volatility has been found to be a better predictor of future volatility than measures based
on historic price volatility, including GARCH models (Poon and Granger 2003, Szakmary et al.
2003). Intuitively, if markets are efficient then options prices incorporate up-to-date information
beyond that available from price histories alone, improving their predictive power.
The classic formula for the value of a commodity option contract is based on the BlackScholes model (1973) and given by Black (1976). It requires as inputs the expected volatility of
the commodity price, the option’s time to maturity τ, the price of the futures contract with time to
maturity τ, the option’s strike price, and the riskless rate of interest.7 Given an options price,
Black’s formula can be inverted to calculate the expected price volatility implied by the option.
Black’s formula assumes that the term structure of volatility is constant over the life of
the option; that is, spot price volatility equals future price volatility at any time to maturity.8
Hilliard and Reis (1998), however, show that when futures prices exhibit mean reversion, the
expected volatility of futures prices declines as time to maturity increases. In figure 3, for
example, it is apparent that the NYMEX front-month contract is, on average, more volatile than
the 18-month contract. With mean reversion, an 18-month futures option price gives the average
implied volatility of futures price contracts with maturities between the front-month and 18

7

I use the interest rate on one-year treasury bills to measure the riskless rate of interest.
The Black (1976) formula also assumes that the options are European and that volatility is not stochastic. As
discussed in appendix 1, however, these assumptions are likely to be minor in importance.

8

10

months. This average implied volatility will be greater than the implied volatility of an 18-month
futures price contract, and my analysis requires the latter of these two variables, not the former.
To address this issue, I first use the realized volatility of futures prices to estimate the
average term structure of volatility: the function by which the volatility of the future price of oil
declines as time to maturity increases. I then use liquidly traded short-term futures options to
generate a time series of the implied volatility of a one-month futures option contract. Because a
one month time horizon is short, this time series is equivalent to the time series of the implied
volatility of the one-month futures price contract. Finally, I combine the one-month futures price
volatilities with the estimated term structure to generate the desired time series of the implied
volatility of an 18-month futures price contract. In appendix 1, I discuss this procedure in more
detail and provide evidence that the term structure of volatility is stable over time.9 The time
series of implied 18-month futures price volatilities is given in figure 1 alongside the time series
of 18-month futures prices (both series are averages of daily observations within each month).
In secondary empirical specifications, I construct volatility forecasts using historic
futures price volatility rather than implied volatility derived from futures options. These
specifications address the possibility that oil production firms’ volatility forecasts differ from
those of the market. One possible forecast is a no-change forecast; that is, the expected future
volatility of the NYMEX futures price is its recent historic volatility. Figure 4a compares the
historic volatility of the futures price, measured over rolling windows of one month and one
year, to the implied volatility series. The one-month forecast is clearly noisy relative to implied
volatility, reflecting small sample variation in volatility calculated using only one month of price
data. The one-year forecast is considerably smoother than the one-month forecast and sometimes

9

An alternative procedure to that used here would use the term structure of the implied volatility of futures options
directly to derive the implied volatility of 18-month futures prices. This approach would use the fact that the
volatility of a τ-month futures price is equal to the volatility of a τ-month futures option plus τ times the derivative of
the futures option term structure (with respect to τ) at τ. The use of the derivative implies that this approach requires
a very precise estimate of the term structure of futures options’ implied volatility. Thin markets for futures options
beyond 6 months render this procedure impractical. For example, 18-month futures options are traded, on average,
only 18 days each year from 1993-2003.

11

deviates substantially from implied volatility. Historic volatility is relatively high in 1997, low in
1998, and does not reflect the implied volatility spikes in 1999 and September 2001.
I have also forecast volatility using a GARCH(1,1) model. For each date in the dataset, I
estimate the GARCH parameters using a four-year rolling window of daily 18-month futures
prices.10 At each date, I then use the estimated GARCH model to forecast volatility over the
upcoming month. The average forecasted volatility over this month is then used as the measure
of firms’ expected price volatility. Figure 4b plots this GARCH volatility forecast against the
implied volatility from futures options. The GARCH forecast aligns more closely with the
implied volatilities than do the measures of historic volatility, though these time series do still
differ substantially at various points, most notably 1997-1998 and late 2001.

2.5 Drilling costs
The primary source for information on drilling costs is RigData, a firm that publishes
reports on the onshore U.S. drilling industry and collects data on daily rental rates (“dayrates”)
for drilling rigs from surveys of drilling companies.11 Rig rental comprises the single largest lineitem in the overall cost of a well, and industry sources have suggested that at typical dayrates rig
rental accounts for one-third of a well’s total cost.12 Because I observe dayrates but not other
components of drilling costs, I will assume that non-rig costs are constant in real terms and equal
to twice the rig rental cost at the average sample dayrate. This constant cost assumption seems
reasonable over the 1993-2003 sample. Prices for steel, which factor into prices for drill pipe,
10

In the GARCH model, the mean price equation is a seventh-order autoregression; this number of lags is necessary
to eliminate serial correlation in the price residuals. A GARCH(1,1) process is then sufficient to eliminate
conditional heteroscedasticity in the residuals (the p-value for rejecting a null hypothesis of no conditional
heteroscedasticity is 0.423).
11
The oil production firms that hold leases, make drilling decisions, and are the focus of this study do not actually
own the drilling rigs that physically drill their wells. Rigs are instead owned by independent drilling companies that
contract out their drilling services. See Kellogg (2009) for further information regarding the contracting process
between production firms and drilling companies.
12
This one-third figure was suggested by RigData and substantiated by information from the Petroleum Services
Association of Canada’s (PSAC’s) Well Cost Study (summers of 2000 through 2004). This study provides a breakout of the costs of drilling representative wells across Canada during the summer months. For the non-Arctic, nonoffshore areas that most closely resemble conditions in Texas, rig rental costs averaged 35.2% of total costs.

12

bits, and well casing, were fairly stable over this time, nominally increasing by an average of
1.8% per year according to data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. Other substantial
components of cost, such as site preparation, construction, and general equipment rental (pumps,
for example), should be based primarily on prices for non-specialized labor and capital inputs
and therefore also be stable in real terms.13 As for the assumption that these non-rig costs
constitute two-thirds of total drilling costs on average, I explore the use of alternative ratios as
robustness tests when estimating the model.
The RigData dayrate dataset is quarterly and continuously reported from 1993 onwards.
Because I conduct my analysis at a monthly level, I generate monthly dayrate data by assigning
each quarterly reported dayrate to the central month of each quarter and then linearly
interpolating dayrates for the intervening months. The alternative approach of simply treating
dayrates as constant within each quarter has only a minor effect on the estimated results.
Because drilling rigs are pieces of capital that are specific to the oil and gas industry, rig
rental rates are positively correlated with oil and gas prices and, accordingly, vary over the
sample frame. For a well of average depth (5,825 feet in the sample), the dayrate ranges from
$5,015 to $12,056, with an average of $7,163.14 Given an average drilling time of 19.2 days, the
average rig rental cost for a well is therefore $137,528 and average non-rig costs, estimated to be
twice this amount, are $275,057 (all figures in real 2003 US$).
For each month in the sample, I calculate the total drilling cost of an average well as the
sum of 19.2 days times the prevailing dayrate for that month (in real terms) with average non-rig
costs. The time series of drilling costs for an average well is plotted alongside oil futures prices
in figure 5. The positive correlation between these two series is readily apparent.

13

Evidence in support of this claim is available from the 2002, 2003, and 2004 PSAC Well Cost Studies, during
which time the specifications for the representative wells were essentially unchanged. These data indicate that nonrig drilling costs changed, on average, by only -0.2% in 2003 and +3.1% in 2004. Rig-related drilling costs,
however, increased by 9.8% in 2003 and 30.9% in 2004, following increases in the price of oil.
14
RigData reports dayrates separately for rigs drilling wells between zero and 5,999 feet deep and for rigs servicing
wells between 6,000 and 9,999 feet deep. The dayrates used in this study are the average of these two depth classes
for the Gulf Coast / South Texas region.

13

3. Descriptive results
Figure 1 plots the three time series of primary data: drilling activity, oil futures prices,
and implied oil price volatility from futures options. Several features of the plot are worth noting.
First, drilling activity rises and falls with the oil price. In particular, the oil price crash of 19981999 that was driven by the Asian financial crisis (Kilian 2009) is associated with a sharp
reduction in drilling activity. Second, following the 1998-1999 price crash, oil prices rapidly
recovered and by the beginning of 2000 actually surpassed their pre-1998 levels. However, oil
drilling did not enjoy a similar recovery: activity did increase once prices began to rise in the
summer of 1999 but recovered only to approximately two-thirds of its pre-1998 level. Why did
drilling activity not reach its earlier level despite such a high oil price? The third line on the
graph—implied volatility—suggests that an increase in uncertainty following the 1998 price
crash may have caused producers to delay the exercise of their drilling options. Implied volatility
increases sharply at the end of 1998 and remains at an elevated level for the remainder of the
sample; this high level of volatility is associated with the period in which expected oil prices
were high yet drilling activity was low. Moreover, several positive shocks to volatility
subsequent to 1999, such as the volatility spike following 11 September, 2001, appear to be
associated with reductions in drilling activity.
A descriptive statistical analysis using a hazard model confirms that the negative
relationship between drilling and expected oil price volatility that is apparent in figure 1 is in fact
statistically significant. The unit of observation in this analysis is an individual drilling prospect
and I model 7,787 such prospects: the 1,150 observed infill wells plus one prospect for each of
the 6,637 sole-operated fields in which I observe no drilling activity. In doing so, I treat
prospects that exist within the same field as independent of one another. While this treatment
does not allow for the modeling of factors that might cause wells within the same field to be
drilled at nearly the same time, the fact that most fields have zero or one well suggests that the
impact of modeling all drilling decisions independently of one another may be minor.

14

I choose a hazard model, rather than a more conventional OLS regression of drilling
activity on expected price and volatility, to capture the idea that drilling activity should decline
over time as the set of available options is gradually reduced through drilling. In the simplest
possible model, I model the hazard rate as an exponential function of the expected future price
level and expected price volatility per (1) below.

γ(t )  exp( β0  β p  Pricet 3  βv  Volt 3 )

(1)

In estimating both this model and the structural model described below, I lag all
covariates by three months, as industry participants have indicated that the engineering,
permitting and rig contracting processes generally drive a three month wedge between the
decision to drill and the commencement of drilling. For inference, I use a “sandwich” variancecovariance matrix estimator that allows arbitrary within-field correlation of the likelihood scores
(Wooldridge 2002).15 In practice, this estimator increases the estimated standard errors by about
25%, on average, relative to the standard BHHH estimator.
The results of estimating (1) are presented in column I of table 1. A $1.00 increase in the
expected future price of oil is associated with an increase in the likelihood of drilling of 4.1%,
and a one percentage point increase in expected price volatility is associated with a decrease in
the likelihood of drilling of 3.1%. Both of these point estimates are statistically significant at the
1% level. Columns II through IV of table 1 indicate that these correlations are robust to
alternative specifications that allow for changes in drilling costs, unobserved prospect-specific
heterogeneity, and a time trend. Column V, however, indicates that no statistically significant
correlation between the drilling hazard and expected volatility is found when the specification
includes an indicator variable for whether the date is greater than or equal to July 1998. Thus, the
15

Wooldridge (2002) shows that that this approach, which is analogous to clustering in linear regression models,
still produces consistent estimates of the parameters even though serial and cross-well correlation within each field
is not explicitly accounted for in the likelihood function. I also use this approach when estimating the structural
model, discussed in sections 4 through 6. I have also estimated these models while clustering the standard errors on
time rather than field to account for cross-sectional correlation of the likelihood scores. These estimated standard
errors are generally similar to those obtained from the standard BHHH estimator.

15

observed negative correlation between drilling rates and expected volatility is largely accounted
for by the substantial and persistent increase in volatility beginning in July 1998 and the
coincident, persistent decrease in drilling.
Because these descriptive results, in the absence of an economic model, cannot speak to
the optimality of firm decision-making or welfare, the remainder of this paper focuses on
formulating and estimating a model of the infill drilling problem faced by oil production
companies in Texas. The primary goal of this model is to relate the observed responses of firms
to changes in uncertainty to the theoretically optimal response. In what follows, I also discuss the
plausibility of alternative explanations for the persistent decrease in drilling subsequent to 1998.

4. A model of drilling investment under time-varying uncertainty
4.1 Model setup
Consider a risk-neutral, price-taking oil production firm that is deciding whether to drill
some prospective well i at date t. Using geologic and engineering estimates, the firm generates
an expectation regarding the monthly oil production from the well should it be drilled. The
present value of the well’s expected revenue is then equal to the sum, over the months of the
well’s productive life, of the product of the well’s expected monthly production with the
expected oil price each month, net of taxes and royalties, and discounted at the firm’s discount
factor δ. Rather than model this discounted sum explicitly, I model it instead as simply the
product riPt. Here, ri represents the sum of the well’s expected monthly production, net of taxes
and royalties, and discounted so that it is in present value terms.16 Pt represents the “average” oil
price that will prevail over all barrels of oil expected to be produced by the well, so that the

16

A narrow view of ri suggests that I am assuming that the ongoing production from any previously drilled wells in
the same field as well i is unaffected by the drilling of well i. This assumption is incorrect if the new well is, at least
to some extent, only accelerating the recovery of reserves from the field rather than exploiting new reserves that the
existing well stock did not reach. However, the model can handle wells drilled with the purpose of acceleration by
interpreting the expected productivity ri as the expected production of the new well net of its expected impact on the
production from the existing well stock (if any).

16

product riPt is equal to the original discounted sum of monthly revenue. In the estimation that
follows, I will use the 18-month futures price of oil as Pt. This simplification allow me to model
the price level using only the single state variable Pt rather than a vector of state variables for the
expected price in each month of the well’s productive life.
I emphasize that riPt is the firm’s expectation of the value that will be obtained from
drilling. Realized value may differ substantially from riPt because the realized oil price may
differ from Pt (though the firm could hedge this risk away) and because realized production may
differ from ri. Recall that some of the wells observed in the sample yielded zero oil production.
Clearly, a dry hole was not the firms’ expected outcome for these wells.
In month t, the well’s drilling cost is equal to the sum of non-rig costs ci with the product
of the dayrate Dt and the number of days di required to drill the well.17 Then, given an expected
oil price Pt and a dayrate Dt, the expected profits πit from drilling the well are given by the
function πi:

pit = pi ( Pt , Dt ) = ri Pt - ci - di Dt

(1)

It will be useful for estimation to rearrange (1), defining the expected productivity of a
well as the ratio of its expected production ri to its drilling cost at the average dayrate. Denote
this cost by Ci  ci  di D and let this ratio be denoted by xi. Further, let c denote ci / Ci and let
d denote di / Ci . Assuming that the ratio of non-rig costs to total costs at the average dayrate is

constant across wells implies that both c and d are constant across wells (in the reference case
  1/ 3 per the discussion in section 2.5). Then, expected profits πit
model, I set c  2 / 3 and dD

can be re-written as (2) below, in which all cross-well productivity heterogeneity relevant to the
drilling timing decision is collapsed into the single variable xi.

 )
pit = pi ( Pt , Dt ) = Ci ( xi Pt - c - dD
t

17

(2)

I assume that di does not vary over time. Learning-by-doing could cause di to decrease as more wells are drilled in
the field (Kellogg 2009); however, since most of the observed sole-operated fields have only one new well during
the sample, this effect is likely to be negligible. Technological progress might also decrease di over time; this
possibility is part of the motivation for allowing for a time trend in an alternative specification.

17

I treat all firms as price takers, in the sense that they believe that their decisions do not
impact Pt or Dt. This assumption almost certainly holds institutionally. The market for oil is
global, and Texas as a whole constitutes only 1.3% of world oil production. With respect to oil
producers’ monopsony power in the market for drilling services, the largest firm in the dataset is
responsible for only 2.2% of all wells drilled in Texas during the sample period, a quantity that
seems insufficient for exertion of substantial market power.
Let the processes by which firms believe the price of oil and drilling costs evolve be firstorder Markov and be given by (3) and (4) below. Pt denotes the oil price (18-month NYMEX
future) in the current month t, and Pt+1 is the price in month t+1. Dt and Dt+1 represent the
current and next month’s dayrates.18

ln Pt 1  ln Pt  μ( Pt , σ t2 )  σ t2 / 2  σ t εt 1

(3)

ln Dt 1  ln Dt  μˆ ( Dt , σˆt2 )  σˆt2 / 2  σˆt εˆt 1

(4)

The firm’s current expectation of the volatility of the oil price is denoted by σt, and the
price shock εt+1 is an iid standard normal random variable that is realized subsequent to the
firm’s drilling decision in the current period. Because I do not observe expectations of dayrate
volatility σˆt , I assume that this volatility is a scalar multiple of the oil price volatility so that σˆt =
ασt. The cost shock εˆt 1 is drawn from a standard normal that has a correlation of ρ with εt+1.

μ ( Pt , σ t2 ) and μˆ ( Dt , σˆt2 ) denote the expected price and drilling cost drifts as stationary
functions of the current expected level and volatility of the oil price and dayrate. Dependence of
these drifts on the price and dayrate levels allows for the mean reverting expectations exhibited
by NYMEX futures prices (figure 3). I also allow the drifts to depend on volatility because, as
pointed out by Pindyck (2004), an increase in volatility may increase the marginal value of
storage and therefore raise near-term prices. In addition, a volatility increase may also affect
investments related to oil production and consumption (via the real options mechanism

18

These transition functions are the discrete time analogue to geometric Brownian motion with drift (see Dixit and
Pindyck 1994). Volatility is assumed to be constant within each time step.

18

considered here, for example), affecting expectations of future prices. The specification and
estimation of μ ( Pt , σ t2 ) and μˆ ( Dt , σˆt2 ) is discussed in section 5.1

4.2 Optimal drilling with time-varying volatility
The firm’s problem at a given time t is to maximize the present value of the well Vit by
optimally choosing the time at which to drill it. This optimal stopping problem is given by (5)
below, in which Ω denotes a decision rule specifying whether the well should be drilled in each
period τ ≥ t as a function of Pτ and Dτ (conditional on the well not having been drilled already). Iτ
denotes a binary variable indicating the outcome of this decision rule each period and δ denotes
the firm’s real discount factor.


Vit  max E   δ τ t I τ πi ( Pτ , Dτ ) 
Ω
 τ t


(5)

In formulating (5), I assume that firms holding multiple drilling options treat them
independently of one another. Given that I only observe zero or one well drilled in most fields in
the sample, this assumption does not seem particularly strong. In those cases in which a firm
holds multiple drilling options within the same field, it may be that the outcome from drilling
one well may convey information regarding other prospects. That is, if the first well drilled by a
firm in a field turns out to be highly productive, the firm may increase its estimate of xi for its
remaining prospects.19 This contingent re-evaluation will result in temporal clustering of drilling
activity in multi-well fields relative to what would be predicted by (5) alone.
Because drilling a well is irreversible and future prices and costs are uncertain, the
decision rule for maximization of (5) is not simply to invest in the first period in which πit ≥ 0.
The firm must trade off the value of drilling immediately against the option value of postponing
the investment to a later date, at which time the expected oil price may be higher or the drilling
19

The process by which firms learn about the quality of fields through drilling is examined by Levitt (2009), which
develops and estimates a dynamic learning model. That paper’s approach cannot be used here because it requires
data on oil production outcomes for all drilled wells and because the separate identification of learning effects and
location-specific heterogeneity requires observations of different firms drilling wells in the same field (as well as an
assumption of no cross-firm information spillovers).

19

cost lower. This trade-off is captured by re-stating the optimal stopping problem as the Bellman
equation (6) below, in which Vi(·) represents the current maximized value of the drilling option
as a function of the state variables P, D, and σ (from which I now remove the subscript t). Vi’
represents this maximized value in the upcoming period.

Vi ( P, D, σ )  max πi ( P, D), δ  E[Vi '( P ', D ', σ ')]

(6)

Equation (6) includes the firm’s expected oil price volatility σ as a state variable even
though it does not appear in the profit function πi(·). Volatility impacts drilling decisions through
its impact on the distribution of next period’s expected oil price P’ given the current expected
price P. An increase in σ increases the variance of P’ conditional on P, thereby increasing the
value of holding the drilling option relative to the value of drilling immediately.
Intuition suggests that the solution to (6) will be governed by the following “trigger rule”:
at any given P, D, and σ, there will exist a unique x*(P,D,σ) such that it will be optimal to drill
prospect i if and only if xi ≥ x*(P,D,σ). Furthermore, x* will be strictly decreasing in P and
strictly increasing in D and σ. The following conditions on the stochastic processes governing the
evolution of P, D, and σ (none of which is rejected by the data) are sufficient for this trigger rule
to hold. S denotes the state space.
(i)

d E[ P ' | P, D, s] < P "P, D, s Î S (oil prices cannot be expected to rise more

(ii)

quickly than the rate of interest)
¶E [ P ' | P , D , s ] 1
< , with the same holding for D and σ, "P, D, s Î S (the
¶P
d
expected rates of change of each state variable cannot increase too quickly with

the current state)
(iii) ρ < 1 (oil price shocks and dayrate shocks are not perfectly correlated)
(iv) The distribution of P’ is stochastically increasing in P, with the same holding
for D and σ

20

(v)

d E[p( P ', D ', s ') | P, D, s] < p( P, D, s) "P, D, s Î S (the Hotelling condition
necessary for drilling to be optimal: expected profits cannot rise more quickly
than the rate of interest)

It is straightforward to show that conditions (i)-(iii) imply that  ( s )  E[ ( s ' | s )] is
strictly increasing in P and xi, and strictly decreasing in D and σ. Given this result and conditions
(iv) and (v), a fixed point contraction mapping argument given in Dixit and Pindyck (1994)
proves that the trigger x*(P,D,σ) must exist. There must also exist similar triggers P*(D,σ,xi),
D*(P,σ,xi), and σ*(P,D,xi), representing the minimum price, maximum drilling cost, and
maximum volatility at which drilling is optimal as functions of the other variables. The existence
of all four triggers implies that x*(P,D,σ) must be strictly decreasing in P and strictly increasing
in D and σ.
Thus, an increase in expected volatility σ will cause a fully optimizing firm to increase
the productivity trigger x* necessary to justify investment, holding the expected price and dayrate
constant. Consider such a firm for which the price volatility expectation σ is equal to the
volatility implied by the futures options market, which I denote by σm. Figure 6 illustrates how
the firm’s critical productivity x* will vary with P and σm for a well with an average drilling cost
at the average sample dayrate. The relationship between x* and P is shown at both low (10%) and
high (30%) levels of expected price volatility σm. At both volatility levels, x* decreases with price
so that less productive wells may be drilled in relatively high price environments. Holding price
constant, x* is greater in the high volatility case than the low volatility case.
Now, however, suppose that firms have time-varying expectations about future volatility
that coincide with those of NYMEX market participants but do not take these expectations into
account when making drilling decisions, so that in terms of the model σ is effectively constant
over time. In this case, the two lines in figure 6 will coincide. It is this difference in investment
behavior between firms that respond to σm and those that do not that will provide identification in
the empirical exercise described below. Note, however, that an observed lack of response to σm

21

could also reflect the possibility that, while firms properly take expected volatility into account
when making investment decisions, they hold a belief that volatility σ is constant over time rather
than equal to the time-varying σm. Thus, to the extent that the data imply differences between σ
and σm, I will not be able to identify whether the differences are due to sub-optimal investment
decision-making or to differences between firms’ beliefs and those of the broader market.
I capture the extent to which firms optimally respond to the market’s implied volatility σm
by parameterizing firms’ beliefs through a behavioral parameter β. First, define ln σ to be the
average log of the market volatility over the first year of the sample (12.3%), and let ln  d be the
deviation of ln  m from ln σ . That is:

ln σ m  ln σ  ln σ d

(7)

I then relate the firm’s expected volatility σ to σd via (8):

ln σ  ln σ  β ln σ d

(8)

Through this formulation, the behavioral parameter β regulates the extent to which firms
respond to changes in σm. A firm that behaves according to β = 1 is a firm that shares the
market’s beliefs regarding future price volatility and correctly optimizes its investment decisions
according to those beliefs. Conversely, a firm with β = 0 does not respond to changes in σm
because it either has beliefs that are orthogonal to σm or does not optimize its investment
decisions correctly. The primary objective of the empirical work is to obtain an estimate of β and
test whether the estimate is consistent with investment behavior that is optimal given beliefs that
coincide with those of the market.
The final component of the model is the process by which firms believe σd evolves over
time. My reference case specification models this process as a random walk per (9) below, in
which γ denotes the volatility of the volatility process and η’ is an iid standard normal random

22

variable.20 I discuss alternatives to the random walk approach in the discussion of the estimation
results in section 6.3.

ln σ d '  ln σ d  γ2 / 2  γη '

(9)

5. Empirical Model and estimation
The parameter of primary interest is β, the behavioral parameter that reflects firms’
sensitivity to the expected volatility of the price of oil. To obtain an estimate of β, I must also
estimate the parameters α, ρ, and γ that govern the state transition processes as well as the oil
price and dayrate drift functions μ ( Pt , σ t2 ) and μˆ ( Dt , σˆt2 ) . An estimate of the discount factor δ is
also required. In what follows, I first discuss how I estimate these “secondary” parameters
independently of the full model before turning to the estimation of β via a procedure based on the
nested fixed point approach of Rust (1987).

5.1 Estimates of the discount factor and state transition processes
While the firms’ discount factor δ can in principle be estimated as part of the nested fixed
point routine, obtaining precise inference in practice is challenging. I adopt the standard
approach in the literature by setting δ in advance. According to a 1995 survey by the Society of
Petroleum Evaluation Engineers, the median nominal discount rate applied by firms to cash
flows is 12.5%. Given average inflation over 1993-2003 of 2.36%, I set δ equal to the quotient
1.0236 / 1.125, approximately 0.910.
I assume that μ ( Pt , σ t2 ) , the expected drift of the log oil futures price, is the stationary
linear function given by (10):

μ ( Pt , σ t2 )  κ p 0  κ p1 Pt  κ p 2 σ t2

20

(10)

A random walk process cannot be rejected using an augmented Dickey-Fuller test. With 12 lags, the p-value for
rejecting the null of a unit-root process is 0.3182.

23

Per equation (3), consistent estimates of κp0, κp1, and κp2 may be obtained via an OLS
regression of E[ln Pt+1] – ln Pt + σ t2 / 2 on Pt and σ t2 . Because the reference case specification
uses 18-month future prices for Pt, I use 19-month future prices to measure E[ln Pt+1] in this
regression. I estimate that κp0 = 0.0095, κp1 = -0.00055, and κp2 = 0.401. These values are
consistent with mean reversion to an oil price of $19.56 per barrel (at the sample average
volatility of 19.4%).
I similarly assume that μˆ ( Dt , σˆt2 ) , the expected dayrate drift, is a linear function of the
current dayrate, so that μˆ ( Dt , σˆt2 )  κ d 0  κ d 1 Dt  κ d 2σˆt2 . There does not exist a futures market for
rig dayrates to facilitate estimation of the κd. Rather than attempt to estimate these parameters
from a short time series of quarterly drilling cost observations, I instead assume that the
parameters κd0, κd1, and κd2 match those from the oil price drift equation, with κd1 re-scaled by the
ratio of the average dayrate to the average oil price.
To estimate α, the ratio of σˆt to σt in each period (this ratio is assumed to be constant), I
first calculate ξt  ln Pt  ln Pt 1 and ξˆt  ln Dt  ln Dt 1 in each period. α is then estimated by the
ratio of the standard deviation of ξˆt to the standard deviation of ξt . I then estimate ρ to be the
correlation coefficient between ξˆt and ξt . The estimate of α is 1.50, and the estimate of ρ is
0.395. Finally, I take γ, the volatility of the volatility process, to be the standard deviation of

ln σ tm  ln σ tm1 . This value is 0.1136.

5.2 Primary empirical model and estimation
Given the state transition functions estimated above, the remaining unknowns in the
econometric model are the behavioral parameter β and the unobserved expected productivity of
each drilling prospect, the xi. Because all firms face the same price, volatility, and dayrate
processes, the trigger productivity x* will be the same for all prospects in the data at any given
time. If xi is modeled as identical across prospects, then all firms would make the decision to drill
at the same time, a prediction that conflicts with the spread of drilling activity over time evident
in figure 1. Clearly, there must exist a distribution of xi across prospects.
24

It is therefore tempting, at first, to estimate a model in which xi varies across prospects
but for each individual prospect is constant over time. However, this model is also incapable of
rationalizing the data. Given the trigger rule described in section 4, such a model implies that in
each period t, all wells with productivity xi > xt* will be drilled. Now consider what would
happen should x* rise in period t+1, perhaps because the oil price fell or because volatility
increased. In this case, only prospects with xi  xt*1 will be drilled. However, all such prospects
will already have been drilled in period t since xt*1  xt* . Thus, an implication of a model in
which xi does not vary over time is that there cannot be any drilling activity following an
increase or no change in x*. Such a model is clearly inconsistent with the drilling data. In 1999,
for example, the expected price is considerably lower than it was in 1998 and the expected
volatility is higher; however, drilling activity does not go to zero. Clearly, any firm that drilled a
well during this period must have positively updated its xi.
There exist numerous reasons why xi may vary over time. The process by which
geologists and engineers develop an estimate of a prospective well’s production is inherently
challenging and error-prone. They must make inferences about an oil reservoir buried thousands
of feet below the earth’s surface with very limited information: seismic surveys, production
outcomes from previously drilled wells, and electromagnetic “logs” of the rock characteristics at
nearby wells. Any individual geologist or engineer may change his or her views regarding a
prospect as more time is spent studying the information, and different personnel may draw
different conclusions from the same set of information (much like different econometricians may
draw different inferences from the same data). Such re-evaluations of prospects, particularly if
there is turnover amongst the firms’ personnel, can drive substantial variation in the xi over time.
In addition, firms may sometimes “discover” new prospects in old fields in their analyses of their
data. Observationally, such discoveries are equivalent to an increase in the xi of what had been a
low-quality prospect.
Prospect re-evaluation is not the only mechanism by which the xi may vary over time. In
multi-prospect fields, the results from the drilling of one well may yield information regarding
25

the quality of another prospect. Firms may also undertake costly information gathering by taking
a seismic survey of their field. Finally, variance in the lag between the decision to drill and the
actual commencement of drilling may arise due to delays in engineering design, permitting, or
drilling contracting. These stochastic lags will lead to drilling at times not predicted by the
model, observationally similar to variation over time in the xi.
To account for these changes in xi, the econometric model must treat each prospect’s
expected productivity as xit, an unobserved state variable that evolves over time. I therefore
rewrite the original Bellman equation (6) as (11):

Vi ( P, D, σ , xi )  max π ( P, D, σ , xi ), δ  E[Vi '( P ', D ', σ ', xi ')]

(11)

In modeling the state variable xi, I abstract away from explicit modeling of the
mechanisms above, such as firms’ use of seismic surveys to gather information. A firm that
undertakes such an action is in reality making an endogenous investment that should in principle
be modeled dynamically in conjunction with the drilling model. This aspect of information
acquisition is omitted from the model both to maintain tractability and because I lack data on the
occurrence of seismic surveys. The present model can accommodate costly information
gathering to the extent that the drilling of a well can be viewed as a compound investment: when
prices rise or volatility falls so that the firm is ready to contemplate drilling, it first undertakes a
seismic survey prior to drilling the well. I also continue to model each prospect independently,
abstracting away from the process by which the drilling of a well in a field can influence the
firm’s beliefs about other prospects in the same field. This omission may result in un-modeled
clustering of drilling behavior in fields with multiple wells drilled, motivating the use of a
sandwich variance-covariance estimator (Wooldridge 2002).
In my reference case empirical specification, I treat log xit as an iid normal variable
across both prospects i and time t, and I estimate the mean μ and variance ζ of this distribution in
addition to the behavioral parameter β. This approach agglomerates the possible sources of
variation in the xit into a single, parsimonious distribution. Separate identification of each source

26

of variation would require strong functional form assumptions and a substantially more complex
model than that given here. In addition, for each source of variation discussed above, the shocks
to the xi are not due to exogenous arrival of new information but rather reassessments of old
information, new prospect “discovery,” costly and deliberate information acquisition, or
variation in the lag between drilling decisions and actual drilling. Because the xit incorporate
these effects rather than exogenous information shocks, I model firms as believing that xit+1 = xit.
Despite the emphasis of the above discussion on time-variance in xit, there may exist
some persistent cross sectional heterogeneity in the expected productivity of each prospect. I
therefore also estimate a model in which log xit is the sum of a time-invariant normally
distributed random variable φi, with mean and standard deviation given by μ1 and ζ 1, and an iid
normal variable νit with a zero mean and standard deviation ζ2. In this specification, I estimate μ1,
ζ 1, and ζ2 in addition to the behavioral parameter β.
Given the state transition processes discussed in section 5.1, the parameters governing the
distribution of the xit, the behavioral parameter β, and the realized monthly time series of future
prices, rig dayrates, and implied volatilities (denoted by P, D, and σ, respectively), the model’s
solution yields the likelihood that a given prospect will be drilled in any given month t
conditional on not having been drilled already. This likelihood is simply the probability that xit
exceeds the trigger productivity xt* .21 Starting from the initial period of January 1993, these
conditional probabilities yield the probability that any given prospect will be drilled in each
month t, as well as the probability that the prospect will not be drilled by the end of the sample.22
These probabilities form the basis for the likelihood function. Let Iit denote an indicator variable
that takes on a value of one if prospect i is drilled in month t and zero otherwise, T denote the

21

Unlike Rust (1987), the unobservable xit is not additively separable to the reward function, implying that I cannot
take advantage of the logit formulation of the likelihood. Instead, I directly model xit as a state variable, and the
model’s solution then yields the trigger productivity each period. Details are provided in appendix 2.
22
For example, the probability that the prospect will be drilled in February 1993 is the conditional probability that it
is drilled in February 1993 multiplied by probability that it was not drilled in January 1993. The probability that it is
drilled in March 1993 is then the conditional probability that it is drilled in March 1993 multiplied by probability
that it was not drilled in February 1993 or earlier, and so on.

27

final month of the sample, Nt denote the number of wells actually drilled at t, and N0 denote the
number of prospects not drilled (N0 = 6,637, the number of undrilled sole-operated fields).23 The
log-likelihood function is therefore:
T

l (( N1 , N 2 ,..., NT ), N 0 | P , D, σ; β , μ, ζ )   Nt log Pr( I it  1| P , D, σ; β , μ, ζ )

(12)

t 1

+ N 0 log Pr( I it  0 t | P , D, σ ; β , μ, ζ )
Estimation of β, μ, and ζ is carried out by maximizing this likelihood function using a
nested fixed point routine. The outer loop searches over the unknown parameters while the inner
loop solves the model and calculates the likelihood function at each guess. Details regarding this
procedure, such as the discretization of the state space used to numerically solve the model, are
provided in appendix 2. The specification with cross-sectional heterogeneity proceeds by
integrating the likelihood over the distribution of φi.

6. Estimation results and discussion
6.1 Reference case estimation results
I begin by estimating the version of the model in which log xit is assumed to be iid across
prospects i and time t. As a baseline, column I of table 2 provides the estimation results when I
impose the restriction that β = 0; that is, firms do not respond to changes in implied volatility. I
find that a broad distribution of expected productivity xit is needed to sufficiently smooth the
model’s simulated drilling activity such that it rationalizes the data. The estimated mean μ and
variance ζ of log xit are -0.653 and 3.094, respectively. Here, and throughout the presentation of
the results, xit is given in barrels of expected discounted production per $100,000 of drilling cost
at the average rig dayrate. These estimates together imply that, in the model, the average
prospect at any point in time is expected to produce only 62 barrels of oil per $100,000 of cost,
23

Throughout this section, I use “drilled” as shorthand for the drilling decision. As with the descriptive hazard
model, I allow for a three-month lag between the drilling decision and the actual start of drilling. Thus, for example,
the model’s drilling probability for January 1993 is matched with drilling activity for April 1993. The final period of
the sample is September 2003, which is matched with drilling activity for December 2003.

28

well below the productivity necessary to justify investment at any reasonable oil price.24 This
estimate reflects the presence of a large number of fields in the data (6,637) in which no drilling
occurs. A large estimate of the variance ζ is therefore necessary to rationalize the observed
drilling. For example, a prospect with average costs and a log xit three standard deviations greater
than the mean will be expected to produce 23,070 barrels of oil, sufficient to trigger drilling over
a range of prices and implied volatilities in the sample.
In column II I allow β, the firms’ sensitivity to implied volatility, to be a free parameter,
and its point estimate is 1.039. This value is very close to one in both an economic and statistical
sense (the standard error is 0.064), consistent with optimal investment responses to volatility
expectations that match the implied volatility of NYMEX futures options.25 Moreover, a
likelihood ratio test strongly rejects, with a p-value less than 0.001, a null hypothesis that firms
do not respond at all to implied volatility (β = 0).26 The time series of predicted drilling under
models I and II are given in figure 7, alongside actual drilling activity. The prediction from
model II, allowing for a response to volatility, yields a better fit to the data, particularly during
the 1999 low price period and the volatility spike following September 11th, 2001. More broadly,
the model that does not allow a response to time-varying volatility under-predicts drilling in the
early part of the sample and over-predicts drilling in the latter part. Allowing for a volatility
response largely corrects these mis-predictions, though there remain sections of the time series,
such as early 1997, that the model does not fit well.
Column III of table 2 presents estimates of the richer model in which xit is permitted to
have persistent cross-sectional heterogeneity. This relaxation has virtually no impact on the
estimate of β. The estimated degree of persistent heterogeneity is low relative to the estimated
24

The 62 barrel per $100,000 figure is equal to exp(-0.653 + 3.0942/2).
25
Note that, in column II, the distribution of log xit is estimated to have a lower mean and higher variance than in
column I. This shift in parameters is necessary to rationalize non-zero drilling activity in early 1999 when oil prices
were low and implied volatility was high: the increased variance allows simulated prospects to have an expected
quality xit greater than the high drilling cutoff xt* during this period.
26
Rejection of the restricted estimate with a test size of 5% requires a difference in log likelihoods of 1.92. A
likelihood ratio test does not take clustering of the likelihood scores on field into account so will therefore
underestimate the true p-value.

29

variance of the time-varying shocks: the estimate of ζ1 is 0.166 while that of ζ2 is 6.177.
Allowing for a deterministic time trend also does not significantly impact the estimate of β, as
shown in column IV. The estimated time trend is slightly negative and indicates a productivity
decrease of about 0.9% per year. This result is consistent with the presence of some crosssectional heterogeneity that causes the most promising prospects to be drilled first.
Why might these estimates of firms’ responses to changes in expected volatility accord so
well with theory? Given the small size of the majority of these firms, it seems unlikely that they
are formally solving Bellman equations. However, they may have developed decision heuristics
that roughly mimic an optimal decision-making process. Moreover, the firms have a strong
financial incentive to get their decision-making at least approximately right. Consider a firm that
has a drilling prospect of average cost that is expected to produce 17,000 bbl, faces an average
dayrate (so that the drilling cost is $412,585), and faces an expected oil price of $30/bbl.
Suppose further that the expected oil price volatility is relatively high: 34%. If the firm is myopic
in that its β equals zero, it will drill the well and realize an expected profit of $97,414. However,
if the firm makes its decision optimally, it will postpone drilling, preserving the full value of the
prospect: $148,000 (this value is taken directly from the model’s value function). In this
example, optimal decision-making in the presence of time-varying volatility yields a 52%
increase in value over behavior consistent with an expectation that volatility is constant at 12.3%.

6.2 Identification and the July 1998 step change
The above results indicate that, in periods of high expected oil price volatility, drilling
activity falls in a way that is commensurate with the predictions of real options theory. This
section considers potential alternative explanations for this measured empirical response.
I first examine the extent to which the empirical results above can be explained by the
correlation of implied volatility with the downward step change in drilling activity that began in
July 1998. To do so, I model a permanent shock to the xit that begins in July 1998 and is common
across all prospects. In this approach, the shock proxies for an unobserved factor that may have

30

affected the likelihood of drilling subsequent to July 1998. The results of estimating the model
while allowing for this step change are given in column V of table 2. The estimated shock is
large, decreasing log xit by 0.454, although it is not statistically significant. The point estimate of
β is not significantly affected, changing from 1.039 in the reference case to 1.060 here.
The standard error on the estimate of β in specification V is 0.040, strongly rejecting a
null of β = 0 in a simple Wald test. However, a likelihood ratio test against the restricted model
of column VI in which β = 0 yields a p-value of only 0.036, suggesting the presence of nonconcavities in the likelihood function when the July 1998 shock is included in the model. In fact,
there is a second local maximum, shown in column VII, at which β = 0.416. The log likelihood at
this maximum is lower than that at β = 1.060 by only 0.2, and β = 0.416 therefore cannot be
rejected by the data. This last result suggests that the persistent step changes in volatility and
drilling activity following 1998 played a non-trivial role in the identification of the robust
response to volatility in the reference case.
Is it possible that unobserved and unmodeled factors took effect after 1998 and caused
the subsequent decrease in drilling activity observed in the data? I investigate here two candidate
explanations: (a) that there was a discontinuous decrease in the expected productivity of drilling
prospects (the literal interpretation of the model estimated in columns V through VII of table 2);
and (b) that the low price period beginning in 1998 caused production firms to lay off
engineering and management staff that they could not subsequently re-hire, restricting their
ability to carry out drilling programs when prices recovered.
Proposition (a), that there was a sudden decrease in prospect quality in 1998, seems
unlikely. Prospect quality is a function of the geologic characteristics of oil reservoirs in Texas,
and there is no obvious reason why firms’ beliefs about these characteristics would sharply
decrease, across many fields and firms, at precisely the same time that oil price volatility rose.
Moreover, a fall in perceived prospect quality should be manifest in the realized production data
from drilled wells. Figure 8 displays a scatter plot of the log of the ratio of oil production to
drilling time for the 162 drilled wells that I could match to oil production data. This plot provides
31

no evidence in support of a drop in prospect quality beginning in July 1998, though the
production realizations are sufficiently noisy that they do not rule out such a drop either.
To examine the plausibility of proposition (b), I obtained data from the Bureau of Labor
Statistics on the employment of petroleum engineers and geologists in Texas. These data are
given in table 3. While the data do indicate a decrease in employment from 1998 to 1999, as
expected, employment quickly rebounds with the oil price and in fact surpasses 1998
employment by 2001. These data therefore suggest that staffing constraints were unlikely to play
a role in determining the low level of drilling activity following 1998. I cannot, however, rule out
the possibility that the employees hired in 2000 and 2001 were of lower quality than those whose
employment terminated after 1998. This quality decrease would need to be substantial, however,
to explain the data: the estimated magnitude of the drop in log(xit) in the restricted model of
column VI in table II is -0.359.

6.3 Alternative specifications
Alternative measures of expected volatility

The analysis thus far has used implied volatility from the NYMEX futures options market
as the measure of firms’ oil price volatility expectations. Table 4, column II reports results in
which expected volatility is instead measured by the historic volatility of futures prices over a
12-month rolling window. The use of historic volatility yields a worse fit to the drilling data than
does implied volatility, as evidenced by the decrease in the log likelihood relative to the implied
volatility results in column I. Moreover, the estimate of the behavioral parameter β is only 0.288
and not statistically significant, indicating that firms do not respond as strongly to historic
volatility as they do to volatility signals that are reflected in the NYMEX futures options market.
Column III of table 4 uses the GARCH(1,1) model to forecast future volatility. This
model yields an estimate of β of 0.551 that is statistically significant at the 5% level, though the
fit of the model is still substantially worse than when implied volatility is used (the decrease in
the log likelihood is equal to 6.5). The reduced fit reflects the fact that, while GARCH provides a
32

closer match to implied volatility than does historic volatility, the two series still diverge
substantially at several points in time (figure 4b). This result, as well that obtained from the
direct use of historic volatility, suggests an explanation for why some previous empirical studies
(Hurn and Wright 1994, Moel and Tufano 2002) have not found strong evidence that timevarying volatility significantly affects investment. These studies measure firms’ volatility
expectations using historic volatility, which may only be a noisy measure of firms’ true beliefs
because it does not reflect up-to-date information regarding volatility shocks.
Thus far, the analysis has modeled firms as believing that volatility follows a random
walk per equation (9). Alternatively, column IV of table 4 models firms as believing that the
volatility process is mean-reverting. I estimate firms’ expected mean reversion rates using the
GARCH model. At each month in the sample, this model provides volatility forecasts for both
the current month (the forecast used in generating the time series in figure 4(b) and the estimates
in column III) and the subsequent month. These two series of predictions are consistent with
mean reversion: when the current GARCH volatility is relatively high, the upcoming-month
forecast predicts a fall in volatility, and the reverse holds when the current GARCH volatility is
relatively low. Using these predictions, I estimate that the expected rate of change in the log of
expected volatility is given by 0.0544 minus 0.0021 times the current volatility (in annualized
percent). This estimate implies that, if the current expected volatility is 10%, the expected
volatility next month is 10.3%. In contrast, if the current expected volatility is 30%, the expected
volatility next month is 29.7%.
When firms have volatility beliefs that are consistent with mean reversion, they will
believe that changes in volatility will not be persistent and therefore not respond as strongly to
such changes. Thus, the estimate of this model in column IV yields a relatively high value of β of
1.304 because a value of one will not yield sufficient sensitivity to volatility to match the data.27
A null hypothesis that β = 1 is rejected at the 5% level.
27

To be clear, this estimate uses implied volatility, not GARCH volatility, as the measure of expected volatility over
the current month. The GARCH model is used only to generate a forecast of expected mean reversion.

33

Alternative forecast horizons

Column V of table 4 considers a model in which firms respond to the 12-month oil
futures price and volatility rather than the 18-month price and volatility. I replace the price series
Pt with the NYMEX 12-month futures contract and the implied price volatility σm with that of
12-month futures prices. Re-estimating the full model (including auxiliary parameters such as the
expected rate of price drift) yields an estimate of β of 1.044, very near the reference case
estimate of 1.039. This result reflects the closeness of the 12-month price and volatility series to
the 18-month series (figures 3 and A1).
Column VI considers a model in which firms respond to the current price and volatility of
oil rather than 18 month futures and volatilities. I replace the price series Pt with the NYMEX
front-month futures contract and the market’s implied 18-month price volatility σm with that of
front-month futures options. Because firms’ use of current prices as expected prices is consistent
with a no-change forecast for the price of oil, I set the price and cost drift functions  () and

ˆ () to zero. The estimate of β from this model is 1.226, with a relatively large standard error of
0.549. The increase in the estimate of β relative to the reference case model likely reflects the
zero price drift assumption associated with the use of front-month prices. A relatively high
volatility state in this model is not associated with an expectation that prices will increase in the
future, as was the case in the reference case model using 18-month futures. A higher estimate of
β is therefore required in order to offset this change in the model and fit the data.
Alternative discount rate and drilling cost assumptions

The estimates heretofore have been based on an assumed 12.5% nominal discount rate,
taken from a 1995 survey by the Society of Petroleum Evaluation Engineers. Columns II and III
of table 5 examine the use of alternative discount rates. A 14.5% discount rate yields an estimate
of β of 1.149 while a 10.5% discount rate yields β = 0.890. These changes to the estimated β are
in line with real options theory’s predictions. As the discount rate increases, firms value the
future less, option value decreases, and firms become less responsive to changes in expected

34

volatility. Thus, to fit the empirical volatility response, the volatility sensitivity parameter β must
increase when the assumed discount rate increases.
Finally, columns IV and V of table 5 examine the estimates’ sensitivity to the assumption
that rig costs constitute one-third of total drilling costs, on average. Assuming a value of 20% or
50% does not substantially alter the estimate of β.

7. Conclusions
The importance of irreversibility and uncertainty in investment decision-making has been
recognized since Marschak (1949) and Arrow (1968). Theoretical work has since derived
optimal timing rules for irreversible investments and demonstrated that firms should defer
projects when uncertainty is relatively high. These concepts have taken a prominent role in
industrial organization and the macroeconomic modeling of aggregate investment. However,
there has been a shortage of empirical evidence regarding the extent to which firms actually take
option value into account when making irreversible investments.
This paper tests the sensitivity of firms’ investment decisions to changes in the
uncertainty of their economic environment by assembling a new, detailed dataset that combines
information on well-level oil drilling with expected oil price volatility data from the NYMEX
market. I develop and estimate a dynamic model of firms’ drilling investment timing problem,
taking advantage of industry features that make a single-agent approach appropriate. I find not
only that firms reduce their drilling activity when expected volatility rises but also that the
magnitude of this reduction is consistent with the optimal response prescribed by theory. This
result provides micro-empirical support for the frequent use of real options models in economic
research. It is also consistent with the existence of a strong incentive for firms to behave
optimally. I find that the cost of failing to respond to changes in volatility can be substantial,
potentially exceeding 50% of a drilling prospect’s value at in-sample oil price and volatility
realizations.

35

I also show that a forward-looking measure of expected price volatility derived from
futures options is a more powerful determinant of drilling behavior than are backward-looking
measures based on historic volatility. The relative strength of the implied volatility measure is
consistent with the hypothesis that participants in the NYMEX commodity market and physical
industry participants share common beliefs about future price uncertainty. This result thereby
provides support for the use of data from financial markets as measures of firms’ expectations in
applied work. It is also well-aligned with other research regarding the predictive power of
option-based implied volatility and supports the intuition that options prices incorporate up-todate information about uncertainty shocks that cannot be conveyed by price histories alone.

References
Alexopoulos, Michelle and Jon Cohen, “Uncertain Times, Uncertain Measures,” University of
Toronto working paper 352 (2009).
Alquist, Ron and Lutz Kilian, “What Do We Learn from the Price of Crude Oil Futures?”
Journal of Applied Econometrics 25 (June, 2010), 539-573.
Arrow, Kenneth J., “Optimal Capital Policy with Irreversible Investment,” in Value, Capital and
Growth, Essays in Honor of Sir John Hicks, ed. James N. Wolfe. Edinburgh, Scotland:
Edinburgh University Press (1968).
Arrow, Kenneth J. and Anthony C. Fisher, “Environmental Preservation, Uncertainty, and
Irreversibility,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 88 (May, 1974), 312-319.
Aguerrevere, Felipe L., “Equilibrium Investment Strategies and Output Price Behavior: A RealOptions Approach,” Review of Financial Studies 16 (Winter, 2003), 1239-1272.
Bachmann, Ruediger, Steffen Elstner, and Eric R. Sims, “Uncertainty and Economic Activity:
Evidence from Business Survey Data,” NBER working paper #16143 (2010).
Bernanke, Ben S., “Irreversibility, Uncertainty, and Cyclical Investment,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 98 (February, 1983), 85-106.

36

Black, Fischer, “The Pricing of Commodity Contracts,” Journal of Financial Economics 3
(1976), 167-179.
Black, Fischer and Myron Scholes, “The Pricing of Options and Corporate Liabilities,” Journal
of Political Economy 81 (May-June, 1973), 637-654.
Bloom, Nicholas, “The Impact of Uncertainty Shocks,” Econometrica 77 (May, 2009), 623-685.
Bloom, Nicholas, Stephen Bond, and John Van Reenen, “Uncertainty and Investment
Dynamics,” Review of Economic Studies 74 (2007), 391-415.
Bloom, Nicholas, Max Floetotto, and Nir Jaimovich, “Really Uncertain Business Cycles,”
mimeo (2009).
Chernenko, Sergey V., Krista B. Schwarz, and Jonathan H. Wright, “The Information Content of
Forward and Futures Prices: Market Expectations and the Price of Risk,” Federal Reserve
Board of Governors International Finance Discussion Paper 808 (2004).
Collard-Wexler, Allan, “Demand Fluctuations in the Ready-Mix Concrete Industry,” mimeo
(2008).
Dixit, Avinash K., “Entry and Exit Decisions Under Uncertainty,” Journal of Political Economy
97 (June, 1989), 620-638.
Dixit, Avinash K. and Robert S. Pindyck, Investment Under Uncertainty, Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press (1994).
Dunne, Timothy and Xiaoyi Mu, “Investment Spikes and Uncertainty in the Petroleum Refining
Industry,” Journal of Industrial Economics 58 (March, 2010), 190-213.
Ericson, Richard and Ariel Pakes, “Markov-Perfect Industry Dynamics: A Framework for
Empirical Work,” Review of Economic Studies 62 (1995), 5-82.
Fernández-Villaverde, Jesús, Pablo Guerrón-Quintana, Juan F. Rubio-Ramírez, and Martín
Uribe, “Risk Matters: The Real Effects of Volatility Shocks,” NBER working paper
#14875 (2009).
Grenadier, Steven R., “Option Exercise Games: An Application to the Equilibrium Investment
Strategies of Firms,” Review of Financial Studies 15 (Summer, 2002), 691-721.

37

Guiso, Luigi and Giuseppe Parigi, “Investment and Demand Uncertainty,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 114 (February, 1999), 185-227.
Hassler, John A. A., “Variations in Risk and Fluctuations in Demand – a Theoretical Model,”
Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 20 (1996), 1115-1143.
Hassler, John A. A., “Uncertainty and the Timing of Automobile Purchases,” Scandanavian
Journal of Economics 103 (June, 2001), 351-366.
Hilliard, Jimmy E. and Jorge Reis, “Valuation of Commodity Futures and Options Under
Stochastic Convenience Yields, Interest Rates, and Jump Diffusions in the Spot,” Journal
of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 33 (March, 1998), 61-86.
Hull, John and Alan White, “The Pricing of Options on Assets with Stochastic Volatilities,”
Journal of Finance 42 (June, 1987), 281-300.
Hurn, A.S. and Robert E. Wright, “Geology or Economics? Testing Models of Irreversible
Investment Using North Sea Oil Data,” Economic Journal 104 (March, 1994), 363-371.
Kellogg, Ryan, “Learning by Drilling: Inter-Firm Learning and Relationship Persistence in the
Texas Oilpatch,” NBER working paper #15060 (2009).
Kilian, Lutz, “Not All Oil Price Shocks are Alike: Disentangling Demand and Supply Shocks in
the Crude Oil Market,” American Economic Review 99 (June, 2009), 1053-1069.
Leahy, John V. and Toni M. Whited, “The Effects of Uncertainty on Investment: Some Stylized
Facts,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 28 (February, 1996), 64-83.
Levitt, Clinton J., “Learning Through Oil and Gas Exploration,” mimeo (2009).
List, John A. and Michael S. Haigh, “Investment Under Uncertainty: Testing the Options Model
with Professional Traders,” NBER working paper #16038 (2010).
Marschak, Jacob, “Role of Liquidity Under Complete and Incomplete Information,” American
Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 39 (May, 1949), 182-195.
Moel, Alberto and Peter Tufano, “When Are Real Options Exercised? An Empirical Study of
Mine Closings,” Review of Financial Studies 15 (Spring, 2002), 35-64.

38

Paddock, James L., Daniel R. Siegel, and James L. Smith, “Option Valuation of Claims on Real
Assets: the Case of Offshore Petroleum Leases.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 103
(August, 1988), 479-508.
Pakes, Ariel, “Patents as Options: Some Estimates of the Value of Holding European Patent
Stocks,” Econometrica 54 (July, 1986), 755-784.
Petroleum Services Association of Canada, “PSAC Well Cost Study,” (summers 2000 through
2004).
Pindyck, Robert S. “Irreversibility, Uncertainty, and Investment,” Journal of Economic
Literature 24 (September, 1991), 1110-1148.
Pindyck, Robert S. “Volatility and Commodity Price Dynamics,” Journal of Futures Markets 24
(2004), 1029-1047.
Poon, Ser-Huang and Clive W. J. Granger, “Forecasting Volatility in Financial Markets: A
Review,” Journal of Economic Literature 41 (June, 2003), 478-539.
Rust, John, “Optimal Replacement of GMC Bus Engines; An Empirical Model of Harold
Zurcher,” Econometrica 55 (September, 1987), 999-1033.
Society of Petroleum Evaluation Engineers (SPEE), “Survey of Economic Parameters Used in
Property Evaluations,” (1995).
Szakmary, Andrew, Evren Ors, Jin Kyoung Kim, and Wallace N. Davidson III, “The Predictive
Power of Implied Volatility: Evidence from 35 Futures Markets,” Journal of Banking and
Finance 27 (2003), 2151-2175.
Wiggins, James B., “Option Values Under Stochastic Volatility,” Journal of Financial
Economics 19 (1987), 351-372.
Wiggins, Steven N. and Gary D. Libecap, “Oil Field Unitization: Contractual Failure in the
Presence of Imperfect Information,” American Economic Review 75 (June, 1985), 368385.
Wooldridge, Jeffrey M., Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data, Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press (2002).

39

Figure 1: Time series of monthly drilling activity, oil futures prices, and implied volatility
from futures options prices

20

# of wells drilled per month

18
16

Implied volatility

35

Futures price

30
14
12

25

10

20

8

15

6
10
4
2
0
Jan-93

5

Drilling activity

Futures Price (real 2003 US $) and
Implied Volatility (%)

40

0
Jan-95

Jan-97

Jan-99

Jan-01

Jan-03

Notes: Oil futures prices are 18-month ahead prices from the New York Mercantile Exchange
(NYMEX). Implied volatility is calculated from futures options prices per the discussion
in section 2.4. Drilling activity corresponds only to infill oil wells drilled in sole-operated
fields.

40

Figure 2: Average monthly production profile from a drilled well

Monthly production
(percent of 3-year total)

8%
7%
6%
5%
4%
3%
2%
1%
0%
0

6

12

18

24

30

36

Months following completion of drilling
Notes: Production data are from the subset of observed drilled wells that are the only active
producing well on their respective lease for the first 36 months subsequent to drilling.
This subset amounts to 162 of the observed 1,150 drilled wells from 1993-2003.

Figure 3: NYMEX front-month, 12 month, and 18 month oil futures prices

Oil Futures Price (real 203 US$/bbl)

40
35

Front month

12 month

30
25
20
15

18 month

10
5
0
Jan-93

Jan-95

Jan-97

Jan-99

41

Jan-01

Jan-03

Figure 4a: Comparison of implied volatility to the historic volatility of the future price,
calculated with one month and one year rolling windows
50
45

Historic volatility,
one year

Historic volatility,
one month

Implied volatility

40
Volatility (%)

35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
Jan-93

Jan-95

Jan-97

Jan-99

Jan-01

Jan-03

Figure 4b: Comparison of implied volatility to a GARCH(1,1) forecast
40

Implied volatility

35

Volatility (%)

30
25
20
15
10

GARCH volatility
5
0
Jan-93

Jan-95

Jan-97

Jan-99

Jan-01

Jan-03

Notes: Implied volatility is calculated from futures options prices per the discussion in section
2.4. Historic volatility at any point in time is the standard deviation of the return on the
18-month futures price within a one month or one year rolling window. The
GARCH(1,1) model is estimated at each date using a 4-year rolling window of 18-month
futures prices.

42

Figure 5: Drilling costs and oil futures prices

600
Drilling cost

50

500

40

400

30

300

20

200

10
0
Jan-93

100

Oil price

Drilling cost (real 2003 US $1000)

Oil futures price (2003 US $/bbl )

60

0
Jan-95

Jan-97

Jan-99

Jan-01

Jan-03

Notes: Oil futures prices are 18-month ahead prices from the New York Mercantile Exchange
(NYMEX). Drilling costs are those for an average well that requires 19.2 days of drilling
time. These costs are based on daily rig rental rates obtained from RigData, as discussed
in section 2.5.

43

Figure 6: Illustration of the impact of the expected oil price and price volatility on the
“trigger” expected production required so that drilling is optimal

Expected production (bbls) needed to
trigger drilling

120000

Implied price volatility = 10%
100000

Implied price volatility = 30%
80000
60000
40000
20000
0
0

10

20
30
40
Expected price of oil, $/bbl

50

60

Notes: The relationships shown are for a well of average cost facing an average dayrate, so that
the drilling cost is $413,000. The model used to generate these curves uses the state
transition parameters estimated in section 5.1 of the text.

44

Figure 7: Predicted drilling from the estimated model vs. actual drilling
20

# of wells drilled per month

18

Predicted drilling, with
volatility response

Actual drilling
Predicted drilling, no
volatility response

16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
Jan-93

Jan-95

Jan-97

Jan-99

Jan-01

Jan-03

Notes: Predicted drilling with no volatility response refers to the time series of predicted drilling
activity from the model with the parameters of table 2, column I, in which the behavioral
parameter β is restricted to zero. Predicted drilling with a volatility response refers to
table 2, column II, in which β is estimated to be 1.039.

45

Figure 8: Scatter plot of realized oil production from drilled wells, relative to the number
of days required to drill each well

Log of production (barrels of oil) over first
three years of well's life, minus log of
drilling time in days

12
10
8
6
4
2
0
Jan-93

Jan-95

Jan-97

Jan-99

Jan-01

Jan-03

Notes: Production data are from the subset of observed drilled wells that are the only active
producing well on their respective lease for the first 36 months subsequent to drilling.
This subset amounts to 162 of the observed 1,150 drilled wells from 1993-2003. Dry
holes (wells with zero production) are plotted as having a log(production/drilling time) of
zero

46

Table 1: Hazard model results for the probability of drilling

Coefficient on covariate:

I
Basic
exponential
hazard
***

Oil futures price ($/bbl)
Implied volatility of future price (%)
Drilling Cost ($100,000)
Linear time trend (in years)
Dummy for date ≥ July 1998
Unobserved heterogeneity (gamma
distribution)
Log likelihood

1.041
(0.016)
***
0.969
(0.008)
-

II

III
IV
V
Prospect- Drilling cost Drilling cost
Include
specific
and time
and July
drilling cost heterogeneity
trend
1998 dummy
***

1.053
(0.023)
***
0.973
(0.009)
0.842
(0.163)
-

***

1.041
(0.016)
***
0.969
(0.008)
-

***

1.053
(0.023)
***
0.964
(0.013)
0.804
(0.159)
1.020
(0.021)
-

***

1.056
(0.024)
1.005
(0.013)
0.949
(0.189)
***
0.654
(0.094)

N

N

Y

N

N

-3979.0

-3978.5

-3979.0

-3978.0

-3972.0

Reported coefficients are hazard ratios: the multiplicative effect on the hazard rate of a one unit increase in the covariate
All estimates use prices of futures and options that are 18 months from maturity
Standard errors are estimated using a sandwich estimator that allows for correlation of the likelihood scores across wells within the same field
*,**,*** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level for a two-tailed test that the coefficient is different from one
All covariates are lagged by three months

47

48

1.039
(0.064)
-9.675
(6.666)
6.176
(2.224)
-8670.8

-0.653
(2.668)
3.094
(0.884)
-8681.1

μ (mean of log(xit ))

ζ (std. dev. of log(xit ))

μ1 (mean of log(φi))

ζ1 (std. dev. of log(φi))

ζ2 (std. dev. of log(νit ))

Time trend (years)

Dummy for date ≥ July
1998

III

-8670.8

-

-

6.177
(2.292)

0.166
(12.805)

-9.681
(7.177)

-

-

1.039
(0.066)

-8670.7

-

-0.009
(0.034)

-

-

-

6.511
(2.667)

-10.640
(7.915)

1.042
(0.069)

Time trend

IV

VI

VII

-8668.5

-0.454
(0.438)

-

-

-

-

9.051
(4.176)

-18.173
(12.432)

1.060
(0.040)

-8670.7

-0.359
(0.200)

-

-

-

-

4.145
(1.624)

-3.686
(4.838)

-

-8668.7

-0.292
(0.182)

-

-

-

-

4.144
(1.519)

-3.656
(4.518)

0.416
(0.289)

July 1998 step, July 1998 step,
July 1998 step Beta restricted alternative local
change
to zero
maximum

V

xit, φi, and ν i are expressed in expected oil production (in bbl) divided by the cost of drilling (in $100,000) at the average sample dayrate
Standard errors are estimated using a sandwich estimator that allows for correlation of the likelihood scores across wells within the same field

All estimates use prices of futures and options that are 18 months from maturity

Log likelihood

β (sensitivity to volatility)

-

Parameter:

II

Beta restricted Reference case Heterogeneous
to zero
model
prospects

I

Table 2: Results from estimation of dynamic model

Table 3: Employment of petroleum engineers
in Texas
Year
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002

Employment
4600
5280
4670
4830
5470
5110

Year
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008

Employment
5670
7240
7610
7000
8240
10640

Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics, occupation code 19-4041
for 1999-2008 and 22111 for 1997 and 1998

Table 4: Alternative specifications of volatility beliefs and decision time horizons
I

Parameter:

II

III

IV

V

VI

Historic volatility
Front month
12-month futures
of futures prices,
futures and
and implied
12 month
Mean-reverting
implied volatility
volatility
window
GARCH volatility
volatility

Reference case
model (table 2,
column II)

β (sensitivity to volatility)

1.039
(0.064)

0.288
(0.304)

0.551
(0.258)

1.304
(0.143)

1.044
(0.109)

1.226
(0.549)

μ (mean of log(xit ))

-9.675
(6.666)

-0.995
(2.828)

-2.068
(3.269)

-8.389
(5.426)

-10.737
(6.524)

-3.736
(4.100)

ζ (std. dev. of log(xit ))

6.176
(2.224)

3.214
(0.939)

3.603
(1.092)

5.768
(1.809)

6.511
(2.174)

4.224
(1.361)

Log likelihood

-8670.8

-8680.2

-8677.3

-8671.2

-8670.6

-8671.2

xit is expressed in expected oil production (in bbl) divided by the cost of drilling (in $100,000) at the average sample dayrate
Standard errors are estimated using a sandwich estimator that allows for correlation of the likelihood scores across wells within the same field

Table 5: Alternative specifications: discount rates and drilling costs
I

Parameter:

II

III

Reference case
model (table 2, 14.5% nominal
column II)
discount rate

IV

V

Rig costs average Rig costs average
10.5% nominal
20% of total
50% of total
discount rate
drilling cost
drilling cost

β (sensitivity to volatility)

1.039
(0.064)

1.149
(0.051)

0.890
(0.094)

1.046
(0.056)

1.044
(0.055)

μ (mean of log(xit ))

-9.675
(6.666)

-10.522
(6.756)

-9.011
(6.497)

-10.410
(6.707)

-10.449
(6.410)

ζ (std. dev. of log(xit ))

6.176
(2.224)

6.451
(2.251)

5.960
(2.171)

6.418
(2.235)

6.442
(2.136)

Log likelihood

-8670.8

-8671.2

-8670.8

-8671.4

-8670.9

All estimates use prices of futures and options that are 18 months from maturity
xit is expressed in expected oil production (in bbl) divided by the cost of drilling (in $100,000) at the average sample dayrate
Standard errors are estimated using a sandwich estimator that allows for correlation of the likelihood scores across wells within the same field

49

Appendix 1: Construction of the time series of implied futures price volatility
This appendix describes how I construct a time series of the implied volatility of the 18month NYMEX oil futures contract. First, I discuss the estimation of the term structure of the
volatility of oil futures. Second, I discuss how I use futures options to construct a time series of
the implied volatility of the one-month oil futures contract. Finally, I discuss the use of the
estimated term structure in converting this time series from one-month to 18-month volatilities.
Let Ft,τ denote the price of a NYMEX futures contract traded at date t with time to
maturity τ measured in months.28 For each t and τ, I calculate the realized volatility at t of the τmonth futures contract as the standard deviation of ln(Fs,τ / Fs-1,τ) for all dates s within the 6
months prior and subsequent to t.29 Let this volatility be denoted by σt,τ. I then estimate the term
structure of futures price volatility by regressing the log of σt,τ on fixed effects for each τ and t:30
ln σt,τ = ητ + δt + ετ,t

(A1)

The fixed effects ητ represent the estimated term structure while the δt control for the
level of volatility on each date t. Given estimates of these fixed effects, the predicted volatility of
a τ-month futures price is given by A·exp(ητ), where A = exp(δt + v2 / 2) and v2 is the variance of
the estimated residuals. Thus, for a fixed trade date t, varying τ will trace out the term structure
of volatility. Figure A1 verifies that the term structure of volatility is stable over the sample by
plotting two estimates of the term structure: one using data from 1999-2003 and another using
data prior to 1999. The constant term A for each estimate is set so that the one-month future price
volatility is 31%, approximately equal to the average one-month volatility over 1993-2003. The
plots overlay each other closely, particularly through 18 months, indicating that the term

28

Time to maturity in months is equal to the time to maturity in days divided by 365.25, multiplied by 12, and
rounded to the nearest whole number.
29
Observations Fs,τ for which date s - 1 is missing (for example, if s - 1 is a Sunday) are excluded.
30
I use the log of σt,τ as the dependent variable rather than the level because the levels regression does not yield an
estimated term structure that is stable over time. In levels, the term structure is has a steeper slope during 1999-2003
than in the earlier part of the data.

50

structure of volatility is stable over the sample despite the substantial increase in the overall level
of volatility after 1999.
Given the estimated term structure (the ητ), all that is needed to compute expected 18month futures price volatilities is a time-series of short-run (one month) expected futures price
volatilities. I derive this time series from the implied volatility of short-term futures options with
a time to maturity between 60 and 180 days. The implied volatility of options with a shorter time
to maturity are noisy, potentially reflecting low option values and integer problems (options
prices must be in whole cents), while options with a longer time to maturity are thinly traded.
For each trade date and time to maturity within the 60 to 180 day window, I use the Black
(1976) model to find the implied volatilities of the call and put options that are nearest to at-themoney.31 I then estimate the implied volatility term structure by regressing the log of each
option’s implied volatility on its time to maturity τ (in days), a call/put dummy, and trade date
fixed effects δt.32 I then use this estimated term structure (the estimated coefficient on τ) to
extrapolate implied volatility back to a 30 day maturity.
As a validation check on the this procedure, I compare the average, over 1993-2003, of
the estimated implied volatilities of 30-day futures options to the average realized volatility of
one-month futures prices over the same timeframe. These two averages should be approximately
equal given the short one month time to maturity. The former series has an average volatility of
30.74% while the average of the latter is 31.07%. The closeness of these two numbers (derived
from two completely different data sets) supports the argument that implied volatilities from onemonth futures options can be used as implied volatilities of one-month futures prices.
31

The Black (1976) model assumes that the options are European rather than American and that volatility is
constant. Neither of these assumptions holds here; however, their effects are likely to be minor and they save
considerable computational complexity. Hilliard and Reis (1998) demonstrate that the American premium is no
more than 2% of the European option price for volatilities similar to those considered here. Stochastic volatility acts
in the opposite direction, causing the Black (1976) model to slightly over-price at-the-money options (this effect is
particularly small for the relatively short maturities considered here); see Hull and White (1987), Wiggins (1987),
and Poon and Granger (2003). The argument that these assumptions are of minor effect is supported by the close
agreement between the average realized and average implied volatility over the 1993-2003 sample.
32
Inspection of the residuals indicates that a linear term structure specification is appropriate. Moreover, when a
squared time to maturity term is added, it is not statistically significant (p-value = 0.465).

51

Finally, I convert the time series of implied volatilities of one-month futures prices to
implied volatilities of 18-month futures prices using the estimated term structure of futures price
volatility (the ητ). This conversion amounts to multiplying the one-month volatility at each trade
date t by exp(η18 - η1).

Figure A1: Estimated term structures of futures price volatility

Volatility (%, annual)

35
30

pre-1999

25
20
1999 - 2003

15
10
5
0
0

3

6
9
12
Time to maturity in months

15

18

Notes: The figure displays two term structures, one estimated using data from before 1999, the
other using data from 1999-2003. Volatility of a one-month future is set to 31.0% for
both term structures.

52

Appendix 2: Numerical solution and estimation methods
A2.1 Value function iteration
I solve the value function (11) on a grid of points in (P,D,σ,x) space (in logs) using
standard value function iteration. An important factor in defining the grid is that, while the price,
dayrate, and volatility states that are realized in the data are bounded, the stochastic processes for
these variables (equations 3, 4 and 9) imply that agents place nonzero probabilities on
realizations outside of these bounds. Thus, the value function must be solved for states extending
beyond the boundaries of the data. The state space I use extends from one-fifth of the lowest
realized price and dayrate to five times the highest price and dayrate, and from one-half the
lowest realized volatility to twice the highest volatility. With this state space, further extensions
do not substantially affect the estimated parameters or the value function within the range of
realized observations.
I found that a relatively dense grid was required to accurately capture the effects of
stochastic volatility. The grid I used has 1,875,000 points: 50 price states by 50 dayrate states by
15 volatility states by 50 productivity states. Starting from this density, the estimated results are
insensitive to variations in the number of grid points. For example, increasing the number of
price and dayrate states to 55 does not change any estimated parameter by more than 2%.
Sensitivity is substantial, however, at sparser state spaces.
In the full estimation routine, the initial value function used for each guess of parameters
is the value function from the previous guess. For the first parameter guess, the initial value
function is zero in all states. The convergence criterion is a tolerance of 10-6 on the sup norm of
the value function (the value function used in the computations is in units of $412,585, the
average drilling cost at the average dayrate). Increasing the tolerance to 10-7 has essentially no
affect on the parameter estimates or value function.
With the value function solved, I can then find, for any given P, D, and σ, the critical
productivity x* such that drilling is optimal iff xi ≥ x*. Because the P, D, and σ realizations do

53

not coincide with the grid states used in the model, I use linear interpolation to find x*. At each xi
grid point, I calculate the value function at the realized P, D, and σ by linearly interpolating the
value function between the states immediately above and below the P, D, and σ. I then find the
smallest xi grid point such that the value of waiting exceeds the realized profits from drilling
immediately and the largest xi such that it is optimal to drill immediately (these two values of xi
will be adjacent grid points). Interpolation gives x* as the productivity level for which the firm is
indifferent: the value of waiting equals the value of drilling immediately. As described in the
text, the realized time series of P, D, and σ can then be combined with a parameterized
distribution on the xit to yield the probability that a given prospect will be drilled each period.

A2.2 Estimation
I search for the parameters β, μ, and log ζ that maximize the log-likelihood function (12)
via a gradient-based search that uses the BFGS method for computing the Hessian at each step (I
take the logarithm of ζ to allow for negative values in the parameter search). I accelerate the
search by conducting it in two stages. First, holding β fixed, I search for the μ and log ζ that
maximize the likelihood. This stage is fast because changing μ and ζ does not require re-solving
the model. The outer-most loop then searches for β. The stopping criterion is a tolerance on the
likelihood function (scaled down by a factor of 10,000) of 10-10 for the μ and ζ loop and 10-8 for
the β loop.
To compute the standard errors of the parameter estimates, I obtain the likelihood score
of each observation (drilling prospect - month) numerically. With respect to each parameter θk, I
l (θ  ε )  l j (θk  εk )
. For the
calculate the derivative of the log likelihood for observation j as j k k
2 εk
parameters β and μ, I use a value for εk of 0.001, and for log ζ I use a value of 0.0001 because the
likelihood function is particularly concave in this parameter. The standard errors are robust to
values of εk that are an order of magnitude larger or smaller.

54

