                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     AN EMPIRICAL ANALYSIS OF THE SWAPTION CUBE

                                            Anders B. Trolle
                                           Eduardo S. Schwartz

                                           Working Paper 16549
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w16549


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      November 2010




This paper subsumes parts of the paper “The price of interest rate variance risk and optimal investments
in interest rate derivatives” by the first author. We are grateful to Michael Brennan for extensive discussions,
Peter Honoré and Kasper Lorenzen for valuable insights into the swaption market, and Pierre Collin-Dufresne,
Peter Feldhutter, Damir Filipovic, Eric Ghysels, Julien Hugonier, Markus Leippold, Loriano Mancini,
Pedro Santa-Clara, Olivier Scalliet, and seminar participants at the 2010 FINRISK meeting and University
of Zurich for comments. Trolle gratefully acknowledges research support from NCCR FINRISK of
the Swiss National Science Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Anders B. Trolle and Eduardo S. Schwartz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
An Empirical Analysis of the Swaption Cube
Anders B. Trolle and Eduardo S. Schwartz
NBER Working Paper No. 16549
November 2010
JEL No. E43,G13

                                                 ABSTRACT

We use a comprehensive database of inter-dealer quotes to conduct the first empirical analysis of the
dynamics of the swaption cube. Using a model independent approach, we establish a set of stylized
facts regarding the cross-sectional and time-series variation of conditional volatility and skewness
of the swap rate distributions implied by the swaption cube. We then develop and estimate a dynamic
term structure model that is consistent with these stylized facts, and use it to infer volatility and skewness
of the risk-neutral and physical swap rate distributions. Finally, we investigate the fundamental drivers
of these distributions. In particular, we find that volatility, volatility risk premia, skewness, and skewness
risk premia are significantly related to the characteristics of agents’ belief distributions for the macroeconomy,
with GDP beliefs the most important factor in the USD market, and inflation beliefs the most important
factor in the EUR market. This is consistent with differences in monetary policy objectives in the two
markets.


Anders B. Trolle
Swiss Finance Institute
Quartier UNIL-Dorigny
Extranef 216
CH-1015 Lausanne
Switzerland
anders.trolle@epfl.ch

Eduardo S. Schwartz
Anderson Graduate School of Management
UCLA
110 Westwood Plaza
Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER
eduardo.schwartz@anderson.ucla.edu
1        Introduction

In this paper, we conduct an extensive empirical analysis of the market for interest rate
swaptions – options to enter into interest rate swaps – using a novel data set. Understanding
the pricing of swaptions is important for several reasons. By some measures (such as the
notional amount of outstanding contracts) the swaption market is the world’s largest options
market. Furthermore, many standard fixed income securities, such as fixed rate mortgage-
backed securities and callable agency securities, imbed swaption-like options, and swaptions
are used to hedge and risk-manage these securities in addition to many exotic interest rate
derivatives and structured products. Moreover, many large corporations are active in the
swaption market either directly or indirectly (through the issuance and swapping of callable
debt) and a better understanding of the pricing of swaptions may, therefore, have implications
for corporate finance decisions.1
        The importance of the swaption market has spurred a number of empirical studies over the
past decade.2 Our paper differs from these in two important ways. First, all existing studies
are limited to only using data on at-the-money (ATM) swaptions. In contrast, we analyze a
proprietary data set with extensive information about non-ATM swaptions, which sheds new
light on the swaption market. Second, existing studies are mostly concerned with the pricing
and hedging of swaptions using reduced-form models. Although we also utilize a reduced-form
dynamic term structure model, a key objective of the paper is to understand the fundamental
drivers of prices and risk premia in the swaption market.
        The paper takes advantage of a unique data set from the largest inter-dealer broker in
the interest rate derivatives market, which records prices of swaptions along three dimensions:
the maturities of the underlying swaps (the swap tenors), the expiries of the options, and the
option strikes. This three-dimensional grid of prices is known, among market participants,
as the swaption cube. The range along all three dimensions is wide with swap tenors from 2
years to 30 years, option expiries from 1 month to 10 years, and strike intervals up to 800 basis
points. The data covers more than eight years from 2001 to 2010, and spans two recessions and
    1
        A 2009 survey by the International Swaps and Derivatives Association found that 88.3 percent of the
Fortune Global 500 companies use interest rate derivatives, such as swaps and swaptions, to manage interest
rate risk.
    2
        See Longstaff, Santa-Clara, and Schwartz (2001a), Longstaff, Santa-Clara, and Schwartz (2001b), Driessen,
Klaassen, and Melenberg (2003), Fan, Gupta, and Ritchken (2003), de Jong, Driessen, and Pelsser (2004),
Han (2007), Joslin (2007), Duarte (2008), Trolle and Schwartz (2009), and Carr, Garbaix, and Wu (2009).


                                                         1
the financial crisis. Moreover, the data contains both USD and EUR denominated swaptions –
by far the most liquid currencies – allowing us to ascertain the robustness of our results across
different markets.
       We first analyze the swaption cube from a model independent perspective. For a given swap
maturity and option expiry, we compute conditional moments (under the appropriate pricing
measure3 ) of the swap rate distribution at a time horizon equal to the option expiry. This is
done by suitably integrating over swaptions with different strikes. For instance, suppose we
consider the 1-year option on the 10-year swap, the cross-section of swaption prices (in terms
of strikes) gives us conditional moments of the 10-year swap rate distribution in 1-year’s time.
Since we observe options with a wide range of expiries, for each swap maturity we obtain a
term structure of conditional moments of the swap rate.
       We investigate how conditional moments vary with option expiry, swap maturity, and
across time. Results regarding conditional volatility are largely consistent with existing studies
using ATM implied swaption volatilities – although we here compute conditional volatility by
taking the entire implied volatility smile into account. It is for the higher-order moments
that we obtain a series of new stylized facts regarding the cross-sectional and time-series
variation. Conditional skewness is mostly positive on average. At a given option expiry,
conditional skewness, on average, decreases with swap maturity, and is negative in some cases.
For a given swap maturity, conditional skewness, on average, increases with option expiry.
Furthermore, conditional skewness exhibits significant variation over time to the extent that
the sign of conditional skewness sometimes changes. However, changes in conditional skewness
are largely unrelated to changes in swap rates, and show strong common variation across swap
maturities and option expiries, strongly indicating that skewness risk, like volatility risk, is
largely orthogonal to the term structure. Conditional swap rate distributions always have
fat tails. However, conditional kurtosis exhibits less systematic variation than is the case for
conditional skewness. For this reason, we mainly focus on conditional volatility and skewness
in the paper.
       Motivated by the model-independent analysis, we develop a dynamic model of the term
structure of swap rates. The model features two volatility factors, which may be partially
spanned by the term structure, and swaptions can be priced with a fast and accurate Fourier-
based pricing formula. By specifying shocks to the term structure judiciously (a specification
   3
       In the case of swaptions, the appropriate pricing measure is not the risk-neutral measure, but rather the
annuity measure, see the discussion in Section 3.


                                                        2
that encompasses “level”, “slope”, and “curvature” shocks), the model reduces to a particular
case of an affine term structure model.4 The model is estimated by maximum-likelihood on
a panel data set, which includes all the swaptions and underlying swap rates in the swaption
cubes. We show that a parsimonious specification with three term structure factors and two
volatility factors, which only differ from each other in their correlations with the term structure
factors, is able to capture the cross-sectional and time-series variation in conditional volatility
and skewness of the swap rate distributions under the pricing measure.
       The main purpose of imposing a dynamic term structure model is to infer the conditional
swap rate distributions under the risk-neutral measure as well as the physical measure. This
allows us to study the pricing of risk in the swaption market. We show that the risk-neutral
swap rate distributions on average exhibit higher volatility and are more skewed towards higher
rates than the swap rate distributions under the physical measure.
       Ultimately, we are interested in understanding the fundamental drivers of the conditional
swap rate distributions – in particular the effects of macro-economic uncertainty. To quantify
macro-economic uncertainty, we infer agents’ perceived probability distributions (which we call
agents’ belief distributions) for 1-year ahead real GDP growth and inflation from the survey of
professional forecasters conducted in both the US and the Eurozone.5 We then regress volatility
and skewness of the physical swap rate distributions as well as volatility risk premia (defined as
the differences between physical and risk-neutral volatility) and skewness risk premia (defined
as the differences between physical and risk-neutral skewness) on the dispersion and skewness of
agents’ belief distributions for future real GDP growth and inflation. We also control for other
factors that may have an effect on swap rate distributions, including volatility and skewness
   4
       In addition to facilitating estimation, the affine representation also facilitates pricing of complex interest
rate derivatives by simulation. A large class of popular derivatives known as callable LIBOR exotics (including
Bermudan swaptions, callable capped floaters, callable range accruals, and target redemption notes) are priced
by simulation, often using the LSM scheme of Longstaff and Schwartz (2001) to address early-exercise features.
In the work-horse model in the financial industry, the LIBOR market model, simulation is time-consuming
since each forward LIBOR rate must be simulated by itself. To price a typical 30-year structure in the USD
market, 120 forward LIBOR rates (with complicated drift conditions) must be simulated. In contrast, the
models considered in this paper have a limited set of state variables (with simple affine dynamics) making it
much faster to obtain prices and hedge-ratios.
   5
       Our focus on expectations about future growth and inflation, as opposed to their current values, is consistent
with an influential paper by Clarida, Gali, and Gertler (2000), which finds that the Federal Reserve adjusts
monetary policy in response to deviations in expected output and inflation from their respective target levels
(i.e. it follows a so-called forward-looking Taylor rule).


                                                           3
of the equity index return distribution, market-wide liquidity, and refinancing activity.6
       In the USD market, we find that dispersion of agents’ belief distribution for future real
GDP growth has a significantly positive effect on volatility of the physical swap rate distri-
butions, and a significantly negative impact on volatility risk premia. This is consistent with
equilibrium models, primarily developed for equity derivatives, in which an increase in uncer-
tainty and/or disagreement among agents about fundamentals increases both risk-neutral and
physical volatility as well as the wedge between the two.7 Furthermore, skewness of agents’
GDP beliefs has a significantly positive effect on skewness of the physical swap rate distribu-
tions. Interestingly, the swap rate distributions are less related to the characteristics of agents’
inflation beliefs.
       In contrast, in the EUR market, the swap rate distributions are more related to the charac-
teristics of agents’ belief distribution for future inflation than for future real GDP growth. For
instance, dispersion of agents’ inflation beliefs has a significantly positive effect on volatility
of the physical swap rate distributions, and a significantly negative impact on volatility risk
premia. Furthermore, skewness of agents’ inflation beliefs has a significantly positive effect
on skewness of the physical swap rate distributions, and a significantly negative impact on
skewness risk premia – the latter possibly reflecting agents’ dislike for high inflation states.
One likely reason for these differences between the two markets is that the primary policy goal
of the European Central Bank is to maintain price stability, whereas the Federal Reserve has a
dual mandate of maximum employment and price stability, leading it to place relatively more
emphasis on expectations for real GDP growth, when settings interest rates.
       We also find that various dimensions of the swap rate distributions are related to the char-
acteristics of the equity index return distribution as well as market-wide liquidity. Refinancing
activity appears to play a more modest role than previous papers have suggested, which may,
in part, be due to the Federal Reserve’s massive involvement in the MBS market in the latter
part of the sample period. Since it does not engage in convexity hedging, this reduces the
   6
       In an extensive study, Duarte (2008) finds that refinancing activity has an impact on the pricing of ATM
swaptions.
   7
       This is, for instance, the case in long run risk models, where agents have preferences for early resolution of
uncertainty, and macro-economic uncertainty is stochastic (see, e.g., Eraker and Shaliastovich (2008), Bollerslev,
Tauchen, and Zhou (2009), Bollerslev, Sizova, and Tauchen (2009), Drechsler and Yaron (2009), and Shalias-
tovich (2009)), in models where agents have incomplete information and face fundamentals subject to regime
switches (see, e.g., David and Veronesi (2002, 2009)), or in models where agents have incomplete information
and heterogeneous beliefs (see, e.g., Buraschi and Jiltsov (2006) and Buraschi, Trojani, and Vedolin (2009)).


                                                           4
effect of refinancing activity on the swaption market.
         The literature on interest rate derivatives is vast. A related set of papers analyze volatility
smiles in the market for interest rate caps/floors.8 That market is a subset of the swaption
market, since a cap is a basket of caplets, which are options on LIBOR rates of a particular
maturity. The swaption cube data set is much more extensive, since the underlying swaps
have a wide range of maturities.9 Compared to those studies that analyze ATM swaptions,
and those that analyze cap/floor volatility smiles, we establish a series of new stylized facts
about swap rate distributions, develop a dynamic term structure model that matches these
stylized facts, and, most importantly, provide a detailed analysis of the fundamental drivers
of the swap rate distributions.
         Our paper is also related to a growing literature linking the term structure of interest rates
to macro factors.10 This literature is mainly based on Gaussian models, and, consequently,
primarily concerns itself with the determinants of the conditional mean of interest rates. We
complement this literature by studying the determinants of the conditional volatility and
skewness of interest rates, which are critical for derivatives prices.
         The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the swaption cube data.
Section 3 uses a model independent approach to establish several stylized facts about the swap
rate distributions under the pricing measure. Section 4 describes and evaluates a dynamic
term structure model for swap rates and infers the the swap rate distributions under the risk-
neutral and physical measures. Section 5 investigates the economic determinants of the swap
rate distributions. Section 6 concludes, and two appendices contain additional information.


2         The swaption cube data

A standard European swaption is an option to enter into a fixed versus floating forward starting
interest rate swap at a predetermined rate on the fixed leg. A receiver swaption gives the right
     8
         See Gupta and Subrahmanyam (2005), Li and Zhao (2006), Jarrow, Li, and Zhao (2007), Deuskar, Gupta,
and Subrahmanyam (2008), Trolle and Schwartz (2009), Li and Zhao (2009), and Deuskar, Gupta, and Sub-
rahmanyam (2010).
     9
         One drawback of the cap/floor market is that caplet prices are not quoted directly. Instead, one needs to
strip caplet prices from quoted caps prices, which is a non-trivial exercise.
    10
         See, among others, Ang and Piazzesi (2003), Gallmeyer, Hollifield, and Zin (2005), Ang, Piazzesi, and
Wei (2006), Smith and Taylor (2009), Bekaert, Cho, and Moreno (2010), Bikbov and Chernov (2010),
Chun (2010), and Joslin, Priebsch, and Singleton (2010).



                                                          5
to enter a swap, receiving the fixed leg and paying the floating leg, while a payer swaption gives
the right to enter a swap, paying the fixed leg and receiving the floating leg.11 For instance,
a two-year into ten-year, five percent payer swaption is the option to pay a fixed rate of five
percent on a ten-year swap, starting two years from today.
       The swaption cube is an object that shows how swaption prices vary along three dimensions:
the maturities of the underlying swaps, the expiries of the options, and the option strikes. In
the swaption cube data provided to us, prices are quoted for 5 different swap maturities (2, 5,
10, 20, and 30 years), 8 different option expiries (1, 3, 6, 9 months and 1, 2, 5, and 10 years),
and up to 15 different strikes given by fixed distances to the forward swap rate (± 400, ± 300,
± 200, ± 150, ± 100, ± 50, ± 25, and 0 basis points).12 Hence, the swaption cube gives an
extremely detailed view of the swaption market.
       Swaptions trade over the counter (OTC) and often via inter-dealer brokers. These act
as intermediaries; they facilitate price discovery and transparency by communicating dealer
interests and transactions, enhance liquidity, and allow financial institutions anonymity in
terms of their trading activities. Our swaption cube data is from ICAP plc., which is the
largest inter-dealer broker in the interest rate derivatives market, and as such provides the
most accurate quotations.
       We consider swaptions denominated in both USD and EUR, which are by far the most
liquid markets.13 Although the data is available daily, we use weekly (Wednesday) data to
avoid potential weekday effects, and to ease the computational burden of the estimation. For
the USD market, the data is from December 19, 2001 to January 27, 2010 (419 weeks), while
for the EUR market, the data is from June 6, 2001 to January 27, 2010 (449 weeks). We
  11
       USD swaps exchange a fixed rate for a floating 3-month LIBOR rate, with fixed-leg payments made semi-
annually, and floating-leg payments made quarterly. EUR swaps exchange a fixed rate for a floating 6-month
EURIBOR rate, with fixed-leg payments made annually, and floating-leg payments made semi-annually. In
both currencies, the daycount convention is 30/360 on the fixed leg, and Actual/360 on the floating leg.
  12
       Prices are for out-of-the-money (OTM) swaptions, i.e. receiver swaptions, when the strike is less than the
forward swap rate, and payer swaptions, when the strike is higher than the forward swap rate.
  13
       To measure market concentration in each segment of the global OTC derivatives market, the Bank for
International Settlements (BIS) computes a Herfindahl index defined as the sum of the squares of the market
shares of each individual institution. The index ranges between 0 and 1, with its value increasing in market
concentration. For OTC interest rate options (for which swaptions constitute the largest component) denom-
inated in USD and EUR, the BIS computed a value of 0.0912 and 0.0638, respectively, as of December 2009;
see, BIS (2010). As such, both markets are very competitive.




                                                         6
apply various filters to the data; we eliminate obvious mistakes in the quotations, and only
consider options for which the price is larger than USD (EUR) 100 in case of a swap notional
of USD (EUR) 1,000,000 (since according to market sources, quotes for extremely deep OTM
swaptions are less reliable).14 In total, we use 172,658 quotes in the USD market, and 172,500
quotes in the EUR market for our analyses.
         While swaptions are quoted in terms prices, it is often more convenient to represent prices
in terms of implied volatilities – either log-normal or normal.15 Most market participants
think in terms of normal implied volatilities, as these are more uniform across the swaption
grid, and more stable over time, than log-normal implied volatilities. Therefore, in this paper,
implied volatilities always refer to the normal type, unless otherwise stated.


3         A model independent analysis of the swaption cube

In this section, we analyze the swaption cube from a model independent perspective. For a
given option expiry and swap maturity, conditional moments of the swap rate distribution
(under the appropriate pricing measure) at a time horizon equal to the option expiry can be
inferred from the implied volatility smile.16 We analyze how conditional moments vary with
option expiry, swap maturity, and across time.


3.1         Conditional moments of the swap rate distribution

Consider a fixed versus floating interest rate swap for the period Tm to Tn with a fixed rate
of K. At every time Tj in a pre-specified set of dates Tm+1 , ..., Tn , the fixed leg pays τj−1 K,
    14
         This implies that for a given underlying swap maturity, the range of strikes will increase with option expiry.
For a given swap maturity and option expiry, the range of strikes will vary over time with the level of volatility
and the level of the underlying forward swap rate (swaptions with negative strikes are obviously not quoted).
    15
         The log-normal (or percentage) implied volatility is the volatility parameter that, plugged into the log-
normal (or Black (1976)) pricing formula, matches a given price. The normal (or absolute or basis point)
implied volatility is the volatility parameter that, plugged into the normal pricing formula, matches a given
price.
    16
         In principle, using the insight from Breeden and Litzenberger (1978), we could obtain the entire conditional
density, rather than just conditional moments, of the swap rate from the implied volatility smile. Beber and
Brandt (2006) and Li and Zhao (2009) study option-implied densities of Treasury futures prices and LIBOR
rates, respectively. In practice, however, it is a non-trivial matter to obtain the conditional density from a finite
number of option prices, and results may be quite sensitive to the choice of numerical scheme. In contrast,
conditional moments can be recovered in a robust fashion.


                                                             7
where τj−1 is the year-fraction between times Tj−1 and Tj . The value of the swap at time
t < Tm (assuming a notional of one) is given by17

                              Vm,n (t) = P (t, Tm ) − P (t, Tn ) − KAm,n (t),                               (1)

where
                                                    n
                                                    X
                                     Am,n (t) =             τj−1 P (t, Tj ),                                (2)
                                                   j=m+1

and P (t, T ) denotes the time-t price of a zero-coupon bond maturing at time T . The time-t
forward swap rate, Sm,n (t), is the rate on the fixed leg that makes the present value of the
swap equal to zero, and is given by
                                                  P (t, Tm ) − P (t, Tn )
                                    Sm,n (t) =                            .                                 (3)
                                                         Am,n (t)
The forward swap rate becomes the spot swap rate at time Tm .
       A payer swaption is an option to enter into an interest rate swap, paying the fixed leg at
a predetermined rate and receiving the floating leg. Let Pm,n (t, K) denote the time-t value of
a European payer swaption expiring at Tm with strike K on a swap for the period Tm to Tn .
At expiration, the swaption has a payoff of18

                            Vm,n (Tm )+ = (1 − P (Tm , Tn ) − KAm,n (Tm ))+

                                           = Am,n (Tm ) (Sm,n (Tm ) − K)+ .                                 (4)
  17
       Here, and throughout the paper, we are implicitly assuming that LIBOR is the proper rate for discounting
swap cash flows. In reality, inter-dealer swap and swaption contracts are virtually always collateralized, and
cash flows should, in principle, be discounted using a risk-free rate. A number of recent papers have analyzed
this issue (see, e.g., Fujii, Shimada, and Takahashi (2009), Mercurio (2009), and, for a more general treatment,
Piterbarg (2010)), and it is generally agreed that one should use discount factors inferred from overnight index
swaps (OIS), which are swaps that exchange a compounded overnight rate against a fixed rate. In principle, all
formulas in the paper could be extended to take into account this extra complication. In practice, however, this
extension is only possible for the very last part of the sample, where long-maturity OIS were actively traded.
Consequently, and consistent with most papers on swaps and swaptions, we discount swap cash flows at LIBOR.
  18
       EUR swaptions are typically cash-settled and have a payoff given by
                                                   n
                                                   X                      1
                              (Sm,n (Tm ) − K)+           τj−1                        ,
                                                  j=m+1
                                                                 (1 + Sm,n (Tm ))τm,j

where τm,j is the year-fraction between times Tm and Tj . The advantage of using this formula, rather than
(4) is that counterparties only have to agree upon a single swap rate, rather than a complete set of discount
factors, to compute the cash settlement value. In practice, the difference between the two payoff formulas is
very small, and in the paper we use (4) also for EUR swaptions; see, e.g., Andersen and Piterbarg (2010) for
further details.


                                                           8
At time t < Tm , its price is given by
                                     h R Tm                                    i
                    Pm,n (t, K) = EtQ e− t r(s)ds Am,n (Tm ) (Sm,n (Tm ) − K)+
                                                               
                                = Am,n (t)EtA (Sm,n (Tm ) − K)+ ,                                        (5)

where Q denotes expectation under the risk-neutral measure, and A denotes expectation under
the annuity measure associated with using Am,n (t) as numeraire.19 The corresponding receiver
swaption is denoted by Rm,n (t, K), and has a time-t price of20
                                                                      
                            Rm,n (t, K) = Am,n (t)EtA (K − Sm,n (Tm ))+ .                                (6)

       From Bakshi and Madan (2000), Carr and Madan (2001), and Bakshi, Kapadia, and
Madan (2003) it follows that for any fixed Z, we can write any twice continuously differ-
entiable function of Sm,n (Tm ), g(Sm,n (Tm )), as
                                                                  Z   ∞
                                         ′
         g(Sm,n (Tm )) = g(Z) + g (Z)(Sm,n (Tm ) − Z) +     g′′ (K)(Sm,n (Tm ) − K)+ dK
                                                          Z
                           Z Z
                         +     g′′ (K)(K − Sm,n (Tm ))+ dK.                                              (7)
                                  0

Taking expectations under the annuity measure, and setting Z = Sm,n (t), we obtain an ex-
pression in terms of prices of out-of-the-money receiver and payer swaptions

                                                      1     Z ∞
            A
          Et [g(Sm,n (Tm ))] = g(Sm,n (t)) +                          g′′ (K)Pm,n (t, K)dK
                                                    Am,n (t) Sm,n (t)
                                     Z Sm,n (t)                        
                                  +             g′′ (K)Rm,n (t, K)dK .                                   (8)
                                             0

       We can use this result to compute conditional moments of the swap rate distribution at a
time horizon equal to the expiry of the option. First, by construction of the annuity measure,
the conditional mean of the future swap rate distribution is simply the current forward swap
rate:

                                      µt ≡ EtA [Sm,n (Tm )] = Sm,n (t).                                  (9)
  19
       For a discussion of the annuity measure; see, e.g., Jamshidian (1997). Note that the annuity measure
changes with m and n. To lighten notation, we have suppressed this dependence.
  20
       From (5) and (6) it is apparent that a receiver swaption can be viewed as a put option on a swap rate,
whereas a payer swaption can be viewed as a call option on a swap rate.




                                                        9
Then, using (8), we get the following expressions for conditional variance, skewness, and
kurtosis of the future swap rate distribution:
                               h                        i
                                                      2
   VarA                      A
      t (Sm,n (Tm )) = Et (Sm,n (Tm ) − µt )              =
                Z
                ∞                              Z   Sm,n (t)                  
         2
                           Pm,n (t, K)dK +                   Rm,n (t, K)dK                                  (10)
     Am,n (t) Sm,n (t)                            0
                                 h                        i
                             EtA (Sm,n (Tm ) − µt )3
   SkewAt (Sm,n (Tm )) =                              3/2
                                                             =
                              VarA t (Sm,n (t, Tm ))
              R                                                 R Sm,n (t)                                 
        6        ∞
     Am,n (t)    Sm,n (t) (K −  S m,n  (t)) P m,n (t, K)dK     +  0         (K  − S m,n (t)) R m,n (t, K)dK
                                                                     3/2
                                                                                                            (11)
                                                  A
                                              Vart (Sm,n (t, Tm ))
                                 h                        i
                            EtA (Sm,n (Tm ) − µt )4
   KurtAt (Sm,n (Tm )) =                               2     =
                               VarA t (Sm,n (t, Tm ))
              R                                                  R Sm,n (t)                                  
       12        ∞                          2                                                2
     Am,n (t)    Sm,n (t) (K − Sm,n (t)) Pm,n (t, K)dK + 0                   (K − Sm,n (t)) Rm,n (t, K)dK
                                                     A                 2                                    (12)
                                                Vart (Sm,n (t, Tm ))

       As discussed in the previous section, swaptions are only available for a finite set of strikes,
while the formulas presume the existence of a continuum of strikes. Swaption prices corre-
sponding to the required strikes in the scheme used for numerical integration are obtained by,
first, linearly interpolating between the available normal implied volatilities, and then con-
verting from implied volatilities to prices. For strikes below the lowest available strike, we use
the implied volatility at the lowest strike. Similarly, for strikes above the highest available
strike, we use the implied volatility at the highest strike. The approximation error caused by
the extrapolation of implied volatilities is very small, since swaption prices are very low in the
regions of strikes where extrapolation is necessary.21


3.2       Results

We now investigate how conditional moments vary with option expiry, swap maturity, and
across time. Table 1 displays results for conditional volatility (the annualized standard de-
viation, measured in basis points) of the swap rate distribution for different swap maturities
  21
       We have experimented with different interpolation/extrapolation schemes, and find that the results are very
robust to the choice of scheme. The only exception is for swaptions with 10-year option expiries in times of high
volatility, where swaptions outside of the available strike range do have some (small) values making the results
slightly dependent on the extrapolation approach. The integrals are evaluated with the trapezoid scheme using
999 integration points for each integral. The first integral in each expression is truncated at Sm,n (t) + 0.10.


                                                         10
(tenors) and at different option expiries. It reports the sample means and, in parentheses, the
sample standard deviations. At short option expiries, conditional volatility is, on average, a
hump-shaped function of swap maturity, with the intermediate (5-year) segment of the swap
term structure being the most volatile. For the shortest (2-year) swap maturity, conditional
swap rate volatility is, on average, a hump-shaped function of option expiry, while for the
longer swap maturities, it declines with option expiry. This pattern is also found in earlier
studies that look at implied normal or log-normal ATM volatilities, without taking the implied
volatility smile into account. It is consistent with a model in which innovations to the term
structure of forward rates exhibits a hump-shape.
       Conditional volatility exhibits significant variation over time. For instance, the conditional
1-year ahead distribution of the USD 10-year swap rate has a volatility that varies between
67 bp and 177 bp through the sample period (see solid line in Figure 1, Panel A). For a
given swap maturity, the variation in volatility declines with option expiry, consistent with a
model exhibiting mean-reverting stochastic volatility. Moreover, an unreported analysis shows
that changes in volatility is largely unrelated to changes in the term structure. This is the
“unspanned stochastic volatility” phenomenon, which is the subject of a number of recent
papers.22 A principal component (PC) analysis reveals large common variation in conditional
volatility across the swaption matrix. For instance, in the USD market, the first PC explains 84
percent of the variation (while the second and third PCs explain 9 and 5 percent, respectively).
       Table 2 displays results for conditional skewness of the swap rate distribution for different
swap maturities (tenors) and at different option expiries. Like the previous table, it reports
the sample means and, in parentheses, the sample standard deviations. Conditional skewness
tends to be positive on average, implying that for most points on the swaption matrix, OTM
payer swaptions are more expensive than equivalently OTM receiver swaptions. At any given
option expiry, conditional skewness, on average, declines with swap maturity to the point,
where it is negative at the longest tenors – particularly in the EUR market. At the same time,
for a given swap maturity, conditional skewness is an increasing and concave function of option
expiry. If innovations to swap rates were independent and identically distributed, conditional
skewness would decrease with option expiry by being proportional to the reciprocal of the
square-root of the option expiry. Instead, the observed term structure of conditional skewness
  22
       This line of research was initiated by Collin-Dufresne and Goldstein (2002) and further evidence has been
provided by Heidari and Wu (2003), Andersen and Benzoni (2010), Li and Zhao (2006, 2009), Trolle and
Schwartz (2009), and Collin-Dufresne, Goldstein, and Jones (2009), among others.


                                                        11
is consistent with volatility following a stochastic process with low to moderate degrees of
mean reversion.23
       Like conditional volatility, conditional skewness also exhibit significant variation over time.
The variation is such that the sign of conditional skewness often changes. For example, skew-
ness of the conditional 1-year ahead distribution of the USD 10-year swap rate varies between
-0.38 and 0.87 through the sample period (see solid line in Figure 1, Panel B). A principal com-
ponent analysis shows that conditional skewness also exhibits large common variation across
the swaption matrix. In the case of the USD market, the first PC explains 85 percent of the
variation (while the second and third PCs explain 7 and 2 percent, respectively).
       Just like volatility is only partially spanned by the term structure, an interesting question
is the extent to which skewness is spanned by the term structure. For instance, if rates
were log-normally distributed, skewness would be time-varying, but be completely spanned by
rates. To investigate the extent to which skewness risk represents a separate source of risk,
we initially extract the first three PCs driving weekly changes in forward swap rates, which
summarize virtually all of the information in the term structure. Next, for each point on the
swaption matrix, we regress changes in conditional skewness on the PCs (and squared PCs).
The R2 s, which are reported in Table 3, are small everywhere. Finally, we factor analyze the
covariance matrix of the 40 time series of regression residuals. The PCs of the residuals are, by
construction, independent of those of rates. There is large common variation in the regression
residuals, with the first PC explaining 78 percent of the variation. This strongly indicates that
there is a skewness risk factor, which is largely orthogonal to the term structure factors.24
       Due to space constraints, we only briefly summarize the results for conditional kurtosis
of the swap rate distributions. The swap rate distributions are always leptokurtic. For a
  23
       The term structure of conditional skewness (and kurtosis) in stochastic volatility models is explored in Das
and Sundaram (1999). In the Heston (1993) model, where variance follows a square-root process, the term
structure of conditional skewness exhibits a hump shape. For parameter values often encountered in practice,
the point of maximum conditional skewness occurs years into the future, implying that the term structure will
often be increasing and concave over the set of option maturities actually observed.
  24
       If the low R2 s in Table 3 were simply due to noisy data, we would not expect to find much common variation
in the residuals. We have run several other regressions to check the robustness of the result. For instance, to
take potential time-variation in the relationship between skewness and rates into account, we also perform the
analysis using a rolling window of 52 observations. That is, for each window we extract the first three PCs of
rates, run the regressions, and factor analyze the residuals. The average R2 s are now somewhat larger, but we
still find large common variation in the regression residuals.



                                                         12
given swap maturity, the term structure of conditional kurtosis is hump-shaped with a peak
between 5 and 10 years – again consistent with a stochastic volatility model with low to
moderate degrees of mean reversion. While conditional kurtosis also exhibits some variation
over time, it is less systematic across the swaption matrix. For instance, in the case of the
USD market, the first PC explains only 42 percent of the variation. For this reason, in the
rest of the paper, we will mainly focus on conditional volatility and skewness.


4     A dynamic term structure model for swap rates

In this section, we propose and estimate a dynamic term structure model, which is capable of
matching the cross-sectional and time-series variation in the conditional moments of the swap
rate distributions under the annuity measure. We then use the model to infer the conditional
moments under the risk-neutral and physical measures.


4.1     The model

We first set up a general model under the risk-neutral measure and then find its dynamics
under the physical and annuity measures. Subsequently, we discuss model features and the
specifications that we estimate.


4.1.1    Dynamics under the risk-neutral measure

Let P (t, T ) denote the time-t price of a zero-coupon bond maturing at time T . We assume
the following general specification for the dynamics of zero-coupon bond prices
                                     N
                                     X                    p                      p                 
           dP (t, T )                                                                          Q
                        = r(t)dt +         σP,i (t, T )        v1 (t)dWiQ (t) +       v2 (t)dW i (t)    (13)
            P (t, T )
                                     i=1
                                                                      p
              dv1 (t) = (η1 − κ1 v1 (t) − κ12 v2 (t))dt + σv1             v1 (t)dZ Q (t)                (14)
                                                                      p            Q
              dv2 (t) = (η2 − κ21 v1 (t) − κ2 v2 (t))dt + σv2             v2 (t)dZ (t),                 (15)

                        Q                                            Q
where WiQ (t) and W i (t), i = 1, ..., N , and Z Q (t) and Z (t) denote Wiener processes under
the risk-neutral measure. We allow for correlations between Z Q (t) and WiQ (t), i = 1, ..., N ,
                                                                                               Q        Q
with correlations denoted by ρi . Similarly, we allow for correlations between Z (t) and W i (t),
i = 1, ..., N , and denote these correlations by ρi . This is the most general correlation structure
that preserves the tractability of the model.



                                                     13
       Now, applying Ito’s Lemma to (3) gives the dynamics of the forward swap rate under Q
                                N
                                                                                       !
                                X
              dSm,n (t) =     −   σS,i (t, Tm , Tn )σA,i (t, Tm , Tn )(v1 (t) + v2 (t)) dt +
                                          i=1
                                    N
                                    X                          p                        p                   
                                                                                                        Q
                                          σS,i (t, Tm , Tn )        v1 (t)dWiQ (t) +           v2 (t)dW i (t) ,   (16)
                                    i=1

where
                                                                n
                                                                X
                                    σS,i (t, Tm , Tn ) =                 ζj (t)σP,i (t, Tj )                      (17)
                                                                j=m
                                                                 Xn
                                    σA,i (t, Tm , Tn ) =                    χj (t)σP,i (t, Tj ),                  (18)
                                                                j=m+1

and ζj (t) and χj (t) are (stochastic) weights that are given in Appendix A.


4.1.2        Dynamics under the physical measure

The dynamics under the physical probability measure P, is obtained by specifying the mar-
ket prices of risk that link the Wiener processes under Q and P. We apply the following
specifications25
                                      p             P          Q         p
        dWiP (t) = dWiQ (t) − λi       v1 (t)dt, dW i (t) = dW i (t) − λi v2 (t)dt, i = 1, ..., N                 (19)

and
                                                p                    P             Q            p
                  dZ P (t) = dZ Q (t) − ν           v1 (t)dt, dZ (t) = dZ (t) − ν                   v2 (t)dt.     (20)

This implies the following dynamics of the forward swap rate under P
                          N
                                                                                                                        !
                          X                                                                                           
dSm,n (t) =           −         σS,i (t, Tm , Tn ) (σA,i (t, Tm , Tn ) + λi )v1 (t) + (σA,i (t, Tm , Tn ) + λi )v2 (t) dt +
                          i=1
                   N
                   X                           p                         p                 
                                                                                       P
                          σS,i (t, Tm , Tn )        v1 (t)dWiP (t) +          v2 (t)dW i (t) ,                           (21)
                    i=1

  25
       This specification is relatively standard in the literature on affine processes. We have experimented with
the more flexible market price of risk specification suggested by Cheredito, Filipovic, and Kimmel (2007) and
Collin-Dufresne, Goldstein, and Jones (2009), but found that it did not change our results significantly. For
several reasons, we prefer the simpler specification. First, it is more parsimonious, which is important given
the length of the time-series at our disposal. Second, we do not have to impose the Feller restriction on the
volatility processes, which are often binding. Third, in the more flexible specification, market prices of risk may
become arbitrarily large as the volatility processes approach their zero boundaries, which is not particularly
intuitive.


                                                                14
where
                                                                p
                  dv1 (t) =  η1 − κP1 v1 (t) − κ12 v2 (t) dt + σv1 v1 (t)dZ P (t)                               (22)
                                                                p         P
                  dv2 (t) =  η2 − κ21 v1 (t) − κP2 v2 (t) dt + σv2 v2 (t)dZ (t),                                (23)

and κP1 = κ1 − σv1 νv and κP2 = κ2 − σv2 ν v .


4.1.3   Dynamics under the annuity measure

As discussed in Section 3, for pricing swaptions it is convenient to work under the annuity
measure, A. Straightforward computations give the following dynamics of the forward swap
rate under A
                              N
                              X                          p                      p                 
                                                                                              A
             dSm,n (t) =            σS,i (t, Tm , Tn )        v1 (t)dWiA (t) +       v2 (t)dW i (t) ,           (24)
                              i=1

where
                                                               p
                 dv1 (t) =  η1 − κA v
                                  1 1 (t)  − κ   v
                                               12 2 (t)  dt + σv1 v1 (t)dZ A (t)                                (25)
                                                               p         A
                 dv2 (t) =  η2 − κ21 v1 (t) − κA v
                                                2 2 (t)  dt + σv2 v2 (t)dZ (t),                                 (26)

                    PN                                                    PN
and κA
     1 = κ1 − σv1     i=1 ρi σA,i (t, Tm , Tn )   and κA
                                                       2 = κ2 − σv2          i=1 ρi σA,i (t, Tm , Tn ).   This leads
to a fast and accurate Fourier-based pricing formula for swaptions derived in Appendix A.


4.1.4   Model features

The model has the potential to match the main stylized facts regarding conditional moments
of the swap rate distributions reported in Section 3. With only one volatility process, the
model can capture the average cross-sectional variation in conditional volatility and skewness.
The former requires a specification of the zero-coupon bond volatility functions, σP,i (t, T ),
such that the intermediate part of the term structure is the most volatile. The latter is a
consequence of a mean-reverting volatility processes combined with the possibility of corre-
lation between innovations to the term structure and volatility. Obviously, the model is also
consistent with variation in conditional volatility over time, including the unspanned stochas-
tic volatility phenomenon. However, a model with only one volatility process is too rigid to
capture the observed variation in conditional skewness over time – in particular the switch in
the sign of conditional skewness. For this purpose, we need at least two volatility processes.


                                                         15
       To see why two volatility processes are helpful in this regard, consider the case of N = 1.
In this case, the correlation between innovations to the forward swap rate, Sm,n (t), and its
instantaneous variance, σS,1 (t, Tm , Tn )(v1 (t) + v2 (t)), is given by

                                              v1 (t)               v2 (t)
                                    ρ1                   + ρ1                 ,                               (27)
                                         v1 (t) + v2 (t)      v1 (t) + v2 (t)

which is a weighted average of ρ1 and ρ1 , with stochastic weights determined by the relative
size of v1 (t) and v2 (t). Skewness of the future swap rate distribution, which depends on this
correlation, is therefore stochastic. In particular, if ρ1 and ρ1 have opposite signs, skewness
may switch sign.26 Obviously, with N > 1, one can generate richer dynamics in conditional
skewness.


4.1.5       Model specifications

It is well known that the term structure of interest rates is driven by three factors, and,
accordingly, we set N = 3 in all specifications. For the bond price volatility functions in (13),
we note that we can equally well specify the volatility functions for instantaneous forward
                                                    RT
rates, since the two are related by σP,i (t, T ) = − t σf,i (t, u)du. As it is generally easier to
relate to rate volatility than bond price volatility, we show both. The specifications we use are

                                                                     α1
                                                                                       
 σf,1 (t, T ) = α1 e−ξ(T −t)                      σP,1 (t, T ) =      ξ   e−ξ(T −t) − 1
                                                                     α2
                                                                                        
 σf,2 (t, T ) = α2 e−γ(T −t)                      σP,2 (t, T ) =     γ    e−γ(T −t) − 1
                                                                     α3
                                                                                           α3
 σf,3 (t, T ) = α3 (T − t)e−γ(T −t)               σP,3 (t, T ) =     γ2   e−γ(T −t) − 1 +   γ (T   − t)e−γ(T −t) .

The second and third are the “slope” and “curvature” factor loadings proposed by Nelson and
Siegel (1987), while the first becomes their “level” factor loading in the limit ξ → 0. These
factor loadings are popular in the term structure literature as they parsimoniously capture
the predominant shocks to the term structure. The reason behind modifying the first factor
loading is that the dynamics of the term structure can then be described by a finite dimensional
affine state vector, making it possible to estimate the model with well-established techniques
from the vast affine term structure literature (in reality, ξ is estimated close to zero, which
implies that the first factor still acts like a level factor). The affine representation of the model
can be derived along the lines of Trolle and Schwartz (2009) and, due to space constraints, is
given in a separate appendix available upon request.
  26
       Carr and Wu (2007) use a similar technique to generate stochastic skewness in currency return distributions.




                                                           16
          For the volatility dynamics, we consider two specifications. In what we denote the SV1
specification, we assume that there is only one volatility factor, v1 (t). In what we call the SV2
specification, we assume that there are two volatility factors, v1 (t) and v2 (t), but impose that
η1 = η2 , κ1 = κ2 , κ12 = κ21 , and σv1 = σv2 , in which case the volatility factors only differ
in terms of the their correlation with the term structure factors.27 We have experimented
with more general specifications, but found that this parsimonious specification suffices for
capturing most of the variation in conditional moments of the swap rate distributions.
          Coupled with the market price of risk specification discussed above, SV1 (SV2) has 11 (14)
risk-neutral parameters and 6 (8) market price of risk parameters, which is well within what
is often encountered in the empirical term structure literature. Given the vast amount data
at our disposal, the model is quite tightly parameterized.


4.1.6          Maximum-likelihood estimation

We estimate the two specifications on all available swap rates and swaptions using maximum-
likelihood in conjunction with Kalman filtering. Critical to estimating the model on all swap-
tions across time, and across all option expiries, swap maturities, and strikes, is the existence
of an efficient pricing formula. Due to the non-linearities in the relationship between obser-
vations and state variables, we apply the non-linear unscented Kalman filter.28 Details are
provided in Appendix B.


4.2          Results

Table 4 displays parameter estimates of the SV1 and SV2 specifications in the two markets.29
30    One thing to note about the estimates of the SV2 specification is the opposite sign on ρi and
     27
          For the specifications to be identified, we set σv1 = 1 in SV1, and σv1 = σv2 = 1 in SV2.
     28
          The unscented Kalman filter has gained popularity in recent years as an alternative to the more standard
extended Kalman filter. Christoffersen et al. (2009) perform an extensive Monte Carlo experiment, which
shows that the unscented Kalman filter significantly outperforms the extended Kalman filter in the context of
estimating dynamic term structure models with swap rates. Their results most likely carry over to our context,
where swaptions are also used in the estimation.
     29
          Since we are mainly interested in the higher-order moments of the swap rate distributions, and to preserve
space, we have left out the estimates of premia associated with interest rate risk (λ1 , λ2 , λ3 , λ1 , λ2 , and λ3 )
from the table. These estimates are in a separate table available upon request.
     30
          The asymptotic covariance matrix of the estimated parameters is computed from the outer-product of
the first derivatives of the likelihood function. Theoretically, it would be more appropriate to compute the



                                                            17
ρi , for most i, which is consistent with stochastic skewness that may switch sign. When v1 (t)
is high relative to v2 (t), the swap rate distributions will be skewed towards lower interest rates,
whereas when v1 (t) is low relative to v2 (t), the swap rate distributions will be skewed towards
higher interest rates. Another thing to note is that the premia associated with volatility risk,
ν and ν, are estimated to be significant and negative. This issue is explored further below.
    From the filtered state variables, we compute fitted values of interest rates and swaptions,
as well as the pricing errors. For swaptions, the pricing errors are the differences between
fitted and actual normal implied volatilities. On each day in the sample, we then compute
the root mean squared pricing errors (RMSEs) of the interest rates and swaptions available on
that day. This way we construct time series of RMSEs for each model specification. The fit
to interest rates is very good, and very similar for the two model specifications. In the USD
market, for instance, the mean RMSE is about 5 bp. This finding is not surprising, since both
specifications have three term structure factors, and similar estimates for the factor loadings.
More interesting is the fit to swaptions. The first row of Table 5 displays the mean of the
RMSEs. It also displays the mean difference in RMSEs between the two model specifications,
and the associated t-statistics. The difference in overall pricing errors is strongly significant.
For instance, in the USD market, the mean RMSE drops from 5.44 bp to 4.58 bp.
    As an example of the improved fit, Figure 2 shows actual and fitted time-series of the USD
normal implied volatility smile of the 1-year option on 10-year swap rate. Clearly, the SV2
specification matches the variation in the implied volatility smile much better than the SV1
specification.
    To understand the improvement in pricing, we compute volatility (annualized), skewness,
and kurtosis of the future swap rate distributions (under A) implied by the two model specifica-
tions. This is done using the fitted swaption prices, and the same interpolation/extrapolation
scheme as in Section 3. On each day in the sample, we then compute RMSEs across all tenor
– option expiry categories, where the errors are now the differences between actual and fitted
moments, rather than implied volatilities. This way we construct time series of RMSEs of
volatility, skewness, and kurtosis for each model specification. The second to fourth row of
Table 5 display the means of these RMSEs as well as the mean differences in RMSEs between
the two model specifications, and the associated t-statistics. The mean volatility RMSEs are
very similar for the two model specifications, and the difference is not very significant. This is

asymptotic covariance matrix from both the first and second derivatives of the likelihood function. In reality,
however, the second derivatives of the likelihood function are somewhat numerically unstable.


                                                      18
expected, given that we impose that the two volatility state variables in the SV2 specification
only differ in terms of their correlation parameters. In contrast, the mean skewness RMSE
is significantly lower for the SV2 specification. For instance, in the USD market the mean
skewness RMSE is 0.21 and 0.05, for the SV1 and SV2 specification, respectively.31
      Table 6 elaborates on the relative fit to skewness. It displays the mean differences in abso-
lute skewness errors for the two specifications within each tenor – option expiry category, and
the associated t-statistics. It shows that the SV2 specification entails a significant improvement
in the fit to skewness across virtually the entire swaption matrix.
      To visualize the improvement in the fit to the moments, Figure 1 displays time-series of
conditional volatility and skewness of the 1-year ahead distribution of the USD 10-year swap
rate (again under A). While both model specifications have very similar fit to conditional
volatility, they differ markedly in their fit to conditional skewness. The SV1 specification has
too little variation in conditional skewness, and model-implied skewness is in fact negatively
correlated with actual skewness. In contrast, conditional skewness of the SV2 specification
tracks actual skewness closely – in particular, it captures the switches between positive and
negative skewness.
      Having established that the SV2 specification provides a good fit to the cross-sectional
and time-series variation in the conditional moments (particularly volatility and skewness)
of the swap rate distributions under A, we use the model to infer the conditional moments
under the risk-neutral measure Q and the physical measure P. This is done by simulating the
distributions of future swap rates, using the formulas in Sections 4.1.1 and 4.1.2, and from the
simulated distributions computing the moments.32 We then define volatility risk premia as
the differences between conditional swap rate volatilities under P and Q. Similarly, we define
skewness risk premia as the differences between conditional swap rate skewness under P and
Q.
      Table 7 shows, for each point on the swaption matrix, the average volatility risk premium
and, in parentheses, the standard deviation of the volatility risk premium. Average volatility
risk premia are negative across the matrix for both currencies, implying that conditional
volatility is typically higher under Q than P, which is consistent with what Duarte, Longstaff,
and Yu (2007) find for the USD cap/floor market.33 Volatility risk premia are somewhat more
 31
      Note that the mean kurtosis RMSE is also significantly lower for the SV2 specification.
 32
      We use 50.000 simulations and anti-thetic variates.
 33
      Our model likely understates the magnitude of volatility and skewness risk premia for very short horizons.


                                                       19
negative in the USD market than in the EUR market.
         Table 8 shows results for skewness risk premia. Average skewness risk premia are negative
across the matrix for both currencies, implying that the conditional Q-distribution is typically
skewed more towards higher interest rates than the conditional P-distribution. Skewness risk
premia are of the same magnitude in the two markets.


5         Fundamental drivers of the swap rate distributions

While we have used a reduced-form dynamic term structure model to infer the conditional
moments of the swap rate distributions under P and Q, ultimately we are interested in under-
standing the fundamental drivers of these conditional moments. For this purpose, we regress
volatility and skewness of the physical swap rate distributions as well as volatility and skewness
risk premia on a number of variables motivated by economic theory and prior results in the
literature. We are primarily interested in the effects of macro-economic uncertainty, which we
proxy by dispersion and skewness of agents’ perceived probability distributions for future real
GDP growth and inflation. But we also control for other factors that may have an effect on
swap rate distributions, including moments of the equity index return distribution, a measure
of market-wide liquidity, and a measure of refinancing activity. These variables are described
in more detail below.


5.1         Explanatory variables

5.1.1         Moments of agents’ belief distributions for future real GDP growth and
              inflation

A number of equilibrium pricing models, primarily related to equity derivatives, imply that
volatility and volatility risk premia are increasing in uncertainty and/or disagreement among
agents about fundamentals. For instance, in long run risk models, where agents have prefer-
ences for early resolution of uncertainty, and macro-economic uncertainty is stochastic, eco-
nomic uncertainty is a priced source of risk.34 That is also the case in models where agents

It is a well-known deficiency of stochastic volatility models that, for plausible parameter values, they cannot
generate a sufficiently large wedge between the P and Q distributions over very short horizons. To do so, we
would need to add a jump process to our model, which is doable, but beyond the scope of the present paper.
    34
         See, e.g., Eraker and Shaliastovich (2008), Bollerslev, Tauchen, and Zhou (2009), Bollerslev, Sizova, and
Tauchen (2009), Drechsler and Yaron (2009), and Shaliastovich (2009).



                                                          20
have incomplete information and face fundamentals subject to regime switches.35 Similarly,
in models where agents have incomplete information and heterogeneous beliefs, disagreement
among agents is a priced source of risk.36
       Motivated by these papers, we investigate the extent to which agents’ perceptions about
macro-economic risks affect swap rate distributions. We focus on the perceived risks to future
real GDP growth and inflation, which are among the most important fundamental determi-
nants of interest rates. For this purpose, we use the quarterly survey of professional forecasters
(SPF) conducted in the US by the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia and in the Eurozone
by the ECB. The SPF is unique, because participants are asked to assign a probability dis-
tribution to their forecasts for real GDP growth and inflation. We aggregate the probability
distributions of the individual respondents, and compute dispersion (i.e., standard deviation)
and skewness of the aggregate distributions of future real GDP growth and inflation.37 Note
that these aggregate belief distributions take both individual uncertainty and disagreement
into account.38


5.1.2       Moments of the equity index return distribution

Numerous papers have documented that equity and fixed-income markets are interconnected.
We, therefore, investigate the extent to which the characteristics of the equity index return
distribution have an impact on the swap rate distributions. Specifically, we consider the S&P
500 index in the USD market and the Eurostoxx 50 in the EUR market, and compute volatility
and skewness of the risk-neutral return distributions in a model independent way using the
formulas in Bakshi, Kapadia, and Madan (2003). As in Section 3, this involves integrating
over options with different strikes. We obtain risk-neutral moments for return horizons cor-
responding to the option expiries that are traded, and we use the first principal component
  35
       See, e.g., David and Veronesi (2002, 2009).
  36
       See, e.g., Buraschi and Jiltsov (2006) and Buraschi, Trojani, and Vedolin (2009).
  37
       Participants are asked to provide probability distributions for the current and following calendar year. We
follow Bekaert and Engstrom (2009) in weighting the probability distributions so as to maintain a 1-year-ahead
forecast horizon. Another issue is that in forming their probability distributions, respondents are asked to attach
probabilities to the outcome being in specific ranges. When computing moments of the aggregate distributions,
we assume that the probability for a given range relates to the mid-point of that range.
  38
       For instance, one can show that the variance of the aggregate distribution is equal to the average variance
of the individual distributions (i.e. individuals’ uncertainty) plus the variance of the point estimates (i.e.
disagreement), see Giordani and Soderlind (2003).



                                                         21
of volatility and skewness, respectively, in the regressions.39 Our measure of volatility in the
USD market has a very high correlation (above 0.98) with the VIX index, which has been
used in numerous studies as a proxy for overall financial market volatility, or as a sentiment
indicator.


5.1.3       Market-wide liquidity

A number of papers show that liquidity affects derivatives prices.40 Unfortunately, our data
set does not include bid-ask spreads or other measures, such as market depth, that can be used
to construct liquidity measures at the level of individual contracts. Instead, we investigate the
effect of liquidity at the market-wide level. As a proxy for market-wide liquidity, we use the
spread between the 3-month overnight index swap (OIS) rate and the 3-month Treasury bill
yield (for the EUR market, we use the German counterpart to the 3-month Treasury bill).
Since an OIS is a measure the expected average overnight rate during the life of the swap, and
is virtually free of credit and counterparty risk, the spread is a fairly clean proxy for liquidity,
see also the discussion in Krishnamurthy (2010).41


5.1.4       Refinancing activity

Several papers find that derivatives prices are affected by supply and demand.42 In the swap-
tion market, dealers absorb or redistribute supply and demand for volatility. From a dealer
perspective, most of the supply of volatility emanates from issuance of callable debt by finan-
cial institutions and large corporations. A significant part of this debt is swapped into floating
rate payments with the embedded optionality often passed on to dealers. Part of the demand
  39
       For the S&P 500 index, the first principal component explains 98 (92) percent of the variation in volatility
(skewness) across the option expiries. For the Eurostoxx 50, the numbers are similar.
  40
       For instance, in the related market for caps and floors, Deuskar, Gupta, and Subrahmanyam (2010) find
that liquidity, as proxied by bid-ask spreads, impacts prices. Other studies include Cetin et al. (2006) and
Bongaerts, de Jong, and Driessen (2010), who provide theory and evidence in support for liquidity having an
impact on the pricing of stock options and credit default swaps.
  41
       In the USD market, an OIS is referenced to the overnight federal funds rate, while in the EUR market, it
is referenced to the euro overnight index average (EONIA) rate. The swap contract itself is fully collateralized
making credit and counterparty risk negligible. As an alternative liquidity proxy, we have used the spread
between yields on on-the-run and off-the-run government bonds of similar maturities, but found similar results.
  42
       For instance, Bollen and Whaley (2004) and Gârleanu, Pedersen, and Poteshman (2009) find demand effects
in the pricing of equity options.



                                                         22
for volatility comes from pension funds and insurance companies that purchase swaptions as
part of their asset-liability management. Another part of the demand stems from issuance
of structured interest rate derivatives, such as CMS-linked notes, which often leave dealers
with short volatility exposure. In the USD market, an important demand for swaptions comes
from investors in MBSs, who actively hedge the negative convexity risk, which stems from
the prepayment option embedded in fixed rate mortgages. This include mortgage giants, Fed-
eral National Mortgage Association (“Fannie Mae”) and the Federal Home Loan Mortgage
Corporation (“Freddie Mac”)43 as well as mortgage hedge funds.
       Since there is no quantitative information on the flows in the swaption market, it is difficult
to estimate the extent to which demand and supply affects pricing. Like previous papers,
we focus on the effect of refinancing activity. Duarte (2008) uses a measure of the average
refinancing incentive in the mortgage universe as a proxy for the swaption demand by active
hedgers in the MBS market, and finds that hedging pressures have a significant impact on
realized and implied volatility levels. We take a simpler route and use the Mortgage Bankers
Association (MBA) Refinancing Index, which is a weekly measure of refinancing activity.44


5.2       Regression results

We face two issues regarding the regressions. First, in principle we could run regressions
for volatility, skewness, and associated risk premia in each tenor – option expiry category.
However, as these quantities are highly correlated across the swaption matrix, we instead run
regressions using cross-sectional averages of volatility, skewness, and associated risk premia.
In other words, our focus is on understanding the overall time-series variation, rather than
the cross-sectional variation. Second, our proxies for macro-economic uncertainty are only
available at a quarterly frequency, while the remaining variables are available at a weekly
frequency. To make use of all the information in the data, we run MIDAS-type regressions45
  43
       Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac were placed into conservatorship in September 2008. However, they were
allowed to increase (and actively hedge) their total portfolio of retained mortgages to USD 1.7tn by 2009.
Therefore, they continue to play a role in the interest rate derivatives market.
  44
       The same proxy is used by Li and Zhao (2009) to study the effect of refinancing activity on the cap/floor
market.
  45
       MIxed DAta Sampling regressions have become popular in the econometrics literature following the initial
publications by Ghysels, Santa Clara, and Valkanov (2005, 2006).




                                                        23
of the following form

yt = β0 + β1 f (θ, τ )GDP voltq + β2 f (θ, τ )GDP skewtq + β3 f (θ, τ )IN F voltq + β4 f (θ, τ )IN F skewtq +

        β5 EQvolt + β6 EQskewt + β7 LIQt + β8 REF It + ǫt ,                                                (28)

where τ = t − tq is the time between the weekly observation at t and the most recent quarterly
observation at tq , and yt is the cross-sectional average of either physical volatility, volatility risk
premia, physical skewness, or skewness risk premia. The function f (θ, τ ) weighs the quarterly
observations according to their distance from t. We assume the following simple functional
form f (θ, τ ) = exp(−θτ ); i.e., the weights are exponentially declining in τ . We also assume
that the same weighing function applies to all four quarterly series. The MIDAS regression
model is estimated by non-linear least squares, and Tables 9 and 10 display the results for the
USD and EUR markets, respectively.
   Consider first the relationships between the swap rate distributions and the characteristics
of agents’ belief distributions for the macro-economy. In the USD market, physical swap rate
volatility depends significantly and positively on the dispersion of agents’ GDP belief distri-
bution, while volatility risk premia have a significantly negative dependance on the dispersion
of agents’ GDP beliefs. That is, an increase in the perceived uncertainty about future real
GDP growth increases risk-neutral swap rate volatility more than physical volatility. This is
consistent with the various types of equilibrium models, mentioned above, in which an in-
crease in uncertainty and/or disagreement among agents about fundamentals increases both
risk-neutral and physical volatility as well as the wedge between the two, since uncertainty
and/or disagreement directly enters the stochastic discount factor. Also, consistent with intu-
ition, physical swap rate skewness depends positively and significantly on the skewness (and,
to a lesser extent, the dispersion) of agents’ GDP beliefs; i.e., when the perceived risk to future
real GDP growth is more skewed to the upside, the physical swap rate distributions tend to
be skewed towards higher interest rates.
   In the EUR market, physical swap rate volatility depends significantly and positively on
the dispersion of agents’ inflation belief distribution (and, more weakly, on the skewness of
GDP beliefs), while volatility risk premia have a significantly negative dependance on the
dispersion of inflation (and, to a lesser extent, GDP) beliefs. That is, perceived uncertainty
about future inflation appear to be a relatively more important state variable for volatility
and volatility risk premia than perceived uncertainty about future real GDP growth. Physical
swap rate skewness depends positively and significantly on the skewness of agents’ inflation

                                                  24
beliefs (and, more weakly, on the dispersion of inflation beliefs), while skewness risk premia
have a significantly negative dependence on the skewness of inflation beliefs (there is also a
weak dependence on the dispersion of GDP and inflation beliefs). The latter result possibly
reflects agents’ dislike for high inflation states; when the physical likelihood of high interest
rates due to high inflation increases, the risk-neutral likelihood of these states increases even
more, increasing risk-neutral skewness relative to physical skewness.
       It is striking that the characteristics of agents’ inflation beliefs are the main determinant
of EUR swap rate distributions, while the USD swap rate distributions are mostly related to
the characteristics of agents’ GDP beliefs. One likely explanation is differences in monetary
policy objectives in the two economies. The primary policy goal of the European Central Bank
is to maintain price stability, whereas the Federal Reserve has a dual mandate of maximum
employment and price stability, leading it to place relatively more emphasis on expectations
for real GDP growth, when setting interest rates.46
       Next, consider the relationships between the swap rate distributions and the equity index
return distribution, market-wide liquidity, and refinancing activity. Overall, equity return
volatility has a significantly positive effect on physical swap rate volatility and a significantly
negative effect on volatility risk premia, while equity return skewness has a significantly positive
effect on physical swap rate skewness. These results underscore the integration between equity
and fixed income markets.
       Market-wide illiquidity has a significantly positive effect on physical swap rate volatility
and, in the USD market, a significantly negative effect on volatility risk premia. That is, a de-
terioration in liquidity increases risk-neutral swap rate volatility more than physical volatility.
       Finally, in the USD market, refinancing activity has a significantly positive effect on phys-
ical swap rate volatility and a (marginally) significantly negative impact on volatility risk pre-
mia. Compared with the results in Duarte (2008) (and Li and Zhao (2009) for the cap/floor
market), the effect of refinancing activity is relatively modest. This may be due to differences
in data, sample period, and methodology, but may also, in part, reflect the Federal Reserve’s
USD 1.25 trillion program to purchase MBSs, initiated in late 2008. Since the Federal Reserve
does not engage in convexity hedging, its massive involvement in the MBS market reduces the
  46
       The different policy objectives of the two central banks were clearly illustrated on July 2, 2008, when
the ECB, despite signs of financial stress and weakening growth, raised its benchmark rate in a bid to attack
inflation. At that point, the Federal Reserve had already reduced its benchmark rate significantly to support
economic growth in the face of the financial crisis.



                                                       25
effect of refinancing activity on the swaption market.47 Refinancing activity, which is a U.S.
phenomenon, has virtually no effect on the swap rate distributions in the EUR market.


5.3         Robustness checks

The MIDAS literature has proposed more flexible weighing functions than the simple one used
above. We have experimented with several of these, but found the results quite robust to the
choice of (sensible) weighing scheme.
         More important, we also run the regressions in quarterly differences, i.e.

     ∆ytq       = β0 + β1 ∆GDP voltq + β2 ∆GDP skewtq + β3 ∆IN F voltq + β4 ∆IN F skewtq +

                    β5 ∆EQvoltq + β6 ∆EQskewtq + β7 ∆LIQtq + β8 ∆REF Itq + ǫtq ,                            (29)

where ∆ytq is the quarterly change in the cross-sectional average of either physical volatility,
volatility risk premia, physical skewness, or skewness risk premia. While this entails discarding
information, it may be more robust than the MIDAS specification. Tables 11 and 12 display
the results for the USD and EUR markets, respectively. The results are generally consistent
with those obtained from the MIDAS regressions. In particular, we continue to find that the
swap rate distributions are related to the characteristics of agents’ belief distributions for the
macro-economy, with GDP beliefs the most important factor in the USD market and inflation
beliefs the most important factor in the EUR market.


6         Conclusion

In this paper, we use a comprehensive database of inter-dealer quotes to conduct the first
empirical analysis of the dynamics of the swaption cube.
         We first analyze the swaption cube from a model independent perspective. We use the fact
that for a given swap maturity and option expiry, one can compute conditional moments of
the swap rate distribution (under the annuity measure) at a time horizon equal to the option
expiry, by suitably integrating over swaptions with different strikes. We establish a set of
stylized facts regarding the cross-sectional and time-series variation of conditional volatility
    47
         This appear to be a consensus view among market participants. For instance, in a recent research report,
Barclays Capital (2010) concludes that “...the Fed portfolio serves as a dampener on the option bid from MBS
portfolios”.




                                                         26
and skewness of the swap rate distributions. In particular, we show that skewness is stochastic
and sometimes changes sign.
       We then develop and estimate a stochastic volatility model of the term structure of swap
rates that is consistent with these stylized facts. This model is used to infer the conditional
swap rate distributions under the risk-neutral measure as well as the physical measure. We
show that the risk-neutral swap rate distributions on average exhibit higher volatility and are
more skewed towards higher rates than the swap rate distributions under the physical measure.
       Finally, we investigate the fundamental drivers of the conditional swap rate distributions.
We find that physical volatility and skewness as well as volatility risk premia (defined as the
differences between physical and risk-neutral volatility) and skewness risk premia (defined in
a similar way) are significantly related to the characteristics of agents’ belief distributions for
the macro-economy, with GDP beliefs the most important factor in the USD market, and
inflation beliefs the most important factor in the EUR market. These different market dynam-
ics are consistent with differences in monetary policy objectives in the two economies. The
results hold true controlling for other factors that may have an effect on swap rate distribu-
tions, including moments of the equity index return distribution, market-wide liquidity, and
refinancing activity.
       In recent years, a number of equilibrium models for the term structure of interest rates
have been proposed.48 A key challenge for future fixed income research is developing successful
equilibrium models for interest rate derivatives. By investigating the fundamental determi-
nants of volatility and skewness of interest rate distributions, our paper provides the first step
in this direction.




  48
       See, e.g., Piazzesi and Schneider (2007), Bansal and Shaliastovich (2009), Le and Singleton (2010), and
Xiong and Yan (2010).


                                                       27
Appendix A

The weights in (17) and (18)

The weights ζj (t) in (17) are given by

                                   P (t, Tm )
                      ζm (t) =                                                                                (30)
                                  A(t, Tm , Tn )
                                                     P (t, Tj )
                      ζj (t) = −τj−1 S(t, Tm , Tn )              , j = m + 1, ..., n − 1                      (31)
                                                 A(t, Tm , Tn )
                                                            P (t, Tn )
                      ζn (t) = −(1 + τn−1 S(t, Tm , Tn ))                ,                                    (32)
                                                          A(t, Tm , Tn )

while the weights χj (t) in (18) are given by

                                               τj−1 P (t, Tj )
                                 χj (t) =                      , j = m + 1, ..., n.                           (33)
                                               A(t, Tm , Tn )

Fourier-based pricing formula for swaptions

The dynamics of the forward swap rate under A is not entirely affine, due to the stochastic
weights ζj (t) and χj (t). However, these are low variance martingales under A, and following
much of the literature on LIBOR market models, we may “freeze” these at their initial values
to obtain a truly affine model, in which case swaptions can be priced quasi-analytically.49
First, we find the characteristic function of Sm,n (Tm ) given by
                                                          h             i
                                   ψ(u, t, Tm , Tn ) = EtA eiuSm,n (Tm ) ,                                    (34)
                √
where i =           −1. This has an exponentially affine solution as demonstrated in the following
proposition:

Proposition 1 (34) is given by
                                                          P2
                        ψ(u, t, Tm , Tn ) = eM (Tm −t)+    j=1   Nj (Tm −t)vj (t)+iuSm,n (t)
                                                                                               ,              (35)
  49
       In a LIBOR market model setting, this “freezing” technique results in very small biases in swaptions prices.
Extensive simulations show that the biases are also very small in our context (these results are available upon
request).




                                                          28
where M (τ ), N1 (τ ), and N2 (τ ) solve the following system of ODEs

          dM (τ )
                    = N1 (τ )η1 + N2 (τ )η2                                                                      (36)
           dτ
                                             N
                                                                        !
         dN1 (τ )                            X                                                   1
                    =      −κA
                             1   + iuσv1            ρi σS,i (t, Tm , Tn ) N1 (τ ) − κ21 N2 (τ ) + N1 (τ )2 σv1
                                                                                                            2
           dτ                                                                                    2
                                              i=1
                                N
                                X
                          1
                         − u2          σS,i (t, Tm , Tn )2                                                       (37)
                          2
                                 i=1
                                             N
                                                                        !
         dN2 (τ )                            X                                                   1
                    =      −κA
                             2 + iuσv2              ρi σS,i (t, Tm , Tn ) N2 (τ ) − κ12 N1 (τ ) + N2 (τ )2 σv2
                                                                                                            2
           dτ                                                                                    2
                                              i=1
                                N
                                X
                          1
                         − u2          σS,i (t, Tm , Tn )2                                                       (38)
                          2
                                 i=1

subject to the boundary conditions M (0) = 0, N1 (0) = 0, and N2 (0) = 0.

Proof: Available upon request.


       Next, we follow the general approach of Carr and Madan (1999) and Lee (2004) to price
swaptions. The idea is that the Fourier transform of the modified swaption price,

                                        Pbm,n (t, K) = eαK Pm,n (t, K),                                          (39)

can be expressed in terms of the characteristic function of Sm,n (Tm ).50 The swaption price is
then obtained by applying the Fourier inversion theorem. The result is given in the following
proposition:

Proposition 2 The time-t price of a European payer swaption expiring at Tm with strike K
on a swap for the period Tm to Tn , Pm,n (t, K), is given by
                                                     Z    ∞                                  
                                       e−αK                      e−iuK ψ(u − iα, t, Tm , Tn )
                Pm,n (t, K) = Am,n (t)                        Re                                du.              (40)
                                         π            0                  (α + iu)2

Proof: Available upon request.


  50
       The control parameter α must be chosen to ensure that the modified swaption price is L2 integrable, which
is a sufficient condition for its Fourier transform to exist.




                                                                29
B. Maximum likelihood estimation

The state space form

We cast the model in state space form, which consists of a measurement equation and a
transition equation. The measurement equation describes the relationship between the state
variables and the prices of swaps and swaptions, while the transition equation describes the
discrete-time dynamics of the state variables.
       Let Xt denote the vector of state variables. While the transition density of Xt is unknown,
its conditional mean and variance is known in closed form, since Xt follows an affine diffusion
process. We approximate the transition density with a Gaussian density with identical first
and second moments, in which case the transition equation becomes

                               Xt = Φ0 + ΦX Xt−1 + wt ,         wt ∼ N (0, Qt ),                               (41)

where Qt = Q0 + Qv1 v1,t + Qv2 v2,t and Φ0 , ΦX , Q0 , Qv1 , and Qv2 are given in closed form.51
       The measurement equation is given by

                                     Zt = h(Xt ) + ut ,     ut ∼ N (0, Ω),                                     (42)

where Zt is the vector of swaps and swaption observed at time t, h is the pricing function, and
ut is a vector of iid. Gaussian pricing errors with covariance matrix Ω.
       Ideally, we would like to fit the model directly to normal implied volatilities, which are
more stable than prices (or log-normal implied volatilities) along the swap maturity, option
expiry, moneyness, and time-series dimensions. This is not practical, however, since computing
implied volatilities from prices requires a numerical inversion for each swaption, which would
add an extra layer of complexity to the estimation procedure. Instead, we fit the model to
option prices scaled by their normal vegas (i.e., the sensitivities of the swaption prices to
variations in volatilities in the normal pricing model).52
  51
       Approximating the true transition density with a Gaussian, makes this a QML procedure. While QML
estimation has been shown to be consistent in many settings, it is in fact not consistent in a Kalman filter
setting since the conditional covariance matrix Qt in the recursions depends on the Kalman filter estimates of
the volatility state variables rather than the true, but unobservable, values; see, e.g., Duan and Simonato (1999).
However, simulation results in several papers have shown this issue to be negligible in practice.
  52
       This essentially converts swaption pricing errors in terms of prices into swaption pricing errors in terms of
implied volatilities, via a linear approximation.



                                                          30
   To reduce the number of parameters in Ω, we assume that the measurement errors are
cross-sectionally uncorrelated (that is, Ω is diagonal), and that one variance applies to all
pricing errors for swap rates and that another variance applies to all pricing errors for scaled
swaption prices.


The unscented Kalman filter

If the pricing function were linear h(Xt ) = h0 + HXt , the Kalman filter would provide efficient
estimates of the conditional mean and variance of the state vector. Let X̂t|t−1 = Et−1 [Xt ] and
Ẑt|t−1 = Et−1 [Zt ] denote the expectation of Xt and Zt , respectively, using information up to
and including time t − 1, and let Pt|t−1 and Ft|t−1 denote the corresponding error covariance
matrices. Furthermore, let X̂t = Et [Xt ] denote the expectation of Xt including information
at time t, and let Pt denote the corresponding error covariance matrix. The Kalman filter
consists of two steps: prediction and update. In the prediction step, X̂t|t−1 and Pt|t−1 are
given by

                                 X̂t|t−1 = Φ0 + ΦX X̂t−1                                    (43)

                                 Pt|t−1 = ΦX Pt−1 Φ′X + Qt ,                                (44)

and Ẑt|t−1 and Ft|t−1 are in turn given by

                                  Ẑt|t−1 = h(X̂t|t−1 )                                     (45)

                                  Ft|t−1 = HPt|t−1 H ′ + Ω.                                 (46)

In the update step, the state estimate is refined based on the difference between predicted and
observed swaps and swaptions, with X̂t = Et [Xt ] and Pt given by

                               X̂t = X̂t|t−1 + Wt (Zt − Ẑt|t−1 )                           (47)

                               Pt = Pt|t−1 − Wt Ft|t−1 Wt′ ,                                (48)

where

                                                      −1
                                    Wt = Pt|t−1 H ′ Ft|t−1                                  (49)

is the covariance between pricing and filtering errors.
   In our setting, the pricing function is non-linear for both swaps and swaptions, and the
Kalman filter has to be modified. Non-linear state space systems have traditionally been

                                                31
handled with the extended Kalman filter, which effectively linearizes the measure equation
around the predicted state. However, in recent years the unscented Kalman filter has emerged
as a very attractive alternative. Rather than approximating the measurement equation, it
uses the true non-linear measurement equation and instead approximates the distribution of
the state vector with a deterministically chosen set of sample points, called “sigma points”,
that completely capture the true mean and covariance of the state vector. When propagated
through the non-linear pricing function, the sigma points capture the mean and covariance of
swaps and swaptions accurately to the 2nd order (3rd order for true Gaussian states) for any
nonlinearity.53
       More specifically, a set of 2L + 1 sigma points and associated weights are selected according
to the following scheme

              0                                                               κ
           X̂t|t−1 = X̂t|t−1                                         w0 =   L+κ
                                      q                     
              i                                                                 1
           X̂t|t−1 = X̂t|t−1 +              (L + κ)Pt|t−1            wi =   2(L+κ)     i = 1, ..., L         (50)
                                      q                     i
              i                                                                1
           X̂t|t−1 = X̂t|t−1 −              (L + κ)Pt|t−1            wi =   2(L+κ)     i = L + 1, ..., 2L,
                                                                 i

where L is the dimension of X̂t|t−1 , κ is a scaling parameter, wi is the weight associated with
                          q                  
the i’th sigma-point, and     (L + κ)Pt|t−1 is the i’th column of the matrix square root.
                                                             i
Then, in the prediction step, (45) and (46) are replaced by
                                      2L
                                      X
                     Ẑt|t−1 =              wi h(Xˆt|t−1
                                                    i
                                                         )                                                   (51)
                                      i=0
                                      2L
                                      X
                     Ft|t−1 =               wi (h(Xˆt|t−1
                                                     i
                                                          ) − Ẑt|t−1 )(h(Xˆt|t−1
                                                                             i
                                                                                  ) − Ẑt|t−1 )′ + Ω.        (52)
                                      i=0

The update step is still given by (47) and (48), but with Wt computed as
                                2L
                                X
                       Wt =           wi (X̂t|t−1
                                             i
                                                  − X̂t|t−1 )(h(Xˆt|t−1
                                                                   i                     −1
                                                                        ) − Ẑt|t−1 )′ Ft|t−1 .              (53)
                                i=0

Finally, the log-likelihood function is given by

                      X     T                T                        T
               1             1X                1X                   −1
       logL = − log2π   Nt −    log|Ft|t−1 | −   (Zt − Ẑt|t−1 )′ Ft|t−1 (Zt − Ẑt|t−1 ),                    (54)
               2             2                 2
                           i=1              i=1                       i=1

where T is the number of observation dates, and Nt is the dimension of Zt .
  53
       For comparison, the extended Kalman filter estimates the mean and covariance accurately to the 1st order.
Note that the computational costs of the extended Kalman filter and the unscented Kalman filter are of the
same order of magnitude.


                                                              32
 Tenor                                                Option expiry
               1 mth       3 mths       6 mths      9 mths        1 yr        2 yrs       5 yrs       10 yrs
                                                  Panel A: USD market
 2 yrs          110.1       112.0        114.4       117.4       120.7        123.6       116.9        98.2
                (35.5)       (31.5)      (27.9)      (26.9)       (26.6)      (24.6)      (18.0)       (12.0)

 5 yrs          122.4       122.2        121.8       121.1       121.3        120.4       111.7        93.2
                (37.4)       (33.5)      (29.4)      (27.4)       (26.3)      (23.2)      (16.5)       (10.4)

 10 yrs         115.9       115.8        115.4       114.7       114.4        113.3       104.7        86.8
                (36.6)       (32.7)      (28.7)      (26.5)       (25.0)      (22.0)      (15.0)       (9.2)

 20 yrs         106.9       105.7        104.0       102.7       101.8        99.5         89.9        74.1
                (36.1)       (31.4)      (26.7)      (24.0)       (21.8)      (18.6)      (12.3)       (7.9)

 30 yrs         103.5       101.7        99.9         98.6        97.5        95.1         85.4        69.6
                (37.6)       (31.5)      (26.3)      (23.4)       (20.9)      (17.1)      (10.8)       (6.3)

                                                  Panel B: EUR market
 2 yrs           80.7        81.2        81.6         81.3        80.8        80.6         78.0        72.1
                (29.2)       (24.6)      (20.2)      (17.2)       (15.3)      (12.9)       (8.7)       (6.3)

 5 yrs           83.6        82.4        80.9         79.6        78.6        77.1         74.2        69.1
                (25.3)       (21.1)      (17.1)      (14.8)       (13.4)      (11.5)       (8.5)       (7.2)

 10 yrs          74.7        74.7        74.3         73.7        73.3        73.4         71.9        67.1
                (23.1)       (20.5)      (17.6)      (15.9)       (15.0)      (13.6)       (9.9)       (7.6)

 20 yrs          72.3        72.0        71.2         70.4        70.0        69.3         67.2        61.9
                (30.0)       (26.4)      (21.8)      (19.3)       (18.0)      (15.4)      (10.9)       (8.2)

 30 yrs          71.6        71.2        70.3         69.3        68.7        67.9         65.3        59.8
                (36.8)       (32.5)      (26.7)      (23.0)       (20.8)      (17.6)      (12.9)       (9.2)

Notes: The table shows average conditional volatilities (annualized and in basis points) of the future swap rate
distributions under the annuity measure A. Standard deviations of conditional volatilities are in parentheses.
In USD, each statistic is computed on the basis of 419 weekly observations from December 19, 2001 to January
27, 2010. In EUR, each statistic is computed on the basis of 449 weekly observations from June 6, 2001 to
January 27, 2010.

                     Table 1: Volatility (annualized) of swap rate distributions
 Tenor                                               Option expiry
               1 mth      3 mths      6 mths      9 mths        1 yr        2 yrs       5 yrs      10 yrs
                                                 Panel A: USD market
 2 yrs          0.00        0.20        0.24        0.24        0.27        0.30        0.43        0.42
                (0.30)      (0.36)      (0.43)      (0.40)      (0.42)      (0.41)      (0.33)      (0.29)

 5 yrs          0.01        0.17        0.19        0.20        0.21        0.23        0.33        0.37
                (0.20)      (0.23)      (0.28)      (0.25)      (0.28)      (0.34)      (0.35)      (0.30)

 10 yrs        −0.00        0.15        0.16        0.15        0.16        0.18        0.29        0.32
                (0.17)      (0.18)      (0.22)      (0.20)      (0.23)      (0.30)      (0.34)      (0.31)

 20 yrs        −0.03        0.12        0.13        0.12        0.13        0.18        0.27        0.30
                (0.13)      (0.13)      (0.16)      (0.16)      (0.19)      (0.25)      (0.32)      (0.36)

 30 yrs        −0.04        0.10        0.12        0.11        0.12        0.15        0.22        0.27
                (0.14)      (0.13)      (0.15)      (0.15)      (0.17)      (0.23)      (0.30)      (0.33)

                                                 Panel B: EUR market
 2 yrs         −0.00        0.17        0.27        0.31        0.36        0.47        0.60        0.62
                (0.15)      (0.21)      (0.28)      (0.27)      (0.29)      (0.35)      (0.33)      (0.38)

 5 yrs         −0.15       −0.03        0.04        0.09        0.12        0.22        0.39        0.46
                (0.38)      (0.41)      (0.40)      (0.33)      (0.35)      (0.30)      (0.27)      (0.25)

 10 yrs        −0.21       −0.11       −0.06       −0.00        0.02        0.12        0.29        0.36
                (0.37)      (0.39)      (0.36)      (0.29)      (0.30)      (0.25)      (0.25)      (0.25)

 20 yrs        −0.29       −0.16       −0.11       −0.05       −0.02        0.05        0.24        0.35
                (0.28)      (0.27)      (0.24)      (0.21)      (0.22)      (0.22)      (0.24)      (0.27)

 30 yrs        −0.32       −0.18       −0.13       −0.07       −0.04        0.00        0.22        0.33
                (0.29)      (0.27)      (0.25)      (0.22)      (0.24)      (0.24)      (0.28)      (0.34)

Notes: The table shows average conditional skewness of the future swap rate distributions under the annuity
measure A. Standard deviations of conditional skewness are in parentheses. In USD, each statistic is computed
on the basis of 419 weekly observations from December 19, 2001 to January 27, 2010. In EUR, each statistic is
computed on the basis of 449 weekly observations from June 6, 2001 to January 27, 2010.

                            Table 2: Skewness of swap rate distributions
 Tenor                                               Option expiry
               1 mth      3 mths         6 mths    9 mths      1 yr       2 yrs       5 yrs      10 yrs
                                                  Panel A: USD market
 2 yrs          0.01        0.03          0.14      0.11       0.13        0.10       0.09        0.11
 5 yrs          0.04        0.04          0.06      0.09       0.08        0.08       0.10        0.07
 10 yrs         0.04        0.05          0.05      0.13       0.22        0.08       0.20        0.25
 20 yrs         0.03        0.01          0.02      0.02       0.03        0.04       0.05        0.14
 30 yrs         0.02        0.02          0.02      0.04       0.10        0.18       0.20        0.18
                                                  Panel B: EUR market
 2 yrs          0.01        0.05          0.11      0.16       0.21        0.17       0.15        0.17
 5 yrs         -0.01        0.01          0.03      0.06       0.08        0.16       0.21        0.32
 10 yrs         0.00        0.03          0.06      0.08       0.09        0.20       0.28        0.31
 20 yrs         0.01        0.02          0.07      0.10       0.11        0.25       0.25        0.35
 30 yrs         0.01        0.04          0.09      0.11       0.13        0.22       0.24        0.31
Notes: The table shows the R2 s from regressing weekly changes in conditional skewness of the swap rate
distributions on the first three principal components of the term structure (and the principal components
squared). In USD, the time-series is from December 19, 2001 to January 27, 2010. In EUR, the time-series is
from June 6, 2001 to January 27, 2010.

                       Table 3: Evidence for unspanned stochastic skewness
                                         USD market                                EUR market
                                    SV1                SV2                   SV1                SV2
 α1                                0.0072             0.0065               0.0090             0.0069
                                   (0.0001)           (0.0001)             (0.0001)           (0.0001)

 α2                                0.0021             0.0028               0.0016             0.0061
                                   (0.0000)           (0.0000)             (0.0000)           (0.0001)

 α3                                0.0049             0.0045               0.0020             0.0022
                                   (0.0001)           (0.0001)             (0.0000)           (0.0000)

 ξ                                 0.0104             0.0086               0.0115             0.0005
                                   (0.0002)           (0.0001)             (0.0001)           (0.0000)

 γ                                 0.2471             0.2435               0.2795             0.1670
                                   (0.0046)           (0.0034)             (0.0042)           (0.0023)

 ϕ                                 0.0479             0.0464               0.0435             0.0441
                                   (0.0018)           (0.0018)             (0.0018)           (0.0017)

 ρ1                                0.2546            −0.1843               0.0887            −0.0446
                                   (0.0202)           (0.0270)             (0.0188)           (0.0265)

 ρ2                                0.5752            −0.0945               0.5263             0.3736
                                   (0.0199)           (0.0298)             (0.0247)           (0.0207)

 ρ3                               −0.0019            −0.3208              −0.0509            −0.5463
                                   (0.0204)           (0.0207)             (0.0201)           (0.0211)

 ρ1                                                   0.4753                                  0.3736
                                                      (0.0230)                                (0.0216)

 ρ2                                                   0.5748                                  0.5582
                                                      (0.0229)                                (0.0178)

 ρ3                                                   0.5247                                  0.5199
                                                      (0.0201)                                (0.0264)

 κ1 = κ2                           0.5045             0.4156               0.5300             0.6948
                                   (0.0066)           (0.0067)             (0.0072)           (0.0109)

 η1 = η2                           0.4957             0.2404               0.2797             0.1981
                                   (0.0075)           (0.0029)             (0.0039)           (0.0022)

 ν                                −0.2169            −0.0873              −0.2014            −0.1320
                                   (0.0823)           (0.0225)             (0.0681)           (0.0427)

 ν                                                   −0.2992                                 −0.4377
                                                      (0.0909)                                (0.1329)

 σrates ×   104                    6.3465             6.3676               5.4623             5.4587
                                   (0.0714)           (0.0751)             (0.0826)           (0.1001)

 σswaptions ×     104              5.5125             4.5998               4.8212             4.3356
                                   (0.0775)           (0.0861)             (0.0540)           (0.0550)

 Log-likelihood     ×104          -27.1280           -25.9420             -23.6951           -23.2632
Notes: Maximum-likelihood estimates of the SV1 and SV2 specifications. The sample period is December 19,
2001 to January 27, 2010 in USD and June 6, 2001 to January 27, 2010 in EUR. Outer-product standard errors
are in parentheses. σrates denotes the standard deviation of interest rate measurement errors and σswaptions
denotes the standard deviation of scaled swaption price measurement errors. For the specifications to be
identified, we set σv1 = 1 in SV1, and σv1 = σv2 = 1 in SV2.

                                     Table 4: Parameter estimates



                                                     36
                                  USD market                                          EUR market
                        SV1             SV2         SV2-SV1               SV1             SV2          SV2-SV1
 Swaptions              5.44            4.58         −0.87∗∗∗             4.72            4.31          −0.41∗∗∗
                                                     (−6.04)                                            (−5.37)

 Volatility             4.96            4.83         −0.13∗∗              3.83            3.76          −0.07∗
                                                     (−1.97)                                            (−1.88)

 Skewness               0.21            0.05         −0.16∗∗∗             0.24            0.08          −0.17 ∗∗∗
                                                     (−6.71)                                           (−10.15)

 Kurtosis               0.34            0.21         −0.13∗               0.47            0.30          −0.17∗∗∗
                                                     (−1.81)                                            (−2.64)

Notes: The table compares the SV1 and SV2 specifications in terms of their ability to match the normal
implied volatilities (in basis points) as well as conditional volatility (annualized and in basis points), skewness,
and kurtosis of the future swap rate distributions under the annuity measure A. It reports means of RMSE
time series of implied volatilities and swap rate moments. It also reports mean differences in RMSEs between
the two model specifications. T -statistics, corrected for serial correlation up to 26 lags (i.e., two quarters), are
in parentheses. In USD, each statistic is computed on the basis of 419 weekly observations from December 19,
2001 to January 27, 2010. In EUR, each statistic is computed on the basis of 449 weekly observations from June
6, 2001 to January 27, 2010. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels, respectively.

                               Table 5: Overall comparison between models
 Tenor                                                  Option expiry
                1 mth       3 mths        6 mths     9 mths         1 yr       2 yrs        5 yrs       10 yrs
                                                    Panel A: USD market
 2 yrs         −0.08∗∗∗ −0.12∗∗∗ −0.17∗∗∗ −0.20∗∗∗ −0.25∗∗∗ −0.29∗∗∗ −0.14∗∗∗ −0.05∗∗
               (−4.44)      (−3.94)      (−4.17)     (−4.56)      (−5.67)    (−6.97)      (−3.29)      (−2.46)

 5 yrs         −0.06∗∗∗     −0.09∗∗∗     −0.14∗∗∗    −0.19∗∗∗     −0.24∗∗∗    −0.29∗∗∗    −0.22∗∗∗     −0.07∗∗∗
               (−3.45)      (−3.17)      (−3.98)     (−5.17)      (−6.68)    (−7.84)      (−6.47)      (−3.68)

 10 yrs        −0.04∗∗∗ −0.07∗∗∗ −0.12∗∗∗ −0.17∗∗∗ −0.21∗∗∗ −0.27∗∗∗ −0.23∗∗∗ −0.07∗∗∗
               (−2.69)      (−2.75)      (−3.36)     (−5.19)      (−5.89)    (−6.74)      (−6.53)      (−2.95)

 20 yrs        −0.07∗∗∗     −0.06∗∗∗     −0.13∗∗∗    −0.15∗∗∗     −0.17∗∗∗    −0.24∗∗∗    −0.26∗∗∗     −0.12∗∗∗
               (−3.79)      (−3.10)      (−4.81)     (−5.27)      (−5.51)    (−6.78)      (−7.67)      (−4.39)

 30 yrs        −0.06∗∗∗ −0.06∗∗          −0.10∗∗∗ −0.14∗∗∗ −0.16∗∗∗ −0.24∗∗∗ −0.27∗∗∗ −0.14∗∗∗
               (−3.29)      (−2.17)      (−3.32)     (−4.42)      (−4.91)    (−6.49)      (−7.94)      (−4.50)

                                                    Panel B: EUR market
 2 yrs         −0.04∗∗      −0.11∗∗∗ −0.15∗∗∗ −0.17∗∗∗ −0.21∗∗∗ −0.26∗∗∗ −0.27∗∗∗ −0.26∗∗∗
               (−2.18)      (−4.00)      (−4.11)     (−4.07)      (−4.07)    (−3.84)      (−4.81)      (−6.44)

 5 yrs         −0.06∗∗∗ −0.15∗∗∗ −0.17∗∗∗ −0.20∗∗∗ −0.16∗∗∗ −0.20∗∗∗ −0.15∗∗∗ −0.20∗∗∗
               (−3.13)      (−7.39)      (−6.93)     (−6.54)      (−4.24)    (−3.93)      (−2.62)      (−5.18)

 10 yrs        −0.07∗∗∗     −0.15∗∗∗     −0.20∗∗∗    −0.22∗∗∗     −0.22∗∗∗    −0.21∗∗∗    −0.10∗       −0.11∗∗∗
               (−3.01)      (−5.26)      (−6.17)     (−6.35)      (−5.71)    (−4.72)      (−1.95)      (−3.01)

 20 yrs        −0.05        −0.11∗∗∗ −0.19∗∗∗ −0.24∗∗∗ −0.27∗∗∗ −0.25∗∗∗ −0.09∗∗                       −0.09∗∗∗
               (−1.45)      (−3.06)      (−4.32)     (−5.41)      (−5.96)    (−5.70)      (−2.45)      (−2.73)

 30 yrs        −0.05∗       −0.13∗∗∗ −0.19∗∗∗ −0.19∗∗∗ −0.18∗∗∗ −0.24∗∗∗ −0.08∗∗                       −0.08∗∗∗
               (−1.68)      (−3.63)      (−4.17)     (−3.77)      (−3.55)    (−5.55)      (−2.28)      (−2.64)

Notes: The table compares the SV1 and SV2 specifications in terms of their ability to match skewness of the
future swap rate distributions under the annuity measure A. For each tenor – option expiry category, the table
reports the mean differences in absolute skewness errors between the two specifications, where skewness errors
are the differences between the model-implied skewness and the model independent skewness. T -statistics,
corrected for serial correlation up to 26 lags (i.e., two quarters), are in parentheses. In USD, each statistic is
computed on the basis of 419 weekly observations from December 19, 2001 to January 27, 2010. In EUR, each
statistic is computed on the basis of 449 weekly observations from June 6, 2001 to January 27, 2010. *, **, and
*** denote significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels, respectively.

                                      Table 6: Evaluating fit to skewness
 Tenor                                                 Option expiry
                1 mth       3 mths      6 mths      9 mths         1 yr       2 yrs        5 yrs       10 yrs
                                                  Panel A: USD market
 2 yrs          −0.93       −2.43       −4.13        −5.20       −5.72        −8.24       −14.27      −16.81
                (0.45)       (1.16)      (1.94)       (2.40)      (2.58)       (3.46)      (4.77)       (3.67)

 5 yrs          −1.02       −2.67       −4.54        −5.72       −6.27        −8.96       −14.80      −16.66
                (0.49)       (1.27)      (2.13)       (2.64)      (2.84)       (3.77)      (4.93)       (3.56)

 10 yrs         −1.00       −2.62       −4.46        −5.62       −6.17        −8.79       −14.30      −15.94
                (0.48)       (1.25)      (2.10)       (2.60)      (2.81)       (3.73)      (4.80)       (3.42)

 20 yrs         −0.88       −2.30       −3.95        −4.99       −5.50        −7.94       −13.21      −15.05
                (0.42)       (1.10)      (1.86)       (2.32)      (2.52)       (3.40)      (4.52)       (3.34)

 30 yrs         −0.82       −2.16       −3.70        −4.70       −5.19        −7.56       −12.81      −14.87
                (0.40)       (1.03)      (1.75)       (2.19)      (2.38)       (3.25)      (4.43)       (3.37)

                                                  Panel B: EUR market
 2 yrs          −0.56       −1.47       −2.51        −3.14       −3.43        −4.81       −7.77        −9.47
                (0.16)       (0.39)      (0.61)       (0.71)      (0.72)       (0.77)      (0.61)       (0.31)

 5 yrs          −0.55       −1.45       −2.47        −3.11       −3.40        −4.80       −7.82        −9.48
                (0.15)       (0.38)      (0.60)       (0.70)      (0.72)       (0.77)      (0.61)       (0.31)

 10 yrs         −0.54       −1.41       −2.41        −3.03       −3.33        −4.72       −7.75        −9.40
                (0.15)       (0.37)      (0.59)       (0.69)      (0.70)       (0.76)      (0.60)       (0.30)

 20 yrs         −0.50       −1.32       −2.26        −2.85       −3.13        −4.49       −7.55        −9.32
                (0.14)       (0.35)      (0.56)       (0.65)      (0.67)       (0.72)      (0.58)       (0.30)

 30 yrs         −0.48       −1.28       −2.19        −2.77       −3.05        −4.41       −7.55        −9.45
                (0.14)       (0.34)      (0.54)       (0.64)      (0.65)       (0.71)      (0.59)       (0.31)

Notes: Volatility risk premia are defined as the differences between conditional volatilities (annualized and in
basis points) of the future swap rate distributions under the physical measure P and the risk-neutral measure
Q. The table shows averages of volatility risk premia and, in parentheses, standard deviations of volatility risk
premia. In USD, each statistic is computed on the basis of 419 weekly observations from December 19, 2001
to January 27, 2010. In EUR, each statistic is computed on the basis of 449 weekly observations from June 6,
2001 to January 27, 2010.

                                      Table 7: Volatility risk premia
 Tenor                                               Option expiry
               1 mth       3 mths      6 mths      9 mths       1 yr        2 yrs       5 yrs      10 yrs
                                                 Panel A: USD market
 2 yrs        −0.008      −0.030       −0.074      −0.096      −0.116      −0.222      −0.419      −0.689
               (0.015)     (0.020)     (0.044)      (0.051)     (0.055)     (0.071)     (0.053)     (0.070)

 5 yrs        −0.007      −0.031       −0.075      −0.098      −0.118      −0.231      −0.451      −0.712
               (0.012)     (0.020)     (0.045)      (0.052)     (0.057)     (0.076)     (0.055)     (0.067)

 10 yrs       −0.007      −0.031       −0.075      −0.098      −0.119      −0.237      −0.473      −0.724
               (0.012)     (0.020)     (0.045)      (0.053)     (0.059)     (0.079)     (0.055)     (0.060)

 20 yrs       −0.007      −0.029       −0.073      −0.096      −0.117      −0.237      −0.478      −0.722
               (0.016)     (0.020)     (0.044)      (0.052)     (0.058)     (0.081)     (0.056)     (0.051)

 30 yrs       −0.008      −0.029       −0.072      −0.094      −0.115      −0.235      −0.478      −0.723
               (0.019)     (0.019)     (0.043)      (0.051)     (0.057)     (0.080)     (0.056)     (0.046)

                                                 Panel B: EUR market
 2 yrs        −0.008      −0.026       −0.068      −0.093      −0.117      −0.241      −0.407      −0.533
               (0.033)     (0.021)     (0.047)      (0.058)     (0.066)     (0.098)     (0.086)     (0.054)

 5 yrs        −0.007      −0.034       −0.086      −0.113      −0.138      −0.266      −0.429      −0.552
               (0.031)     (0.026)     (0.057)      (0.068)     (0.075)     (0.107)     (0.089)     (0.055)

 10 yrs       −0.008      −0.039       −0.097      −0.125      −0.151      −0.284      −0.450      −0.567
               (0.036)     (0.029)     (0.062)      (0.073)     (0.080)     (0.111)     (0.090)     (0.054)

 20 yrs       −0.006      −0.039       −0.099      −0.128      −0.155      −0.292      −0.463      −0.572
               (0.047)     (0.029)     (0.062)      (0.073)     (0.080)     (0.110)     (0.088)     (0.053)

 30 yrs       −0.012      −0.039       −0.097      −0.126      −0.153      −0.291      −0.467      −0.574
               (0.048)     (0.028)     (0.060)      (0.071)     (0.078)     (0.107)     (0.085)     (0.052)

Notes: Skewness risk premia are defined as the differences between conditional skewness of the future swap
rate distributions under the physical measure P and the risk-neutral measure Q. The table shows averages of
skewness risk premia and, in parentheses, standard deviations of skewness risk premia. In USD, each statistic
is computed on the basis of 419 weekly observations from December 19, 2001 to January 27, 2010. In EUR,
each statistic is computed on the basis of 449 weekly observations from June 6, 2001 to January 27, 2010.

                                     Table 8: Skewness risk premia
                   GDP vol        GDP skew          IN F vol      IN F skew          EQvol          EQskew            LIQ            REF I              R2
 vol                21.428∗∗∗        8.401 ∗∗        30.536        −6.701                                                                             0.404
                     (4.888)         (2.064)         (0.854)        (−0.690)

 vol                19.027∗∗∗        0.892           51.982           9.763          77.317∗∗∗      127.823∗∗∗       11.401∗∗         2.142 ∗∗        0.585
                     (6.345)         (0.199)         (1.390)         (1.427)         (4.619)          (3.069)         (2.456)         (2.077)

 volP rem          −3.707∗∗∗       −0.736∗∗∗       −4.900∗∗           0.496                                                                           0.540
                   (−9.589)        (−2.628)        (−2.063)          (0.691)

 volP rem          −3.397 ∗∗∗      −0.288          −2.758          −0.171           −7.050∗∗∗       −6.225∗         −0.897∗∗        −0.162∗           0.641
                   (−10.613)       (−1.002)        (−1.021)         (−0.292)        (−5.980)        (−1.880)        (−2.015)        (−1.761)

 skew                0.290 ∗         0.352 ∗∗∗     −0.726          −0.060                                                                             0.413
                     (1.907)         (2.773)       (−1.139)         (−0.304)

 skew                0.199 ∗         0.284 ∗∗      −0.421             0.123           0.729 ∗         3.971 ∗∗∗     −0.192            0.017           0.544
                     (1.677)         (2.373)       (−0.615)          (0.985)          (1.719)         (3.174)       (−1.241)          (0.810)

 skewP rem           0.023 ∗         0.011 ∗         0.074          −0.035∗                                                                           0.134
                     (1.741)         (1.814)         (1.208)        (−1.786)

 skewP rem           0.008 ∗         0.007         −0.004          −0.015             0.045 ∗       −0.203∗           0.010         −0.002            0.248
                     (1.760)         (1.319)       (−0.088)         (−1.495)          (1.892)       (−1.931)          (1.447)       (−1.301)

Notes: The table reports estimates of the MIDAS regression specification (28) in which the cross-sectional average of USD physical volatility (vol), volatility
risk premia (volP rem), physical skewness (skew), or skewness risk premia (skewP rem) is regressed on a constant, dispersion and skewness of agents’ belief
distributions for future U.S. real GDP growth and inflation (GDP vol, GDP skew, IN F vol, and IN F skew), volatility and skewness of the risk-neutral
S&P 500 index return distribution (EQvol and EQskew), the spread between the 3-month OIS rate and the 3-month Treasury bill yield (LIQ), and the
MBA Refinancing Index (REF I). Physical volatility and volatility risk premia are measured in basis points, and the MBA Refinancing Index is divided by
1000. Estimation is by non-linear least squares. T -statistics, corrected for heteroscedasticity and serial correlation up to 26 lags (i.e., two quarters), are in
parentheses. The sample period is December 19, 2001 to January 27, 2010. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels, respectively.

                                           Table 9: Fundamental drivers of USD swap rate distributions
                   GDP vol        GDP skew          IN F vol      IN F skew          EQvol          EQskew            LIQ            REF I              R2
 vol               −2.193            3.153 ∗        106.612∗∗∗       10.677∗∗                                                                         0.630
                   (−0.602)          (1.759)         (6.296)         (2.183)

 vol                 2.730           2.176 ∗         60.941∗∗∗        4.057          25.633∗∗∗        3.357           4.232 ∗         0.409           0.698
                     (1.092)         (1.856)         (4.924)         (1.017)         (3.817)          (0.174)         (1.882)         (0.749)

 volP rem          −0.781∗∗        −0.447∗         −7.063∗∗∗       −0.254                                                                             0.411
                   (−2.063)        (−1.660)        (−3.937)         (−0.364)

 volP rem          −0.704∗∗        −0.425          −4.759∗∗∗       −0.337           −2.665∗∗∗       −4.165          −0.520          −0.067            0.434
                   (−2.300)        (−1.588)        (−3.160)         (−0.492)        (−2.791)        (−1.426)        (−1.587)        (−0.884)

 skew                0.256 ∗∗        0.047         −1.071∗∗           0.483 ∗∗                                                                        0.269
                     (2.468)         (0.468)       (−2.141)          (2.548)

 skew                0.114           0.126         −0.877∗            0.351 ∗       −0.767∗           2.911 ∗∗∗       0.134           0.009           0.462
                     (1.226)         (1.338)        (−1.718)         (1.846)        (−1.951)          (2.780)         (1.266)         (0.351)

 skewP rem         −0.044∗           0.003           0.237 ∗∗      −0.098∗∗∗                                                                          0.228
                   (−1.847)          (0.158)         (2.248)        (−2.638)

 skewP rem         −0.035∗         −0.011            0.191 ∗       −0.071∗∗           0.159 ∗∗      −0.396∗         −0.037          −0.002            0.329
                   (−1.733)        (−0.584)          (1.715)        (−1.971)          (2.080)       (−1.806)        (−1.577)        (−0.376)

Notes: The table reports estimates of the MIDAS regression specification (28) in which the cross-sectional average of EUR physical volatility (vol), volatility
risk premia (volP rem), physical skewness (skew), or skewness risk premia (skewP rem) is regressed on a constant, dispersion and skewness of agents’ belief
distributions for future Eurozone real GDP growth and inflation (GDP vol, GDP skew, IN F vol, and IN F skew), volatility and skewness of the risk-neutral
Eurostoxx 50 index return distribution (EQvol and EQskew), the spread between the 3-month OIS rate and the 3-month German Bubill yield (LIQ), and
the MBA Refinancing Index (REF I). Physical volatility and volatility risk premia are measured in basis points, and the MBA Refinancing Index is divided
by 1000. Estimation is by non-linear least squares. T -statistics, corrected for heteroscedasticity and serial correlation up to 26 lags (i.e., two quarters), are
in parentheses. The sample period is June 6, 2001 to January 27, 2010. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent levels, respectively.

                                          Table 10: Fundamental drivers of EUR swap rate distributions
                    ∆GDP vol          ∆GDP skew ∆IN F vol         ∆IN F skew ∆EQvol               ∆EQskew           ∆LIQ          ∆REF I             R2
 ∆vol                  23.591∗∗       −0.474          8.335           8.059                                                                         0.176
                       (2.343)        (−0.083)        (0.221)         (1.175)

 ∆vol                  21.784∗∗         1.790        12.096          11.926          18.723       −94.012           12.153∗∗        2.154           0.311
                       (2.139)          (0.244)       (0.322)         (1.513)        (0.556)       (−0.944)         (2.013)         (1.103)

 ∆volP rem           −1.742∗          −0.741        −0.210          −1.049                                                                          0.187
                      (−1.692)        (−1.267)      (−0.055)        (−1.495)

 ∆volP rem           −2.125∗          −0.803        −1.842          −0.635         −0.203           17.462          0.082           0.033           0.280
                      (−1.885)        (−0.989)      (−0.443)        (−0.728)       (−0.055)          (1.585)        (0.122)         (0.153)

 ∆skew               −0.077             0.436 ∗∗∗     1.483         −0.117                                                                          0.258
                      (−0.269)         (2.672)        (1.380)       (−0.595)

 ∆skew               −0.041             0.433 ∗∗      1.931 ∗       −0.282           0.585         −0.337         −0.414∗∗          0.045           0.502
                      (−0.151)          (2.196)       (1.910)       (−1.331)         (0.646)       (−0.126)        (−2.548)         (0.853)

 ∆skewP rem            0.018          −0.013        −0.181            0.038 ∗                                                                       0.141
                       (0.593)        (−0.765)      (−1.569)          (1.817)

 ∆skewP rem            0.039          −0.002        −0.151            0.037 ∗      −0.146∗         −1.021∗∗∗        0.023           0.003           0.472
                       (1.541)        (−0.110)      (−1.609)          (1.852)      (−1.724)        (−4.095)         (1.497)         (0.669)

Notes: The table reports estimates of the regression specification (29) in which the quarterly change in the cross-sectional average of USD physical volatility
(vol), volatility risk premia (volP rem), physical skewness (skew), or skewness risk premia (skewP rem) is regressed on a constant and the quarterly changes
in the dispersion and skewness of agents’ belief distributions for future U.S. real GDP growth and inflation (GDP vol, GDP skew, IN F vol, and IN F skew),
the volatility and skewness of the risk-neutral S&P 500 index return distribution (EQvol and EQskew), the spread between the 3-month OIS rate and the
3-month Treasury bill yield (LIQ), and the MBA Refinancing Index (REF I). Physical volatility and volatility risk premia are measured in basis points, and
the MBA Refinancing Index is divided by 1000. Estimation is by ordinary least squares. T -statistics, corrected for heteroscedasticity and serial correlation
up to 2 lags (i.e., two quarters), are in parentheses. The sample period is January, 2002 to January, 2010. *, **, and *** denote significance at the 10, 5,
and 1 percent levels, respectively.

                            Table 11: Fundamental drivers of USD swap rate distributions, regression in changes
                    ∆GDP vol         ∆GDP skew ∆IN F vol          ∆IN F skew ∆EQvol               ∆EQskew           ∆LIQ          ∆REF I             R2
 ∆vol                 −0.703            5.926 ∗      66.321∗∗       −1.567                                                                          0.169
                      (−0.146)          (1.883)       (2.122)       (−0.249)

 ∆vol                 −1.506            6.155 ∗      67.924∗∗       −4.409           34.517∗      −43.332           5.718         −1.282            0.308
                      (−0.305)          (1.744)       (2.055)       (−0.676)         (1.737)       (−0.807)         (1.597)       (−1.108)

 ∆volP rem            −0.317∗         −0.206∗       −2.516∗∗          0.250                                                                         0.226
                      (−1.676)        (−1.671)      (−2.055)          (1.013)

 ∆volP rem            −0.350∗         −0.265∗       −2.940∗∗          0.281        −0.577            2.546        −0.016            0.036           0.285
                      (−1.714)        (−1.818)      (−2.155)          (1.043)      (−0.703)          (1.148)       (−0.105)         (0.762)

 ∆skew                  0.193 ∗         0.055         0.984           0.294 ∗∗                                                                      0.257
                        (1.776)         (0.769)       (1.398)         (2.073)

 ∆skew                  0.224 ∗∗        0.070         1.052           0.297 ∗∗     −0.867∗           1.056          0.083           0.025           0.357
                        (1.975)         (0.863)       (1.386)         (1.981)      (−1.901)          (0.855)        (1.008)         (0.932)

 ∆skewP rem           −0.051∗           0.003       −0.202          −0.061∗                                                                         0.309
                      (−1.882)          (0.164)     (−1.158)        (−1.732)

 ∆skewP rem           −0.052∗         −0.003        −0.205          −0.063∗          0.242 ∗∗        0.108        −0.027          −0.006            0.439
                      (−1.891)        (−0.161)      (−1.124)        (−1.763)         (2.204)         (0.363)       (−1.346)       (−0.924)

Notes: The table reports estimates of the regression specification (29) in which the quarterly change in the cross-sectional average of EUR physical volatility
(vol), volatility risk premia (volP rem), physical skewness (skew), or skewness risk premia (skewP rem) is regressed on a constant and the quarterly changes in
the dispersion and skewness of agents’ belief distributions for future Eurozone real GDP growth and inflation (GDP vol, GDP skew, IN F vol, and IN F skew),
the volatility and skewness of the risk-neutral Eurostoxx 50 index return distribution (EQvol and EQskew), the spread between the 3-month OIS rate and
the 3-month German Bubill yield (LIQ), and the MBA Refinancing Index (REF I). Physical volatility and volatility risk premia are measured in basis
points, and the MBA Refinancing Index is divided by 1000. Estimation is by ordinary least squares. T -statistics, corrected for heteroscedasticity and serial
correlation up to 2 lags (i.e., two quarters), are in parentheses. The sample period is July, 2001 to January, 2010. *, **, and *** denote significance at the
10, 5, and 1 percent levels, respectively.

                             Table 12: Fundamental drivers of EUR swap rate distributions, regression in changes
                         Panel A: Volatility                             Panel B: Skewness
                200                                            1
                         SV1 specification
                         SV2 specification
                180      Data


                160
                                                             0.5
 Basis points




                140

                120
                                                               0
                100

                 80

                 60                                         -0.5
                 Jul01    Jul04        Jul07   Jul10          Jul01      Jul04         Jul07        Jul10



Figure 1: Time-series of volatility and skewness of the conditional 1-year ahead distribution
of the USD 10-year swap rate
Notes: Panel A displays conditional volatility, measured in basis points, and Panel B displays conditional
skewness. The moments are computed under the annuity measure A The time-series consist of 419 weekly
observations from December 19th, 2001 to January 27th, 2010.




                                                       45
                                     Panel A: Data                                            Panel B: SV1 specification                                       Panel C: SV2 specification




                      40                                                               40                                                               40

                      30                                                               30                                                               30

                      20                                                               20                                                               20
       Basis points




                                                                        Basis points




                                                                                                                                         Basis points
                      10                                                               10                                                               10

                       0                                                                0                                                                0

                  -10                                                            -10                                                                -10
46




                  -20                                                              -20                                                              -20

         -30                                                      200     -30                                                      200    -30                                                         200
       Jul10                                                100         Jul10                                                100         Jul10                                                  100
                           Jul07                          0                                 Jul07                          0                                 Jul07                            0
                                   Jul04             -100                                           Jul04             -100                                           Jul04               -100
                                           Jul01 -200     Moneyness                                         Jul01 -200     Moneyness                                         Jul01   -200     Moneyness


     Figure 2: Time-series of the USD normal implied volatility smile of the 1-year option on 10-year swap rate
     Notes: Panel A displays the data, Panel B displays the smiles obtained in the SV1 specification, and Panel C displays the smiles obtained in the SV2
     specification. The normal implied volatilities are measured in basis points. The time-series consist of 419 weekly observations from December 19th, 2001 to
     January 27th, 2010.
References
Andersen, L. and V. Piterbarg (2010): Interest Rate Modeling, Atlantic Financial Press.

Andersen, T. G. and L. Benzoni (2010): “Do bonds span volatility risk in the U.S. Treasury
    market? A specification test for affine term structure models,” Journal of Finance, 65:603–653.

Ang, A. and M. Piazzesi (2003): “A no-arbitrage vector autoregression of term structure dynamics
    with macroeconomic and latent variables,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 50:745–787.

Ang, A., M. Piazzesi, and M. Wei (2006): “What does the yield curve tell us about GDP growth?,”
    Journal of Econometrics, 131:359–403.

Bakshi, G., N. Kapadia, and D. Madan (2003): “Stock return characteristics, skew laws, and the
    differential pricing of individual equity options,” Review of Financial Studies, 16:101–143.

Bakshi, G. and D. Madan (2000): “Spanning and derivative-security valuation,” Journal of Finan-
    cial Economics, 55:205–238.

Bansal, R. and I. Shaliastovich (2009): “A long-run risks explanation of predictability puzzles in
    bond and currency markets,” Working paper, Duke University.

Barclays (2010): 2010 US Volatility Outlook,

Beber, A. and M. Brandt (2006): “The effects of macroeconomic news on beliefs and preferences:
    Evidence from the options market,” Journal of Monetary Economics, pages 1997–2039.

Bekaert, G., S. Cho, and A. Moreno (2010): “New-Keynesian macroeconomics and the term
    structure,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 42:33–62.

Bekaert, G. and E. Engstrom (2009):           “Asset return dynamics under bad environment-good
    environment fundamentals,” Working paper, Columbia Business School.

Bikbov, R. and M. Chernov (2010): “No-arbitrage macroeconomic determinants of the yield curve,”
    Journal of Econometrics, 159:166–182.

BIS (2010): OTC derivatives market activity in the second half of 2009,

Black, F. (1976): “The pricing of commodity contracts,” Journal of Financial Economics, 3:167–179.

Bollen, N. and R. Whaley (2004): “Does net buying pressure affect the shape of implied volatility
    functions?,” Journal of Finance, 59:711–753.

Bollerslev, T., N. Sizova, and G. Tauchen (2009): “Volatility in equilibrium: Asymmetries and
    dynamic dependencies,” Working paper, Duke University.

Bollerslev, T., G. Tauchen, and H. Zhou (2009): “Expected stock returns and variance risk
    premia,” Review of Financial Studies, 22:4463–4492.


                                                 47
Bongaerts, D., F. de Jong, and J. Driessen (2010):           “Derivative pricing with liquidity risk:
    Theory and evidence from the credit default swap market,” Working paper, Tilburg University,
    forthcoming Journal of Finance.

Breeden, D. and R. Litzenberger (1978): “Prices of state-contingent claims implicit in option
    prices,” Journal of Business, pages 621–651.

Buraschi, A. and A. Jiltsov (2006): “Model uncertainty and option markets with heterogeneous
    beliefs,” Journal of Finance, 61:2841–2897.

Buraschi, A., F. Trojani, and A. Vedolin (2009): “When uncertainty blows in the orchard: Co-
    movement and equilibrium volatility risk premia,” Working paper, Imperial College and University
    of Lugano.

Carr, P., X. Garbaix, and L. Wu (2009): “Linearity-generating processes, unspanned stochastic
    volatility, and interest-rate option pricing,” Working paper, New York University.

Carr, P. and D. Madan (1999): “Option valuation using the Fast Fourier Transform,” Journal of
    Computational Finance, 2:61–73.

           (2001): “Optimal positioning in derivatives securities,” Quantitative Finance, 1:19–37.

Carr, P. and L. Wu (2007): “Stochastic skew in currency options,” Journal of Financial Economics,
    86:213–247.

Cetin, U., R. Jarrow, P. Protter, and M. Warachka (2006): “Pricing options in an extended
    Black Scholes economy with illiquidity: Theory and empirical evidence,” Review of Financial
    Studies, 19:493–529.

Cheredito, P., D. Filipovic, and R. Kimmel (2007): “Market price of risk specifications for affine
    models: Theory and evidence,” Journal of Financial Economics, 83:123–170.

Christoffersen, P., K. Jakobs, L. Karoui, and K. Mimouni (2009): “Non-linear filtering in
    affine term structure models: Evidence from the term structure of swap rates,” Working paper,
    McGill University.

Chun, A. L. (2010): “Expectations, bond yields, and monetary policy,” Working paper, Copenhagen
    Business School, forthcoming Review of Financial Studies.

Clarida, R., J. Gali, and M. Gertler (2000): “Monetary policy rules and macroeconomic stability:
    Evidence and some theory,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115:147–180.

Collin-Dufresne, P. and R. Goldstein (2002): “Do bonds span the fixed income markets? Theory
    and evidence for unspanned stochastic volatility,” Journal of Finance, 57:1685–1730.

Collin-Dufresne, P., R. Goldstein, and C. Jones (2009):             “Can interest rate volatility be
    extracted from the cross section of bond yields?,” Journal of Financial Economics, 94:47–66.

                                                   48
Das, S. R. and R. K. Sundaram (1999): “Of smiles and smirks: A term structure perspective,”
    Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 34:211–239.

David, A. and P. Veronesi (2002): “Options prices with uncertain fundamentals,” Working paper,
    University of Chicago.

            (2009): “Macroeconomic uncertainty and fear measures extracted from index options,”
    Working paper, University of Chicago.

de Jong, F., J. Driessen, and A. Pelsser (2004): “On the information in the interest rate term
    structure and option prices,” Review of Derivatives Research, 7:99–127.

Deuskar, P., A. Gupta, and M. Subrahmanyam (2008): “The economic determinants of interest
    rate option smiles,” Journal of Banking and Finance, 32:714–728.

            (2010): “Liquidity effects in OTC options markets: Premium or discount?,” Working
    paper, New York University, forthcoming Journal of Financial Markets.

Drechsler, I. and A. Yaron (2009): “What’s vol got to do with it,” Working paper, NYU Stern
    and the Wharton School, forthcoming Review of Financial Studies.

Driessen, J., P. Klaassen, and B. Melenberg (2003): “The performance of multi-factor term
    structure models for pricing and hedging caps and swaptions,” Journal of Financial and Quanti-
    tative Analysis, 38:635–672.

Duan, J.-C. and J.-G. Simonato (1999): “Estimating and testing eksponential-affine term structure
    models by Kalman filter,” Review of Quantitative Finance and Accounting, 13:111–135.

Duarte, J. (2008): “The causal effect of mortgage refinancing on interest rate volatility: Empirical
    evidence and theoretical implications,” Review of Financial Studies, 21:1689–1731.

Duarte, J., F. Longstaff, and F. Yu (2007): “Risk and return in fixed income arbitrage: Nickels
    in front of a steamroller,” Review of Financial Studies, 20:769–811.

Eraker, B. and I. Shaliastovich (2008): “An equilibrium guide to designing affine pricing models,”
    Mathematical Finance, 18:519–43.

Fan, R., A. Gupta, and P. Ritchken (2003): “Hedging in the possible presence of unspanned
    stochastic volatility: Evidence from swaption markets,” Journal of Finance, 58:2219–2248.

Fujii, M., Y. Shimada, and A. Takahashi (2009): “A market model of interest rates with dynamic
    spreads in the presence of collateral and multiple currencies,” Working paper, Shinsei Bank and
    University of Tokyo.

Gallmeyer, M., B. Hollifield, and S. Zin (2005): “Taylor rules, McCallum rules, and the term
    structure of interest rates,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 52:921–950.


                                                 49
Gârleanu, N., L. H. Pedersen, and A. M. Poteshman (2009): “Demand-based option pricing,”
     Review of Financial Studies, 22:4259–4299.

Ghysels, E., P. Santa-Clara, and R. Valkanov (2005): “There is a risk-return trade-off after
     all,” Journal of Financial Economics, 76:509–548.

             (2006): “Predicting volatility: Getting the most out of return data sampled at different
     frequencies,” Journal of Econometrics, 131:59–95.

Giordani, P. and P. Soderlind (2003):          “Inflation forecast uncertainty,” European Economic
     Review, 47:1037–1059.

Gupta, A. and M. Subrahmanyam (2005): “Pricing and hedging interest rate options: Evidence
     from cap-floor markets,” Journal of Banking and Finance, 29:701–733.

Han, B. (2007): “Stochastic volatilities and correlations of bond yields,” Journal of Finance, 62:1491–
     1524.

Heidari, M. and L. Wu (2003): “Are interest rate derivatives spanned by the term structure of
     interest rates?,” Journal of Fixed Income, 13:75–86.

Heston, S. (1993): “A closed form solution for options with stochastic volatility,” Review of Financial
     Studies, 6:327–343.

Jamshidian, F. (1997): “Libor and swap market models and measures,” Finance and Stochastics,
     1:293–330.

Jarrow, R., H. Li, and F. Zhao (2007): “Interest rate caps ’smile’ too! But can the LIBOR market
     models capture the smile?,” Journal of Finance, 62:345–382.

Joslin, S. (2007): “Pricing and hedging volatility risk in fixed income markets,” Working paper, MIT.

Joslin, S., M. Priebsch, and K. Singleton (2010): “Risk premiums in dynamic term structure
     models with unspanned macro risks,” Working paper, MIT and Stanford.

Krishnamurthy, A. (2010):        “How debt markets have malfunctioned in the crisis,” Journal of
     Economic Perspectives, 24:3–28.

Le, A. and K. Singleton (2010): “An equilibrium term structure model with recursive preferences,”
     American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings.

Lee, R. (2004): “Option pricing by transform methods: Extensions, unification, and error control,”
     Journal of Computational Finance, 7:51–86.

Li, H. and F. Zhao (2006): “Unspanned stochastic volatlity: Evidence from hedging interest rate
     drivatives,” Journal of Finance, 61:341–378.



                                                    50
           (2009): “Nonparametric estimation of state-price densities implicit in interest rate cap
    prices,” Review of Financial Studies, 22:4335–4376.

Longstaff, F., P. Santa-Clara, and E. Schwartz (2001a): “The relative valuation of caps and
    swaptions: Theory and evidence,” Journal of Finance, 56:2067–2109.

           (2001b): “Throwing away a billion dollars: the cost of suboptimal exercise strategies in
    the swaptions market,” Journal of Financial Economics, 62:39–66.

Longstaff, F. and E. Schwartz (2001):          “Valuing American options by simulation: A simple
    least-square approach,” Review of Financial Studies, 14:113–147.

Mercurio, F. (2009):     “Interest rates and the credit crunch. New formulas and market models,”
    Working paper, Bloomberg.

Nelson, C. and A. Siegel (1987): “Parsimonious modeling of yield curves.,” Journal of Business,
    60:473–489.

Piazzesi, M. and M. Schneider (2007): “Equilibrium yield curves,” in, Daron Acemoglu, Kenneth
    Rogoff, and Michael Woodford, eds.: NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2006, MIT press, Cambridge
    MA.

Piterbarg, V. (2010): “Funding beyond discounting: Collateral agreements and derivatives pricing,”
    RISK magazine, pages 97–102.

Shaliastovich, I. (2009): “Learning, confidence and option prices,” Working paper, The Wharton
    School, University of Pennsylvania.

Smith, J. and J. Taylor (2009):        “The term structure of policy rules,” Journal of Monetary
    Economics, 56:907–919.

Trolle, A. B. and E. S. Schwartz (2009): “A general stochastic volatility model for the pricing
    of interest rate derivatives,” Review of Financial Studies, 22:2007–2057.

Xiong, W. and H. Yan (2010): “Heterogeneous expectations and bond markets,” Review of Financial
    Studies, 23:1433–1466.




                                                 51
