NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

A NOTE ON DETECTING LEARNING BY EXPORTING
Jan De Loecker
Working Paper 16548
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16548

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2010

The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Jan De Loecker. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

A Note on Detecting Learning by Exporting
Jan De Loecker
NBER Working Paper No. 16548
November 2010
JEL No. F0
ABSTRACT
Learning by exporting refers to the mechanism whereby firms improve their performance (productivity)
after entering export markets. Although this mechanism is often mentioned in policy documents, a
significant share of econometric studies has not found evidence for this hypothesis. This paper shows
that the methods used to come to the latter conclusion suffer from a large internal inconsistency: they
rely on an exogenous evolving productivity process. I show how recent proxy estimators can accommodate
endogenous productivity processes such as learning by exporting. I rely on my framework to discuss
the bias introduced by ignoring such a process and how adjusting for it can lead to detect significant
productivity gains upon export entry. I estimate my model on standard firm-level data and find substantial
additional productivity gains from entering export markets.

Jan De Loecker
Department of Economics
307 Fisher Hall
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544-1021
and NBER
jdeloeck@princeton.edu

1

Introduction

Learning by exporting (LBE) refers to the mechanism whereby firms improve their performance
(productivity) after entering export markets. This mechanism is often mentioned in policy documents, based on case-studies, and has recently been confirmed for developing countries.1 The
case-study evidence tends to point to the importance of learning from foreign markets through
buyer-seller relationships where exporters can learn from foreign customers and rivals about improving product quality, shipment size, or even more directly by specific investment requirements.
All of the above mentioned potential mechanisms are, however, never observed or modelled in
our empirical models. In practice, researchers typically rely on a residual of a production function
as a measure of productivity and test whether this increases post export entry. In addition to the
known problems with estimating production functions to obtain reliable measures of productivity, I focus on the role of exporting in shaping a firm’s future productivity draw. In this paper I
argue that even when we only observe a firm’s export status, LBE can be detected by explicitly
allowing the evolution of productivity to depend on previous export experience. In particular, I
show that current methods are biased towards rejecting the LBE hypothesis. Moreover, they suffer
from a large internal inconsistency by either (implicitly) assuming that productivity is simply an
idiosyncratic shock or that productivity at the firm level follows an exogenous (Markov) process
over time. In both cases, past export experience is not allowed to impact future productivity in
any way. Given that our measures of productivity are typically sales per input measures, we are
excluding past export experience to impact both direct technological improvements (process innovation) as well as product innovation or product quality upgrading. I do not want to distinguish
between true productivity and measured productivity, because if anything, the implicit assumption
in current empirical work is even stronger, i.e. past export experience is not allowed to impact any
component.2
A significant share of studies has not found evidence for the learning by exporting hypothesis. In a survey article on international trade and technology diffusion, Keller (2004) concludes
that “The analysis has shown that there is no econometric evidence for a strong learning fromexporting effect”, but goes on to say that “... it is puzzling that the econometric evidence is so
strongly at odds with the case-study evidence.”. In a more recent survey Wagner (2007) reports
strong evidence in favor of the self-selection mechanism across a wide range of countries and industries, “while exporting does not necessarily improve productivity”. Finally, Keller (2009) does
provide more evidence in favor of learning from exporting and discusses outstanding issues related
to measuring the exact channels. This paper is concerned with identifying whether any effects are
present, and can augment the arguments made by Keller.
Although evidence is reported for a list of developing countries, the current view is that the
1

For instance Van Biesebroeck (2005) for Africa and De Loecker (2007) for Slovenia.
I refer to De Loecker (2010) and references herein for a discussion on what measured productivity contains given
we use sales (or value added) to proxy for output when estimating production functions.
2

2

correlation between firm-level export status and productivity is a result of a self-selection process
of more productive firms into becoming exporters. The recent evidence using rich micro datasets
should be contrasted to results obtained using aggregate data analyzing the link between trade and
various macro aggregates such as output, income, TFP and innovation. For instance Frankel and
Romer (1999) conclude that their results on trade and income “bolster the case for the importance
of trade and trade promoting policies”. However, these type of aggregate studies cannot separate
the productivity gains into reallocation effects across producers and within-firm productivity gains.
This paper is concerned with estimating the within-firm productivity effect associated with export
entry.
The lack of overwhelming evidence from micro data impacted the direction of theoretical
work in this field where not much attention is devoted to model possible feedback effects, at
the level of a firm, from exporting on productivity.3 Instead, most models of international trade
with heterogeneous firms, as introduced by Melitz (2003), rely on exogenous productivity shocks
coupled with a fixed cost of exporting to generate the result that exporters are more productive.
These models therefore provide no direct insight in the potential role of export promotion policies
often pursued by developing countries.
A recent literature has emphasized the importance of studying the productivity-export relationship while acknowledging that firms often decide to export while making investments simultaneously. I rely on my empirical framework to shed light on the separate effect of exporting on
productivity, while controlling for potential joint investment decisions. Although not the focus of
this paper, I provide estimates on the productivity effect of export entry while controlling for other
firm-level actions such as R&D (as in Aw, Roberts and Xu forthcoming), technology adoption (as
in Bustos, forthcoming) and quality upgrading (as in Verhoogen 2008). I briefly discuss such a
decomposition at the end of the paper.
I stress that I do not take a stand on whether productivity gains upon export entry are due to
passive learning or due to active decisions of firms. In this sense, the term learning by exporting
is not rich enough to cover all potential mechanisms that might induce productivity gains when
firms start exporting, such as investing in marketing, upgrading product quality, innovation, or
dealing with foreign buyers. Although the difference is important and crucial for understanding the
underlying mechanism, this paper is about establishing the correct predicted average productivity
gain associated with firms entering export markets. Throughout the paper I refer to LBE as the
process whereby exporting leads to higher productivity.
This paper is related to earlier work by De Loecker (2007) using the same data, where post
export entry productivity gains were found to be important, and to vary with export destinations.
This paper, however, deals with a different and new mechanism on how exporting can impact
productivity. In particular, I focus on the potential role of export experience in shaping a firm’s
3
An exception is Costantini and Melitz (2007) who model a joint export-innovation decision in a dynamic model of
international trade.

3

future productivity, while allowing other firm-level actions to impact future productivity as well.
The point made in this paper extends beyond the export-productivity literature, and is important
whenever we want to allow for endogenous productivity processes when evaluating the relationship between firm-level actions - such as technology upgrading, FDI, patenting, merger activity and productivity.

2

Empirical Models Used to Test LBE

In this section I introduce my empirical model which directly allows past export experience to
(potentially) impact current productivity. I show that current techniques rule out any LBE to take
place in the data to start with, and hereby bias the productivity estimates in an important way. In
what follows I consider the following production function (in logs) for firm i at time t generating
output (yit ) from labor (lit ) and capital (kit ) as follows,
yit = βl lit + βk kit + ωit + εit

(1)

where ωit captures productivity and subsumes the constant term, and εit is a standard i.i.d. error
term capturing unanticipated shocks to production and measurement error. The point made in
this paper can easily be extended towards more flexible production functions such as the translog
and CES production functions. I stick to the Cobb-Douglas production function to highlight the
importance of departing from the standard assumptions on the law of motion of productivity. In
addition, most if not all of the empirical literature has relied on the Cobb-Douglas specification
and this allows me to compare my results directly to the standard techniques.

2.1

Estimating LBE using proxy estimators

Proxy estimators suggested by Olley and Pakes (1996, OP hereafter) and Levinsohn and Petrin
(2003, LP hereafter) quickly became popular in empirical international economics.4 They provided researchers with an empirical model to estimate production functions using firm-level data
and deal with the endogeneity of inputs and the non random exit of firms, as well as allowing
for persistence in the unobserved productivity shocks. In particular, these methods were used to
obtain firm-specific productivity measures and verify the causal relationship with export status,
import status, and other firm-level international trade activities such as FDI.
2.1.1

Dealing with Unobserved Productivity Shocks

The method relies on a control function in firm specific decision variables such as investment,
capital and intermediate inputs (in LP), to proxy for unobserved productivity (ωit ) in a first stage
of the econometric procedure to estimate a production function. The crucial insight of Olley and
4

An influential paper is this line of research is Pavcnik (2002).

4

Pakes (1996) is that we can proxy productivity by a function in investment and capital, or in my
notation ωit = ht (iit , kit ), provided that investment is monotonically increasing in productivity,
whereas Levinsohn and Petrin (2003) suggest the use of a static input, such as intermediate inputs,
to control for productivity. The latter has two main advantages over the investment approach.
First not all producers in micro data invest in every period, and second proving monotonicity
of investment in productivity can be complicated when introducing new state variables, such as
export status in my case.5
The focus of this paper is on the productivity process in the context of learning by exporting.
This law of motion plays a crucial role in the proxy estimator approach and guides the identification of the production function coefficients.6 Both the OP and LP method crucially rely on an
exogenous (first order) Markov process for productivity, where productivity at time t + 1 consists
of expected productivity given a firm’s information set, and a productivity shock ξit+1 ,
ωit+1 = g1 (ωit ) + ξit+1

(2)

The news term in the Markov process, ξit+1 , is by assumption uncorrelated with any lagged choice
variables of the firm because the latter are in the firm’s information set. The latter forms the basis
for the identification of the capital coefficient in a final stage of the OP/LP procedure. In fact
given the assumption that capital is formed by past investment, both current and lagged capital
stock should be uncorrelated with shocks to the productivity process, and hence can be used to
to identify the capital coefficient. The identification of variable inputs in production, such as
labor, require a different strategy. We expect current labor choices to be correlated with shocks to
productivity, and can therefore rely on lagged labor choices provided that wages are sufficiently
serially correlated over time.
The practice of implicitly relying on such a productivity process is problematic when analyzing potential productivity effects from exporting. In particular, such a procedure does not allow
for a firm’s productivity to be impacted by whether it exported or not before. This has implications
for testing whether exporting impacts future productivity or not and will not be helpful in evaluating the strong export-productivity correlation reported in various datasets across countries and
industries. I.e. whether the correlation is generated by a process whereby firms with exogenous
high draws from an underlying productivity distribution can incur the fixed cost associated with
entering export markets, or whether the correlation is a consequence of exporting impacting future productivity. Note that both channels are not mutually exclusive, and one can rely on various
methods to control for a potential self-selection effect, by either matching on observables or by
relying on firm specific trade liberalization variables. At a minimum, in order to allow for the
learning by exporting hypothesis to be true in the data, we need, at the very least, to include the
5

I refer to Van Biesebroeck (2005) and De Loecker (2010) for a more detailed discussion.
I abstract away from the additional correction for sample selection. This will lead to the inclusion of an estimated
survival probability in the expected productivity component, i.e. the function g1 (.).
6

5

export status in g(.).7
To highlight the importance of not allowing export status to impact future productivity, I consider a more general model where exporting can potentially impact future productivity, given by
the following process for productivity
ωit+1 = g2 (ωit , Eit ) + ξit+1

(3)

where Eit is a vector of variables capturing a firm’s export experience. For what follows I will
simply rely on an export dummy variable, eit , but this vector Eit can be extended to capture
export intensity as measured by export sales, the number of export markets, how long the firm
has been exporting, among others. The point of the paper will be reinforced when we make this
specification richer. I will consider various specifications in the empirical analysis, but for the
remainder of the paper I stick to the simple export dummy specification.
2.1.2

Estimation Procedure

A recent literature has discussed the ability to identify any parameter in the first stage of the OP/LP
procedure. The argument made by Ackerberg, Caves and Frazier (2006) rests on the insight that
conditional on a non parametric function of capital and investment (or materials), it is very unlikely
that there is any variation left to identify the coefficient on the labor input. The exact specification
of the first stage depends on whether a static or dynamic input control is used (material inputs or
investment) to proxy for productivity, but the main point is that the first stage produces an estimate
of predicted output as a function of the production function’s parameters. More specifically, the
first stage when relying on a proxy variable zit , either investment or an intermediate input, is given
by
yit = φt (zit , lit , k it , eit ) + εit

(4)

where φt (zit , lit , k it , eit ) = βl lit + βk kit + ht (zit , kit , eit ). When relying on investment the first
stage control function φ(.) will include eit as well since the export status of a firm impacts future
productivity, and therefore constitutes a new state variable.8 In the case where zit is a static input,
the export status variable is included to capture differences in input demand between exporters and
domestic producers.
The parameters of interest are identified using GM M by relying on the moment conditions
on ξit+1 , for which we need to specify the evolution of productivity. Relying on the endogenous
7

This is the case even when we include an export dummy as an input into the production function. In fact, the
latter is problematic for at least two reasons within this setup. First of all, the impact of exporting on productivity is
only deterministic, and implies that all export entrants’ productivity will increase by the estimated coefficient on the
export dummy. Finally, the Cobb-Doulgas production function implies that a firm can substitute any input with being
an exporter at a constant unit elasticity. This remark is also valid in the context of R&D and productivity.
8
This is distinct from the export status entering the investment policy function through modeling the firm’s decision
of entering the export market. However, In both cases, eit will become a state variable in the underlying dynamic
problem and therefore requires that the investment function includes it as well

6

productivity process, ωit+1 = g2 (ωit , eit ) + ξit+1 , I consider the following moments
(

E ξit+1 (βl , βk )

lit

!)

kit+s

=0

(5)

where ξit+1 (βl , βk ) is obtained by non parametrically regressing ωit+1 (βl , βk ) on (ωit (βl , βk ), eit ),
and ωit+1 (βl , βk ) = φbit+1 − βl lit+1 − βk kit+1 . Note that I can in principal rely on multiple moments for capital, as indicated by s = {0, 1}, depending on the assumptions made on when a
firm’s capital stock is determined.
Verifying the bias on the coefficients due to endogenous productivity changes in this framework is straightforward. If ξit+1 (.) is obtained from simply regressing ωit+1 (.) on its lag, the
innovation in productivity will contain lagged export status’ effect on productivity. The coefficient
on capital (and potentially labor) will be biased if eit is correlated with kit+s (lit ). From the above
it is clear that under LBE the capital coefficient will be biased if a firm export status is correlated
with its capital stock. There is overwhelming evidence that exporters are more capital intensive,
and therefore will imply an upward bias of the capital coefficient. This arises because too much
variation in output (purified from variation in labor) is attributed to variation in the capital stock
This general framework also shows that the labor coefficient is potentially biased as well.
However, the first stage of a modified OP approach, where the export status is explicitly treated as
a state variable, would control for this potential correlation. Therefore I focus mostly on the role
of capital and how it interacts with the productivity process. Finally, it is important to note that
this approach allows for both labor and capital to be treated as dynamic inputs.9 In fact, in the
latter case I can rely on lit+s for s = {0, 1} as well, and test for overidentifying restrictions in the
GM M framework.
2.1.3

Illustration: a special case

I illustrate the potential bias from excluding past export experience in the productivity process using a simplified version of the model discussed above. I consider a simple case where productivity
follows an AR(1) process with a coefficient of one, and is simply a linear function of past export
status and a shock to productivity which occurs after the investment decision.
ωit+1 = ωit + γeit + ξit+1

(6)

The moment conditions used to identify the production coefficients, as given by (5), are constructed by running a simple regression of productivity given parameters, ωit+1 (βl , βk ), on its lag
and an export dummy as given by (6). If we ignore the effect of past export experience on current
productivity, or in other words if we exclude the term γeit , the productivity shock contains variation in export status. The moments used to estimate the coefficients are based on an error term
∗
which contains export status variation, i.e. ξit+1
= ξit+1 + γeit . This will lead to biased estimates
9

This would require making ht (.) a function of lit as well. For my purpose the difference is irrelevant.

7

of the production function coefficients if a firm’s capital stock (labor) is correlated with its export
status. In this special case the magnitude of the capital coefficient’s bias is directly related to γ.
It is useful to return to the original OP framework and consider the final stage of their procedure
under this specific law of motion (6). It is easy to show that the capital coefficient is obtained after
running the following OLS regression
∆yeit+1 = c + βk ∆kit+1 + γeit + ξit + εit+1

(7)

Output growth purified from variation in labor (∆yeit+1 ) is related to capital growth and the firm’s
lagged export status. Ignoring the export status eit will lead to a biased estimate of βk if the
(percentage) change in capital is correlated with the firm’s lagged export status. Note that in this
simplified framework the change in capital ∆kit+1 picks up variation in investment across firms,
in addition to a common depreciation factor. If firms that export at time t also invested more at t,
our estimate of the capital coefficient will be biased.
In fact, we expect this correlation to be positive if anything, and hereby overestimate the capital
coefficient and attribute productivity variation coming from export experience to capital variation.
Or in other words if productivity gains from exporting occur simultaneously with investment, this
will bias the capital coefficient upward and, as I will show below, will underestimate the actual
productivity effect from exporting by attributing it to a growth in capital.
In sum, when excluding the export status in the law of motion of productivity, the model is
internally inconsistent if LBE is the true underlying process in the data, if it is not, the relevant
coefficients of g(.) will not be significant. In addition, we get a biased estimate of the capital
coefficient and therefore of firm-level productivity in a systematic way that biases against finding LBE. This has direct implications for testing the LBE hypothesis, which is mostly tested by
comparing productivity trajectories of exporters while entering export markets (during the sample
period) with that of non exporters. If firms that become exporters also invest more into capital, the
productivity gain from exporting will be underestimated and might lead to the false conclusion that
being an exporter does not impact future productivity. Again, I do not take a stand whether investing in capital is a source of LBE. In this paper I want to correctly predict the future productivity
path of exporters.

2.2

Alternatives to proxy estimators

Although the focus of this paper is on using proxy estimators to detect LBE, it is important to
note that the same critique applies to other empirical methods used in the literature. For instance,
one of the earliest studies by Bernard and Jensen (1999) using US plant-level data relied on OLS
based production function residuals to test for LBE effects, and found no strong evidence. First
of all, the use of OLS is problematic when it comes to obtaining consistent estimates of the production function coefficients. In addition, using OLS assumes that a firm’s productivity shock is
independent of any activity or decision made by the firm in the past, including export behavior.
8

Relying on OLS implies that productivity is not correlated with any input choice and in addition that it is not correlated over time (within firms). The latter implies that past export experience
is not allowed to influence future productivity outcomes. The productivity residuals obtained
using OLS are therefore not suited to test the LBE hypothesis as they are obtained under the assumption that “learning effects” are not present. An often used alternative is the use of firm fixed
effects, which implies that productivity only moves over time due to idiosyncratic shocks (υit ),
ωit = ωi + υit , which clearly does not allow for LBE either. In fact, for firms that enter export
markets during the sample period, the export effect will be washed out due to averaging productivity over both the pre and post export years.

2.3

Implications for detecting LBE

The ultimate goal of estimating production functions is to obtain firm-specific estimates for productivity or performance more broadly. Let me denote the coefficient of the production function
obtained with and without explicitly allowing LBE effects by β e and β, respectively. For now, I
assume that the labor coefficient is estimated consistently. The latter is the case when relying on
a standard OP/LP setup where lagged export status is incorporated in the control function in the
first stage.10 This implies that the difference in estimated productivity is given by (βk − βke )kit ,
and from the discussion above, I expect this to be positive. In other words, productivity is overestimated in levels, no matter whether a firm is an exporter or not (if exporting is not an input into
the production function).
I highlight the implications of the biased capital coefficient in a simple difference-in-difference
framework. However, the point made here is more general. In particular, let us consider the change
in productivity before and after a firm becomes an exporter and compare it to a firm that does not
but is identical in any other dimension. If an exporter becomes both more productive and expands
its capital stock, too much of the growth in capital (βk − βke ) is subtracted from output growth and
will not be attributed to productivity growth upon export entry.
The average productivity effect of export entry after s periods (LBEs ) using non exporters’
d ) as a control group (C) is given by the average difference between productivity
productivity (ωis
e ) belonging to the set of starters (ST ART ) and domestic producers.
growth of export entrants (ωis

LBEs =
=

1
N

"

#
X

e
∆ωis

i∈ST ART
X
e
[(∆yis
− ∆yis )
i

−

X

d
∆ωis

i∈C
e
e
− βl (∆lis
− ∆lis ) − βk (∆kis
− ∆kis )]

(8)

where ∆xis = xis − xi,−1 and s = 0 is the time when a firm enters the export market with s =
{0, 1, ..., S} and I dropped the relevant summation index. Therefore the impact of underestimating
10

See Van Biesebroeck (2005) and De Loecker (2007). I focus mostly on the role capital and exporting in shaping
the evolution of productivity.

9

the capital coefficient, interacted with the increase in capital stock at the time of export entry
implies that we do not correctly identify the productivity effect of entering foreign markets. Or
more formally, I can write the bias of the learning by exporting effect for s = {0, 1, .., S} by
considering the difference of (8) between the exogenous (LBEs ) and the endogenous productivity
process (LBEs∗ )
1 X
e
(∆kis
− ∆kis )
(9)
|LBEs − LBEs∗ | = (βk − βke )
N i
The bias is a function of two terms. The first one is due to the different estimate of the capital
coefficient by allowing the productivity process to depend on past export status. The second
term is the (average) difference in capital stock growth between exporters and non exporters, or a
reduced set of the latter when relying on matching techniques. Up to differences in depreciation
rates among exporters and domestic producers, the second term captures differences in investment
over s periods between exporters and domestic producers.
This last equation clearly demonstrates that we will typically underestimate the LBE effect
given that both terms are expected to be positive. The extent to which standard methods will
underestimate LBE depends on how much exporters grow disproportional in their capital stock
e − ∆k ), as well as how strong the role of exporting is in the law of motion on productivity
(∆kis
is
(βk − βke ). It is clear that the bias potentially grows with the time frame used to verify the LBE

effect, i.e. for s = {0, 1, 2, .., S}, as the potential for exporters to further widen the capital stock
gap with domestic producers increases. I will empirically quantify (9) using firm-level data where
a substantial amount of firms enter the export market during the sample.

3

Data

I rely on a unique dataset covering all firms active in Slovenian manufacturing during the period
1994-2000. I refer the reader to De Loecker (2007) for more details on the Slovenian data. In sum,
the data are provided by the Slovenian Central Statistical Office and contains the full company
accounts for an unbalanced panel of 7,915 firms. I also observe market entry and exit, as well as
detailed information on firm level export status.
Over the time period 1994-2000, labor productivity increased dramatically, consistent with the
image of a Slovenian economy undergoing successful restructuring. At the same time, the number of exporters grew by 35 percent, taking up a larger share of total manufacturing both in the
total number of firms, in total sales and total employment. I observe a 42 percent increase in total
exports of manufacturing products over the sample period. Furthermore, entry and exit reshaped
market structure in most industries. Both the entry of more productive firms and the increased
export participation was responsible for significant productivity improvements in aggregate (measured) productivity.

10

4

Results

Before I estimate the model with a more general law of motion for productivity I report a number
of fundamental correlations in the data. In my sample exporters are clearly more capital intensive
and they become even more so (compared to domestic producers in the same industry) upon export
entry. Table 1 indicates the importance of incorporating the export status of a firm in law of motion
of productivity. In panel A I report the average export premium for capital and investment while
controlling for industry and year effects. I consider two partial correlations that directly relate
to equation (6), by controlling for employment (I) and employment and output jointly (II). In
panel B, I report the percentage capital growth difference between new exporters and domestic
producers after export entry (s = 0) for various windows (s = 1, 2, 3, 4), while controlling for a
full set of year and time effects.
The results in panel A indicate that without correcting the standard model, the capital coefficient will be biased given the strong correlation between a firm’s export status and its level of
capital stock, after controlling for output and employment. Panel B clearly shows that new exporters’ capital stock grows faster than their domestic counterparts. For example, four years after
export entry the difference in the growth of capital is 37 percent. Both observations directly relate
to the two components of the bias in the LBE parameter, as described in equation (9) and imply an
underestimation of the LBE effect since both terms are expected to be positive and quite large. In
fact, using expression (9), I only need to estimate the capital coefficient under a more general law
of motion of productivity to compute the actual LBE parameter by multiplying the difference in
the estimates of the capital coefficient (βk − βke ) by the average capital growth difference upon export entry. Under the approach outlined under section 2 the growth differential in labor interacted
with the difference in labor coefficients will add to the bias in the LBE parameter.
I first need to estimate the coefficients for each industry in my data separately. I estimate the
coefficients under the assumption of a pure exogenous productivity process and compare them with
estimates obtained from a more general law of motion of productivity whereby I allow exporting to
impact future productivity in a flexible way.11 I report the estimated coefficients in the Appendix.
The results are as expected and hold for every 2 digit industry reported. As expected the capital
coefficient is estimated significantly lower when allowing for a more general law of motion on
productivity, confirming the positive correlation between a firm’s export status and its capital stock.
On average, the capital coefficient is estimated 30 percent lower.12 It is worth mentioning that
the bias in the labor coefficients is significantly smaller. This table is at some level sufficient to
conclude that taking an endogenous productivity process to the data is important for obtaining the
11

I rely on a 4th order polynomial in productivity and interact all terms with various variables measuring past export experience such as a simple export dummy, the export share in total sales to capture the intensity of exporting,
the number of years exported. The estimated coefficients are robust with respect to the inclusion of these additional
variables.
12
I checked whether (βk − βke ) is significantly different from zero for each industry using the bootstrapped standard
errors of both estimators.

11

correct LBE parameter. However, in order to compute the additional productivity effects from
export entry, I need to compute the input growth differentials between starters and their domestic
counterparts.
Table 2 reports the bias in the LBE parameter using (9) for s = {0, 1, 2, 3}, or the additional
productivity gain after s + 1 years of exporting. The additional productivity gain (or the bias)
is reported for each industry, and for the manufacturing sector at large. The columns consider
different windows (s) and I expect, if anything, the bias to increase with s. The results in Table 2
show that across the various industries of the manufacturing sector, the bias in the LBE parameter
is substantial. Taking stock of the differences in the production function coefficients reported in the
Appendix, this table reflects that exporters’ input usage grows faster compared to their domestic
counterparts. Both effects imply that one would underestimate the importance of export entry of
future productivity, as suggested in equation (9).
For instance, in the Chemical industry (sector 24), an additional 7.35 percent productivity
growth effect upon export entry is found when relying on a more general law of motion for productivity. The bias in the LBE parameter is considerable in magnitude ranging from 1.08 to 7.38
percent additional productivity after four years of exporting. The additional productivity effects
need to added to the productivity effects potentially obtained using standard methods. Finally, I
do find substantial heterogeneity across sectors, which can be traced back to either heterogeneity
in input growth differences between exporters and domestic producers, or to heterogeneity in the
impact of exporting on future productivity across sectors.

5

Identifying the separate effect of exporting

Although this paper is focussed on correctly predicting the productivity effect of exporting, my
framework can help shed light on the separate role of exporting when firms jointly decide on
exporting and investments broadly defined. A recent literature has emphasized the importance
of studying the productivity-export relationship while acknowledging that firms often decide to
export while making investments simultaneously. Therefore, we might overstate the effect of
exporting on productivity if becoming an exporter was jointly decided with other productivity
enhancing actions.
I briefly show how my empirical framework can single out the impact of exporting, while
holding ”investments” fixed. As I will argue below, given the data constraints I face I do not
pursue a precise decomposition of the role of exporting, technology adoption and other firm-level
actions that potentially raise future productivity. However, I do show that my framework is a
natural setting to study this.
Given the above, I assume that the data on firm-level investment (iit ) contains expenditure on
new technologies, and upgrading of existing production processes. Obviously, it also captures the
standard capital expansion expenditures. It is important to understand that in this way I attribute

12

future productivity effects to a wide range of firm-level actions and I can therefore isolate the role
of exporting. The matched treatment estimator does control for those firm-level actions, by comparing firms who only differ in their export status. However, that approach cannot verify the additional impact of jointly entering export markets and investing. The law of motion on productivity
is then given by ωit+1 = g(ωit , iit , eit ) + ξit+1 ,where I now explicitly allow future productivity
gains to come from either exporting or investing, or both. Note that the same arguments apply on
the importance of incorporating lagged investment expenditures to obtain consistent estimates of
the production function.
For the empirical analysis I consider the following parametric form for the productivity process
which is similar to Aw, Roberts and Xu (forthcoming), only that in addition I allow for interactions
between the level of productivity and firm level actions, exporting and investing.
ωit+1 =

3
X

j
θj ωit
+ θ4 iit + θ5 eit + θ6 eit iit + θ7 iit ωit + θ8 eit ωit + θ9 eit iit ωit + ξit+1

(10)

j=0

Table 3 shows the results of running this procedure on the Slovenian manufacturing sectors. I rely
on materials to proxy for productivity and use the moments described in section 2. In addition
to the estimates of of θ, I also present the result of a F -test on the joint significance of all θk for
k = {4, ..., 9} which implies testing whether productivity follows an exogenous process.
Table 3 shows the importance of incorporating the relevant firm-level actions that can plausibly
affect future productivity to obtain correct estimates of the production function coefficients, and
consequently productivity. The additional effect of investing, while having the same export status
and productivity level is less of interest to me given my aggregate measure of investment, which
contains replacement investment, capital expansion, in addition to investing in new technologies.13
I can now compute the additional effect from joint exporting and investing, while holding the
level of productivity fixed. In this way I can compare predicted productivity effect from joint
exporting and investing. Using my estimates I can compute this for each firm using θb6 iit eit +
θb9 iit eit ωit . I report the average predicted additional productivity effect from the joint decision to
export and invest for the manufacturing sector and the various industries in the Appendix. Across
all sectors exporting and investing raises future productivity, and the average ranges from 1 to 8
percent. The standard deviation within industries is substantial and reflects the large variation in
investment and productivity among firms who jointly export and invest.
Finally, while I am comparing firms with the same level of productivity, I still allow for a
magnifying effect as measured by θ9 . When comparing two firms who both jointly enter the
export market and invest the same dollar amount, θ9 captures the additional productivity effect for
the more productive firm. Similarly, θ8 captures the idea that the productivity effect from exporting
last period depends on the firm’s productivity level. The results indicate that the productivity gains
are lower when firms are already very productive.
13

My results do support the hypothesis that investing raises (expected) future productivity, as assumed by various
theoretical frameworks in industry dynamic models.

13

6

Conclusion

In this note I show how current methods that are used to test for learning by exporting are biased
towards rejecting this hypothesis. I address the large inconsistency in current empirical approaches
by allowing exporting to affect a firm’s future productivity. I show that recent proxy estimators of
production functions are a natural framework to accomplish this by allowing for an endogenous
productivity process. I provide a simple way to sign the importance of the bias and apply it to
a firm-level dataset. I find substantial additional productivity gains associated with export entry,
ranging up to 7.35 percent.
These results indicate the importance of export participation for productivity growth and warrant further investigation of the exact underlying mechanisms and its potential policy implications.
I reported results for the case of Slovenia to show the importance of my correction. Slovenia is
good case to study this since there was substantial export entry during the sample period and at
the same time LBE is plausible given that exporting opened new possibilities for domestic firms .
In doing so I make a simple point that in order to test the learning by exporting hypothesis in the
data we need at the very least an empirical model that allows future productivity to depend on past
export participation, to estimate the correct productivity effects from export participation. The
methodology discussed in this paper extends naturally to cases where firm level actions impact future productivity, such as technology adoption, R&D, product quality upgrading, and investment
more broadly defined.

14

References
[1] Ackerberg, D., Caves, K., and Frazer, G., 2006. Structural Identification of Production Functions, mimeo, UCLA.
[2] Aw, B.Y., Roberts, M. and Xu, Y., R&D Investment, Exporting, and Productivity Dynamics,
American Economic Review, forthcoming.
[3] Bernard, A. and Jensen, B. 1999. Exceptional Exporter Performance: Cause, Effect, or
Both?, Journal of International Economics , Vol. 47, pp. 1-25.
[4] Bustos, P., Trade Liberalization, Exports and Technology Upgrading: Evidence on the impact
of MERCOSUR on Argentinean Firms, American Economic Review, forthcoming.
[5] Costantini, J. and Melitz, M. 2008. The Dynamics of Firm-Level Adjustment to Trade Liberalization, in The Organization of Firms in a Global Economy, Helpman, E., D. Marin, and
T. Verdier (Eds), Harvard University Press.
[6] De Loecker, J. 2007. Do Export Generate Higher Productivity? Evidence from Slovenia.
Journal of International Economics, 73, 69—98.
[7] De Loecker, J. 2010. Product Differentiation, Multi-Product Firms and Estimating the Impact
of Trade Liberalization on Productivity, Revised version of NBER WP.
[8] Frankel, J.A. and Romer, D. 1999. Does Trade Cause Growth, American Economic Review,
vol 89 (3), 379-399.
[9] Keller, W. 2004. International Technology Diffusion, Journal of Economic Literature, 42,
pp. 752-782.
[10] Keller, W. 2009. International Trade, Foreign Direct Investment, and Technology Spillovers,
NBER # 15442 and Handbook of the Economics of Innovation, North-Holland.
[11] Levinsohn, J. and Petrin, A., 2003. Estimating Production Functions Using Inputs to Control
for Unobservables. Review of Economics Studies 70, 317-340.
[12] Melitz, M. 2003. The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate Industry Productivity, Econometrica, Vol. 71, November 2003, pp.1695-1725.
[13] Olley, S. G. and Pakes, A, 1996. The Dynamics of Productivity in the Telecommunications
Equipment Industry, Econometrica 64 (6), 1263-1297.
[14] Pavcnik, N. 2002. Trade Liberalization, Exit, and Productivity Improvements: Evidence
from Chilean Plants, The Review of Economic Studies, 69 (January),pp. 245-76.
[15] Van Biesebroeck, J., 2005. Exporting Raises Productivity in sub-Saharan African Manufacturing Firms, Journal of International Economics, 67 (2), 373-391
[16] Verhoogen, E. 2008. Trade, Quality Upgrading and Wage Inequality in the Mexican Manufacturing Sector, Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 123, no. 2, pp. 489-530.
[17] Wagner, J. 2007. Exports and Productivity: A Survey of the Evidence from Firm Level Data,
The World Economy, 30 (1), pp. 60-82.

15

Appendix. Production Function and Exporting-Investment Results
1. Production Function Coefficients.
I present the estimated coefficients of the production function under the standard exogenous
productivity process assumption, and compare it to my endogenous process, where exporting is
allowed to impact future productivity. I list the percentage difference between both estimates.

Industry
15
17
18
19
20
22
24
25
26
27
28
29
31
32
33
36

Table A.1 Production function coefficients
Capital Coefficients
Labor Coefficients
Exog. Endog. Diff. Exog Endog Diff.
0.181 0.131
38
0.863 0.810
7
0.190 0.165
15
0.774 0.562
38
0.175 0.152
15
0.844 0.833
1
0.373 0.356
5
0.599 0.542
11
0.088 0.063
40
0.908 0.885
3
0.361 0.337
7
0.662 0.603
10
0.373 0.274
36
0.681 0.601
13
0.201 0.142
42
0.768 0.669
15
0.321 0.255
26
0.687 0.614
12
0.058 0.042
39
0.910 0.751
21
0.250 0.194
28
0.714 0.666
7
0.237 0.199
19
0.669 0.700
-4
0.254 0.223
14
0.742 0.558
33
0.268 0.155
73
0.759 0.732
4
0.179 0.120
50
0.862 0.797
8
0.194 0.146
33
0.781 0.709
10

All Coefficients are significant at the 1 percent. Standard errors are obtained by block bootstrapping.

The industry classification NACE rev. 1 is similar to the ISIC industry classification in the
U.S.A. and the various industries with corresponding code are: Food Products (15), Textiles (17),
Wearing Apparel (18), Leather and Leather Products (19), Wood and Wood Products (20), Pulp,
Paper and Paper Products (21), Chemicals (24), Rubber and Plastic Products (25), Other nonMetallic Mineral Products (26), Basic Metals (27), Fabricated Metal Products (28), Machinery
and Equipment n.e.c. (29), Electrical Machinery (31), RTv and Communication (32), Medical,
Precision and Optical Instruments (33), Other Transport Equipment (35), Furniture and Manufacturing n.e.c. (36).
2. Joint Export-Investment Productivity Effects.
I report the average, by industry and across all manufacturing sectors, joint export-investment
productivity effect. These numbers should be interpreted as the average additional percentage
predicted productivity effect from jointly entering export markets and investing, compared to a
domestic firm who does not invest.14 The variation across firms within a sector comes from the
variation in actual investment expenditures.
14
Alternatively, I can rely on a fixed replacement investment rate and consider a threshold percentage to consider a
smaller sample of investing firms, or equivalently a large share of non investing firms.

16

Table A.2. Joint export-investment productivity effects
Industry (Nace 2) Additional Effect (%)
15
1.5
17
5.4
18
2.4
19
5.6
20
2.1
22
1.1
24
7.8
25
3.3
26
3.5
27
7.7
28
2.5
29
4.7
31
5.8
32
5.0
33
4.6
36
2.4
Manufacturing
3.69

17

Capital
Investment

Table 1: Capital stock and export status
A: Correlation Export
B: Capital Growth
P
e
I
II
Window (s)
i (∆kis − ∆kis )
0.38
0.21
1
0.21 (0.02)
(0.02)
(0.02)
2
0.25 (0.04)
0.39
0.18
3
0.37 (0.05)
(0.03)
(0.03)
4
0.35 (0.07)

Table 2: Additional Productivity Gains (bias LBE)
Industry
s=0 s=1 s=2 s=3
15
1.52
2.77
3.11
4.06
17
0.21
2.60
4.46
5.92
18
0.57
1.05
1.11
1.47
19
0.93
1.63
2.02
2.57
20
0.73
1.33
1.48
1.93
22
1.07
1.89
2.29
2.92
24
2.79
5.09
5.60
7.35
25
2.18
3.91
4.58
5.90
26
2.07
3.75
4.23
5.51
27
1.91
3.27
4.37
5.44
28
1.60
2.91
3.23
4.22
29
0.47
0.96 0.733 1.08
31
2.45
4.24
5.51
6.90
32
2.56
4.77
4.92
6.58
33
1.85
3.36
3.79
4.94
36
1.69
3.04
3.52
4.55
Manufacturing 1.52
2.73
3.14
4.07
The Appendix lists the industry classification codes with their corresponding descriptions.

18

Table 3: Estimates of Productivity Process
Parameter Estimate Standard Error
θ1
0.853
0.025
θ2
0.074
0.017
θ3
-0.015
0.004
θ4
0.020
0.003
θ5
0.172
0.044
θ6
-0.038
0.011
θ7
-0.007
0.002
θ8
-0.111
0.026
θ9
0.024
0.004
#Obs
5,203
F -test
F (6, 5203) = 38.61

19

