                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    SIZE ANOMALIES IN U.S. BANK STOCK RETURNS:
                              A FISCAL EXPLANATION

                                           Priyank Gandhi
                                            Hanno Lustig

                                        Working Paper 16553
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16553


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2010




The authors thank the editors, Cam Harvey and Ken Singleton, as well as the associate editor and several
referees for excellent suggestions. The authors also thank Viral Acharya, Martin Bodenstein, Markus
Brunnermeier, John Campbell, John Cochrane, Ron Feldman, Cesare Fracassi, Etienne Gagnon, Mark
Garmaise, Amit Goyal, Mark Grinblatt, Jennifer Huang, John Krainer, Arvind Krishnamurthy, David
Laibson, Jonathan Parker, Lasse Pedersen, Andrea Raffo, Richard Roll, Jan Schneider, Martin Schneider,
Clemens Sialm, Rob Vishny, Skander Vandenheuvel, and Baolian Wang for many for detailed and
helpful comments, as well as seminar participants at University of Texas at Austin, Chicago Booth,
New York University Stern, Harvard Economics, the Federal Reserve Board of Governors, the Federal
Reserve Bank of San Francisco, the Society for Economic Dynamics 2010 Annual Meeting in Montreal,
and the 2010 Stanford Institute for Theoretical Economics for detailed and helpful comments. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Priyank Gandhi and Hanno Lustig. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Size Anomalies in U.S. Bank Stock Returns: A Fiscal Explanation
Priyank Gandhi and Hanno Lustig
NBER Working Paper No. 16553
November 2010, Revised November 2014
JEL No. G01,G12

                                             ABSTRACT

The largest commercial bank stocks, ranked by total size of the balance sheet, have significantly lower
risk-adjusted returns than small- and medium-sized bank stocks, even though large banks are significantly
more levered. We uncover a size factor in the component of bank returns that is orthogonal to the standard
risk factors, including small-minus-big, which has the right covariance with bank returns to explain
the average risk-adjusted returns. This factor measures size-dependent exposure to bank-specific tail
risk. These findings are consistent with government guarantees that protect shareholders of large banks,
but not small banks, in disaster states.


Priyank Gandhi
University of California at Los Angeles
110 Westwood Plaza
Los Angeles, CA 90095
gandhip@ucla.edu

Hanno Lustig
UCLA Anderson School of Management
110 Westwood Plaza, Suite C413
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and NBER
hlustig@anderson.ucla.edu
Banks are different from nonfinancial firms in many ways. One of the most salient distinctions
is that banks are subject to bank runs during banking panics and crises, not just by depositors,
but also by other creditors (see Gorton and Metrick (2012) and Duffie (2010)). Because financial
crises are high marginal utility states for the average investor, the expected return on bank stocks
should be especially sensitive to variation in the anticipated financial disaster recovery rates of
bank shareholders related to bank size, the regulatory regime, implicit government guarantees, and
other characteristics. For example, if a bank is deemed too big to fail, the expected return on
its stock is lower in equilibrium than that of smaller banks holding the exact same assets in their
portfolio because the government absorbs some of the large bank’s tail risk. We find evidence that
the pricing of bank-specific tail risk in the stock market depends on all of these bank characteristics.
   To explore the asset pricing implications of financial disasters, our paper studies historical bank
stock returns in the U.S. We find that there is a size effect in bank stock returns that is different
from the market capitalization effects that have been documented in nonfinancial stock returns (see
Banz (1981) and many others). All else equal, a 100% increase in a bank’s book value lowers its
annual return by 2.23% per annum. For nonfinancial stocks, there is no similar relation between
book value and returns (Berk (1997)).
   These return differences cannot be imputed to differences in standard risk exposure. A long
position in the stock portfolio of the largest commercial banks, measured by deciles of total book
value, and a short position in the stock portfolio of the smallest banks underperforms an equally
risky portfolio of all (nonbank) stocks and bonds by more than 7% per annum. The average alphas
are small but positive for commercial banks in the first five deciles and then decrease for the largest
banks in the top three deciles.
   Small banks differ from large banks in many ways, but these differences should not lead to
differences in average risk-adjusted returns on bank portfolios unless there is bank-specific tail risk
that is priced but not spanned by the traded returns on other stocks in the sample. We find evidence
of such a risk factor in bank stock returns: the second principal component of the risk-adjusted
returns on size-sorted portfolios of commercial banks is a size factor that has exactly the right
covariance with the portfolio returns to account for most of this pricing anomaly. By construction,
this size factor is orthogonal to the stock and bond risk factors.
   This highly levered size portfolio, determined by the second principal component, which goes
long in small bank stocks and short in large bank stocks, loses an average of 61 cents during National
Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) recessions per dollar invested at the start, after hedging out
exposure to standard stock and bond risk. We attribute the cyclical banking size factor in the data
to size-dependent differences in the perceived shareholder recovery rates on these bank portfolios
during financial disasters.
   In a version of the Barro (2006), Rietz (1988), and Longstaff and Piazzesi (2004) asset pricing
model with a time-varying probability of rare events, developed by Gabaix (2012), Wachter (2013),
Gourio (2008), financial disasters that disproportionately impact bank cash flows contribute an
additional bank-specific risk factor. These rare events are priced into the expected returns on


                                                   2
portfolios of banks, but are not fully spanned by the returns on other assets in a small sample.
A general equilibrium version of our model can match the average alphas in a sample without
disasters if the financial disaster recovery rate is 35 cents higher for large banks, in line with the
failure rate of banks in the lowest decile during the latest crisis.
   Historically, the probability of a financial disaster increases during recessions. Because of the
size-contingent nature of the recovery rate for bank stockholders in the case of a financial disaster,
the variation in the probability of a financial disaster generates a common business cycle factor in
the normal risk-adjusted returns of size-sorted bank stock portfolios; the loadings of bank stock
portfolio returns on this size factor are determined by the recovery rates and hence by size. Small
banks have positive loadings while large banks have negative loadings. As the probability of a
financial disaster increases, the expected return gap between small and large banks grows.
   In the U.S., shareholder recovery rates for banks depend on size. During financial disasters,
large banks fare much better, even though they are more levered than their smaller counterparts.
A total of 30% of publicly traded commercial banks in the first size decile were delisted in 2009 but
there were no delistings in the last decile.
   Why study the effect of bailouts on bank equity? The anticipation of future bailouts of bond-
holders and other creditors always benefits shareholders (see Kareken and Wallace (1978)) ex ante.
Furthermore, during a crisis, there may be massive uncertainty about the resolution regime, espe-
cially for large financial institutions. As a result, government guarantees will inevitably tend to
benefit shareholders ex post as well. Clearly, the U.S. government and regulators are willing to let
small banks fail, but not large banks. Acharya and Yorulmazer (2008) point out that bailouts may
be ex post efficient if a sufficiently large fraction of banks is impacted. Of course, ex ante, one could
have expected that the government would wipe out shareholders of large financial institutions in
the case of a bailout. Our evidence suggests that this is not what market participants expect.
   Government guarantees essentially grant stockholders of large banks a menu of path-dependent
put options that can only be exercised after large declines in a broad index of stocks. This essentially
reduces the negative co-skewness of large bank stock returns, but not of small banks. In our sample,
large bank stock returns are indeed less negatively skewed and feature less co-skewness, even though
the Harvey and Siddique (2000) skewness factors constructed from nonfinancial stocks cannot fully
account for the variation in average returns on size-sorted bank portfolios.
   To back out the implicit financial tail risk premium or discount charged by the shareholders
of commercial banks, we multiply the loadings on the size factor by its risk price. The implicit
insurance provided against financial disaster risk lowers the expected equity return for the largest
U.S. commercial banks by 1.97%, but the additional exposure to bank-specific tail risk increases the
expected return on the smallest bank stocks by 2.85%, compared to a portfolio of nonbank stocks
and bonds with the same standard risk characteristics. The largest banks have an average market
capitalization of $140 billion in 2005 dollars. For the largest commercial banks, this amounts to an
annual savings of $2.76 billion per bank. The market imposes large financial tail risk ”subsidies”
(”taxes”) on large (small) bank stocks compared to a portfolio of stocks and bonds with the same


                                                   3
observed risk profile. There is direct evidence from option markets to support this conclusion:
Kelly, Lustig, and Nieuwerburgh (2011) find that out-of-the-money put options on large banks
were cheap during the crisis.
   The pricing of financial tail risk depends not only on bank size. We relate the financial disaster
premium of banks to the regulatory regime. Commercial banks, which have access to the discount
window and benefit from deposit insurance, and government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs), which
benefit from an explicit guarantee, are imputed a large financial tail risk subsidy while investment
and foreign banks are not. On the other hand, hedge funds are imputed a financial tail risk tax,
just like small banks.
   After the repeal of key provisions in the Glass-Steagall Banking Act in 1999, we find large
across-the-board increases in the size of the subsidy for large commercial banks, investment banks,
and GSEs. For example, the Fannie Mae subsidy tripled to 5.93% over the period 2000 to 2005.
This period also coincides with dramatic growth in securitization, which allows financial institu-
tions to benefit from the collective bailout option more aggressively by eliminating idiosyncratic
risk exposure (see Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2014) for a clear description of this effect of secu-
ritization).
   Furthermore, we provide a direct link to bailouts. We show that the financial disaster subsidy
of the largest 10 banks increases immediately after bailout announcements. O’Hara and Shaw
(1990) document large positive wealth effects for shareholders of banks that were declared ”too big
to fail” by the Comptroller of the Currency in 1984, and negative wealth effects for other banks.
Consistent with this result, we document large increases in the implicit financial disaster subsidy
to the too-big-to-fail banks after this announcement, and six other bailout announcements prior
to the recent financial crisis identified by Kho, Lee, and Stulz (2000). Furthermore, we find large
increases after announcements that benefited large banks during the recent financial crisis.
   The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section I discusses the related literature. In Section
II we construct portfolios of commercial U.S. bank stocks sorted by size as measured by the market
capitalization and the book value. Presumably, the government cares about the size of the entire
balance sheet. Section III describes the size effect in bank stock returns. Section IV establishes that
there is a procyclical size factor in the normal risk-adjusted returns of these portfolios. Section V
relates the pricing of bank tail risk to government announcements and the r‘egulatory environment.
We use a calibrated version of the model to back out the implied differences in recovery rates in
Section VI, and we use the model to explain how government puts for the largest banks may also
impact the expected returns of smaller banks. Section VII concludes.


                                  I.    Related Literature
      A large literature in finance considers size effects in stock returns (see Banz (1981), Basu
(1983), Lakonishok, Shleifer, and Vishny (1993), Fama and French (1993), Berk (1995) and others),
but most of these papers do not include financial stocks, presumably because of their high leverage.


                                                   4
Our paper is the first to document that the size effect in financial stocks is really about size, rather
than market capitalization. We attribute the size effect to how tail risk is priced in financial stocks.
   There is direct evidence from option markets that tail risk in the financial sector is priced dif-
ferently. Kelly, Lustig, and Nieuwerburgh (2011) find that the out-of-the-money index put options
of bank stocks were relatively cheap during the recent crisis, as a consequence of the government
absorbing sector-wide tail risk. In related work on bank stock returns, Fahlenbrach, Prilmeier, and
Stulz (2012) document that those banks that incurred substantial losses during previous crises were
more likely to incur losses during the recent crisis. If some banks benefit from a larger perceived
tail risk subsidy, they have an incentive to load up on this type of risk. In fact, shareholder value
maximization requires that they do so, as pointed out by Panageas (2010a), who analyzes optimal
risk management in the presence of guarantees. Interestingly, Fahlenbrach and Stulz (2012) find
some evidence that banks whose managers’ interests were more aligned with shareholders actually
performed worse during the recent financial crisis.
   Our work contributes to the important task of measuring systemic risk in the financial sector.
Acharya et al. (2011a), Acharya et al. (2011b), Adrian and Brunnermeier (2010), and Huang,
Zhou, and Zhou (2009) develop novel methods for measuring systemic risk. Our measure of the
banking tail risk premium is determined by the bank’s loading on the size factor, which gauges a
firm’s systemic risk exposure. Firms that are deemed systemically important have large negative
loadings on the size factor, because these are less likely to be allowed to fail in the event of a financial
disaster, and they trade at a premium as a result. As far as we know, our paper is the first to link
the subsidy that accrues to banks deemed systemically important with exposure to systemic risk.
To the extent that these differences in bank tail risk pricing are directly attributable to government
policies, they are an ex ante measure of the distortion created by the implicit guarantee extended to
some U.S. financial institutions. Estimating the entire ex post realized cost of the various measures
implemented by the U.S. Treasury, the Federal Reserve system, the FDIC, and other regulators in
the face of the recent crisis is hard. Veronesi and Zingales (2010) estimate the cost to be between
$21 billion and $44 billion, with a benefit of more than $86 billion.


                      II.    Size Effect in Bank Stock Returns
   This section reports returns on size-sorted portfolios of commercial bank stocks. We also show
the results of a cross-sectional regression of returns on firm characteristics that confirms the portfolio
results.
   We collect data on equity returns from the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP). There
is no unique, full-proof way of identifying all of the U.S. commercial banks in CRSP. Many papers
in the literature identify these banks manually over short samples. This not feasible in our study.
Instead, we define commercial banks as all firms with header Standard Industrial Classification
(SIC) codes 60 or historical SIC code 6712. This definition ensures that bank holding companies
are consistently included in our sample. Bank holding companies need to be included in this


                                                     5
definition because the banks that belong to a holding company are not publicly traded themselves.
   We use the header SIC codes (HSICCD) on December 2013 rather than the historical SIC codes
(SICCD) to identify these firms in the data.1 When we screen the CRSP database for SICCDs
equal to 60 or 67, several of the largest U.S. banks drop out of the sample, including BB&T
Corp on, Banc One Corp, Barclays, Citigroup, First Bancorp and Sterling Bancorp. All of these
banks are identified by the Federal Reserve as part the largest 100 deposit-taking institutions in
the U.S. These banks clearly belong in our sample. The HSICCD screen correctly identifies these
commercial banks throughout the sample, because the coding conventions were changed in the late
1990s. Conversely, we define nonfinancials as all firms excluding those with two-digit HSICCDs
ranging from 60 to 67. The Internet Appendix includes a detailed discussion of these choices.2
   We exclude data for all financial firms that are inactive and we also exclude financial firms that
are not incorporated in the U.S. because these financial firms are subject to regulations both in the
country of operation and the country of incorporation. Since these policies vary across countries,
our focus on financial firms operating and incorporated inside the U.S. ensures that all firms in our
analysis are subject to a uniform regulatory regime. Foreign firms are identified by share codes
ending in 2 or 5.
   We start by building portfolios of domestic commercial bank stocks. We employ the standard
portfolio formation strategy of Fama and French (1993). We rank all bank stocks by market
capitalization as of January of each year. The stocks are then allocated to 10 portfolios based on
their market capitalization. We calculate value-weighted returns for each portfolio for each month
over the next year. At the end of this exercise, we have monthly value-weighted returns for each
size-sorted portfolio of banks.
   The data start in January 1970 and end in December 2013. Only a small fraction of all banks
that operate in the U.S. are publicly listed. For instance, for the years 2000 to 2008, data are
available from CRSP for approximately 630 banks, as compared to more than 5,300 FDIC-insured
banks operating in the U.S. over the same period. However, the largest 600 banks control more
than 88% of all commercial bank assets in the U.S. Most of these large banks are publicly listed.
To the extent that small banks that are not publicly listed are very different from those that are,
some of our results need to be qualified.
   Presumably, the government cares about the entire balance sheet of banks, not just their equity.
As a result, book value may be the better measure of size. We follow a similar strategy for forming
portfolios of commercial bank stocks sorted by book value. We rank all bank stocks by book
value as of December of each year. Book values for all bank stocks are obtained from the merged
CRSP-COMPUSTAT database. We calculate value-weighted returns for each portfolio for each
month over the next year. While our market capitalization results are based on 17,594 bank-years
from 1980 to 2013, the book value results are based on only 14,403 bank-years. The reduction in
the number of banks is primarily due to missing balance sheet data in the CRSP-COMPUSTAT
merged data set.
   While the CRSP data are available from 1926, our main sample of banks begins only in 1970,


                                                 6
as there are not enough publicly traded commercial banks prior to 1970. In addition, data for book
value of commercial banks are not available for a substantial number of banks in our portfolio in
Compustat prior to 1980. Hence, our main sample for book value size-sorted portfolios begins only
in 1980.


  III.      Size Effect in Normal Risk-Adjusted Bank Stock Returns
     We start by adjusting the portfolio returns for exposure to the standard risk factors that explain
cross-sectional variation in average returns on other portfolios of nonfinancial stocks and bonds.
We do so by comparing the performance of the bank portfolio to the performance of a portfolio of
nonbank stocks and bonds with the same exposure to normal risk factors. To do so, we use the
Fama and French (1993) three-factor model. We find that small banks, measured either by market
cap or book value, outperform the benchmark portfolio of bonds and stocks, while large banks
underperform.
     A bank manages a portfolio of bonds of varying maturities and credit risk.3 Therefore, we also
include two bond risk factors in addition to three stock risk factors
                                      h                                 i
                               ft =       market smb hml ltg crd            ,                       (1)

where ft is 5 × 1. The terms market, smb, and hml represent the returns on the three Fama-French
stock factors, namely, the market, small minus big, and high minus low factors respectively. The
Fama-French stock factors are constructed using the six value-weighted portfolios of all stocks on
NYSE, Amex and NASDAQ (including financials) formed on size and book-to-market. We capture
market using the value-weighted return on all NYSE, Amex and NASDAQ stocks (from CRSP)
minus the one-month Treasury bill rate (from Ibbotson Associates). We use ltg to denote the excess
returns on an index of 10-year bonds issued by the U.S. Treasury as our first bond risk factor. The
USA 10-year Government Bond Total Return Index (ltg) is downloadable from Global Financial
Data. We use crd to denote the excess returns on an index of investment grade corporate bonds,
maintained by Dow Jones, as our second bond risk factor. To compute excess returns, we use the
one-month risk-free rate.4

A.     Risk-Adjusted Returns on Commercial Bank Stock Portfolios
     We regress monthly excess returns for each size-sorted portfolio on the three Fama-French stock
factors and two bond factors. For each portfolio i we run the following time-series regression to
estimate the vector of betas β i :

                                 i      f
                                Rt+1 − Rt+1 = αi + β i,0 f t+1 + εit+1 ,                            (2)

       i
where Rt+1 is the monthly return on the ith size-sorted portfolio. Since all of the risk factors in f t
are traded returns, the estimated residuals in the time series-regression are estimates of the normal

                                                   7
                      bi .
risk-adjusted returns Rt+1
   Market Capitalization Table I provides the results of the regression specified in equation 2.
The portfolios are ranked from smallest (1) to largest (10). Panel A reports the results based on
sorting by market capitalization into deciles. The table reports the regression coefficients for each
size-sorted portfolio, along with their statistical significance and adjusted R2 . Table I excludes the
recent financial crisis.
   The estimated intercepts decrease nearly monotonically with bank size from 1.94% for the first
decile to -5.09% for the tenth decile. The negative alpha on the tenth decile is significantly different
from zero at the 1% level. A significant share of this alpha is due to the very largest banks. We
also split the highest decile in two bins, 10A and 10B. In the top half of the tenth decile (10B) the
alpha is -5.60% (statistically significant at the 1% level), while it is only -3.13% in the bottom half
of the tenth decile. If we split the top decile into three bins instead, the top 3.33% earns -6.78% per
annum (not reported in the table, statistically significant at the 1% level). The top 3.33% accounts
for more than 90% of the industry’s market capitalization. Clearly, the largest U.S. commercial
banks earn significantly negative risk-adjusted returns.
   A long-short position that goes long 1$ in a portfolio of the largest market capitalization banks
in decile 10 and short 1$ in a portfolio of the smallest market capitalization banks in decile 1 loses
7.03% over the entire sample. This return spread is statistically significant at the 5% level. The
difference between 10A and 10B is 2.47% and accounts for 35% of the entire 7.03% spread between
the first and last deciles. The total difference between 10B and 1 is 7.54%. When we split the
top decile into three bins, the spread between the first decile and the top 3.33% in the market cap
distribution is even larger: 8.72% (not reported in the table). When we exclude the largest banks,
the differences in risk-adjusted returns are much smaller. The average normal risk-adjusted return
on a 9-minus-2 position is -4.26% per annum, and -5.29% per annum for the 8-minus-3 portfolio.
   The differences in risk-adjusted portfolio returns tend to be larger than the differences in raw
portfolio returns, because larger banks are more levered and hence impute higher market betas to
large bank stock portfolios. The market beta increases from 0.46 for the first decile to 1.22 in the
last decile. However, this effect is attenuated by the lower credit risk exposure for the larger banks.
   The second row of Table I reports the coefficient on excess market return, market, for each
size-sorted portfolio. The market beta increases monotonically with bank size. Over the entire
sample, a portfolio of large banks has a market beta of 1.22, as compared to a beta of 0.46 for a
portfolio of the smallest banks. The largest banks were 2.65 times more exposed to market risk as
compared to the smallest banks. This difference can be attributed largely to differences in leverage.
   The loadings on smb and hml also depend systematically on size. We first look at the exposure
to the size factor. Contrary to what one expects to find, over the entire sample the loading on smb
increases from 0.40 in the first size decile to 0.42 in the ninth decile, while in the tenth decil, the
loading is -0.13. Clearly, the common variation in stock returns of banks along the size dimension
is very different from that in other industries. A similar pattern holds true for the loadings on hml,
which increase from 0.50 for the first portfolio to 0.70 for the last portfolio.


                                                   8
   There is a clear size pattern in the loadings on the bond risk factors. The slope coefficient on
the excess return on an index of 10-year bonds issued by the U.S. Treasury, ltg, is negative and
statistically insignificant for small banks, and positive and almost always statistically significant for
large banks. The loadings vary monotonically in size. A $1 long position in large banks and a $1
short position in small banks results in a net exposure of 30 cents to long-term government bonds
over the entire sample. The results for the portfolios of large bank stocks seem largely consistent
with the findings of Flannery and James (1984) for a value-weighted portfolio of large bank stocks.
They interpret this bond factor loading as a measure of interest rate sensitivity resulting from the
maturity mismatch between assets and liabilities. Small and mid-sized banks seem to be different.
   On the other hand, the loadings on the credit risk factor, crd, are surprisingly small for large
banks and positive for small banks. A long-large-banks-short-small-banks position delivers a net
negative exposure to credit markets of 49 cents per dollar invested.

                                     [Place Table I about here]

   Book Value Market cap measures size, but it also measures expected returns. Firms that gen-
erate more cash flows will tend to have higher market capitalization, but firms with lower expected
returns, holding cash flows constant, also have larger market capitalization. As a result, Berk
(1995) argues that there should be a relation between expected returns and market capitalization.
Of course, this argument does not apply to other measures of size such as book value. For example,
while market cap sorts are likely to be picking up liquidity effects, book sorts are not. A priori,
there is no reason to expect a relation between book values and expected returns.
   Panel B reports the results obtained by sorting by book value. The pattern in risk-adjusted
returns is similar to that obtained when sorting by the market capitalization of banks. The risk-
adjusted returns remain around 100 to 200 bps for the first six portfolios. The seventh portfolio
posts average risk-adjusted returns of -140 bps. After that, the average risk-adjusted returns decline
to -353 bps for portfolio 8, -521 bps for portfolio 9, and -5.70% for portfolio 10, which is significantly
different from zero at the 5% level. The top 5% of banks by book value earn risk-adjusted returns
that are even lower: -6.14% per annum.
   A long-short position that goes long $1 in a portfolio of the largest banks in decile 10 and short
$1 in a portfolio of the smallest banks in decile 1 loses 7.92% over the entire sample. This return
spread is statistically significant at the 1% level. The difference between 10A and 10B is 1.55%, and
accounts for 1/5 of the entire 7.92% spread between the first and last deciles. The average normal
risk-adjusted return on a 9-minus-2 position is -7.14% per annum, and -5.96% per annum for the
8-minus-3 portfolio. These results are statistically significant at the 1% and 5% levels, respectively.
   Larger banks have higher market betas, consistent with leverage increasing in size, although the
increase is smaller than the difference in leverage suggests. However, the negative effect of higher
market betas on risk-adjusted returns is partly offset by a strong inverse U-shaped pattern in the
credit risk loading. The loading increases from 0.11 in the first portfolio to 0.32 in the fifth portfolio,
and then declines to -0.14 in the ninth portfolio. Clearly, there is strong connection between average


                                                    9
risk-adjusted returns on bank stocks and the actual size of these banks as measured by book value.
This is not the case for nonfinancials.
     This size anomaly is quite robust. However, if we exclude bank holding companies from the
sample, we do not find evidence of a size anomaly for the banking sector. That is not surprising,
because these firms include some of the largest U.S. commercial banks.

B.    Risk-Adjusted Returns on Portfolios of Non-financial Stocks
     To make the results easily comparable, we sorted all banks and nonfinancials into 10 size bins
using the NYSE market capitalization decile breakpoints available from Ken French’s web site.
Table II reports the results, Panel A for commercial banks, Panel B for nonfinancials. By design,
the banks and nonfinancials in each portfolio are roughly of the same size. The value-weighted
risk-adjusted returns on banks in the last size bin are 7.35 % lower than those in the first bin. The
difference between the ninth and tenth bank portfolios is 3.91%, which confirms that the very largest
banks which exceed the tenth NYSE decile breakpoint earn much lower risk-adjusted returns.
     For nonfinancials, there is no evidence of a size anomaly. In fact, the value-weighted risk-
adjusted returns on the last portfolio are now 3.38% higher than those on the first portfolio.
Finally, by comparing Panel A and Panel B, we note that the risk-adjusted returns on the largest
banks are a full 9.96% per annum lower than those of nonfinancials of the same size.5

                                   [Place Table II about here]



C.    Characteristics Regression
     The portfolio sorts reveal that the actual size of a bank measured by its book value seems to
be a key determinant of bank stock returns: larger banks have lower returns. This is confirmed by
running standard characteristics regressions. When we run a cross-sectional regression of average
annual returns on firm characteristics (the log of market capitalization, the log of book value, book-
to-market, and leverage), we obtain a large and significant negative coefficient for log book value
(-2.23) and a positive coefficient for market capitalization (2.79). Thus, a 100% increase in book
value above the sample average lowers annual returns by 223 bps for a typical bank, holding all
variables, including market capitalization, fixed. These coefficients are significant at the 1% level.
The detailed results are in the Internet Appendix.
     This pooled regression explains 0.42% of the variation in annual returns. Leverage seems to
have no additional explanatory power for returns. We obtain identical results when we exclude
leverage from the regression. When we drop book value, the regression only accounts for 0.09%
of the variation in annual returns. Hence, this size effect in bank stocks is very different from the
”market capitalization” effect first documented by Banz (1981).




                                                 10
                      IV.    Size Factor in Bank Stock Returns
     The key to activating the collective bailout clause is common variation in bank payoffs.6 We
use principal component analysis to study the common variation. We uncover a bank-specific size
factor that can help us understand and interpret these anomalies. The second principal component
of normal risk-adjusted returns on size-sorted portfolios of bank stocks has loadings that depend
monotonically on size. The covariance between the returns on size-sorted portfolios of bank stocks
and the size factor can explain the size pattern in average risk-adjusted returns.

A.     Constructing the Size Factor
     We compute the residuals from the time-series regression of returns of each size-sorted portfolio
on the equity and bond risk factors in equation (2). We extract the loadings for the principal
components (w1 , w2 ) and report the results in Table III. This table shows the loadings for the
first two principal components. Together, these two principal components explain 66% of the
residual variation over the entire sample. The numbers in brackets are standard errors generated
by bootstrapping 10,000 samples. The first two columns in the table show results for market
capitalization sorts; the last two columns show results for book sorts. The two sets of results are
similar. We therefore focus on the results obtained using the market capitalization sort, as this
sort provides more observations and hence the loadings are estimated more precisely.
     The first principal component is a banking industry (”level”) factor with roughly equal weights
on all 10 portfolios. The second principal component is a size factor that loads positively on portfo-
lios of small banks and negatively on portfolios of large banks. The loadings vary monotonically in
size. This is a candidate risk factor because the loadings align with the average normal risk-adjusted
returns that we want to explain.

                                   [Place Table III about here]

     Next, we take our (T × 10) matrix of estimated residuals, t , and multiply it by the (10 × 10)
loadings of the principal components to construct the asset pricing factors. The weights (w1 , w2 )
are renormalized to (w     b 2 ) so that they sum to one. This results in a (T × 10) linear combination
                      b 1, w
                                                                                  b 01 t and
of the residuals. We focus on the first two principal components, denoted P Ct1 = w
         b 02 t , where w
P C2,t = w               c2 is given by
                h                                                                    i
                    0.53 0.24 0.20 0.12 -0.02 -0.12 -0.31 -0.41 -0.43 -0.37              .

This is a highly levered portfolio with a long position of $53 in small banks and a short position of
$37 in large banks. The return on this portfolio investment has a monthly standard deviation of
8.25%.
     The size factor is a natural candidate for explaining the size pattern in normal risk-adjusted
returns, because the average normal risk-adjusted returns align with the covariance between the size


                                                  11
factor (second principal component) and the returns on the portfolios. This is not the case for any
of the other principal components. The second principal component is the only candidate factor,
because the second principal component is the only one for which the covariances line up with the
average excess returns, suggesting that the common variation in banks stock returns captured by
the second principal component can explain the size anomaly in bank stock returns.
     To check whether the size factor actually explains the average normal risk-adjusted returns, we
define a new independent variable. We take the (T ×10) matrix of returns for each of the size-sorted
portfolio of banks and multiply it by the (10 × 1) loading of the second principal component. We
denote the results of our multiplication by R[P C2 ]t+1 = wb 2 Rt which is a (T × 1) vector of the
returns weighted by the second principal component. Thus, for each month, the returns of each of
the 10 portfolios are multiplied by their corresponding weights in the second principal component
and added together. This portfolio is long in small banks and short in large banks. The weights
of the portfolio are given by the second principal component loadings, renormalized to sum to one.
We then run a time-series regression of the returns on the size-sorted bank portfolios on the equity
and bond factors, as well as the size factor R[P C2 ]:

                        i      f
                       Rt+1 − Rt+1 = αi + β i,0 f t+1 + βPi C,2 R[P C2 ]t+1 + εit+1 .             (3)

     The tail and normal risk-adjusted returns or alphas from this regression are presented in Table
IV. Panel A corresponds to the pre-crisis sample (1970 to 2005) and Panel B to the whole sample
(1970 to 2013). In Panel A, we want to use an ex ante measure of the risk price that excludes the
effects of the crisis; the disaster model rationalizes this approach. The risk-adjusted returns on all
portfolios are smaller than 250 bps over the entire sample once we account for the size factor. Not
only does the magnitude of the alphas change, but nearly all of them are statistically insignificant.
In addition, there is no discernible size-related pattern in these normal risk-adjusted returns. In
panel B, we show the risk-adjusted returns that obtain over the entire sample, which includes the
crisis. For the very largest banks, we still see significantly negative risk-adjusted returns over the
sample that includes the crisis.

                                   [Place Table IV about here]



B.    What is the Size Factor?
                            b 02 t as the normal risk-adjusted return on a portfolio that is long
         We define P C2,t = w
small banks and short large banks. The weights of the portfolio are given by the second principal
component. Figure 1 plots the 12-month moving average (months t − 11 through t) of the P C2
series along with a plot of the index for industrial production. The units are monthly returns.
Recall that this portfolio is levered almost 10-to-1. The gray-shaded regions represent NBER
recessions and the light-shaded regions represent banking crises. The NBER recession dates are
published by the NBER Business Cycle Dating Committee. The dates for the Mexico and Long


                                                    12
Term Capital Management (LTCM) crises come from Kho, Lee, and Stulz (2000) and the FDIC
(for the developing country debt crisis of 1982).
   The size factor, which by construction is orthogonal to the bond and equity pricing factors,
declines during recessions and financial crises. Moreover, it is very sensitive to large slowdowns in
the growth rate of industrial production. We plot a backward-looking 12-month moving average,
which explains why the returns appear to drop a couple of months after the start of the NBER
recessions. The returns also tend to increase before the end of the NBER recession.
   There are two exceptions to this cyclical pattern. The first is the double-dip recession in the
early 1980s. Small bank stocks were already recovering from the huge declines suffered relative to
large bank stocks, and hence starting from very low valuations, when the second recession started.
The second is the 2001 recession in the wake of the LTCM crisis. Moreover, in 2001, the NBER
chose the starting point of the recession well after the decline in industrial production started (in
other recessions, the starting date coincides with the decline in industrial production.) On average,
during recessions, this normal risk-adjusted return drops by an average of 3.34% per month or
40.08% per annum. During the most recent recession, which coincides with a financial crisis, the
levered size factor lost more than 100% of its value after adjusting for risk exposure.

                                  [Place Figure 1 about here]

   Table V, Panel A shows the value at the trough of the NBER cycle (the end of the banking
crisis) of $100 invested at the peak of the NBER cycle (the start of the banking crisis) in the size
portfolio. The third column reports the dollar value without risk adjustment. The fourth column
reports the dollar value after subtracting the performance of a benchmark portfolio with the same
exposure to the bond and equity factors ($100 + x, the cumulative return of x% in excess of the
benchmark portfolio). This is the return on a portfolio that is hedged to have zero betas with
respect to the standard risk factors. On average, the unhedged size portfolio loses $36.61 during
a recession or banking crisis. The hedged strategy loses more than $40.08 per recession. As is
clear from Panel B, the largest losses are concentrated in the first twelve months of the NBER
recessions. Moreover, this portfolio (both hedged and unhedged) experienced steep declines during
the developing country debt and LTCM crises. Panel B in Table V shows the average value of the
portfolio n months into a recession. The hedged portfolio gradually drops more in value. Twelve
months after the peak it has lost almost $41 dollars of its value.

                                  [Place Table V about here]

   The size factor appears to be a reliable measure of bank-specific tail risk. During the most
recent U.S. recession, a full-fledged banking crisis, the hedged size portfolio of commercial banks
lost more than 100 cents on the dollar (see Table V). This is not a surprise. In 2008, 18% of the
commercial banks in the first market capitalization decile were delisted, followed by another 30%
in 2009. We also went back to 1926 by including all financial firms in our sample. During the Great
Depression (NBER recession dates), the hedged size portfolio of all financials was trading at -44

                                                    13
cents at the end of the recession per $100 invested at the peak. We did not find a similar cyclical
pattern in the second principal component of nonfinancials.
     In the data, there is a strong connection between the business cycle and the incidence of banking
panics. We examine U.S. banking panics starting in 1873, as well as NBER business cycle peaks
and troughs. Except for the first banking panic, all of these occur during the contraction phase
of the U.S. business cycle. The dates of the banking panics come from Gorton (1988, p. 223)
and Wicker (1996, p.155). Details are provided in the Internet Appendix. This is not the case for
nonfinancials. Giesecke et al. (2011) examine 150 years of U.S. corporate history and find a weak
relation between the business cycle and corporate bond defaults.

C.    Alternative Explanations
     Large idiosyncratic shocks can cause bank failures. If the volatility of these shocks increases
more in recessions for small banks, that could explain some of our findings. Smaller banks are much
more exposed to idiosyncratic risk than large banks, but the amount of idiosyncratic risk exposure
of small banks does not seem to increase very much during recessions. During NBER recessions,
the standard deviation ranges from 30.11% for the smallest banks to 23.86% for the largest banks
as compared to 36.06% and 19.19% respectively in the full sample. Details are in Appendix A.
Hence, the largest percentage point increase in volatility during recessions from 19.19% to 23.86% is
noted for the largest banks. For the smallest banks, the idiosyncratic volatility decreases by 5.85%.
There is no evidence to suggest that the cyclicality of the size factor is due to idiosyncratic bank
risk. While smaller banks are more exposed to idiosyncratic risk, we do not see large increases in
this type of risk during recessions.
     There is no evidence that business cycle variation in cash flows can explain our findings. If
anything, the evidence suggests that large financial institutions are more exposed to business cycle
risk. Boyd and Gertler (1993) analyze the impact of size on the performance of banks as measured
by accounting data. They show that increased competition and financial innovation have induced
the largest banks to participate in riskier investments. We examine bank performance during the
last two recessions by studying the Quarterly Banking Reports issued by the FDIC, and find that
small banks tend to outperform large banks during recessions along several dimensions: return on
equity, returns on assets, loan losses, and several other measures. Appendix B contains the details.
We analyze the data in the report for the first three quarters of 2001, which corresponds to the
recession dates provided by NBER.

D.    Size and Co-Skewness
     By granting the shareholders of large bank stocks a menu of out-of-the-money put options, the
government reduces the negative co-skewness of large bank stock returns. Consistent with our
interpretation of the size factor, we find that large bank stock returns have significantly less co-
skewness with the market than small banks. We measure co-skewness by adding the squared market
return as a risk factor. Table VI reports the results. We find large and statistically significant

                                                  14
positive differences in the loadings on the squared market return between the upper and lower
deciles. Given that the largest commercial banks use more leverage, this finding is surprising, unless
we consider the effect of government guarantees. Harvey and Siddique (2000) show that co-skewness
is priced in stocks.7 Finally, we also find that small bank stock returns are significantly more exposed
to the Fama-French momentum factor than large bank stock returns. This is not surprising given
that Harvey and Siddique (2000) relate the momentum effect to systematic skewness.

                                   [Place Table VI about here]



         V.       The Pricing of Bank Tail Risk and the Government
     The average return of this size factor is the price of banking tail risk insurance. For individual
banks, we measure the effect on the cost of equity capital as the loading on this factor times this
risk price. When the total effect is negative, we refer to this as a tail risk subsidy; otherwise,
we refer to it as a tail risk tax. Of course, this only measures the impact on equity. Since these
institutions are highly levered, the direct effect on the overall cost of capital may be small, but the
indirect effect is not: since shareholders are last in line, the implied subsidy to other bank creditors
is even larger.
     This section examines how bank-specific tail risk is priced in the stock market, and relates it to
both the regulatory regime and government announcements.

A.    Size of Largest Banks
     The events immediately after the collapse of Lehman in September 2008 are in line with the
commonly held view that the U.S. government and monetary authorities are reluctant to let large
financial institutions fail collectively, even though they may occasionally be willing to let individual
institutions fail. For example, over the course of the recent financial crisis, the Federal Reserve
made emergency loans totaling about $9.99 trillion to 10 of the largest U.S. financial institutions,
which accounted for 83% of the emergency credit extended to all U.S. institutions.8 Moreover, even
if regulators are willing to let these large banks fail, uncertainty about the resolution regime for
distressed banks clearly favors the creditors and shareholders of large financial institutions.
     Consistent with this view, even within the highest market capitalization decile of commercial
banks, we find a strong negative relation between the market capitalization of individual firms
relative to GDP and the loading on the size factor. We choose banks that are in portfolio 10
in each year of our sample and then compute the loadings on P C2 over the subsequent five-year
window. As individual banks grow larger relative to GDP over time, their loadings on this size
factor clearly tend to increase. The slope coefficient in the regression of P C2 loadings on market
capitalization/GDP is 0.032, meaning that a 100% increase in the size of market capitalization
relative to GDP raises the loading by 0.032 (t-stat is 5.9) in absolute value, or equivalently, increases
the tail risk subsidy by 35 bps per annum, using the pre-crisis market price of 11.14%. We find a

                                                   15
similar relation in the ninth decile, but not in the other deciles. The P C2 itself is computed over
the full 1970 to 2013 sample.

B.     Regulatory Regime
         We want to relate the pricing of tail risk in the pre-crisis sample, as captured by the size
factor, to the regulatory regime of different banks. Commercial banks and GSEs benefit from
special provisions: deposit insurance,9 access to the discount window at the Federal Reserve and
other special lending facilities in the case of commercial banks, and widely acknowledged debt
guarantees in the case of GSEs. Foreign banks and investment banks do not enjoy the same level
of protection.
     Table VII compares the results for a value-weighted index of commercial banks, investment
banks, foreign banks, and GSEs. The first row reports the value-weighted average market capital-
ization for each index. For foreign banks, this only includes the market capitalization of U.S. listed
shares.10 Investment and foreign banks do not benefit from the tail risk subsidy to commercial
banks, but the GSEs (Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac) clearly do. Over the entire sample, the sub-
sidy to commercial banks is 1.18% and the subsidy to GSEs is 2.58%. This subsidy is computed
as the loading on P C2 times the risk price (11.14%). The loadings on P C2 are computed over
1970-2005. The loadings on R[P C2 ] are negative and statistically significantly different from zero
for commercial banks and GSE’s at the 1% level, but the loadings on R[P C2 ] are much smaller
(investment banks) or positive (foreign banks) and not statistically significant.
     Table VII also shows the same results for some of the largest commercial banks and investment
banks in the U.S. Panel A reports the results for the entire sample excluding the crisis. The tail
risk subsidy is largest for the large commercial banks. For BoA (from 1973 to 2005), we estimate
a tail risk subsidy of 3.51% per annum, for Wells Fargo (from 1970 to 2005) it is 3.61%, and for
Citibank (from 1986 to 2005) it is 1.52%. For investment banks, the loadings on P C2 are mostly
not statistically significant, except for Lehman. In contrast, BoA, Citi, Wells Fargo, Freddie Mac,
and Fannie Mae have loadings that are negative and statistically significantly different from zero
at the 5% level or better.
     We also report the subsidies over 1990 to 2005 in Panel B. As above, the loadings on P C2 are
computed over 1970 to 2005. The subsidies are computed as the loading on P C2 times the pre-crisis
risk price (11.14%). Over this period the subsidy to commercial banks is 1.00%, but the subsidy to
GSEs is 3.33%. This number is the unweighted average of the subsidy for Fannie Mae and Freddie
Mac.
     As a benchmark, we also compute the loading on R[P C2 ] for an index of hedge fund returns.
Hedge funds do not benefit from the umbrella extended to large banks. We use the HFRI fund-
weighted hedge fund index. These results are not reported. Over the entire sample (1991 to 2005)
the loading for hedge fund returns on R[P C2] is 0.02 (t-statistic 2.31) and it is 0.05 (t-statistic
2.02) over 2000 to 2005. Hence, as expected, hedge funds face a tail risk tax, because the loadings
are positive, just like small banks.


                                                  16
     These results lend some support to a government-based interpretation of the size factor, as com-
mercial banks and GSEs benefit from more extensive government guarantees than other financial
institutions.11

                                   [Place Table VII about here]


C.    Elimination of Glass-Steagall Act
     The Glass-Steagall Act of 1933 effectively separated U.S. commercial banking from investment
banking. The provisions of this act preventing bank holding companies from owning financial
companies were repealed in 1999. Its repeal allowed large commercial banks to originate and trade
collateralized debt obligations.
     After 2000, the tail risk subsidy to commercial banks and GSEs nearly doubled to 1.75% and
4.90%, respectively. These numbers are derived by multiplying the loadings with the same risk price
(11.14%) computed over the entire sample, and hence are valid only if the risk price is constant
across these subsamples. These changes are large even when taking into account the statistical
uncertainty. For example, the loading for commercial banks increased by almost three standard
errors from -0.09 (with a standard error of 0.03) to -0.16.
     The loadings for the largest banks increased dramatically in the last decade. The largest
subsidies are collected by Fannie Mae (5.93% per year), Lehman (5.09%), and Freddie Mac (3.82%),
in spite of their smaller size. All of these banks were building up substantial exposure to the
subprime mortgage market during this period. Note that there is no mechanical connection between
our size factor and the subprime exposure, since we exclude the financial crisis. In addition, Fannie
Mae, Lehman and Freddie Mac are themselves excluded from the sample when we compute the
size factor. Exposure to the size factor seems to be a good yardstick of systemic risk exposure.

D.    Announcement Effects
     In September 1984, the Comptroller of the Currency announced a list of 10 banks deemed too
big to fail. We examine the pricing of the financial tail risk embedded in the stocks of these 10
banks around this announcement date. The Internet Appendix lists all the announcement dates.
     Pre-Crisis Announcement Dates We also look at six other announcement dates listed by Kho,
Lee, and Stulz (2000). Table VIII reports the results. We report regressions for windows of
30, 45, 60, 90, and 105 days around the announcement date. Panel A reports results from a
pooled regression for all seven announcement dates. In the 30-day window after the Comptroller
announcements, the loading increases by 0.12. This amounts to an annualized 1.33% tail risk
subsidy per year. This effect gradually decreases as we increase the event window. We find slightly
smaller effects for the LTCM, Brazilian, Mexican, and South Korean crises. The average effect
in a 30-day window is a 33 bps per annum (0.03 times 11.14%) increase in the tail risk subsidy.
This average effect is roughly constant across the windows. These effects are economically and
statistically significant.

                                                  17
     Crisis Announcement Dates In the crisis sample, we identify announcements that increased the
likelihood of a bailout for all banks, and for large banks, and, we also look at events that decreased
the likelihood of a bailout. These are listed in the Internet Appendix.

                                   [Place Table VIII about here]

     Table VIII, Panel B looks at the financial crisis announcements. Only the positive announce-
ments for large banks have an economically and statistically significant effect on the pricing of tail
risk. The tail risk subsidy for the too-big-to-fail banks increases by 78 bps (per annum) in a 30-day
window around these announcements. The other announcements have small or negative effects that
are statistically insignificant.


VI.       Recovery Rates and Equilibrium Pricing of Tail Risk in the
                                           Banking Sector
     To help us interpret our empirical findings, we use a stylized dynamic asset pricing model with
time-varying probability of banking panics that reproduces the size anomalies, as well as the size
factor in returns. The driving force is the size variation in recovery rates. The model yields a key
testable prediction: a size factor in normal risk-adjusted returns on banking portfolios that is tied
to the U.S. business cycle.

A.    A Simple Model of the Size Anomaly in Bank Stock Returns
     We adopt a version of models with time-varying probabilities of financial disasters proposed
by Gabaix (2012) and Wachter (2013), which are extensions of the rare event models developed
by Barro (2006) and Rietz (1988). The model produces a one-to-one relation between the average
risk-adjusted returns and the financial disaster recovery rates. In our model, the stochastic discount
factor has two components, a standard normal component and a disaster component:

                             G
                     Mt+1 = Mt+1 × 1 in states without a financial disaster                       (4)
                             G      D
                     Mt+1 = Mt+1 × Mt+1 in states with a financial disaster,

       G denotes the representative investor’s intertemporal marginal rate of substitution (IMRS)
where Mt+1
in normal times, that is, in states without a disaster. We use pt to denote the probability of a fi-
nancial disaster.
     In the simplest CCAPM version of his model, Gabaix (2012) defines

               ∆ log Ct+1 = gC + σηt+1 in states without a financial disaster                     (5)
               ∆ log Ct+1 = gC + σηt+1 + log F c in states with a financial disaster,




                                                 18
where 1 ≥ F c > 0, and ηt+1 is Gaussian white noise. We assume that agents have standard power
utility defined over consumption with coefficient of relative risk aversion γ.
   The dividend process of a portfolio of bank stocks of size i is given by

                        i            i,G
                 ∆ log Dt+1 = ∆ log Dt+1 in states without banking crisis
                        i            i,G
                 ∆ log Dt+1 = ∆ log Dt+1 + log Fti in states with banking crisis

             i,G
where ∆ log Dt+1 is the i.i.d. Gaussian component of dividend growth, and 1 ≥ F i > 0 can be
thought of as the recovery rate, that is, in the case a rare event is realized, a fraction F i of the
dividend gets wiped out (as in Longstaff and Piazzesi (2004) and Barro (2006)). The recovery rate
varies across banks depending on size, in part because the realization of the rare event can trigger
a collective bailout of larger banks, but not necessarily of smaller banks.
    Following Gabaix (2012), the resilience of banks is defined as the marginal utility-weighted
recovery rate in disaster states: Hti = pt Et Mt+1
                                                D i        
                                                     F − 1 . In the CCPAM case, this would be
Hti = pt Et (F c )−γ F i − 1 . As the economy enters into a recession, pt increases and the resilience
                           

of large banks HtB increases relative to that of small banks HtS if F B > F S . Indeed, we assume
that the recovery rate F n > F n−1 increases monotonically in size.
   The log expected return on asset i conditional on no disaster realization after adjusting for
                                     bi ] = (r − hit ), where r denotes the rate of return on an
normal risk exposure becomes log Et [Rt+1
                                              G ]−1 , and hi denotes log(1 + H i ). The proof is in
asset with zero resilience, log Rt = log Et [Mt+1          t                  t
Appendix A. This implies that, in a sample without a disaster realization, the average normal
risk-adjusted return will be given by

                                                i            i
                                        log E[R
                                              bt+1 ] ≈ (r − h ),                                   (6)
       i
where h = E[log 1 + H i ] denotes the average resilience and r denotes the average r. The dif-
                       

ference in alphas in a sample without a rare event realization measures the differences in average
                                                                         S    B
resilience between different bank stock portfolios: log αB − log αS = h − h . Hence, we can inter-
pret the difference between small and large bank portfolios in the normal risk-adjusted returns as
measuring differences in the resilience of these bank portfolios to banking crises.
   Quantitative Implications of CCAPM Model We set the coefficient of relative risk aversion γ
to five. We consider a per annum consumption drop of 5% (F C = 0.95) in the financial disaster
state. This scenario matches the experience of all developed economies considered by Reinhart and
Rogoff (2009) during banking crises. The authors document a cumulative drop of 5%. We set the
average probability of a banking crisis to 13%, because the U.S. spent 13% of all years since 1800
in a banking panic according to Reinhart and Rogoff (2009).12
   If the spread in recovery rates is 35 cents per dollar, then the difference in risk-adjusted returns
                     B     S
(log αS − log αB = h − h =3.70%-(-2.1%)) in a sample without disasters is equal to 5.8%. When
the coefficient of relative risk aversion increases to 15, the spread increases to 8.9%.
   Recovery Rates in the Data There is strong empirical evidence for size-dependent variation in


                                                  19
financial disaster recovery rates. In our sample (from 1970 to 2009), the average delisting rate for
banks in the first market capitalization decile is 1.77%, compared to 0.018% for the ninth decile
and 0% for the tenth decile. During 2008 alone, 18% of banks in the first decile were delisted,
another 30% were delisted in 2009 and 10% were delisted in 2010. None of the commercial banks
in the highest decile was delisted.
     Size Factor A key prediction of this model is that the variation in the probability of a financial
disaster imputes common variation to the normal risk-adjusted stock returns along the size dimen-
sion, since we assumed that the recovery rate depends on size, even in a sample without disasters.
The loadings on this common factor are proportional to F i − 1. To see why, note that log(1 + Hti ) ≈
      D i       
pt Et Mt+1 F − 1 . This is a size factor because the loadings depend on the recovery rates and hence
(by assumption) on size. The conditional normal risk-adjusted
                                                      h      i    multiplicative
                                                                      h      i risk premium on a
                                                          B               S      S      B
long-short portfolio is given by the expression log Et R  t+1 − log Et Rt+1 = ht+1 − ht+1 . As pt
                                                        b               b
increases during recessions, the risk premium on this long-short portfolio becomes more negative.
This variation in risk premia is the driving force. The size factor tracks the variation in pt .

B.    Mergers, Acquisitions, and Risk-Adjusted Returns
     Suppose that only the very largest banks directly benefit from government guarantees. Our
model does not predict that only those banks will have lower expected risk-adjusted returns. Be-
cause of the possibility of mergers, some of the effects will contaminate the expected risk-adjusted
returns on smaller bank stocks.
     In our model, a characteristic (the size of the bank) actually determines the financial disaster
risk premium, because of the collective bailout guarantee for large banks. This creates an opening
for arbitrage opportunities. Let us assume that there is a single critical size threshold. In this case,
the low recovery rate (F i = F ) applies for all bank portfolios with size below the cutoff. Also,
suppose banks do not switch between portfolios as a result of growth, mergers, or acquisitions.
For banks in portfolios above the cutoff, the higher recovery rate applies: F i = F . The baseline
model predicts large, positive, but constant α’s for all the banks in size-sorted portfolios below
the threshold, and much smaller negative alphas for all banks above the threshold. In that sense,
the pattern we find in the data is surprising. However, this stark (α, α) outcome can only be an
equilibrium if there are prohibitively large costs associated with merging and acquiring banks.
     Suppose there are no such costs. Consider two banks (A and B) just below the threshold with
recovery rates F A = F B = F . By bundling the cash flows of these two banks (A and B), the
recovery rate increases to F A+B = F , and the value of a claim to the cash flows of A and B will
exceed the sum of the value of these cash flows: P (A) + P (B) ≤ P (A + B). In the absence of costs,
this represents an arbitrage. However, if there are positive costs C, then the value of A and B has
to increase such that P (A) + P (B) ≥ P (A + B) − C[A, B] to eliminate the arbitrage opportunities.
This increase reflects the probability that these banks end up crossing the size threshold because
of growth or because of a future merger or acquisition. Hence, the α’s for these banks (A and B)
will decrease, as their value rises, even though they do not directly benefit from the guarantee yet.


                                                  20
Alternatively, A and B will actually merge right away.
   There has been a large amount of consolidation in the banking sector in the last few decades,
with the share of total market capitalization accounted for by the top decile of commercial banks
increasing from 50% in the 1970s to 90% in the last decade. Similarly, the share of the total balance
sheet accounted for by the top decile has increased from 52% to 95%. Kane (2000) and Brewer
and Jagtiani (2007) document that acquiring banks are willing to pay larger premiums for banks
that put them over critical size thresholds, consistent with our hypothesis. By backward induction,
the same argument applies to smaller banks in other portfolios. However, the costs of bundling
the cash flows (C[D, E, F, . . . , Z]) of many smaller banks to reach this critical threshold increase,
which mitigates the effect on the average risk-adjusted returns. This can account for the decreasing
pattern in the alphas that we find in the data.


                                       VII.    Conclusion
   Our paper documents a size anomaly in bank stock returns that is different from the size effect
that has been documented for nonfinancials. This size effect can be explained by the covariance
with a new size factor that we extract from that component of bank stock returns that is orthogonal
to standard risk factors. This size factor is a measure of bank-specific tail risk. Our evidence from
bank stock returns reveals how the pricing of bank-specific tail risk in financial markets depends
on which bank is holding the risk.
   To the extent that these effects reflect implicit bailout guarantees in financial disasters, the
government subsidizes large financial institutions to take on tail risk. To mitigate this distortion,
the government could consider taxing size in the banking sector. Our paper is the first to develop
asset price-based measures of the resulting distortion to the equity component of the balance sheet.
Our findings suggest that cost of capital distortions might have contributed to the pre-crisis growth
in the size of the financial sector relative to the overall economy. Philippon (2008) argues that
much of the variation in the size of the U.S. financial sector can be imputed to standard corporate
finance forces. However, he notes the 2002 to 2007 period as an exception, which is exactly when
we identify the largest distortions.




                                                  21
                                     REFERENCES

Acharya, Viral V., Christian Brownlees, Robert Engle, Farhang Farazmand, and Matthew Richard-

  son, 2011a, Regulating Wall Street: The Dodd-Frank Act and the New Architecture of Global

  Finance, chapter Measuring systemic risk (John Wiley and Sons, Inc.).

Acharya, Viral V., Lasse Pedersen, Thomas Philippon, and Matthew Richardson, 2011b, Regulating

  Wall Street: The Dodd-Frank Act and the New Architecture of Global Finance, chapter Taxing

  systemic risk (John Wiley and Sons, Inc.).

Acharya, Viral V., and Tanju Yorulmazer, 2007, Too many to fail - An analysis of time-inconsistency

  in bank closure policies, Journal of Financial Intermediation 16, 1–31.

Acharya, Viral V., and Tanju Yorulmazer, 2008, Cash-in-the-market pricing and optimal resolution

  of bank failures, Review of Financial Studies 21(6), 2705–2742.

Adrian, Tobias, and Markus K. Brunnermeier, 2010, Covar, Federal Reserve Bank of New York

  Working Paper.

Banz, Rolf W., 1981, The relationship between return and market value of common stocks, Journal

  of Financial Economics 9, 3–18.

Barro, Robert, 2006, Rare disasters and asset markets in the twentieth century, Quarterly Journal

  of Economics 121, 823–866.

Basu, Sanjoy, 1983, The relationship between earnings’ yield, market value and return for nyse

  common stocks : Further evidence, Journal of Financial Economics 12, 129–156.

Berk, Jonathan, 1995, A critique of size-related anomalies, Review of Financial Studies 8(2), 275–

  286.

Berk, Jonathan, 1997, Does size really matter?, Financial Analysts Journal 53(5), 12–18.

Boyd, J. H., and M. Gertler, 1993, U.S. commercial banking: Trends, cycles, and policy, NBER

  Macroeconomics Annual 319–368.




                                                22
Brennan, Michael J., and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, 1996, Market microstructure and asset pric-

  ing: On the compensation for illiquidity in stock returns, Journal of Financial Economics 41(3),

  441–464.

Brewer, Elijah, and Julapa Jagtiani, 2007, How much would banks be willing to pay to become

  ”too-big-to-fail” and to capture other benefits?, Research Working Paper RWP 07-05, Federal

  Reserve Bank of Kansas City.

Brunnermeier, Markus K., and Yuliy Sannikov, 2014, A macroeconomic model with a financial

  sector, American Economic Review 104, 379–421.

Duffie, Darrell, 2010, The failure mechanics of dealer banks, Journal of Economic Perspectives

  24(1), 51–72.

Fahlenbrach, Rüdiger, Robert Prilmeier, and René M. Stulz, 2012, This time is the same: Using

  bank performance in 1998 to explain bank performance during the recent financial crisis, The

  Journal of Finance 67, 2139–2185.

Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1993, Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and

  bonds, Journal of Finanicial Economics 33, 3–56.

Farhi, Emmanuel, and Jean Tirole, 2012, Collective moral hazard, maturity mismatch and systemic

  bailouts, The American Economic Review 102, 60–93.

Flannery, Mark J., and Christopher M. James, 1984, The effect of interest rate changes on the

  common stock returns of financial institutions, The Journal of Finance 39(4), 1141–1153.

Gabaix, Xavier, 2012, Variable rare disasters: An exactly solved framework for ten puzzles in

  macro-finance, Quarterly Journal of Economics 127, 645–700.

Giesecke, Kay, Francis A. Longstaff, Stephen Schaefer, and Ilya Strebulaev, 2011, Corporate bond

  default risk: A 150-year perspective, Journal of Financial Economics 102, 233–250.

Gorton, Gary, 1988, Banking panics and business cycles, Oxford Economic Papers 40(4), 751–781.

Gorton, Gary, and Andrew Metrick, 2012, Securitized banking and the run on repo, Journal of

  Financial Economics 104, 425–451.

                                               23
Gourio, Francois, 2008, Time-series predictability in the disaster model, Finance Research Letters

  5(4), 191–203.

Harvey, Campbell R., and Akhtar Siddique, 2000, Conditional skewness in asset pricing tests,

  Journal of Finance 55(3), 1263–1295.

Huang, Xin, Hao Zhou, and Haibin Zhu, 2009, A framework for assessing the systemic risk of major

  financial institutions, Journal of Banking and Finance 33, 2036–2049.

Kane, Edward J., 2000, Incentives for banking megamergers: What motives might regulators infer

  from event-study evidence?, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 32(3), 671–701.

Kareken, John H., and Neil Wallace, 1978, Deposit insurance and bank regulation: A partial-

  equilibrium exposition, Journal of Business 51(3), 413–438.

Kelly, Bryan T., Hanno N. Lustig, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, 2011, Too-systemic-to-fail: What

  option markets imply about sector-wide government guarantees, Working Paper, UCLA Ander-

  son.

Kho, Bong-Chan, Dong Lee, and René M. Stulz, 2000, U.S. banks, crises, and bailouts: From

  Mexico to LTCM, American Economic Review 90, 28–31.

Lakonishok, Josef, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny, 1993, Contrarian investment, extrap-

  olation, and risk, University of Chicago - George G. Stigler Center for Study of Economy and

  State 84, Chicago - Center for Study of Economy and State.

Longstaff, Francis A., and B. Myers, 2009, Valuing toxic assets: An analysis of CDO equity, Working

  Paper, UCLA .

Longstaff, Francis A., and Monika Piazzesi, 2004, Corporate earnings and the equity premium,

  Journal of Financial Economics 74(3), 401–421.

Newey, Whitney K, and Kenneth D West, 1987, Hypothesis testing with efficient method of mo-

  ments estimation, International Economic Review 777–787.

O’Hara, Maureen, and Wayne Shaw, 1990, Deposit insurance and wealth effects: The value of being

  ‘too big to fail’, Journal of Finance 45, 1587–1600.

                                                24
Panageas, Stavros, 2010a, Bailouts, the incentive to manage risk, and financial crises, Journal of

  Financial Economics 95, 296–311.

Panageas, Stavros, 2010b, Optimal taxation in the presence of bailouts, Journal of Monetary Eco-

  nomics 57, 101–116.

Philippon, Thomas, 2008, The evolution of the U.S. financial industry from 1860 to 2007, Working

  Paper NYU Stern.

Ranciere, Romain, and Aaron Tornell, 2011, Financial black-holes: The interaction of financial

  regulation and bailout guarantees, Working Paper UCLA Anderson School.

Reinhart, Carmen M., and Kennth Rogoff, 2009, This Time is Different (Princeton University

  press).

Rietz, Thomas A., 1988, The equity risk premium: A solution, Journal of Monetary Economics

  22, 117–131.

Schneider, Martin, and Aaron Tornell, 2004, Balance sheet effects, bailout guarantees and financial

  crises, Review of Economic Studies 71(3), 883–913.

Veronesi, Pietro, and Luigi Zingales, 2010, Paulson’s gift, Journal of Financial Economics 97(3),

  339–368.

Wachter, Jessica A., 2013, Can time-varying risk of rare disasters explain aggregate stock market

  volatility?, The Journal of Finance 68, 987–1035.

Wicker, Elmus, 1996, The Banking Panics of the Great Depression (Cambridge University press).




                                                25
                                                 Notes

   1 The   complete panel of commercial banks that fall under our definition is available from the

authors.
   2 The   Internet Appendix is available in the online version of the article on the Journal of Finance

website.
   3 Flannery   and James (1984) were the first to demonstrate a link between interest rate changes

and common stock returns of commercial banks that depends on the maturity structure of their

assets and liabilities. Longstaff and Myers (2009) also show that banks can be treated as active

managers of fixed income portfolios.
   4 Data   for the risk-free rate and the Fama-French factors were collected from Kenneth French’s

website. The Dow Jones Corporate Bond Return Index (crd) is downloadable from Global Financial

Data.
   5 When    sorting the nonfinancials into standard size deciles, there is a large positive risk-adjusted

return of 15% per annum on the first portfolio that is driven entirely by the non-financial firms

with the smallest market capitalization. This is not surprising. In 1980, the average market

capitalization of a firm in the first portfolio is only $22.8 million, compared to $75.9 million for the

banks in the first portfolio in 1980. Illiquid stocks earn abnormal returns (see, for example Brennan

and Subrahmanyam (1996)). However, when we use the NYSE breakpoints, this effect disappears

completely, because the smallest nonfinancials do not significantly affect the value-weighted returns

in the first portfolio. These size decile results are reported in the separate Internet Appendix.
   6 In   a recent paper, Acharya and Yorulmazer (2007) and Farhi and Tirole (2012) explore the

incentives for banks in this type of environment to seek exposure to similar risk factors. The govern-

ment’s guarantee creates complementarities in firm payoffs. In earlier work, Schneider and Tornell

(2004) explain the currency mismatch on firm balance sheets in emerging markets endogenously by

means of a bailout guarantee for the nontradeables sector. Ranciere and Tornell (2011) discuss how

to design regulation in the context of government bailout guarantees. Panageas (2010b) explores

the optimal taxation implications of bailouts.
   7   However, the Harvey and Siddique (2000) skewness factors constructed from nonfinancial as

well financial stocks cannot account for the variation in risk-adjusted returns on banks.


                                                    26
   8 Data    are from the Term Auction Facility (TAF), which provided emergency loans to commercial

banks, the Primary Dealer Credit Facility (PDCF)(provided emergency loans to investment banks

and other broker-dealers, which typically do not have access to Fed funds, and the Term Securities

Lending Facility (TSLF), which allowed financial firms to borrow Treasury securities.
   9 The    FDIC Improvement Act of 1991 limits the protection of creditors, but it provides a systemic

risk exception.
  10 The    worldwide market-cap for just the six largest banks included in the index of foreign banks

is $330.21 billion in 2010.
  11 The    GSEs and foreign banks were suggested to us by Martin Bodenstein.
  12 This   matches 13 U.S. financial crises over 210 years with an average length of 2.1 years.




                                                   27
     Appendix A.               Derivation of Tail Risk Premium Expression
   Consider the investor’s Euler equation for asset i:

                                                       i
                                             Et [Mt+1 Rt+1 ] = 1.                                          (A1)

   The stand-in investor’s SDF Mt+1 is described in equation (6). This Euler equation can be
decomposed as
                                     G    i               G    D    G,i D,i
                       (1 − pt )Et [Mt+1 Rt+1 ] + pt Et [Mt+1 Mt+1 Rt+1 R ] = 1.                           (A2)

   We assume that the distribution of the Gaussian factors is (conditionally) independent of the
realization of the disaster,

                                                   D                    G,i
                                                       RD,i ] Et [Mt+1
                                                                   G
                                                             
                               (1 − pt ) + pt Et [Mt+1                 Rt+1 ] = 1.                         (A3)

   Given these assumptions, this expression can be further simplified to yield

                                             D
                                                 F i − 1] Et [Mt+1
                                                               G    i
                                                         
                                 1 + pt Et [Mt+1                   Rt+1 ] = 1,                             (A4)

where we have substituted the recovery rate F i for RD,i . To see why, note that the Gaussian return
on stock i can be stated as
                                       G,i     (Pt+1 /Dt+1 ) + 1 Dt+1
                                      Rt+1 =                          ,                                    (A5)
                                                    Pt /Dt        Dt
                                                                                                         
                                                   G,i             (Pt+1 /Dt+1 )+1                    i,G
which in the case of no disaster can be stated as Rt+1 =               Pt /Dt         exp gD + ∆ log Dt+1   . In
the case of a disaster, the return is given by

                                              i      G,i i
                                             Rt+1 = Rt+1 Ft+1 ,                                            (A6)

which only reflects the effect of the recovery rate on the dividend growth realization. Using the
                                 D F i − 1], this yields the expression
definition of resilience pt Et [Mt+1

                                                           G,i
                                         1 + Hti Et [Mt+1
                                                      G
                                                
                                                          Rt+1 ] = 1.                                      (A7)

   Decomposing this expectation into a covariance term and a cross-product yields

                             G         i              G      G,i                     −1
                        Et [Mt+1 ]Et [Rt+1 ] + covt [Mt+1 , Rt+1 ] = 1 + Hti               .               (A8)

   Given the linear specification of the stochastic discount factor, this equation can in turn be
written in the conditional beta representation:

                                                                       G , RG,i ]
                                                               covt [Mt+1               G
                      G,i          G −1
                                                     −1                    t+1 vart [Mt+1 ]
                 Et [Rt+1 ] = Et [Mt+1 ] 1 + Hti           −              G ]          G ]
                                                                                             .             (A9)
                                                                  vart [Mt+1      Et [Mt+1



                                                      28
                    G ]−1 . Note that the variation in the price/dividend ratios induced by the
   We let Rt = Et [Mt+1
variation in the case of a disaster does not co-vary with the normal risk factors –by assumption–
and hence is not priced in the normal risk premium. The expected return on asset i, conditional
on no disaster realization, after adjusting for Gaussian risk exposure, becomes

                                              i
                                        Et [R
                                            bt+1 ] = exp(rt − hit ),                             (A10)

where rt denotes log Rt and hit denotes log(1 + Hti ).


                        Appendix B.               Other Explanations
   Business Cycle Variation in Common and Idiosyncratic Risk Factors other than financial dis-
asters that could explain the cyclicality in the size factor. In particular, large idiosyncratic shocks
can cause bank failures. If the volatility of these shocks increases more in recessions for small banks,
that could explain some of our findings. Table BI measures the standard deviation of normal risk-
adjusted returns both at the portfolio level (Panel A) and the bank level (Panel B). The first one
measures the quantity of residual common risk. The second one measures the quantity of residual
idiosyncratic risk. The portfolio-level measure in Panel A is the time series standard deviation of
normal risk-adjusted returns, reported separately for NBER expansions and recessions The bank-
level measure in Panel B is the average over time of the cross-sectional standard deviation within
each portfolio of normal risk-adjusted returns.
   During recessions, the exposure of the largest banks to residual common risk increases from
14.2% to 21.6%. For the smallest banks, the increase is only 3%. As expected, smaller banks are
much more exposed to idiosyncratic risk than large banks, but the amount of idiosyncratic risk
exposure of small banks does not seem to increase very much during recessions. The standard
deviation ranges from 38% for the smallest banks to 26% for the largest banks during recessions,
and from 36% to 20% in the whole sample. However, the largest percentage point increase in
volatility during recessions from 20% to 26% is noted for the largest banks. For the smallest banks,
the increase is less than 2%. There is no evidence to suggest that the cyclicality of the size factor
is due to idiosyncratic bank risk.

                                     [Place Table BI about here]

   Business Cycle Variation in Cash Flows We analyze the data in the report for the first three
quarters of 2001, which corresponds to the recession dates provided by NBER. During this period,
small banks outperform large banks on almost all 13 performance parameters measured. Small
banks had a higher return on equity (14.00% versus 13.80%), a higher return on assets (1.15 times
that of large banks), a higher net interest margin (4.34% versus 3.62%), and comparable cost of
funds (approximately 3.75% for both). During this recession, 70% of small banks and 60% of large
banks reported earnings gains.


                                                    29
   In 2008, large banks are again unable to match the performance of small banks on most mea-
sures. For the first half of 2008, small banks’ return on equity is 1.5 times and yield on assets is 50
bps higher than corresponding values for large banks. Further, 14.16% of the 558 small banks and
26.72% of the 114 large banks were unprofitable, and, 41.22% of small banks reported an earnings
gain as compared to 24.14% of large banks.
   For the full year of 2008, 28.70% of small banks and 40.35% of large banks reported losses.
Small banks do have lower return on assets and return on equity for the full year, but it is not
obvious if this is due to higher cash flow risk. During the second half of 2008, small banks not
only earned a higher yield on assets and a higher net interest margin, but also provisioned more
conservatively for losses. The ratio of loan loss provisions to assets increases to 1.93% for small
banks by 4Q 2008 from 0.76% during 1Q 2008, but this ratio hardly changes for the largest banks.




                                                  30
                                                                            Table I
                                              Risk-Adjusted Returns on Size-Sorted Portfolios of Commercial Banks.
     This table presents estimates from OLS regression of monthly value-weighted excess returns on each size-sorted portfolio of domestic commercial banks on the
     three Fama and French (1993) stock and two bond risk factors. U.S. commercial banks are defined as all firms with HSICCD equal to 60 or historical SICCD equal
     to 6712. We exclude foreign banks with share codes ending in 2 or 5. market, smb, and hml are the three Fama-French stock factors: market, small minus big,
     and high minus low, respectively. ltg is the excess return on an index of long-term government bonds and crd is the excess return on an index of investment-grade
     corporate bonds. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. Alphas are annualized by multiplying by 12 and are
     expressed in percentages. Standard errors are adjusted for heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation using Newey-West (1987) with three lags. The sample is 1970
     to 2013 in Panel A, 1980 to 2013 in Panel B.

                   Small           2             3             4             5             6              7             8             9           Large          10A           10B          10 - 1        10A-1        10B - 1
                                                                                           Panel A: Market Capitalization
         α         1.94          1.12          3.28∗        -0.16          1.04         -0.14          -1.49         -2.01         -3.14∗        -5.09∗∗∗ -3.13              -5.60∗∗∗ -7.03∗∗            -5.06∗        -7.54∗∗∗
         market 0.46∗∗∗ 0.55∗∗∗ 0.50∗∗∗                      0.59∗∗∗       0.57∗∗∗       0.68∗∗∗        0.78∗∗∗ 0.81∗∗∗ 0.92∗∗∗ 1.22∗∗∗ 0.98∗∗∗ 1.24∗∗∗ 0.76∗∗∗ 0.52∗∗∗ 0.78∗∗∗




31
         smb     0.40∗∗∗ 0.42∗∗∗ 0.38∗∗∗                     0.41∗∗∗       0.39∗∗∗       0.44∗∗∗        0.49∗∗∗ 0.44∗∗∗ 0.42∗∗∗ -0.13∗          0.14∗∗ -0.15∗∗ -0.53∗∗∗ -0.26∗∗ -0.55∗∗∗
                                                                                                             ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗
         hml     0.50∗∗∗ 0.48∗∗∗ 0.44∗∗∗                     0.54∗∗∗       0.49∗∗∗       0.59∗∗∗        0.69      0.66      0.65      0.70      0.58∗∗∗ 0.73∗∗∗ 0.19∗      0.08     0.22∗∗
                                                                                                                       ∗∗        ∗∗∗       ∗         ∗∗       ∗∗       ∗∗       ∗∗
         ltg    -0.19    -0.07   -0.05                       0.09          0.15∗         0.06           0.14      0.24      0.39      0.19      0.24     0.24     0.38     0.43     0.43∗∗∗
                                                                                                                                                                       ∗∗       ∗
         crd     0.36∗    0.23    0.29∗∗                     0.14          0.11          0.21∗          0.04     -0.06     -0.16     -0.14     -0.04    -0.19    -0.49    -0.40    -0.55∗∗
         R2       25.37         43.68         43.20         49.84         51.96         59.74          60.89         62.16         66.50         68.01         62.02         65.73         27.42         14.32         27.59
                                                                                                      Panel B: Book Value
         α         2.22          1.93          2.43          2.62          1.30          1.07          -1.40         -3.53         -5.21∗∗       -5.70∗∗       -4.59∗        -6.14∗∗       -7.92∗∗∗ -6.81∗∗            -8.36∗∗
                          ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗
         market    0.44          0.46          0.54          0.54     0.65               0.79     0.89     0.88    0.90                           1.07          1.07          0.83      0.64      0.64      0.40∗∗∗
                                                                                                                                                                                             ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗
         smb       0.38∗∗∗       0.38∗∗∗       0.30∗∗∗       0.38∗∗∗ 0.46∗∗∗             0.54∗∗∗ 0.58∗∗∗ 0.60∗∗∗ 0.32∗∗∗                          0.02          0.01          0.04     -0.36     -0.37     -0.34∗∗∗
                                                                                                                                                                                   ∗∗∗       ∗∗        ∗∗
         hml       0.36∗∗∗       0.39∗∗∗       0.44∗∗∗       0.51∗∗∗ 0.60∗∗∗             0.75∗∗∗ 0.85∗∗∗ 0.85∗∗∗ 0.73∗∗∗                          0.68∗∗∗       0.69∗∗∗       0.42      0.32      0.33      0.07
         ltg       0.11          0.11          0.11          0.06    -0.02               0.19∗    0.42∗∗∗ 0.45∗∗∗ 0.35∗∗∗                         0.05          0.04          0.22∗    -0.06     -0.07      0.11
         crd       0.11          0.15          0.15          0.21∗    0.32∗              0.08    -0.13    -0.22   -0.14                           0.20          0.17          0.17      0.09      0.07      0.06
         R2       34.01         39.85         39.29         47.66         49.13         57.53          62.47         57.68         63.47         56.53         50.03         40.27         22.54         19.90          9.73
                                                           Table II
           Risk-Adjusted Returns on Size-Sorted Portfolios using the NYSE Market Capitalization Decile Breakpoints.
     Panel A (B) presents estimates from OLS regression of monthly value-weighted excess returns on each size-sorted portfolio of commercial banks (nonfinancials)
     on the three Fama and French (1993) stock and two bond risk factors. We use the NYSE market capitalization breakpoints available from Ken French’s website.
     U.S. commercial banks are defined as all firms with HSICCD equal to 60 or historical SICCD equal to 6712. We exclude foreign banks with share codes ending in
     2 or 5. Nonfinancials are defined as all firms excluding those with two-digit HSICCDs ranging from 60 to 67. market, smb, and hml are the three Fama-French
     stock factors: market, small minus big, and high minus low, respectively. ltg is the excess return on an index of long-term government bonds and crd is the excess
     return on an index of investment-grade corporate bonds. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. Alphas are
     annualized by multiplying by 12 and are expressed in percentages. Standard errors are adjusted for heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation using Newey-West
     (1987) with three lags. The sample is 1970 to 2013.

                                Small        2           3          4          5          6          7           8          9        Large      10 - 1
                                                                             Panel A: Commercial Banks
                    α           0.88      -0.31      -0.08       -1.95      -2.53      -4.16∗∗    -1.28      -4.29∗      -3.44∗     -7.35∗∗∗   -8.23∗∗∗




32
                    market      0.58∗∗∗    0.67∗∗∗    0.73∗∗∗     0.83∗∗∗    0.83∗∗∗    0.92∗∗∗    1.00∗∗∗    1.09∗∗∗     1.15∗∗∗    1.03∗∗∗    0.45∗∗∗
                    smb         0.43∗∗∗    0.49∗∗∗    0.51∗∗∗     0.45∗∗∗    0.38∗∗∗    0.15∗∗     0.13∗     -0.08       -0.10      -0.16∗∗    -0.58∗∗∗
                    hml         0.54∗∗∗    0.61∗∗∗    0.65∗∗∗     0.61∗∗∗    0.65∗∗∗    0.67∗∗∗    0.61∗∗∗    0.66∗∗∗     0.60∗∗∗    0.75∗∗∗    0.22∗
                    ltg        -0.05       0.20∗∗     0.13        0.29∗∗     0.11       0.17       0.29∗∗∗    0.16        0.35∗∗∗    0.09       0.14
                    crd         0.23∗     -0.03       0.07       -0.10       0.10       0.13      -0.05       0.10       -0.15      -0.42∗     -0.65∗∗∗
                    R2         56.39      58.48      60.50      61.85       62.36      63.17      61.36      59.55      62.07       47.29      17.83
                                                                               Panel B: Nonfinancials
                    α          -0.77      -1.82∗      0.76       -0.83       0.04      -0.94       1.50       1.92       1.99        2.61       3.38∗∗
                    market      0.94∗∗∗    1.02∗∗∗    1.03∗∗∗     1.03∗∗∗    0.99∗∗∗    1.01∗∗∗    1.03∗∗∗    1.08∗∗∗     1.02∗∗∗    0.94∗∗∗   -0.01
                    smb         0.95∗∗∗    0.94∗∗∗    0.90∗∗∗     0.81∗∗∗    0.68∗∗∗    0.50∗∗∗    0.44∗∗∗    0.32∗∗∗     0.20∗∗∗    0.11∗     -0.85∗∗∗
                    hml         0.25∗∗∗    0.12∗∗     0.00        0.08∗     -0.08∗     -0.12∗∗∗   -0.11∗∗    -0.24∗∗∗    -0.32∗∗∗   -0.32∗∗∗   -0.57∗∗∗
                    ltg        -0.28∗∗∗   -0.08       0.03        0.03       0.07       0.01       0.06       0.01       -0.04      -0.15∗      0.13
                    crd         0.17       0.04      -0.04       -0.12∗∗    -0.05       0.01      -0.09      -0.09       -0.06       0.05      -0.12
                    R2         86.07      91.08      91.74      91.18       89.24      87.18      84.49      80.66      74.13       68.64      32.12
                                     Table III
        Principal Components of Size-Sorted Commercial Bank Stock Returns.

This table presents the loadings for the first and second principal components (w1 , w2 ) extracted
from the residuals of the regression specified in equation (3). U.S. commercial banks are sorted
into deciles by market capitalization. The last row indicates the percentage of variation explained
by each principal component. Standard errors in brackets generated by bootstrapping from the
data 10, 000 times. First, we bootstrapped the returns for each size-sorted portfolio and the risk
factors 10,000 times. For each bootstrapped sample, we regress the returns on the standard risk
factors. We then compute the first and second principal components from the residuals of this
regression. This results in 10,000 samples of the first and second principal components, which we
use to compute the standard errors.

                                   Market Cap                     Book Value
                                   1970 - 2013                    1980 - 2013
                 Portfolio        w1         w2                  w1         w2
                 Small            0.47         0.53             0.25         0.34
                                 [0.02]      [0.05]            [0.02]      [0.10]
                 2                0.34         0.24             0.27         0.28
                                 [0.02]      [0.03]            [0.02]      [0.07]
                 3                0.31         0.20             0.32         0.27
                                 [0.02]      [0.05]            [0.02]      [0.08]
                 4                0.32         0.12             0.31         0.19
                                 [0.02]      [0.02]            [0.01]      [0.06]
                 5                0.31        -0.02             0.39         0.16
                                 [0.01]      [0.04]            [0.01]      [0.05]
                 6                0.30        -0.12             0.39        -0.02
                                 [0.02]      [0.03]            [0.03]      [0.05]
                 7                0.31        -0.31             0.36        -0.16
                                 [0.01]      [0.04]            [0.01]      [0.09]
                 8                0.25        -0.41             0.37        -0.27
                                 [0.01]      [0.05]            [0.02]      [0.12]
                 9                0.24        -0.43             0.27        -0.27
                                 [0.01]      [0.04]            [0.01]      [0.11]
                 Large            0.24        -0.37             0.18        -0.71
                                 [0.01]      [0.05]            [0.02]      [0.17]
                 %               49.19       18.86             47.93       15.15




                                                33
                                                                 Table IV
                                Size-Factor-Adjusted Returns for Size-Sorted Portfolios of Commercial Banks.
     This table presents estimates from OLS regression of monthly value-weighted excess returns on each size-sorted portfolio of U.S. commercial banks on the three
     Fama and French (1993) stock and two bond risk factors, and the second principal component weighted returns. mkt, smb, and hml are the three Fama-French
     factors: the market, small minus big, and high minus low, respectively. ltg is the excess return on an index of long-term government bonds and crd is the excess
     return on an index of investment-grade corporate bonds. RP C2 is the time-series of the returns of the size-sorted portfolios weighed by the loadings of the second
     principal component w  b 2 . The weights of the second principal component have been renormalized so that they sum to 1. *, **, and *** indicate statistical
     significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. The alphas have been annualized by multiplying by 12 and are expressed in percentages. Standard errors
     were adjusted for heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation using Newey-West (1987) with three lags. In panel A, the weights of the second principal component are
     computed over 1970 to 2005 and the sample is 1970 to 2005. The annualized price of risk is 11.14% in the sample ending in 2005. In panel B, the weights of the
     second principal component are computed over 1970 to 2013 and the sample is 1970 to 2013. The annualized price of risk is 9.36% in the sample ending in 2013.
     The last line in each panel shows the loadings on the size factor P C2 times the risk price.




34
                                        Small        2         3            4        5         6          7          8          9       Large       10A        10B
                                                                      Panel A: Pre-Crisis Sample (1970 - 2005)
              Risk-adjusted Returns     0.55       0.62      3.92∗∗      0.94        2.49    1.66       1.67       0.75      -0.02      -1.23      -0.77      -1.76
              P C2                      0.15∗∗∗    0.07∗∗∗   0.07∗∗      0.05∗∗∗    -0.01   -0.03∗     -0.06∗∗∗   -0.09∗∗∗   -0.11∗∗∗   -0.12∗∗∗   -0.12∗∗∗   -0.12∗∗∗
              Size                      1.71       0.82      0.78        0.50       -0.07   -0.29      -0.69      -1.00      -1.20      -1.37      -1.34      -1.37
                                                                        Panel B: Full Sample (1970 - 2013)
              Risk-adjusted Returns     0.06       0.26      2.56∗∗      -0.58       1.12    0.27      -0.38      -0.57      -1.62      -3.78∗∗    -1.72      -4.31∗∗
              P C2                      0.30∗∗∗    0.14∗∗∗   0.12∗∗∗      0.07∗∗∗   -0.01   -0.07∗∗∗   -0.18∗∗∗   -0.24∗∗∗   -0.25∗∗∗   -0.21∗∗∗   -0.23∗∗∗   -0.21∗∗∗
              Size                      2.85       1.30      1.10        0.65       -0.12   -0.62      -1.69      -2.20      -2.32      -2.00      -2.15      -1.97
                                  Table V
     Cumulative Return On 2nd PC Portfolio in Recessions and Financial Crises.

This table shows the value of $100 invested in a portfolio that goes long in small commercial banks
and short in large commercial banks. The weights of the portfolio are given by the second principal
component, renormalized so that they sum to one (w     b 2 ). $100 is invested in this portfolio at the
”Start” date and its value, given in columns 3 and 4, is measured on the ”End” date. The column
labeled Value represents the value of $100 invested at the peak (or start of the crisis) as of the
trough (or end of the crisis) on this portfolio and the column labeled Hedged Value represents the
normal-risk-adjusted returns on this portfolio. The average is computed for all NBER recessions
using NBER dating conventions. The bottom panel shows the value of a $100 investment n months
into the recession.
                               Panel A: Portfolio Value at NBER Trough
                  Start              End            Value          Hedged Value
                  01: 1970           11:   1970      14.00                    55.14
                  11: 1973           03:   1975      91.14                   115.07
                  01: 1980           11:   1982      24.18                    36.75
                  07: 1990           03:   1991      66.13                    60.85
                  03: 2001           11:   2001     110.29                    82.67
                  12: 2007           06:   2009     -12.58                    -1.44
                  Average                            48.86                    58.17
                  Panel B: Average Portfolio Value n Months after NBER Peak
                                                    Value          Hedged Value
                  Month   1                         113.12                   101.84
                  Month   2                          94.42                    93.31
                  Month   3                         112.51                    88.19
                  Month   4                          98.11                    84.30
                  Month   5                          94.05                    83.15
                  Month   6                         101.77                    81.45
                  Month   12                         63.39                    59.92




                                                  35
                                                                           Table VI
                                                                   Betas to Market Squared.
     This table presents the estimates from an OLS regression of monthly value-weighted excess returns on each size-sorted portfolio of U.S. commercial banks on
     the three Fama and French (1993) stock and two bond risk factors, and market2 . market, smb, and hml are the three Fama-French stock factors: the market,
     small minus big, and high minus low respectively. ltg is the excess return on an index of long-term government bonds and crd is the excess return on an index of
     investment-grade corporate bonds. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. The alphas have been annualized
     by multiplying by 12 and are expressed in percentages. Standard errors were adjusted for heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation using Newey-West (1987) with
     three lags. The sample is 1970 to 2013.

                   Small       2         3        4         5         6        7          8        9      Large     10A       10B      10 - 1   10A - 1   10B - 1
                                                           Panel A: Market Capitalization
        market   0.44∗∗∗ 0.54∗∗∗ 0.49∗∗∗ 0.57∗∗∗ 0.56∗∗∗ 0.67∗∗∗ 0.77∗∗∗ 0.81∗∗∗ 0.92∗∗∗ 1.22∗∗∗ 0.99∗∗∗ 1.25∗∗∗ 0.78∗∗∗ 0.55∗∗∗ 0.80∗∗∗
        smb      0.39∗∗∗ 0.42∗∗∗ 0.37∗∗∗ 0.39∗∗∗ 0.38∗∗∗ 0.44∗∗∗ 0.48∗∗∗ 0.44∗∗∗ 0.43∗∗∗ -0.12∗                     0.15∗∗ -0.14∗      -0.51∗∗∗ -0.23∗∗ -0.53∗∗∗
                      ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗      ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗       ∗∗∗




36
        hml      0.50      0.48      0.43      0.53      0.49      0.59     0.69      0.66      0.66      0.70      0.59      0.73      0.21∗    0.09     0.23∗∗
                                                              ∗                            ∗∗        ∗∗∗       ∗         ∗∗        ∗∗        ∗∗       ∗∗
        ltg     -0.18     -0.07     -0.05      0.10      0.16      0.06     0.15      0.24      0.39      0.19      0.23      0.24      0.37     0.42     0.42∗∗∗
                      ∗∗                  ∗∗                            ∗                                                                    ∗∗       ∗
        crd      0.37      0.23      0.30      0.15      0.13      0.21     0.05     -0.06     -0.17     -0.14     -0.05     -0.20     -0.51    -0.42    -0.57∗∗∗
              2       ∗                             ∗∗        ∗∗                                                                             ∗∗       ∗
        market -0.86      -0.29     -0.54     -0.93     -0.86     -0.17    -0.53      0.11      0.44      0.36      0.61      0.38      1.22     1.46     1.23∗∗
        R2        25.60     43.63    43.32     50.39     52.48    59.68     60.97      62.10   66.54     68.00    62.12     65.72    27.88      15.08     28.03
                                                                 Panel B: Book Value
        market   0.41∗∗∗ 0.42∗∗∗ 0.50∗∗∗ 0.52∗∗∗ 0.64∗∗∗ 0.78∗∗∗ 0.91∗∗∗ 0.92∗∗∗ 0.92∗∗∗                  1.07∗∗∗ 1.07∗∗∗    0.85∗∗∗ 0.67∗∗∗ 0.66∗∗∗ 0.44∗∗∗
        smb      0.36∗∗∗ 0.35∗∗∗ 0.26∗∗∗ 0.36∗∗∗ 0.45∗∗∗ 0.54∗∗∗ 0.59∗∗∗ 0.63∗∗∗ 0.34∗∗∗                  0.02     0.00      0.06     -0.34∗∗∗ -0.36∗∗∗ -0.30∗∗
                                                                                                                                  ∗∗∗
        hml      0.34∗∗∗ 0.36∗∗∗ 0.40∗∗∗ 0.49∗∗∗ 0.59∗∗∗ 0.75∗∗∗ 0.86∗∗∗ 0.88∗∗∗ 0.74∗∗∗                  0.68∗∗∗ 0.68∗∗∗    0.44      0.34∗∗   0.35∗∗   0.10
                                                                                                                                  ∗
        ltg      0.12    0.12     0.13    0.07   -0.01    0.19∗   0.42∗∗∗ 0.44∗∗∗ 0.34∗∗∗                 0.05     0.04      0.21     -0.08    -0.08     0.09
                                               ∗       ∗
        crd      0.12    0.18     0.17    0.23    0.32    0.08   -0.13    -0.24    -0.15                  0.20     0.18      0.16      0.08     0.06     0.04
        market2 -1.03∗∗ -1.55∗∗∗ -1.69∗∗ -0.80∗  -0.53   -0.12    0.47     1.36∗∗∗ 0.71                   0.00    -0.32      0.74      1.03     0.71     1.77∗∗∗
        R2        34.82     41.97    41.43     48.09     49.17    57.43     62.48      58.40   63.65     56.42    49.94     40.35    22.82      19.90     10.84
                                                                   Table VII
                                    Bank Tail Risk Pricing for Investment Banks, Foreign Banks, and GSEs.
     This table presents the estimates from OLS regression of monthly excess returns on a value-weighted index of U.S. commercial banks, U.S. investment banks and
     foreign banks on the Fama-French stock factors, bond factors, and the second principal component weighted returns. The table also reports results for individual
     banks. U.S. commercial banks are defined as all firms with HSICCD equal to 60 or historical SICCD equal to 6712. U.S. Investment banks are those with
     two-digit HSICCD of 62. We exclude foreign banks with share codes ending in 2 or 5. For individual banks, the longest available sample for each bank till 2005
     was selected. The starting year for each bank is mentioned in parentheses under the name of the bank. P C2 is the time-series of the returns of the size-sorted
     portfolios weighed by the loadings of the second principal component w   b 2 . The weights of the second principal component have been renormalized so that they
     sum to 1. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. Standard errors were adjusted for heteroskedasticity and
     autocorrelation using Newey-West (1987) with three lags. The implicit subsidy is the risk price (the 1970-2005 average return on P C2 11.14% ) times minus the
     loading on P C2 ). The risk price is fixed at 11.14% in the different subsamples, but we recompute the loading on P C2 in Panel B over shorter sub-samples. The
     full sample is 1970 to 2005.

                                            Index of Banks                                  Individual Banks
                                     Commercial Investment Foreign BoA Citi     WFC FNM        FRE      GS    LEH     ML    MS
                     Mkt Cap(Jan 05) 118.57     24.12      44.71   187.30 254.56 52.22  34.33   55.78   61.25  103.71 62.48 44.95
                     start                                         (1970) (1986) (1970) (1970) (1989) (1999) (1994) (1971) (1986)




37
                                                                                 Panel A: Pre-Crisis Sample (1970-2005)
                                            ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗           ∗∗∗
                     market             0.78        1.53          1.16      0.90∗∗∗      1.38∗∗∗    0.65∗∗∗    0.79∗∗∗    0.72∗∗∗    1.46∗∗∗    1.36∗∗∗    1.70∗∗∗    1.51∗∗∗
                                                                       ∗∗∗
                     smb                0.01        0.24∗∗        0.65     -0.14        -0.44∗∗∗   -0.46∗∗∗   -0.31∗∗    -0.15       0.00      -0.28       0.18      -0.17
                     hml                0.42∗∗∗     0.05          0.58∗∗∗ 0.40∗∗         0.15       0.30∗∗     0.18       0.34∗     -0.35∗     -0.33       0.07      -0.23
                     ltg               -0.03        0.06         -0.18      0.03        -0.08      -0.10       1.30∗∗∗    1.11∗∗     0.85      -0.01      -0.30      -0.13
                     crd                0.25∗∗     -0.21          0.36      0.35         0.32       0.35      -0.23      -0.35      -0.45       0.74       0.37      -0.25
                     P C2              -0.11∗∗∗    -0.04∗∗        0.04     -0.32∗∗∗     -0.14∗     -0.32∗∗∗   -0.16∗∗∗   -0.30∗∗∗   -0.18      -0.33∗∗    -0.10      -0.13∗
                     size              1.18         0.48         -0.42         3.51     1.52        3.61      1.78       3.37       2.03       3.63       1.06       1.50
                                                                                           Panel B: Pre-Crisis
                                                                                                   1990-2005
                     P C2              -0.09∗∗∗    -0.06∗∗∗       0.04         -0.26∗∗ -0.13∗      -0.35∗∗∗ -0.28∗∗∗     -0.32∗∗∗ -0.18        -0.33∗∗ -0.12∗        -0.15∗∗
                     size               1.00        0.65         -0.50          2.91    1.48        3.89     3.15         3.51     2.03         3.63    1.30          1.70
                                                                                                   2000-2005
                     P C2              -0.16∗∗∗    -0.01∗∗∗       0.00         -0.35∗∗∗ -0.17∗     -0.34∗∗∗ -0.53∗∗∗     -0.35∗∗∗ -0.21        -0.46∗∗ -0.17         -0.32∗∗
                     size               1.75        0.12         -0.02          3.91     1.89       3.82     5.93         3.87     2.39         5.09    1.92          3.55
                                                    Table VIII
                                              Bailout Announcements.

This table presents the results of OLS regression RtT BT F − Rtf = α + β1 P C2 + β2 P C2 D + , where T BT F represents the value-
weighted return of the 10 banks that were declared too-big-to-fail by the Comptroller of Currency in September of 1984, P C2
represents the daily return of the portfolio that goes long in small U.S. commercial banks and short in large U.S. commercial
banks, the weights for the portfolio are given by the second principal component and sum to one, and D represents a dummy
variable that equals one after the announcement date and zero otherwise. The regression is estimated over a 30-, 60-, 90-, and
a 105-day window around the announcement date. A 7-day window around the exact announcement date is excluded from
the sample while estimating coefficients. Dates for the announcements are from O’Hara and Shaw (1990) and Kho, Lee, and
Stulz (2000). *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. Standard errors were
adjusted for heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation using Newey-West (1987).

                           Coeff         30D           45D         60D         90D            105D
                                            Panel A: Pre-crisis Announcements
                                           9/19/1984; Comptroller of Currency
                           P C2        -0.19∗∗∗      -0.19∗∗∗    -0.20∗∗∗    -0.21∗∗∗        -0.20∗∗∗
                           P C2 D      -0.12∗        -0.05       -0.03       -0.02            0.00
                                                      9/24/1998; LTCM
                           P C2        -0.22∗∗∗      -0.23∗∗∗    -0.24∗∗∗    -0.23∗∗∗        -0.24∗∗∗
                           P C2 D      -0.05         -0.05       -0.05       -0.05           -0.05∗
                                                 9/15/1998; Brazilian Crisis
                           P C2        -0.24∗∗∗      -0.25∗∗∗    -0.25∗∗∗    -0.26∗∗∗        -0.26∗∗∗
                           P C2 D      -0.03         -0.03       -0.03       -0.02           -0.03
                                                10/08/1998; Brazilian Crisis
                           P C2        -0.24∗∗∗      -0.24∗∗∗    -0.25∗∗∗    -0.25∗∗∗        -0.25∗∗∗
                           P C2 D      -0.08∗        -0.09∗∗     -0.09∗∗∗    -0.08∗∗∗        -0.06∗∗
                                                11/13/1998; Brazilian Crisis
                           P C2        -0.27∗∗∗      -0.26∗∗∗    -0.27∗∗∗    -0.25∗∗∗        -0.25∗∗∗
                           P C2 D      -0.06         -0.05       -0.03       -0.05           -0.03
                                              11/14/1997; South Korean Crisis
                           P C2        -0.27∗∗∗      -0.27∗∗∗    -0.27∗∗∗    -0.26∗∗∗        -0.26∗∗∗
                           P C2 D      -0.01          0.00        0.00        0.00            0.00
                                                 01/25/1995; Mexico Crisis
                           P C2        -0.17∗        -0.11∗      -0.12∗∗∗    -0.15∗∗∗        -0.14∗∗∗
                           P C2 D      -0.06         -0.12 ∗     -0.08       -0.05           -0.05
                                                      Pooled Regression
                           P C2        -0.24∗∗∗      -0.24∗∗∗    -0.24∗∗∗    -0.24∗∗∗        -0.24∗∗∗
                           P C2 D      -0.03∗∗       -0.04 ∗∗∗   -0.04 ∗∗∗   -0.04∗∗∗        -0.04∗∗∗
                                               Panel B: Crisis Announcements
                                            Positive Announcements: All Banks
                           P C2        -0.17∗∗∗      -0.17∗∗∗    -0.17∗∗∗    -0.16∗∗∗        -0.16∗∗∗
                           P C2 D       0.00         -0.00       -0.01       -0.01           -0.01
                                          Positive Announcements: Large Banks
                           P C2        -0.11∗∗∗      -0.15∗∗∗    -0.16∗∗∗    -0.15∗∗∗        -0.14∗∗∗
                           P C2 D      -0.07∗∗∗      -0.04 ∗∗    -0.02       -0.02           -0.03∗
                                                  Negative Announcements
                           P C2        -0.15∗∗∗      -0.15∗∗∗    -0.16∗∗∗    -0.16∗∗∗        -0.16∗∗∗
                           P C2 D      -0.01         -0.01        0.00       -0.01           -0.01




                                                               38
                                             Table BI
                                  Measuring Residual Risk Exposure.
This table presents the standard deviation of residuals from OLS regression of monthly value-weighted excess returns
of each size-sorted portfolio of U.S. commercial banks on the three Fama and French (1993) stock and two bond risk
factors. In panel A the row labeled ”Recession” computes the (time series) standard deviation of residuals during
recession months and the row labeled ”Full Sample” computes the (time series) standard deviation for the 1970 to
2013 sample. In Panel B we examine the cross-sectional standard deviation of the residuals of banks in each bin for
each period t. Panel B reports the time-series average of the cross-sectional standard deviation for each bin. The
row labeled ”Recession” lists the standard deviation of residuals during recession months and the row labeled ”Full
sample”
    √    lists the standard deviation for the full sample. The standard deviations have been annualized by multiplying
by 12 and are expressed in percentages.

                                                    Panel A: Portfolios
      Period            1        2         3        4          5       6        7        8         9       10
      Recession       19.02    15.57     11.25    14.46    13.15     12.44    15.25    15.50    15.65     18.45
      Full Sample     14.64    11.68     11.36    11.34    10.73     10.72    11.70    11.37    11.21     12.70
                                                 Panel B: Individual Banks
      Recession       30.11    29.85     20.34    22.91    23.89     23.68    23.66    26.53    24.31     23.86
      Full Sample     36.06    27.88     26.21    25.24    24.29     23.28    23.29    22.95    21.12     19.16




                                                          39
                                                    0.05
                                                                                                                                                 100




                                                                                                                                                 90




                                                                                                                                                 80


                                                      0




                                                                                                                                                 70
                                                                                                                                                       Industrial Production




                    Moving Average of the 2nd PC
                                                                                                                                                 60




40
                                                   −0.05
                                                                                                                                                 50




                                                                                                                                                 40




                                                           Apr71   Dec84                            Sep98                               May12
                                                                                Month and Year




     Figure 1. Size factor in normal risk-adjusted returns of commercial banks. The solid line plots the 12-month (backward-
     looking) moving average (months t − 11 through t) of the time series of the weighted sum of the residuals from the OLS regression of
     monthly value-weighted excess stock returns for each size-sorted portfolio of U.S. commercial banks on the Fama-French and bond risk
     factors. The weights are given by the second principal component and sum to one. The dashed line represents the index of industrial
     production. The gray-shaded regions represent NBER recessions and the light-shaded regions represent banking crisis. The NBER
     recession dates are published by the NBER Business Cycle Dating Committee. The dates for the Mexico and LTCM crisis are obtained
     from Kho, Lee, an Stulz (2000) and the FDIC (for the developing country debt crisis of 1982). The left axis references the moving average
     of the residuals and the right axis references the index of industrial production.
                           Internet Appendix to
                “Size Anomalies in U.S. Bank Stock Returns”∗




                               PRIYANK GANDHI and HANNO LUSTIG




   ∗
    Citation format: Gandhi, Priyank and Hanno Lustig, [2015], Internet Appendix to “Size Anomalies in U.S. Bank
Stock Returns,” Journal of Finance [vol #], [pages], http://www.afajof.org/supplements.asp. Please note: Wiley-
Blackwell is not responsible for the content or functionality of any supporting information supplied by the authors.
Any queries (other than missing material) should be directed to the authors of the article.


                                                         1
   This appendix lists supplementary tables and figures to accompany the main text. This ap-
pendix also presents the details regarding our definition of commercial banks.


I.   Additional Tables and Figures
Table IA.I Risk-Adjusted Returns on Size-Sorted Portfolios of Nonfinancials
Table IA.I provides results of the regression specified in equation (2) for nonfinancials sorted by
market capitalization (Panel A) and book value (Panel B). The table reports regression coefficients
for each size-sorted portfolio along with their statistical significance and the adjusted R2 . In Panel
A, we see that nonfinancial stocks with market capitalization in the lowest decile earn much higher
risk-adjusted returns. This is not surprising. In 1980, the average market capitalization of a firm in
the first portfolio is only $22.8 million, compared to $75.9 million for the banks in the first portfolio.
The average market capitalization in the second portfolio is much larger ($65.7 million in 1980).
These small cap stocks are typically highly illiquid stocks. Other than this illiquidity effect in
the first decile, there is no clear pattern in risk-adjusted returns. The risk-adjusted returns on the
largest nonfinancials in decile 10 are positive, but small and statistically insignificant. Interestingly,
the risk-adjusted returns on the top 5% are much larger than those on the next 5% of the size
distribution. In Panel B, we sort by book values. While smaller firms seem to earn higher risk-
adjusted returns, the effects do not exceed 300 bps, and are statistically only marginally significant.
The largest nonfinancials earn risk-adjusted returns that are positive but small and statistically
insignificantly different from zero.

Table IA.I NBER reference cycle peaks and banking panics
This table presents a lists of banking panics taken from Gorton (1988, p. 223) and Wicker (1996,
p. 155). In this table, ”Months Before Peak” and ”Months After Peak” refer to the number of
months relative to the peak of the business cycle when the banking crisis occurs.


Table IA.II Characteristics Regression
This table presents the results of a pooled regression in which the dependent variable is the annual
return of each bank in our sample and the independent variables are the bank’s market capitaliza-
tion, the book value of the bank, and leverage. All variables are measured as of time t. The table
shows that a 1% increase in the log book value of the bank results in a 2.45% decline in the annual
return of the bank.

Table IA.III Announcement Dates
Table IA.IV presents the dates for the pre-crises announcements from O’Hara and Shaw (1990)
and Kho, Lee, and Stulz (2000). Dates for the crisis announcements are from the New York Fed
Timeline of the Financial Crisis. These dates are used in the event study analysis the results of
which are in Table VIII in the main paper.

Figure IA.1 A Size Factor in Normal Risk-Adjusted Returns of All Banks
This figure presents the time series plot of the size factor in normal risk-adjusted returns of all
banks. In the figure, the solid line plots the 12-month (backward-looking) moving average (months
t − 11 through t) of the time series of the weighted sum of the residuals from OLS regressions of
monthly excess stock returns for each size-sorted portfolio of all financial firms on the Fama-French
and bond risk factors. The weights are given by the second principal component and sum to one.
The dashed line represents growth in the industrial production index. The dates are indicated on

                                                    2
the x-axis. The left axis references the moving average of the residuals and the right axis references
the index of industrial production.




                                                  3
                                   Table IA.1 Risk-Adjusted Returns on Size-Sorted Portfolios of Nonfinancials
    This table presents estimates from an OLS regression of monthly value-weighted excess returns on each size-sorted portfolio of nonfinancials on the three Fama
    and French (1993) stock and two bond risk factors. nonfinancials are defined as all firms excluding those with two-digit HSICCDs ranging from 60 to 67. market,
    smb, and hml are the three Fama-French stock factors: market, small minus big, and high minus low, respectively. ltg is the excess return on an index of long-term
    government bonds and crd is the excess return on an index of investment-grade corporate bonds. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%,
    and 1% levels, respectively. Alphas are annualized by multiplying by 12 and are expressed in percentages. Standard errors were adjusted for heteroskedasticity
    and autocorrelation using Newey-West (1987) with three lags. The sample is 1970 to 2013.


                  1          2           3          4          5          6            7          8          9        Large       10A        10B       10 - 1     10A - 1     10B - 1
                                                                              Panel A: Market Capitalization
     α         15.51∗∗∗    1.35∗∗     -1.82      -1.79      -4.57∗∗∗   -2.56∗       -3.81∗∗∗   -2.10∗     -2.80∗∗     2.34∗     -1.47       3.20∗∗    -13.18∗∗∗   -16.98∗∗∗   -12.31∗∗∗
     market     0.67∗∗∗    0.80∗∗∗     0.84∗∗∗    0.91∗∗∗    0.94∗∗∗    0.96∗∗∗      0.99∗∗∗    1.01∗∗∗    1.03∗∗∗    0.97∗∗∗    1.06∗∗∗    0.95∗∗∗    0.30∗∗∗     0.40∗∗∗     0.28∗∗∗




4
     smb        1.22∗∗∗    1.13∗∗∗     1.02∗∗∗    1.09∗∗∗    1.10∗∗∗    1.05∗∗∗      1.07∗∗∗    0.92∗∗∗    0.79∗∗∗    0.21∗∗∗    0.50∗∗∗    0.17∗∗∗   -1.00∗∗∗    -0.71∗∗∗    -1.05∗∗∗
     hml        0.17       0.25∗∗      0.26∗∗∗    0.31∗∗∗    0.32∗∗∗    0.22∗∗∗      0.16∗∗∗    0.11∗∗    -0.04      -0.42∗∗∗   -0.05      -0.46∗∗∗   -0.58∗∗∗    -0.22       -0.62∗∗∗
     ltg       -0.70∗∗∗   -0.50∗∗∗    -0.34∗∗∗   -0.34∗∗∗   -0.24∗∗∗   -0.15∗∗      -0.05       0.11∗      0.07      -0.02       0.07      -0.03       0.68∗∗∗     0.77∗∗∗     0.67∗∗∗
     crd        0.70∗∗∗    0.50∗∗      0.32∗∗     0.19       0.13       0.05         0.00      -0.15∗     -0.08       0.02      -0.11       0.03      -0.68∗∗∗    -0.81∗∗∗    -0.67∗∗∗
     R2        52.88      64.34       70.22      78.44      81.67      86.18       89.12       91.29      90.06      78.77      86.31      74.38      25.89       33.43       21.50
                                                                                   Panel B: Book Value
     α          3.56∗∗     3.17∗       3.15∗∗     3.16∗      0.42      -0.65        0.56       -0.03      -0.13      -0.15       0.78       0.52      -2.78∗∗     -3.00∗∗     -3.03∗∗
     market     0.87∗∗∗    0.96∗∗∗     0.95∗∗∗    0.96∗∗∗    1.01∗∗∗    1.04∗∗∗      0.99∗∗∗    1.12∗∗∗    1.12∗∗∗    1.13∗∗∗    1.06∗∗∗    0.98∗∗∗    0.18∗∗∗     0.12∗∗∗     0.11∗∗∗
     smb        1.24∗∗∗    1.12∗∗∗     1.22∗∗∗    1.09∗∗∗    1.02∗∗∗    0.98∗∗∗     -0.14∗∗∗    0.87∗∗∗    0.71∗∗∗    0.37∗∗∗    0.13∗∗    -0.19∗∗∗   -1.11∗∗∗    -1.38∗∗∗    -1.43∗∗∗
     hml       -0.10      -0.12       -0.03      -0.14      -0.02       0.08         0.29∗∗∗    0.19∗∗∗    0.26∗∗∗    0.31∗∗∗    0.29∗∗∗    0.29∗∗∗    0.39∗∗∗     0.39∗∗∗     0.39∗∗∗
     ltg       -0.48∗∗∗   -0.44∗∗∗    -0.40∗∗∗   -0.46∗∗∗   -0.38∗∗∗   -0.35∗∗∗     -0.14∗∗∗   -0.27∗∗∗   -0.22∗∗∗   -0.20∗∗∗   -0.14∗     -0.14∗∗∗    0.34∗∗      0.34∗∗      0.34∗∗
     crd        0.44∗∗∗    0.42∗       0.39∗∗∗    0.45∗∗∗    0.32∗∗     0.35∗∗∗      0.17∗∗∗    0.21∗∗     0.18       0.18∗      0.17       0.18∗∗∗   -0.27∗∗     -0.27∗∗     -0.27∗∗
     R2        77.65      81.71       84.97      82.32      88.67      92.49       94.22       93.27      91.78      91.08      90.60      93.29      12.95       16.57       15.63
                Table IA.2 NBER reference cycle peaks and banking panics.
The dates of the banking panics were taken from Gorton (1988, p. 223) and Wicker (1996, p. 155). ”Months Before
Peak” and ”Months After Peak” indicate the number of months relative to the peak when the banking crisis occurs.

   Peak               Trough            Panic                           Months Before Peak   Months After Peak

   October 1873       March 1879        September 1873                              1
   March 1882         May 1885          May 1884                                                      17
   July 1890          May 1891          November 1890                                                  4
   January 1893       June 1894         February 1893                                                  1
   December 1895      June 1897         October 1896                                                  10
   May 1907           June 1908         October 1907                                                   5
   January 1913       December 1914     August 1914                                                   20
   August 1929        March 1933        October-November 1930                                         19
                                        September-October 1931
                                        February-March 1933
   July 1981          November 1982     February-July 1982                                            8
   December 2007                        September-December 2008                                       9




                                Table IA.3 Characteristics Regression
Pooled Regression. The dependent variable is the annual return for each individual bank in our sample. The
independent variables are the bank’s market capitalization, the book value, and leverage. All variables are at date
t. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. Standard errors were
adjusted for heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation using Newey-West (1987). Annual data. The sample is 1970 to
2013.

                                                         Regression 1      Regression 2
                                 constant                 5.56              -4.52

                                 log Book                -2.23∗∗∗
                                 log M arketcap           2.79∗∗∗           0.82∗∗∗
                                 Leverage                 0.00              0.02

                                 adj − R2                0.0042            0.0009




                                                         5
                                                                Table IA.4 Announcement Dates
    Dates for the pre-crises announcements are from O’Hara and Shaw (1990) and Kho, Lee, and Stulz (2000). Dates for the crisis announcements are from the New York Fed
    Timeline of the Financial Crisis.

                                                                                                                       + All + large - large
                                                                Panel A: Pre-Crisis Bailout Announcement Dates
                               9/19/1984   Comptroller of Currency                                                           x
                               9/24/1998   LTCM                                                                              x
                               9/15/1998   Brazilian Crisis                                                                  x
                               10/08/1998 Brazilian Crisis                                                                   x
                               11/13/1998 Brazilian Crisis                                                                   x
                               11/14/1997 South Korean Crisis                                                                x
                               01/25/1995 Mexico Crisis
                                                                      Panel B: Crisis Announcement Dates
                               2007/08/10 The FR provides liquidity                                                    x
                               2007/12/12 Term auction facility is announced                                           x
                               2007/12/17 First Term auction takes place                                               x
                               2007/12/21 Term auction facility is extended                                            x




6
                               2008/03/11 Term securities lending facility is extended                                 x
                               2008/03/14 Emergency lending from the Fed to Bear Stearns                               x     x
                               2008/03/17 Bear Stearns is bought for $2 per share                                                    x
                               2008/03/17 Primary dealer credit facility is extended **delayed by a day*               x     x
                               2008/05/02 TSLF collateral eligibility is expanded                                      x
                               2008/07/15 Paulson requests govnmt funds for Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac                 x     x
                               2008/07/30 84-day TAF auctions are introduced                                           x
                               2008/09/15 Lehman files for bankruptcy                                                                x
                               2008/09/29 House votes down bailout plan                                                              x
                               2008/10/03 Revised plan passes House                                                    x
                               2008/10/06 TALF increased to $900 billion                                               x
                               2008/10/14 Treasury announces $250 billion capital injection
                               2008/11/7   Bush Speech                                                                               x
                               2008/11/13 TARP not used for buying troubled assets from banks                                        x
                               2008/11/25 Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF)                            x
                               2009/01/16 Treasury/ Federal Reserve and the FDIC Provide Assistance to Bank of America x     x
                               2009/02/10 The FRB expands TALF to as much as $1 trillion                               x
                               2009/03/18 The FRB purchases up to $300 billion of longer-term Treasury securities      x
                                                                                                                                                   100




                                                                                                                                                   90




                                                                                                                                                   80
                                                   0.05



                                                                                                                                                   70




                                                                                                                                                   60




                                                                                                                                                   50
                                                                                                                                                         Industrial Production




                    Moving Average of the 2nd PC
                                                     0                                                                                             40




7
                                                                                                                                                   30




                                                                                                                                                   20




                                                                                                                                                   10




                                                     Mar30   Nov43   Aug57        Apr71             Dec84               Sep98              May12
                                                                                Month and Year




    Figure IA.1. Size factor in normal risk-adjusted returns of all banks. The solid line plots the 12-month (backward-looking)
    moving average (months t − 11 through t) of the time series of the weighted sum of the residuals from OLS regression of monthly excess
    stock returns for each size-sorted portfolio of all financial firms on the Fama-French and bond risk factors. The weights are given by
    the second principal component and sum to one. The dashed line represents growth in the industrial production index. The dates are
    indicated on the x-axis. The left axis references the moving average of the residuals and the right axis references the index of industrial
    production.
II.   Identifying Commercial Banks
    This section presents the details regarding our definition of commercial banks. We also explore
some alternative methods for identifying commercial banks in CRSP. In the text, U.S. commercial
banks are defined as all firms with two-digit HSICCD equal to 60 or historical SICCD equal to
6712.
    A review of the asset pricing literature suggests that it is more common to map firms to a
particular industry using the four-digit historical SIC code (SICCD) in CRSP. In this section, we
evaluate the challenges of this approach to identifying commercial banks. The primary reason why
we cannot identify commercial banks as those firms in CRSP for whom the first two digits of the
SICCD equals 60 alone is that such a definition excludes all commercial bank holding companies
which are organized under the SICCD beginning with 67. The largest commercial banks in the
United States are part of bank holding companies. Prior to 1998, almost all bank holding com-
panies were listed under the SICCD beginning with 67, not under the SICCD beginning with 60.
Commercial banks owned by bank holding companies always trade as part of the holding company
and are not separately listed on the market.
    Given that bank holding companies in the U.S. are often organized under a separate SIC code,
it should still be possible for a researcher to define commercial banks using SICCDs from CRSP.
For example, one could define commercial banks as firms for which the first two digits of SICCD
equals 60 or 67. A careful analysis of the data reveals that there are at least two potential problems
with the use of SICCDs.
    First, SICCDs beginning with 67 identify not only bank holding companies but are also used
to identify financial holding companies of investment banks, real estate invest trusts, oil traders,
patent owners and lessors, educational trusts, religious trusts, charitable trusts, and investors not
classified elsewhere in the SIC system.
    Second, these SICCDs vary a lot over time. This variation does not seem to reflect changes
in the main economic function of the firm. As a result, any combination of SICCDs beginning
with 60 or 67 still potentially misses quite a few firms that should have been correctly identified as
commercial banks. For example, BB&T Corp with SICCD = 2000, Banc One Corp with SICCD =
0, Barclays with SICCD = 6281, Citigroup with SICCD = 6153, 6211, and 6311, First Bancorp with
SICCD = 0, and Sterling Bancorp with SICCD = 6144 will be filtered out using any permutation
of a rule that combines SICCDs beginning with 60 or 67. All of these banks are among the 100
largest bank holding companies by the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council in 2014.
We can identify other commercial banks for which the HSICCD begins with 60 but for whom the
SICCD does not begin with either 60 or 67 (or even 61 or 62).
    Based on just the short list of examples cited above it appears that for commercial banks,
SICCDs can begin with 0, 20, 30, 61, 62, and 63s with no apparent logic or pattern while the
HSICCDs are remarkably stable and almost always equal 60. It seems improbable that BB&T,
the 17th largest commercial bank in the United States, for a brief period of time in its history,
converted to a manufacturing firm, with an SICCD beginning with 20.
    This analysis confirms that the exclusive use of SICCDs to filter commercial banks does not
allow for a time-consistent definition of commercial banks that ensures actual banks are never
excluded from the sample. Any filter based on SICCDs to define/identify commercial banks either
implies that commercial banks randomly drop in and out of our sample or that, we manually (and
randomly) add or exclude SICCDs in our definition of commercial banks over time.
    Around 1999, the SEC eliminated the bank holding company option from its menu of choices for
financial firms when filing their SIC codes (see http://www.sec.gov/info/edgar/siccodes.htm).
Hence, bank holding companies were essentially forced to state that they are banks. This can easily


                                                  8
be confirmed by tracking the SICCD for individual bank holding companies. In the late 90s and
early 00s, they all switch to SICCD codes starting with 60. To sum up, our analysis reveals
that a sample of commercial banks based on HSICCDs would more or less (correctly) identify all
commercial banks that are in existence in 1998 including bank holding companies. This is also
perhaps the reason that the Federal Reserve advocates the of 3-digit header SIC industry group
codes.
    As a result of the change in the coding conventions, the HSICCDs correctly capture banks in all
of the instances mentioned as in all these cases banks are listed in CRSP with HSICCD beginning
with 60. Therefore, this is the approach we adopt in our paper.
    There is one potential weakness of using HSICCDs to define commercial banks. The use of
HISCCDs beginning with 60 to identify/define commercial banks implies that our sample excludes
all firms classified as commercial banks in 1998 that did not have an HSICCD beginning with 60
and that exited the sample before 1998-99 for reasons other than mergers and acquisitions. This is
why we decide to include firms with historical SICCD equal to 6712. SIC code 6712 appears to be
reserved only for bank holding companies1 .
    We infer from our review of the banking literature that none of the approaches used in the
literature are completely free from problems. In fact, any filter based on historical SIC codes
to identify commercial bank stocks in CRSP is almost always augmented by a manual search to
eliminate (include) irrelevant (relevant) firms in the sample. However, none of the papers that we
came across analyzed commercial bank stocks from an investment perspective using more than 40
years of monthly data. A manual filter, while easy to implement for data spanning short periods
of time and a selective sample of commercial banks, is not feasible given the time-period and the
cross-section of the data analyzed our paper.
    There is no perfect SIC-code-based algorithm for identifying commercial banks over the entire
period covered by our sample. The change in the coding convention in 1999 possibly addresses
all of the concerns that we highlight in this note regarding SIC codes, but this fix occurs too late
for us. Even the definition advocated by regulators does not produce a satisfactory solution. The
Federal Reserve Bank of New York suggests that one use the three-digit header SIC codes equal to
602 and 671 to identify commercial banks.
    While HSICCD is a reasonable alternative, given the issues identified above, we do not claim that
HSICCDs are the best approach to identify commercial banks. Indeed, one can do better if one man-
ually sifts through CRSP data to carefully identify commercial banks to form a sample, a project
that is underway (and incomplete) at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.2 The methodol-
ogy is available at http://www.newyorkfed.org/research/banking_research/datasets.html.
However, this project only covers bank holding companies and excludes more than 20% of the
commercial banks in the United States that are not part of a bank holding company. The sample
period starts in 1990 and thus potentially only covers half of the sample we analyze in our paper.
    Given these limitations, the use of HSICCDs to filter commercial banks is reasonably efficient, as
it enables to use the change in the coding convention to obtain better coverage of commercial banks,
as can be seen from looking over our sample and comparing it to other sources. To summarize, the
use of HSICCDs (a) ensures that all bank holding companies and commercial banks are included in
our sample over the entire sample period, (b) does not require us to change the SIC code definition
of commercial banks to ensure that the largest commercial banks are consistently included in our
sample across time, (c) does not require us to manually add and remove firms from our sample
   1
     See definitions for SIC codes available at https://www.osha.gov/pls/imis/sicsearch.html?p_sic=67&p_
search=.
   2
     However, the project at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York identifies bank holding companies in the United
States and will not cover publicly listed banks among that are not part of the bank holding companies.


                                                       9
based on a manual search and to ensure that our sample is relatively complete, (d) does not expose
us to sample selection concerns that go together with a manual selection procedure.




                                               10
REFERENCES

Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1993, Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and

  bonds, Journal of Finanicial Economics 33, 3–56.

Gorton, Gary, 1988, Banking panics and business cycles, Oxford Economic Papers 40(4), 751–781.

Kho, Bong-Chan, Dong Lee, and René M. Stulz, 2000, U.S. banks, crises, and bailouts: From

  Mexico to LTCM, American Economic Review 90, 28–31.

Newey, Whitney K, and Kenneth D West, 1987, Hypothesis testing with efficient method of mo-

  ments estimation, International Economic Review 777–787.

O’Hara, Maureen, and Wayne Shaw, 1990, Deposit insurance and wealth effects: The value of being

  ‘too big to fail’, Journal of Finance 45, 1587–1600.

Wicker, Elmus, 1996, The Banking Panics of the Great Depression (Cambridge University press).




                                                11
