                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     CRISIS “SHOCK FACTORS” AND THE CROSS-SECTION OF GLOBAL EQUITY
                                RETURNS

                                      Charles W. Calomiris
                                           Inessa Love
                                   Maria Soledad Martinez Peria

                                        Working Paper 16559
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w16559


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2010




Charles W. Calomiris is Henry Kaufman Professor of Financial Institutions at Columbia Business
School and a Research Associate of the National Bureau of Economic Research. Inessa Love and Maria
Soledad Martinez Peria are Senior Economists in the Finance and Private Sector Research Group of
The World Bank. Gemechu Ayana, Sharai Gomez, and Shafique Jamal provided excellent research
assistance. We are grateful to Andrew Ang, Murillo Campello, Deniz Anginer, Shang-Jin Wei and
seminar participants at Columbia Business School for helpful comments and discussions. The views
and opinions in this paper are those of the authors and do not reflect those of The World Bank and/or
its Executive Directors. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Charles W. Calomiris, Inessa Love, and Maria Soledad Martinez Peria. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Crisis “Shock Factors” and the Cross-Section of Global Equity Returns
Charles W. Calomiris, Inessa Love, and Maria Soledad Martinez Peria
NBER Working Paper No. 16559
November 2010
JEL No. F30,G01,G12

                                             ABSTRACT

We study stock returns over the period of the global financial crisis of 2007-2008 and identify three
crisis “shock factors” related to unique features of the crisis: (1) the collapse of global demand, (2)
the contraction of credit supply, and (3) selling pressure on firms’ equity. All three of these “shock
factors” are reflected in large and statistically significant influences on residual equity returns during
the crisis period (after controlling for normal risk factors that are associated with expected returns).
Similar analysis for the placebo period of August 2005-December 2006 shows that the influences identified
during the 2007-2008 sample period are unique to the crisis. A month-by-month analysis shows that
the time variation of the importance of each of the shock factors tracks related changes in the global
economic environment.


Charles W. Calomiris                                Maria Soledad Martinez Peria
Graduate School of Business                         The World Bank
Columbia University                                 mmartinezperia@worldbank.org
3022 Broadway Street, Uris Hall
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
cc374@columbia.edu

Inessa Love
The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, DC 20433
Ilove@worldbank.org
I.     Introduction

       The financial crisis of 2007-2008 was a significant shock to the financial system and the

global economy. The shock that originated in the US mortgage market and banking system

reduced the supply of credit, led to distressed sales of risky assets as banks and investors

scrambled to shore up their liquidity and capital ratios, and plunged the global economy into a

severe recession, one in which economic activity slowed or contracted, and global trade

collapsed. While the crisis originated in the US and other developed economies, it quickly spread

over the globe, affecting all economies, which saw their stock prices collapse as investors

panicked.

       Stock returns are a unique measure of performance that is comparable across firms and

countries, forward-looking, comprehensive in scope, and insensitive to differences in accounting

rules. In normal times, a firm’s stock returns reflect a combination of expected returns (its

loadings on risk factors) and residual returns that are associated with firm-specific news. At

times of significant economy-wide shocks, however, the cross-section of residual returns can be

understood as reflecting the exposure of firms to unexpected shocks.

       Three categories of crisis-related shocks – reduced global product demand, contraction in

the supply of credit, and selling pressure in the equity markets – could have contributed to the

decline of equity prices worldwide during the financial crisis of 2007-2008. These shocks were

unexpected prior to the crisis. In this paper, we consider whether the financial crisis of 2007-

2008 was a unique event from the standpoint of stock returns and isolate crisis-related “shock

factors” that can explain the cross-section of residual returns during the crisis.

       Our strategy is to construct measures of “shock factors” for each of the three categories

of shocks described above and then identify their relative contribution to the observed declines in

                                                  2
equity returns. As a measure of sensitivity to global product demand shocks, we employ

measures of global trade exposure. The sensitivity to selling pressure is captured by the structure

of stock ownership and stock trading prior to the crisis. We measure firms’ sensitivity to credit

supply shocks through a combination of variables relating to the capital structure, its dividend

behavior, and the ability of the firm to cover its debt obligations.

       We use data on over 17,000 firms in 44 countries around the world to study whether

cross-sectional stock returns over the period of August 2007 to December 2008 can be explained

by the crisis “shock factors” described above. We exclude US firms in order to focus on factors

that were associated with the global spread of the crisis. We use a methodology similar to Tong

and Wei (forthcoming) which employs a cross-sectional model of stock returns and captures

expected returns with a standard set of control variables.1 In this framework, our “shock factors”

capture unexpected influences of crisis-related shocks on residual stock returns. Empirically, we

use values from 2006 to construct our shock factors, which are based on firm characteristics

observed prior to the crisis. We then compare our results for the crisis period with a similarly

structured model of the “placebo” period that runs from August 2005 to December 2006 and uses

predetermined values from 2004 to construct shock factors.

       To preview our results, we find that credit supply shocks, global demand shocks and

selling pressures in the equity market had negative influences on stock returns during the crisis

but positive or not significant effects during the placebo period. Our results are robust to three

ways of modeling the influence of “shock factors”: (1) as three sets of individual variables that

enter separately as regressors in the model of residual returns, (2) as the first principle

component of the set of individual regressors used to measure each category of influence, and (3)

1
  Tong and Wei (forthcoming) follow Whited and Wu (2006) in incorporating Fama and French (1992) factors
directly in cross-sectional regressions of returns.

                                                   3
as dummy variables that divide firms in groups according to combinations of regressor values.

Furthermore, our results do not change if we use a local instead of a global measure of beta as a

control or if we conduct weighted estimations to reduce the importance of countries that have

many firms in our sample. Finally, our main findings are similar if we conduct separate

estimations for firms in developed and developing countries.

       A month-by-month analysis shows that the time variation of the importance of each of

the “shock factors” tracks related changes in the global economic environment. The magnitude

of the negative coefficients associated with the global demand shock factor rises during times of

greatest decline in exports. Time variation in the coefficients associated with the credit-supply

factor are similar to those found in credit risk spreads that reflect the timing of credit-supply

shocks. The variation over time in the coefficients that measure the stock market selling pressure

shock factor closely tracks the variation in the returns to the stock market.

       While our methodology builds on Tong and Wei (forthcoming), our focus is different.

Tong and Wei explore the role of country-level exposure to financial globalization, specifically

through the composition of capital flows. They also find an important firm-specific factor in

cross-sectional returns related to financial dependence (specifically, working capital financing

needs). Our focus is entirely on firm-specific “shock factors” which arise as a result of an

unexpected crisis event. We abstract from the effect of country characteristics by using country

fixed effects. Didier, Love, and Martinez Peria (2010) provide a detailed analysis of country-

specific factors in aggregate equity returns during the crisis. In considering firm-specific factors,

we explore a broader range of firm characteristics, both relating to financing structure and other

characteristics of firms than did Tong and Wei.




                                                  4
        We find that each of the three categories of crisis-related shock factors accounts for

significant proportions of the declines in equity prices observed during the crisis. Of course, it is

not possible to completely disentangle the influences of demand contraction, credit scarcity, and

selling pressure through these three shock factors. Each of our three measured shock factors is

likely to have been influenced by all three sources of shock. Nevertheless, we argue that the

dominant influences on each of the three shock factors are likely to be primarily traceable to one

of the three categories of shocks.

        This paper is related to the growing literature on the origin and consequences of the

crisis. Most of the existing papers have focused on the causes and consequences of the crisis and

thus have mostly analyzed its epicenter, the United States.2 A few others have studied the global

transmission of this crisis. For instance, Fratzscher (2009) and Obstfeld, Shambaugh, and Taylor

(2009) focus on the transmission via exchange rates. Dooley and Hutchison (2009) provide

evidence of transmission to credit default swap spreads in emerging markets. Rose and Spiegel

(2009a and 2009b) conduct an analysis of the international propagation of the crisis based on a

measure of crisis incidence and severity which combines changes in real GDP, stock markets,

credit ratings, and exchange rates. However, these papers use macro data to analyze the

incidence and determinants of the propagation of the crisis. Ehrmann, Fratzscher, and Mehl

(2009) study the transmission of the US 2007-2008 crisis to stock markets around the world by

focusing on the performance of about 450 industry-equity portfolios across 64 countries. That

paper emphasizes primarily on the role of macro factors on the performance of industry

portfolios rather than the role of the crisis shock factors we consider here.




2
  See Caprio, Demirguc-Kunt, and Kane (2008), Reinhart and Rogoff (2008), Brunnermeier (2009), Calomiris
(2009), Cecchetti (2009), and Taylor (2009), among many others.

                                                   5
       The rest of our paper is organized as follows. Section II explains our approach to

identifying shock factors. Section III describes the data and empirical model. Section IV presents

our main empirical results for the global cross-section of stock returns during the crisis, and

shows that our identified shock factors played a uniquely important role in explaining equity

returns during the crisis, as compared with the pre-crisis “placebo” period. Section V presents a

number of robustness checks on our baseline results and confirms that our main findings do not

change. Section VI examines the cross-section of returns during the crisis period in more detail,

performing a month-by-month analysis of the changing importance of shock factors over time.

Section VII concludes.




II.    Identifying Shock Factors

       Global Demand Shock

       The financial crisis was associated with a remarkable decline in global trade. World

exports fell by 9 percent between July 2007 and December 2008. This decline reflected a variety

of potential influences, including the sensitivity of export financing to credit supply contraction

(Amiti and Weinstein 2009, Chor and Manova 2009). Our interest, of course, is not in explaining

export decline, but rather using the crisis-related collapse in exports to measure firms’ differing

sensitivity to the decline in global demand during the crisis. Firms that had positioned

themselves prior to the crisis to be more dependent on trade were relatively more vulnerable to

global demand shocks during the financial crisis. We, therefore, measure global demand shock

sensitivity using firm-specific variables that capture the exposure of a firm to global trade. Our

two measures are (1) the firm’s pre-crisis proportion of sales outside the company’s home

country, and (2) the proportion of company assets held outside the company’s home country.

                                                6
         Stock Market Selling Pressure Shock

         There have been numerous studies of the effects of the crisis and the role of credit

contraction and illiquidity crisis-induced selling on the redemptions of money market debts and

the widening of bond spreads. These studies identify important effects of correlated selling

pressure traceable to illiquidity problems in generating the contraction of quantities and the

declines in prices in different debt markets.3

         In publicly traded equity markets, crisis-related shocks should have had even greater

consequences than in debt markets, given the consequences of the crisis for firms’ immediate

and future incomes and their debt financing options. Just as in debt markets, problems of

“funding illiquidity” for investors in publicly traded firms (due to declines in investor equity,

rising market volatility, and the decline in available credit), should have been transformed into

“market illiquidity” as owners of publicly traded shares were forced to liquidate their shares.

Billio, Pelizzon, Getmansky, and Lo (2010) examine correlations in returns across different

equity investors and document apparent crisis-specific linkages in returns that they argue reflect

this selling pressure.4 Additionally, publicly traded firms’ expected performance was itself

affected by declining expected sales and by contraction in the supply of credit. Equity selling

pressure, therefore, should have magnified declines in share prices that reflected the influences

of declining demand and tight credit in reducing the discounted expected future cash flows of

firms.




3
  See Schwarz (2009) on the Libor market, Heider, Hoerova and Holthausen (2009) on the Euribor market, Gorton
and Metrick (2010) on the repo market, Corvitz, Liang, and Suarez (2009) on the asset-backed commercial paper
market, Duca (2010) on the commercial paper market, and Mitchell and Pulvino (2010) on the bond market.
4
  Cella, Ellul, and Giannetti (2010) find that investors with short trading horizons are inclined or forced to sell their
holdings to a larger extent than investors with longer trading horizons, amplifying the effects of market-wide shocks
on stock prices.

                                                           7
        We measure the sensitivity of a firm’s equity to selling pressures in the stock market

using two variables: pre-crisis free float relative to the total market value of equity, and pre-crisis

stock turnover (the volume of trading relative to outstanding market value of equity). These

measures are intended to capture the relative liquidity of a stock prior to the crisis.

        In contrast to the findings for the literature on liquidity effects in debt markets, we find

that relatively liquid stocks experience the greatest declines during the crisis. In theory, the effect

of stock liquidity on returns is ambiguous. On the one hand, greater liquidity may be associated

with steeper declines in equity prices, as investors select their most liquid risky assets to sell

during a liquidity squeeze. On the other hand, liquidity becomes more valuable during a crisis,

implying that relatively illiquid stocks may experience relative price declines. Our findings

indicate that during the recent crisis the former effect was dominant.

        Of course, the meaning of observed relative declines related to relative liquidity is

controversial. One could argue that relatively illiquid stocks also experienced similar or even

larger “shadow” declines in value during the crisis, which were masked by the lack of sales of

these illiquid stocks. In other words, had someone tried to sell a large amount of an illiquid stock,

its price would have been much lower. Selectivity bias related to endogenous decisions to sell,

therefore, complicates the interpretation of the meaning of the effects of liquidity on stock

returns during the crisis.




Credit-Supply Shock

        Several studies show dramatic declines in credit supply during the crisis. Ivashina and

Scharfstein (2009) find that banks curtailed new lines of credit, and thus, that credit supply


                                                   8
contracted much faster than would be apparent by only examining outstanding aggregates

amounts of commercial and industrial lending. Campello, Graham, and Harvey (2010) survey

chief financial officers (CFOs) of 1,050 firms in 40 countries after the September 2008 market

collapse and find that a substantial proportion of those surveyed report that they were forgoing

positive net present value investments due to financing constraints.5 Almeida, Campello,

Laranjeira, and Weisbenner (2010) find that firms that are more exposed to debt rollover risk

experienced much greater investment decline during the financial crisis.6

        Although the contraction of credit supply affects all firms, either directly (through

reduced credit) or indirectly (through reduced demand by customers who face reduced credit),

some companies should be harder hit by a contraction in credit supply than others. Companies

with intrinsically high costs of external finance – for example, small, growing firms, specializing

in new products, or with short histories of public trading – will find their prospects of attracting

financing reduced relative to other firms during times of general economic contraction, or credit-

supply stringency.7

        For a given degree of exogenous difference in the costs of external finance, a company

with higher leverage and lower cash flows relative to debt service requirements (i.e. interest

coverage) prior to the crisis should experience greater vulnerability to credit supply shocks

associated with a financial crisis. All firms experience reductions in their “debt capacities”

5
  “[T]he inability to borrow externally caused many firms to bypass attractive investment opportunities, with 86% of
constrained U.S. CFOs saying their investment in attractive projects was restricted during the credit crisis of 2008.
More than half of the respondents said they canceled or postponed their planned investments.”
6
   Almeida, Campello, Laranjeira and Weisbenner (2010) use long-term debt maturing in the near term as a
particularly exogenous indicator of firms’ exposures to rollover risk. They argue that while a reliance on short-term
contractual debt may proxy for other firm attributes, long-term debt maturing in the near term is a purer measure of
exposure to rollover risk.
7
  There is a long literature examining indicators of firms’ costs of external finance. Fazzari, Hubbard and Petersen
(1988) used dividend payout as their key indicator. Dividend payout may reflect other differences, and has been
criticized in some studies (Kaplan and Zingales 1997, but see the response by Fazzari, Hubbard and Petersen 2000,
and the further evidence in Campello and Chen 2010 and Almeida, Campello and Weisbach 2004).

                                                         9
during a crisis (the maximum degree of leveraging that their cash flow prospects will permit);

therefore, companies with high leverage and lower interest coverage prior to the onset of a credit

crunch will be more adversely affected than other firms, as credit supply constraints will be more

likely to bind on them.8

         Thus, vulnerability to credit-supply shocks should reflect both the exogenous external

finance costs of the firm and its endogenous financial choices. To capture both sorts of

contributors to financial fragility, we considered a variety of measures that had been identified in

the literature, and settled on a subset of indicators that capture endogenous leverage choices as

well as exogenous characteristics related to external financing costs.9

         Previous research on the effects of financial constraints on stock returns confirms that the

effects are relatively pronounced during macroeconomic downturns. Lamont, Polk, and Saa-


8
  A large body of empirical and theoretical research supports the view that “corporate finance vulnerability” should
matter for the cross-section of stock returns (Anginer and Yildizhan, 2010 is an exception), and that it should matter
more for the cross-section of returns in adverse states of the world (i.e., recessions, credit crunches, or financial
panics). The theoretical foundations of “corporate finance vulnerability” for stock returns dates back to the seminal
work of Brock and LeBaron (1990), who showed that financing constraints (i.e., differences in the marginal cost of
external finance across firms and across time) could explain variation in stock returns above and beyond those
predicted by standard risk models. Brock and LeBaron (1990) showed that an adverse macroeconomic shock should
cause a larger decline in the stock returns of financially constrained firms (those with relatively high costs of
external finance) than other firms. With respect to the effects of leverage in magnifying financial constraints, Sharpe
(1994) and Calomiris, Orphanides, and Sharpe (1994) find that although high leverage tends not to be useful for
explaining cross-sectional differences in investment and employment decisions during expansions, during recessions
US firms that had chosen to increase their debt to high levels during the preceding booms suffered larger
contractions of employment, fixed investment and inventory accumulation in reaction to declines in their sales
growth during the recession. In other words, highly levered firms experience relatively large declines in expected
cash flows in adverse economic states, but not in other economic states.
9
   Unlike Tong and Wei (2010) we do not confine our investigation to exogenous influences on external finance
dependence related to working capital. We consider financial structure characteristics more broadly for two reasons.
We note that working capital use, like other financial structure characteristics is endogenous to firm-specific costs of
external finance. Calomiris, Himmelberg and Wachtel (1995) show that, ceteris paribus, firms that face greater
external financing constraints tend to choose combinations of productive factors that make greater use of working
capital. While that finding supports Tong and Wei’s emphasis on working capital to measure financing constraints,
it also indicates that their measure is endogenous to choices that reflect financing constraints, which are related more
broadly to age, opacity, and other firm characteristics. We do not regard endogeneity as a problem; on the contrary,
we believe that it makes sense to consider the ways in which endogenous choices of firms’ financing structure make
them differentially vulnerable to crisis-related credit-supply shocks. We consider a wide range of such measures. In
particular, we show that endogenous decisions by firms – for example, the decision to increase leverage – mattered
for firms’ sensitivity to the crisis.

                                                          10
Requejo (2001) surprisingly found “no evidence that the relative performance of constrained

firms reflects monetary policy, credit conditions, or business cycles.” Subsequent research by

Campello and Chen (2010), however, shows that macroeconomic conditions do affect the

magnitude of the financial constraint factor, once one properly identifies cross-sectional variation

in the extent of financing constraints, which they show Lamont et al. did not do.

       In light of these theoretical and empirical findings, we chose four indicators to capture

the sensitivity of firms to the credit-supply shock aspect of the crisis: (1) dividends to sales, (2)

total debt to assets, (3) a dummy variable that is a threshold measure of potential financial

distress, which distinguishes whether firms’ debt service payments are very high relative to their

cash flows – firms that have debt service coverage greater than one are defined as “good

coverage” firms, and (4) an interaction effect that considers the effect of leverage interacted with

good coverage.

       Dividend payout is a useful indicator of the exogenous cost of external finance; firms

with high dividend payout tend to have high cash flows relative to investment, and are relatively

mature. Our three leverage measures allow us to distinguish between the effects of financial

distress, per se, and the effect of the financial crisis in reducing the effective debt capacity of

non-distressed firms with significant pre-crisis leverage ratios. In particular, the interaction of

leverage and good coverage highlights this potential effect of the crisis.




       Limits to Shock Factor Identification

       We believe that our seven observable measures (the ratio of foreign sales, the ratio of

foreign assets, the ratio of free floating shares, the share of firms traded, the dividend to sales


                                                 11
ratio, the leverage ratio, and the interest coverage) capture firms’ sensitivities to the three

categories of “shock factors” reasonably well. Our identification assumptions linking each of

these seven observable variables primarily to one of the three shock factors (global product

demand shocks, market sell-off pressure shocks, and credit-supply shocks) are plausible, but we

recognize that all three shock factors probably affect each of the seven observable variables to

some extent. For example, firms with high pre-crisis costs of external finance will be more

sensitive to reductions in cash flow (related to contractions in product demand) than other firms,

even if credit supply were not declining. Nevertheless, we believe that the three sets of variables

are naturally divisible into three groups based on our priors about the factor to which one would

expect them to be most closely related.



III.   Methodology and Data

       To explore the role of crisis-related “shock factors” in driving the performance of firms’

stocks we estimate a cross-section model of returns represented by equation (1)

yf,i,c = 1Standard Risk Factorsf + 2Crisis Shock Factorsf + i+ γc + f,i,,c               (1)

where f represents the firm, i the industry, and c the country where each firm operates. The

dependent variable in our study, yf,i,c, is the return of each firm f, in each industry i, and each

country c. Standard Risk Factors refer to a set of variables which the asset pricing literature have

shown to drive expected results (Sharpe, 1964; Fama and French, 1992; Lakonishok, Shleifer,

and Vishny, 1994; Ang et al., 2006, 2009). The Crisis Shock Factors are our proxies for firms’

credit supply sensitivity, global demand sensitivity, and stock market selling pressure sensitivity.

Following Tong and Wei (forthcoming) and Whited and Wu (2006), we incorporate the standard

risk factors and the crisis shock factors by entering the relevant firm characteristics directly into

                                                  12
the regression, rather than entering them indirectly first going through a factor model. i and γc

are industry and country fixed effects, respectively, and f,i,c is the firm level error term. We

estimate our model with clustered standard errors to allow for within-country across-firms

correlation of error terms.

        We estimate equation (1) over two periods: the crisis period and a placebo (non-crisis)

period. Crisis period returns are measured over the period August 2007 through December 2008.

Most firm characteristics are measured at December 2006.10 The placebo period encompasses

returns from August 2005 through December 2006, with most firm characteristics measured at

December 2004. Table 1 lists the countries along with the number of firms included in each

sample. We only consider countries with at least 20 firms. The crisis period includes 17,127

firms operating in 44 countries, while during the placebo period our sample consists of 15,595

firms operating in 45 countries.

        Table 2 presents descriptive statistics for returns, standard risk factors, and crisis shock

factors during the crisis and placebo periods. Data on returns come from Datastream. Table 2

shows that firm returns average -47 percent over the crisis period. The standard deviation of

returns over the crisis period is 32 percent. During the placebo period, returns average 29 percent

and the standard deviation is 54 percent.

        The independent variables used in our analysis come from Worldscope, a commercial

database produced by Thomsom Reuters, which provides financial statement data for most listed

firms around the world. Standard Risk Factors follow Tong and Wei (forthcoming) and include:


10
   The firms’ beta vis-a-vis the global market portfolio is calculated over the period December 2001 through
December 2006 for the crisis period regressions. For the placebo regressions, beta is calculated over the period
December 2000 through December 2005. Momentum (i.e., a measure of returns six month prior) is calculated over
the period January 2005 through June 2005 for the placebo period and for January 2007 through June 2007 for the
crisis period.

                                                      13
the beta of each firm vis-a-vis the global market, the standard deviation of the beta residual (i.e.,

the standard deviation of the error from the estimation of the beta vis-a-vis the global market),

the log of firm assets, a measure of momentum, and the market to book value ratio. The beta of

each firm vis-a-vis the global market is the coefficient from regressing each firm’s stock return

on the return from a global portfolio as captured by the FTSE World Index. The capital asset

pricing model of Sharpe (1964) predicts that individual stock returns will be driven by the

correlation of each firm with the market’s return. Because stock markets around the world have

become increasingly integrated (see, for example, Bekaert et all, 2010), we consider the

correlation or beta vis-a-vis a world portfolio as opposed to the local market. For the crisis period

beta is measured over the period December 2001 and December 2006 and averages 0.72. For the

placebo period beta is calculated over the period December 2000 through December 2005 and

averages 0.79. The standard deviation of beta is 0.59 in both periods.

       Following Ang et al. (2006, 2009), we also include the standard deviation of the error

term from the regressions used to calculate beta. The average of this variable during the crisis

period is 11.6, while it averages 11.9 during the placebo period.

       Fama and French (1992) have shown that aside from beta, firms’ expected returns are

driven by firms’ size and market to book value ratios. We measure firm size by the log of asset

measured in dollars. The average for this variable during the crisis period is 11.6 (109,097

dollars) and the standard deviation is 2.1 (8.6 dollars). For the placebo, the log of assets averages

11.5 ( 98,715 dollars) and the standard deviation is 2.09 (8.1 dollars). The market to book value

ratio is equivalent to the number of firms outstanding multiplied by the price of the shares,

divided by the book value of equity. For the crisis period, the mean market to book value ratio is




                                                 14
2.51 and the standard deviation is 2.80. This variable averages 2.10 during the placebo period,

with a standard deviation of 2.45.

        Following Lakonishok, Shleifer, and Vishny (1994), we also include among the standard

risk factors a measure of momentum, defined as each firm’s return over the six month period

prior. For the crisis period, this refers to January 2007 through June 2007. For the placebo

period, momentum is measured over the period January 2005 through June 2005. The mean of

momentum is 29 percent during the crisis, while it is 0 percent during the placebo period.

       Among the crisis shock factors, we include a number of variables to measure firms’

sensitivity to credit supply shocks, namely: the ratio of dividends to sales, the leverage ratio,

good coverage – a dummy equal to 1 for firms with interest coverage ratios above 1- and the

interaction between leverage and good coverage, which we label leverage_good coverage. The

interest coverage ratio is defined as the ratio of earnings to interest expenses. It measures the

ability of firms to meet their debt obligations. Hence, the dummy variable we use captures the

share of firms for which their earnings exceed their debt obligations. Table 1 shows that 75.4

(75.3) percent of firms have interest coverage ratios above 1 during the crisis (placebo) period.

The average leverage ratio is 0.21 during both the crisis and the placebo period, and the standard

deviation in both periods is close to 0.20.

       Our estimations include two variables to capture firms’ sensitivity to stock selling

pressures: the ratio of shares traded and the share of stocks free floating. The former is defined

as the number of shares traded over the number of shares outstanding, while the share of stocks

free floating is the number of shares free floating (not held by insiders) over the total number of

shares outstanding. Both of these variables are indicators of the ease with which firms’ stocks

can be traded. The average for the volume traded is 0.11 during the crisis and 0.10 during the

                                                15
placebo period. The mean ratio of free floating shares is 68 percent during the crisis and 64

percent during the placebo.

       We capture firms’ sensitivity to global demand shocks by including the share of foreign

(overseas) sales to total sales and the ratio of foreign assets to total assets. For the crisis and

placebo periods, the share of foreign sales averages 0.31. The ratio of foreign assets to total

assets averages 0.19 during the crisis period and 0.17 during the placebo period.

       In some estimations, instead of including each of the individual variables that enter as

indicators of firms’ sensitivities to the three shock factors (demand sensitivity, credit supply

sensitivity and selling pressure sensitivity), we compute the first principal component for each

set of variables and use the standardized principal component of each set of variables to capture

the effect of a particular shock factor. In particular, Standardized Credit Supply Shock Factor is

the first principal component of the leverage ratio, good coverage, and the dividend to sales ratio.

The Standardized Selling Pressure Shock Factor is the principal component of the ratio of shares

traded over total shares and the ratio of free floating shares over total shares, while the

Standardized Global Demand Shock Factor is the principal component of the share of foreign

assets and the share of foreign sales. The principal components are standardized by subtracting

the mean and dividing by the standard deviation. This facilitates the comparison of marginal

effects across variables.

       We also conduct estimations replacing the individual credit supply, selling pressure, and

global demand sensitivity ratios with a set of dummies that separate firms in different categories,

depending on the values of the individual ratios. For each of the three categories of shocks we

sort firms in three groups: Group A contains the firms that a priori are likely to be the most

sensitive to the shock, Group B contains the firms that have middle degree of sensitivity and

                                                16
Group C contains firms with least sensitivity to the shock (Group C is the omitted category in the

regressions).11

        In the case of the credit supply sensitivity ratios, Group A contains firms that have low

interest coverage (i.e. “good coverage” equals to zero). These are “distressed” firms that cannot

meet their debt obligation with their cash flows. In addition, firms with good coverage but high

debt levels (above 80th percentile) and zero dividends also belong to this group. These firms

have the lowest debt capacity and are likely to be the most affected by the credit supply shock.

Group B contains firms with good coverage and which either have high debt but pay dividends,

or those that have moderate debt but do not pay dividends.12 This group has some vulnerability

to credit supply shock. Group C contains the rest of the firms. In our sample 29% of all firms are

classified as Group A, 19% as Group B and about 52% as Group C.

        In the case of the selling pressure sensitivity ratios, Group A contains firms with either

high volume traded and/or high free float, Group B contains firms with medium levels of volume

traded and free float and Group C contains all other firms.13 In our sample 13% of firms are in

group A, 32% are in group B and 54% in group C.

        We also include the following dummies based on the global demand sensitivity ratios:

Group A contains firms with either high foreign sales and/or high foreign assets, Group B

contains firms with medium levels of foreign sales and assets and Group C contains all other



11
   Our results do not change significantly if we modify the specific criteria we use to separate firms into these
groups..
12
   Specifically, Group B contains firms that have moderate debt levels (i.e. fall between 60th and 80% percentile of
debt distribution) and have no dividends, or firms that are high in debt (above 80th percentile) but have non-zero
dividends.
13
   Specifically, we consider high volume traded or free float to be above 80th percentile and medium to be between
60th and 80th percentiles. If one of the two measures is high and the other is either high or medium, the firm is in
Group A, if both are medium, or one is high and the other one is low, the firm is in Group B. The rest are in group
C.

                                                        17
firms.14 In our sample 23% of all firms are in Group A, 15 % are in Group B and 62% are in

Group C. In all three categories of shocks Group C contains about half the firms, which helps us

isolate the most sensitive firms into groups A and B.




IV.      Empirical Results

         In Table 3, we begin by reporting results for six regressions, estimated over the crisis

period August 2007-December 2008, in which each of the eight variables that we use to capture

the crisis shock factors enters separately in the regressions, and a seventh regression for the

“placebo” period of August 2005-December 2006.

         The first three columns in Table 3 consider regressions in which all three types of crisis

shock factors are present (where we alternately omit one of the three leverage measures to

demonstrate the effects of doing so). The fourth through sixth columns of Table 3 include the

three sets of crisis shock factor variables one at a time. All regressions include controls for

standard risk factors relating to expected returns, as discussed in Section III, which are not

discussed here.15 We focus our discussion on the crisis shock factors.

         For the crisis period, the measured coefficients on variables associated with each of the

three sets of shock factors do not change much as the result of including or excluding variables

associated with the other two sets of crisis shock factors. We find statistically significant and

economically important effects for all three categories of shock factors. With respect to selling


14
    Specifically, we consider high foreign assets or foreign sales to be above 80th percentile and medium to be
between 60th and 80th percentiles. Similar to selling pressure groups, if one of the measures is high and the other is
either high or medium, the firm is in Group A, if both are medium, or one is high and the other one is low, the firm
is in Group B. The rest are in group C.
15
    All regressions also include country level and industry level fixed effects. Furthermore, standard errors are
clustered by country.

                                                         18
pressure effects, both the share of free float and the share of stocks traded consistently enter

negatively and statistically significantly in the regressions. With respect to the global demand

shock factor, the coefficient on the proportion of foreign sales is consistently negative and

statistically significant, and the coefficient on the foreign assets share is consistently negative,

but not statistically significant. This is not surprising since foreign assets, which captures the

extent to which a firm’s production is multinational, is not directly related to global trade, while

foreign sales are.

       The four corporate finance indicators used to measure the sensitivity to credit supply

shocks (dividends to sales, leverage, good coverage, and the interaction between leverage and

good coverage) generally enter with the predicted signs and are statistically significant.

Dividends to sales enters positively, indicating that firms with higher pre-crisis payout tended to

experience higher residual returns during the crisis. Leverage enters negatively and good

coverage enters positively, and the interaction between the two also enters negatively and

significantly.

       During the placebo period, leverage effects are absent, with the exception of a positive

coefficient on the good coverage-leverage interaction term, which is significant at 10% only. In

other words, during non-crisis periods, firms that are highly leveraged and face a significant

prospect of financial distress (those whose debt service commitments are extremely high relative

to their income) experience negative expected returns. A similar finding has been noted in prior

work by Campbell, Hilscher and Szilagyi (2006), who document that the probability of financial

distress is associated with negative stock returns for U.S. firms for the past thirty years.

       Clearly, the effect of the credit supply shock factor components is very different between

the crisis and placebo periods. During non-crisis times only distressed firms have negative

                                                  19
returns (i.e., those with interest coverage below one), while during crisis time we find that not

only firms in distress have negative returns, but even firms with high leverage that are not

distressed also have negative returns. Also, firms with high dividend payout experience higher

returns during the crisis, but not during the placebo period.

       Similarly, with respect to the other two shock factors, we find that the variables capturing

the global demand shock factor or the market liquidity shock factor are insignificant during the

placebo period, confirming that these variables capture shocks that are crisis-specific.

       In Table 4, we use the eight variables that collectively proxy for the three shock factors to

construct first principal components for each of the three categories of shock factors and report

those results, as well as the results based on the Group A, B, and C categorizations of the three

shock factors, as described in Section III. We label those alternative ways to summarize the

overall effects of each of the three crisis-related shock factors the “principal components”

approach and the “group” approach. The first two columns of Table 4 report coefficients for the

crisis period, and the second two columns report effects for the placebo period.

       The principal-components regressions in Table 4 confirm the results reported in Table 3

since we find that all three principal components are negative and statistically significant.

Furthermore, these results suggest that the effect of the crisis shock factors is also economically

significant. A one standard deviation increase in the principal component for the credit supply

shock factor is associated with a decline in returns of 2.7 percent; an increase in the selling

pressure shock factor has a similar impact on returns. A one standard deviation increase in the

global demand shock factor translates into a fall of 1.5 percent.

       During the crisis, for all three factors, using the group approach, the Group A effects are

larger and more statistically significant than the Group B and Group C effects. In particular,

                                                 20
firms that fall in the Group A category for the credit supply shock factor exhibit returns that are 5

percent lower than firms in Group C. At the same time firms in the Group A category for the

global demand and selling pressure shock factors have returns that are 3 and 4 percent lower,

respectively, than those for Group C firms in each category. In the case of the variables which

capture sensitivity to credit-supply shocks, the Group B effect is also negative and statistically

significant relative to the omitted Group C, and returns for Group B firms are approximately 3

percent lower.

           In contrast, during the placebo period, under the principal-components approach, none of

the shock factors is significant. Under the group approach, with the exception of the global

demand sensitivity group A variable, which is marginally significant and positive while it was

negative during the crisis, none of the other group variables are significant during the placebo

period. Overall, the results in Table 4 confirm those using individual indicators of crisis shock

factors.




V. Robustness Checks

           We conduct a number of additional estimations to verify the robustness of our results. We

use as the baseline results those reported in models (2) and (7) of Table 3. First, instead of

calculating the beta vis-à-vis the global market index, we compute the beta for each firm vis- à -

vis its local stock market index. Second, because the number of firms varies by country, to

reduce the potentially excessive influence of countries with a large number of firms, we conduct

weighted least squares with weights proportional to the inverse of the square root of the number

of firms in each country. Finally, we run separate estimations for developed and developing

countries to ascertain whether our main findings are verified for both samples of countries.

                                                  21
        Table 5 presents results for the crisis period and Table 6 shows the estimations for the

placebo period. Using the local beta rather than the global beta does not change our main results

in any significant way (see model (1) in Table 5 and 6). The same variables proxying for credit

supply, selling pressure, and global demand shock factors are significant during the crisis period

when we use the local beta instead of the global beta. As before, these variables are not

significant in the placebo period.

       Running our estimations with weights proportional to the inverse of the square root of the

number of firms does not lead to major changes in results either. The only noticeable change is

that while the ratio of debt to assets is significant at 10 percent in the unweighted estimations,

when we conduct weighted estimations, that variable is no longer significant. However, the other

proxies for sensitivity to the credit supply shock (i.e., the good coverage indicator, the interaction

of the coverage indicator with the leverage ratio, and the dividend to sales ratio) all remain

negative and significant during the crisis (see model (2) Table 5) , while they are mostly not

significant (or positive) during the placebo period (see model (2) Table 6).

       Our main findings are not driven by a particular sample of countries, since we are able to

verify our findings among separate samples of developed and of developing countries. There are,

however, some differences across samples with respect to which specific proxies are relatively

important. The leverage ratio is significant during the crisis for developed countries, but not for

developing countries. On the other hand, for developed countries the interaction between

leverage and coverage is not significant, while it is significant for developing countries.

Similarly, among the indicators of sensitivity to global demand shocks, the ratio of foreign assets

matters for developed countries, while the ratio of foreign sales is significant for developing

countries. Overall, however, we continue to find that the variables proxying for credit supply,


                                                 22
selling pressure and global demand shock factors are significant during the crisis period but not

during the placebo period.




VI.    A Month-by-Month Analysis of the Cross-Section of Returns During the Crisis

       Having shown that residual returns for the crisis period as a whole varied importantly as

the result of each of the three shock factors, we now turn to a more detailed analysis of the crisis

period on a month-by-month basis. To do so, we ran separate monthly regressions for each

month from August 2007 through December 2008, using the same specifications as those in the

first two columns of Table 4. Figures 1-3, Panel A plot the coefficients and two times their

standard errors for each shock factor principal component in each month using regressions

analogous to those in column (1) of Table 4. Panel B in each of the figures plots Group A

coefficient values and standard errors from column (2) of Table 4.

       We find that the effects of the crisis shock factors vary in intensity during the crisis in a

manner that conforms to what one would expect. Time variation in the coefficients associated

with the credit-supply sensitivity factor (Figure 1) are similar to those found in credit risk

spreads that reflect the timing of credit-supply shocks. The first major change in both plots

occurs in early 2008, followed by subsequent recovery in early 2008 and then a steep decline

toward the end of 2008.

       The time variation in the coefficients associated with the global demand shock factor

vary with the timing of the declines in exports (see Figure 2). Both show a drop in August 2007,

a subsequent recovery, then another drop in late 2007, followed by a rising trend through the




                                                23
Spring of 2008, after which the trend is negative, culminating in a steep drop around November

2008.

        The variation over time in the coefficients that measure the sensitivity to selling pressure

closely tracks the variation in the returns to the stock market. Peaks and troughs of returns are

closely related to peaks and troughs in the coefficients of the selling pressure indicators (see

Figure 3). The time variation in these three sets of coefficients confirms our interpretation of the

coefficients relating to the three shock factors as reflecting three unique, crisis-related influences

on residual returns.




VII.    Conclusion

        Equity returns provide a uniquely comparable window to the performance of firms

throughout the world, and their responses to financial crises. The global financial crisis of 2007-

2008 posed exceptional challenges for firms, which implied unique determinants of equity

returns. The collapse of global trade caused a major shock to demand for firms that had

positioned themselves to benefit from participating in expanding global trade and production.

Credit-supply contraction curtailed the access of firms to funding and reduced their effective

debt capacity (which affected not only firms on the verge of financial distress, but also

moderately levered firms). Firms whose equity was relatively liquid, and therefore, easier to

trade, found their stock prices falling more than other firms, as investors who owned stock and

were scrambling for cash chose to sell off relatively liquid stocks, in order to limit their losses

from disposing of assets in an illiquid market.




                                                  24
        All three of these crisis “shock factors” – exposure to the collapse in global trade

demand, vulnerability to credit-supply shocks, sensitivity to stock market selling pressures – are

reflected in the large and statistically significant observed patterns in residual equity returns

(after controlling for normal risk factors that are associated with expected returns). We construct

a vector of eight variables that measure the effects of the three crisis-related shock factors from

August 2007-December 2008 – four variables that measure vulnerability to credit-supply shocks,

two that measure exposure to global trade demand shocks, and two that measure sensitivity to

stock market selling pressure. These eight variables enter with the expected sign and are

significant statistically. The three sets of influences are unique to the crisis. Similar analysis for

the placebo period of August 2005-December 2006 shows that the influences identified during

the 2007-2008 sample period are not present in this non-crisis period.

        Using the eight variables we identify as measures of firms’ exposures to one of the three

shock factors, we construct composite measures of each shock factor in two ways: using the first

principal component of each of the variables included in the relevant set of variables, or by

constructing indicator variables that group firms according to their combined values of the

various indicators. The composite effect regressions confirm the unique importance of the shock

factors during the crisis.

        A month-by-month analysis of the magnitude of the influence of each of three factors

shows that the time variation of the importance of each of the shock factors tracks related

changes in the global economic environment. The time variation in the coefficients associated

with the global trade demand shock factor vary with the timing of the declines in exports. Time

variation in the coefficients associated with the credit-supply factor are similar to those found in

credit risk spreads that reflect the timing of credit-supply shocks. The variation over time in the


                                                 25
coefficients that measure the market illiquidity shock factor closely tracks the variation in the

returns to the stock market.




                                               26
References

Almeida , Heitor, Murillo Campello, Bruno Laranjeira, and Scott Weisbenner (2010). “Corporate
      Debt Maturity and the Real Effects of the 2007 Credit Crisis”,
      http://www.gsm.ucdavis.edu/uploadedFiles/Faculty/Conferences_and_Programs/DebtMa
      turityCrisis_022010.pdf
Almeida, Heitor, Murillo Campello and Michael S. Weisbach (2004). “The Cash Flow
      Sensitivity of Cash”, The Journal of Finance, LIX(4), 1777-1804.
Amiti , Mary and David E. Weinstein (2009). “Exports and Financial Shocks”, NBER Working
        Paper No. 15556.
Ang , Andrew, Robert Hodrick, Yuhang Xing, and Xiaoyan Zhang (2006). “The Cross-Section
       of Volatility and Expected Returns”, Journal of Finance 61, 259-299.
Ang, Andrew, Robert Hodrick, Yuhang Xing, and Xiaoyan Zhang (2009). “High Idiosyncratic
      Volatility and Low Returns: International and Further U.S. Evidence”, Journal of
      Financial Economics 91, 1-24.
Anginer, Deniz and Celim Yildizhan (2010). “Is There A Distress Risk Anomaly? Corporate
      Bond Spread as a Proxy for Default Risk,” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper
      5319.
Bekaert, Geert, Campbell R. Harvey, Christian T. Lundblad, and Stephan Siegel (2010). “What
       Segments Equity Markets”, Columbia University. Mimeo.
Billio, Monica, Mila Getmansky, Andrew Lo, and Loriana Pelizzon (2010). “Econometric
        Measures of Systemic Risk in the Finance and Insurance Sectors”, NBER Working Paper
        No. 16223.
Brock, William and Blake Lebaron (1990). “Liquidity Constraints in Production-Based Asset-
       Pricing Models”, Asymmetric Information, Corporate Finance, and Investment, Ed (
       Hubbard, Glenn ), NBER.
Brunnermeier, Markus (2009). “Deciphering the Liquidity and Credit Crunch 2007-2008”,
      Journal of Economic Perspectives 23 (1), 77–100.
Calomiris, Charles (2009). “The Subprime Turmoil: What’s Old, What’s New and What’s Next,”
      Journal of Structured Finance 15 (1), 6–52.
Calomiris, Charles, Charles Himmelberg, and Paul Wachtel (1995). “Commercial Paper,
      Corporate Finance, and the Business Cycle: A Microeconomic Perspective,” Carnegie-
      Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 42, 203-250.
Calomiris, Charles, Athanasios Orphanides, and Steven A. Sharpe (1994). “Leverage as a State
      Variable for Employment, Inventory Accumulation, and Fixed Investment”, NBER
      Working paper No. 4800.
Caprio, Gerard, Asli Demirguc-Kunt, and Edward Kane (2008).“The 2007 Meltdown in
     Structured Securitization: Searching for Lessons, Not Scapegoats.” World Bank Policy
     Research Working Paper Series 4745.



                                             27
Campbell, John Y., Jens Hilscher, and Jan Szilagyi (2006). “In Search of Distress Risk,” NBER
     Working Paper No. 12362.
Campello, Murillo and Long Chen (2010) “Are Financial Constraints Priced? Evidence from
      Firm Fundamentals and Stock Returns”, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking , 1185–
      1198.
Campello, Murillo, John R. Graham, and Campbell Harvey (2010). “The Real Effects of
      Financial Constraints: Evidence from a Financial Crisis”, Journal of Financial
      Economics 97, 470-487.
Cecchetti, Stephen G.(2009). “Crisis and Responses: The Federal Reserve in the Early Stages of
      the Financial Crisis”, Journal of Economic Perspectives 23 (1), 51–75.
Cella, Cristina, Andrew Ellul, and Mariassunta Giannetti (2010). “Investors’ Horizons and the
        Amplification of Market Shocks”, Indiana University and Stockholm School of
        Economics. Mimeo.
Chor, Davin, and Kalina Manova (2010). “Off the Cliff and Back: Credit Conditions and
       International Trade during the Global Financial Crisis”, Working Paper, Stanford
       University.
Covitz, Daniel, Nellie Liang, Gustavo A. Suarez (2009). “The Evolution of a Financial Crisis:
        Panic in the Asset-Backed Commercial Paper Market”,
        http://www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/feds/2009/200936/200936abs.html
Didier, Tatiana, Inessa Love, and Maria Soledad Martinez Peria (2010). “What Explains Stock
        Markets' Vulnerability to the 2007-2008 Crisis?”, World Bank Policy Research Working
        Paper 5224.
Dooley, Michael P. and Hutchison, Michael (2009). “Transmission of the U.S. Subprime Crisis
      to Emerging Markets: Evidence on the Decoupling-Recoupling Hypothesis,” NBER
      Working Paper 15120.
Duca, John (2009). “Preventing a Repeat of the Money Market Meltdown of the Early 1930s”,
       Research Department Working Paper No. 0904, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas.
Ehrmann, Michael, Fratzscher, Marcel and Mehl, Arnaud (2009). “What Has Made the Current
      Financial Crisis Truly Global?”, Mimeo. European Central Bank.
Fama, Eugene and Kenneth French (1992). “The Cross-Section of Expected Stock Returns”,
      The Journal of Finance 47(2):427-465.
Fazzari, Steven, Glenn Hubbard, and Bruce Peterson (1988). “Financing Constraints and
       Corporate Investment”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1: 141-195.
Fazzari, Steven, Glenn Hubbard, and Bruce Peterson (2000). “Investment-Cash Flow
       Sensitivities are Useful: A Comment on Kaplan and Zingales”, Quarterly Journal of
       Economics 115(2), 695-704.
Fratzscher, Marcel (2009). “What Explains Global Exchange Rate Movements During the
       Financial Crisis?” European Central Bank Working Paper 1060.
Gilchrist , Simon and Charles Himmelberg (1998). “Investment, Fundamentals and Finance”,
       NBER Working Paper No. 6652.

                                               28
Gorton, Gary and Andrew Metrick (2009). “Securitized Banking and the Run on Repo”, NBER
       Working Paper No. 15223.
Heider , Florian, Marie Hoerova, Cornelia Holthausen (2009). “Liquidity Hoarding and
       Interbank Market Spreads: The Role of Counterparty Risk”, European Central Bank
       Working Paper Series No. 1126.
Ivashina, Victoria, and David S. Scharfstein (2009). “Bank Lending During the Financial Crisis
       of 2008”, http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1297337.
Kaplan, Steven, and Luigi Zingales (1997). “Do Investment.Cash Flow Sensitivities Provide
      Useful Measures of Financing Constraints?”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 112,
      169.215.
Kotlikoff, Laurence (2010). Jimmy Stewart is Dead – Ending the World's Ongoing Financial
       Plague with Limited Purpose Banking. John Wiley and Sons.
Lakonishok, Josef , Andrei Shleifer and Robert Vishny (1994). “Contrarian Investment,
      Extrapolation, and Risk,” Journal of Finance, 49(5),1541-78.
Lamont, Owen, Christopher Polk,, and Jesus Saa-Requejo (2001). “Financial Constraints and
      Stock Returns,” Review of Financial Studies, 14(2), 529-54.
Mitchell, Mark, and Todd Pulvino (2010). “Arbitrage Crashes and the Speed of Capital”,
       http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1628261
Obstfeld, Maurice, Shambaugh, Jay, and Taylor, Alan (2009). “Financial Instability, Reserves,
       and Central Bank Swap Lines in the Panic of 2008,” NBER Working Paper 14826.
Reinhart, Carmen, and Rogoff, Kenneth(2008). “Is the 2007 US Sub-Prime Financial Crisis So
       Different? An International Historical Comparison,” American Economic Review 98 (2),
       339–344.
Rose, Andrew, and Spiegel, Mark (2009a). “Cross-Country Causes and Consequences of the
      2008 Crisis: Early Warning,” CEPR Discussion Paper 7354.
Rose, Andrew, and Spiegel, Mark (2009b). “Cross-Country Causes and Consequences of the
      2008 Crisis: International Linkages and American Exposure,” NBER Working Paper
      15358.
Schwarz , Krista (2009). “Mind the Gap: Disentangling Credit and Liquidity in Risk Spreads”,
      http://www0.gsb.columbia.edu/faculty/eravina/seminar/Krista.pdf.
Sharpe, Steven (1994). “Financial Market Imperfections, Firm Leverage, and the Cyclicality of
       Employment”, The American Economic Review 84(4), 1060-1074.
Taylor, John (2009). “The Financial Crisis and the Policy Responses: An Empirical Analysis of
       What Went Wrong”, NBER Working Paper 14631.
Tong, Hui and Shang-Jin Wei (Forthcoming). “The Composition Matters: Capital Flows and
       Liquidity Constraint during a Global Economic Crisis,” Review of Financial Studies.
Whalen, R. Chrisopher (2008). “The Subprime Crisis: Cause, Effect and Consequences.”
      Networks Financial Institute Policy Brief No. 2008-PB-04.



                                              29
Whited, Toni and Goujun Wu (2006). “Financial Constraints Risk,” Review of Financial Studies
      19, 531-59.




                                             30
Table 1: Sample of countries and firms

Countries                              Number of firms
                           Crisis period      Placebo
Argentina                  66                 63
Australia                  1388               1197
Austria                    72                 65
Belgium                    108                95
Brazil                     269                254
Canada                     1369               1368
Chile                      149                151
China                      1649               1388
Colombia                   0                  26
Czech Republic             25                 38
Denmark                    105                103
Egypt, Arab Rep.           42                 32
Finland                    118                120
France                     618                618
Germany                    656                606
Greece                     255                278
Hong Kong, China           759                754
Hungary                    28                 32
India                      859                506
Indonesia                  237                238
Ireland                    64                 61
Israel                     153                149
Italy                      231                202
Japan                      1213               1145
Korea, Rep.                958                878
Luxembourg                 28                 31
Malaysia                   874                833
Mexico                     105                109
Netherlands                145                149
New Zealand                109                105
Norway                     176                147
Pakistan                   89                 73
Peru                       63                 53
Philippines                134                119
Poland                     212                145
Portugal                   46                 53
Russian Federation         148                89
Singapore                  551                527
South Africa               254                246
Spain                      99                 104
Sweden                     344                277
Switzerland                181                182
Thailand                   408                369
Turkey                     172                187
United Kingdom             1598               1430
Total                      17127              15595




                                                 31
Table 2: Descriptive statistics

Variables                                               Crisis period             Placebo period
                                                 N        Mean    Std Dev.    N      Mean    Std Dev.
Return                                          17127     -0.47     0.32     14898   0.29     0.54
Beta                                            15829      0.72     0.59     14579   0.79     0.59
Momentum                                        16160      0.29      0.5     14096     0      0.27
Market to book value                            16061      2.51      2.8     14001    2.1     2.45
Logarithm of total assets in USD                17127     11.59     2.09     14898   11.53     2.1
Standard error of residuals from beta           15907      11.6     3.91     14728   11.89    4.07
Good coverage                                   15082      0.75     0.43     13299   0.75     0.43
Leverage ratio (debt to assets)                 16925      0.21     0.19     14721   0.21      0.2
Dividends over sales                            14103      0.02     0.04     12745   0.02     0.04
Ratio of free floating shares to total shares   14073     68.17     27.81    11523   64.32    28.04
Ratio of shares traded to total shares          15928      0.11     0.18     13907    0.1      0.2
Foreign assets to total assets                  17127      0.19      0.2     14898   0.17     0.19
Foreign sales to total sales                    17127      0.31     0.26     14898   0.31     0.26
Construction industry dummy                     17127      0.09     0.29     14898   0.09     0.29
Mining industry dummy                           17127      0.15     0.35     14898   0.13     0.33
Retail trade industry dummy                     17127      0.05     0.21     14898   0.05     0.23
Services industry dummy                         17127      0.24     0.43     14898   0.25     0.43
Transport, communication, electricity, gas,     17127      0.12     0.32     14898   0.12     0.32
and sanitary industry dummy




                                                           32
Table 3: Estimations using individual indicators of “crisis shocks”

Table shows estimations for returns over the crisis (August 2007-December 2008) and placebo (August 2005-
December 2006) periods. Robust standard errors, clustered by country, are in parentheses. *, **, *** denote
statistical significance at 10, 5 and 1 percent respectively.
                                                                     Crisis                                  Placebo
                                   (1)         (2)         (3)            (4)        (5)         (6)         (7)
Beta                               -0.021***   -0.021***   -0.021***     -0.026***   -0.019***   -0.024***   0.025*
                                   (0.007)     (0.007)     (0.007)       (0.007)     (0.006)     (0.007)     (0.013)
Momentum                           -0.027**    -0.027**    -0.027**      -0.033***   -0.041***   -0.042***   0.125***
                                   (0.01)      (0.01)      (0.01)        (0.008)     (0.012)     (0.01)      (0.031)
Market to book value ratio         -0.002      -0.001      -0.001        -0.003***   -0.002*     -0.002***   -0.008*
                                   (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)       (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.004)
Logarithm of total assets          0.002       0.002       0.001         -0.003      0.002       0.000       0.031***
                                   (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.004)       (0.004)     (0.005)     (0.005)     (0.007)
Standard dev. beta residuals       -0.015***   -0.015***   -0.015***     -0.017***   -0.017***   -0.017***   -0.012***
                                   (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.002)       (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.003)
Dividends to sales                 0.318***    0.311***    0.311***      0.339***                            -0.168
                                   (0.07)      (0.07)      (0.07)        (0.066)                             (0.209)
Good coverage dummy                0.025***    0.045***    0.056***      0.041***                            0.019
                                   (0.007)     (0.007)     (0.009)       (0.008)                             (0.029)
Leverage ratio                     -0.097***   -0.044*                   -0.03                               -0.097
                                   (0.019)     (0.024)                   (0.022)                             (0.075)
Good coverage *leverage                        -0.079***   -0.122***     -0.071***                           0.135*
                                               (0.027)     (0.023)       (0.02)                              (0.072)
Ratio of shares free float         -0.001***   -0.001***   -0.001***                 -0.001***               -0.000
                                   (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)                   (0.000)                 (0.000)
Ratio of shares traded             -0.084***   -0.084***   -0.085***                 -0.04                   0.027
                                   (0.025)     (0.025)     (0.025)                   (0.05)                  (0.046)
Ratio of foreign to total assets   -0.028      -0.027      -0.028                                -0.031*     0.086
                                   (0.021)     (0.021)     (0.021)                               (0.018)     (0.072)
Ratio of foreign to total sales    -0.050**    -0.051**    -0.050**                              -0.054**    -0.027
                                   (0.022)     (0.022)     (0.022)                               (0.024)     (0.037)
Constant                           -0.197***   -0.214***   -0.222***     -0.219***   -0.188**    -0.200**    -0.012
                                   (0.073)     (0.072)     (0.073)       (0.063)     (0.09)      (0.082)     (0.092)
Industry fixed effects             Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
Country fixed effects              Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
Observations                       10,104      10,104      10,104        11,517      13,030      14,889      8926
R-squared                          0.196       0.196       0.196         0.193       0.184       0.19        0.141
Number of countries                44          44          44            44          44          44          45




                                                                       33
Table 4: Estimations using composite indicators of “crisis shocks”

Table shows estimations for returns over the crisis (August 2007-December 2008) and placebo (August 2005-December 2006)
periods. Robust standard errors, clustered by country, are in parentheses. *, **, *** denote statistical significance at 10, 5 and 1
percent respectively.
                                                                                   Crisis                       Placebo
Beta                                                                   -0.021***       -0.023***    0.025*           0.025**
                                                                       (0.007)        (0.007)       (0.013)         (0.012)
Momentum                                                               -0.028**       -0.029***     0.128***        0.127***
                                                                       (0.01)         (0.01)        (0.031)         (0.03)
Market to book value ratio                                             -0.001         -0.001        -0.008*         -0.008*
                                                                       (0.001)        (0.001)       (0.004)         (0.004)
Logarithm of total assets                                              0.000          -0.001        0.033***        0.031***
                                                                       (0.004)        (0.004)       (0.007)         (0.007)
Standard dev. beta residuals                                           -0.015***      -0.017***     -0.012***       -0.012***
                                                                       (0.002)        (0.002)       (0.003)         (0.003)
Standardized principal component credit supply shock factor            -0.027***                    -0.013
                                                                       (0.004)                      (0.01)
Standardized principal component global demand shock factor            -0.015**                     0.008
                                                                       (0.006)                      (0.01)
Standardized principal component selling pressure shock factor         -0.026***                    0.001
                                                                       (0.005)                      (0.007)
Group A credit supply shock factor                                                    -0.051***                     -0.024
                                                                                      (0.007)                       (0.022)
Group B credit supply shock factor                                                    -0.032***                     0.019
                                                                                      (0.008)                       (0.014)
Group A global demand shock factor                                                    -0.028*                       0.028*
                                                                                      (0.014)                       (0.016)
Group B global demand shock factor                                                    0.007                         -0.018
                                                                                      (0.021)                       (0.017)
Group A selling pressure shock factor                                                 -0.040**                      0.016
                                                                                      (0.015)                       (0.027)
Group B selling pressure shock factor                                                 -0.013                        0.007
                                                                                      (0.014)                       (0.015)
Constant                                                               -0.260***      -0.200***     -0.022          0.001
                                                                       (0.065)        (0.073)       (0.082)         (0.08)
Industry fixed effects                                                 Yes            Yes           Yes             Yes
Country fixed effects                                                  Yes            Yes           Yes             Yes
Observations                                                           10,104         10,104        8,926           8,926
R-squared                                                              0.195          0.189         0.139           0.14
Number of countries                                                    44             44            45              45




                                                                  34
Table 5: Robustness checks for the crisis period
Table shows estimations for returns over the crisis period (August 2007-December 2008). Robust standard errors, clustered by
country, are in parentheses. *, **, *** denote statistical significance at 10, 5 and 1 percent respectively.
                                                Local beta             Weighted              Developing      Developed
                                                (1)                    (2)                   (3)             (4)
  Beta                                          -0.030**               -0.026***             -0.028***       -0.017*
                                                (0.012)                (0.008)               (0.009)         (0.009)
  Momentum                                      -0.026**               -0.026**              -0.031**        -0.014
                                                (0.011)                (0.011)               (0.013)         (0.016)
  Market to book value ratio                    -0.002                 -0.002                0.000           -0.002**
                                                (0.001)                (0.001)               (0.002)         (0.001)
  Logarithm of total assets                     0.002                  -0.002                0.003           0.002
                                                (0.004)                (0.003)               (0.004)         (0.005)
  Standard dev. beta residuals                  -0.015***              -0.016***             -0.019***       -0.013***
                                                (0.001)                (0.001)               (0.002)         (0.003)
  Dividends to sales                            0.318***               0.333***              0.241**         0.377***
                                                (0.068)                (0.070)               (0.089)         (0.104)
  Good coverage dummy                           0.043***               0.049***              0.051***        0.044***
                                                (0.008)                (0.012)               (0.013)         (0.009)
  Leverage ratio                                -0.051**               -0.030                0.020           -0.092***
                                                (0.024)                (0.035)               (0.039)         (0.028)
  Good coverage *leverage                       -0.071**               -0.107**              -0.154***       -0.016
                                                (0.028)                (0.042)               (0.041)         (0.030)
  Ratio of shares free float                    -0.001***              -0.001***             -0.001***       -0.001***
                                                (0.000)                (0.000)               (0.000)         (0.000)
  Ratio of shares traded                        -0.085***              -0.097***             -0.069**        -0.111***
                                                (0.025)                (0.024)               (0.031)         (0.033)
  Ratio of foreign to total assets              -0.034                 -0.026                -0.007          -0.050*
                                                (0.021)                (0.023)               (0.029)         (0.025)
  Ratio of foreign to total sales               -0.047*                -0.049**              -0.088***       -0.020
                                                (0.024)                (0.020)               (0.018)         (0.024)
  Constant                                      -0.215***              0.007                 -0.138*         -0.287**
                                                (0.068)                (0.057)               (0.072)         (0.107)
  Industry fixed effects                        Yes                    Yes                   Yes             Yes
  Country fixed effects                         Yes                    Yes                   Yes             Yes
  Observations                                  9,961                  10,104                4,406           5,698
  R-squared                                     0.197                  0.190                 0.221           0.186
  Number of countries                           44                     44                    23              21




                                                              35
Table 6: Robustness checks for the placebo period
Table shows estimations for returns over the placebo period (August 2005-December 2006). Robust standard errors, clustered by
country, are in parentheses. *, **, *** denote statistical significance at 10, 5 and 1 percent respectively.

                                                   Local beta         Weighted          Developing           Developed
                                                   (1)                (2)               (3)                  (4)
Beta                                               0.031              0.013             0.015                0.027
                                                   (0.021)            (0.016)           (0.019)              (0.018)
Momentum                                           0.125***           0.132***          0.130***             0.106**
                                                   (0.031)            (0.033)           (0.046)              (0.041)
Market to book value ratio                         -0.008*            -0.011***         -0.018**             -0.004
                                                   (0.004)            (0.004)           (0.007)              (0.004)
Logarithm of total assets                          0.030***           0.029***          0.030***             0.029***
                                                   (0.007)            (0.007)           (0.011)              (0.010)
Standard dev. beta residuals                       -0.011***          -0.009***         -0.013**             -0.011***
                                                   (0.003)            (0.003)           (0.006)              (0.003)
Dividends to sales                                 -0.169             -0.053            -0.130               -0.220
                                                   (0.216)            (0.210)           (0.405)              (0.129)
Good coverage dummy                                0.024              0.040             -0.026               0.041
                                                   (0.030)            (0.032)           (0.042)              (0.032)
Leverage ratio                                     -0.087             -0.102            -0.167               -0.056
                                                   (0.076)            (0.080)           (0.127)              (0.087)
Good coverage *leverage                            0.121              0.153*            0.210**              0.123
                                                   (0.074)            (0.088)           (0.098)              (0.093)
Ratio of shares free float                         0.000              0.000             0.000                0.000
                                                   (0.000)            (0.000)           (0.000)              (0.000)
Ratio of shares traded                             0.031              0.052             -0.005               0.117
                                                   (0.046)            (0.059)           (0.048)              (0.144)
Ratio of foreign to total assets                   0.088              0.104             0.052                0.098
                                                   (0.071)            (0.073)           (0.120)              (0.080)
Ratio of foreign to total sales                    -0.027             -0.056            -0.097*              0.011
                                                   (0.037)            (0.041)           (0.049)              (0.057)
Constant                                           -0.003             -0.084            0.141                -0.077
                                                   (0.095)            (0.098)           (0.155)              (0.109)
Industry fixed effects                             Yes                Yes               Yes                  Yes
Country fixed effects                              Yes                Yes               Yes                  Yes
Observations                                       8,885              8,926             3,694                5,232
R-squared                                          0.141              0.147             0.130                0.149
Number of countries                                45                 45                24                   21




                                                                36
Figure 1. Panel A.
Principal Component Credit Supply Shock Factor Coefficients and Baa-Treasury spread

   0.8                                                                                            7
   0.6
                                                                                                  6
   0.4
   0.2                                                                                            5

    0
                                                                                                  4
  ‐0.2
                                                                                                  3
  ‐0.4
  ‐0.6                                                                                            2
  ‐0.8
                                                                                                  1
    ‐1
  ‐1.2                                                                                            0

                                Credit Supply Coeff         Coeff-2std error
                                Coeff+2std error            Baa-Treasury spread




Figure 1. Panel B.
Group A Credit Supply Shock Factor Coefficients and Baa-Treasury spread


   2                                                                                              7

  1.5
                                                                                                  6
   1

  0.5                                                                                             5

   0
                                                                                                  4
 ‐0.5
                                                                                                  3
   ‐1

 ‐1.5                                                                                             2
   ‐2
                                                                                                  1
 ‐2.5
            Credit Supply Group A       Coeff-2std error        Coeff+2std error   Baa-Treasury
   ‐3                                                                                             0




                                                           37
Figure 2. Panel A.
Principal Component Global Demand Shock Factor Coefficients and Exports



   1.5                                                                                       15

    1                                                                                        10

   0.5                                                                                       5

    0                                                                                        0

  ‐0.5                                                                                       ‐5

    ‐1                                                                                       ‐10

  ‐1.5                                                                                       ‐15

    ‐2                                                                                       ‐20

             Global Demand coeff     Coeff‐2stdev          Coeff+2stdev     %Export Growth


Figure 2. Panel B.

Group A Global Demand Shock Factor Coefficients and Exports

   3.00                                                                                          15

   2.00                                                                                          10

   1.00                                                                                          5

   0.00                                                                                          0

  ‐1.00                                                                                          ‐5

  ‐2.00                                                                                          ‐10

  ‐3.00                                                                                          ‐15

  ‐4.00                                                                                          ‐20

             Global Demand Group A     Coeff‐2stdev          Coeff+2stdev    %Export Growth




                                                      38
Figure 3. Panel A.
Principal Component Stock Market Selling Pressure Shock Factor Coefficients and S&P Returns

    2                                                                                  0.1

   1.5
                                                                                       0.05
    1
                                                                                       0
   0.5

    0                                                                                  -0.05

  -0.5
                                                                                       -0.1
    -1
                                                                                       -0.15
  -1.5

    -2                                                                                 -0.2
                         Selling pressure coefficient    Coeff - 2std error
                         Coeff+2std error                S&P, % change




Figure 3. Panel B
Group A Stock Market Selling Pressure Shock Factor Coefficients and S&P Returns

   4.00                                                                                0.1

   3.00
                                                                                       0.05
   2.00
                                                                                       0
   1.00

   0.00                                                                                -0.05

  -1.00
                                                                                       -0.1
  -2.00
                                                                                       -0.15
  -3.00

  -4.00                                                                                -0.2
                          Selling Pressure Group A       Coeff - 2std error
                          Coeff+2std error               S&P, % change




                                                        39
