NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PROPERTY RIGHTS AND FINANCIAL DEVELOPMENT:
THE LEGACY OF JAPANESE COLONIAL INSTITUTIONS
Dongwoo Yoo
Richard H. Steckel
Working Paper 16551
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16551

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2010

We thank Lee Alston, Paul Evans, Sumner La Croix, Gary Libecap, Trevon Logan, Lung-fei Lee,
Noel Maurer, Chiaki Moriguchi, Kelly Olds, and Paul Rhode, as well as seminar participants at the
NBER summer institute, Ohio State University, the University of Michigan, Bowling Green State
University, the Social Science History Association meetings, and the Midwest Economics Association
meetings. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Dongwoo Yoo and Richard H. Steckel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Property Rights and Financial Development: The Legacy of Japanese Colonial Institutions
Dongwoo Yoo and Richard H. Steckel
NBER Working Paper No. 16551
November 2010
JEL No. K11,N2,O1
ABSTRACT
Several studies link modern economic performance to institutions transplanted by European colonizers
and here we extend this line of research to Asia. Japan imposed its system of well-defined property
rights in land on some of its Asian colonies, including Korea, Taiwan and Palau. In 1939 Japan began
to survey and register private land in its island colonies, an effort that was completed in Palau but interrupted
elsewhere by World War II. Within Micronesia robust economic development followed only in Palau
where individual property rights were well defined. Second, we show that well-defined property rights
in Korea and Taiwan secured land taxation and enabled farmers to obtain bank loans for capital improvements,
principally irrigation systems. Our analytical model predicts that high costs of creating an ownership
updating system and a citizen identity system discourage a short-sighted government from implementing
these crucial components, the absence of which gradually makes land registration obsolete. Third,
considering all of Japan’s colonies, we use the presence or absence of a land survey as an instrument
to identify the causal impact of new institutions. Our estimates show that property-defining institutions
were important for economic development, results that are confirmed when using a similar approach
with British Colonies in Asia.

Dongwoo Yoo
Department of Economics
Ohio State University
410 Arps Hall, 1945 North High Street
Columbus, OH 43210-1172
yoo.127@osu.edu
Richard H. Steckel
Department of Economics
Ohio State University
410 Arps Hall, 1945 North High Street
Columbus, OH 43210-1172
and NBER
steckel.1@osu.edu

1. Introduction
When and why developed nations became rich are central questions in economics and history.
The process was undoubtedly complex, involving many factors such as government policies, investments
in infrastructure, terms of trade, legacies of colonialism, natural resources, climate, and luck. Differential
economic progress around the globe over the past half century has stimulated a search for fundamental
conditions that trigger and sustain the process of development and modernization.
Many researchers now recognize the importance of institutions that protect property rights for
economic development (La Porta et al. 1997, 1998; Acemoglu et al. 2001, 2002; Engerman and Sokoloff
1997, 2002; Banerjee and Iyer 2005; Nunn 2008). Economic agents are less willing to invest if others can
seize the returns of their investments (Demsetz 1967, Alchian and Demsetz 1973). Research on the
institutional roots of economic development often pays homage to the work of Douglass North and
collaborators, who were trying to understand the onset and geographic spread of industrialization within
Europe (North 1990, North and Weingast 1989). They linked England‘s head start, for example, to the
Glorious Revolution of 1688, which limited the confiscatory power of the Crown and strengthened rights
in private property. In their view, the commitment to property rights lowered interest rates on public and
private investments that became the building blocks of industrialization. While the pathway is plausible,
the historical data available to confirm the linkage to British industrialization is modest.
This paper contributes by clarifying the pathways between property-defining institutions and
growth, and by incorporating work on a neglected continent, Asia. We divide property rights into two
categories: institutions that ‗define‘ property rights such as a land survey system and a land registration
system and those that ‗protect‘ property rights such as land expropriation laws or constitutional
safeguards against property takings. We assess the economic legacy of institutional change imposed by
Japan on its Asian colonies which were acquired through an opportunistic process of territorial expansion.
We argue that decisions to colonize were exogenous to late twentieth century growth, a point
substantiated by results from the quasi experiment in Micronesia. We return to the issue of exogeneity
later in the paper. Prior to colonization these countries had complex systems of land tenure that impeded
1

transactions, including multiple ownership, clan or lineage ownership, poorly defined boundaries, and
lack of official titles. In an effort to generate tax revenue, Japanese colonial administrators abolished
these complex systems in favor of single ownership, official titles, updated land registers and boundaries
established by clear survey maps. A new system made plain who was responsible to pay taxes.
Our inquiry is inspired by rates of economic growth that were vastly different across Asia, where
Japan was the only Asian country to successfully begin industrialization in the late nineteenth century.
Asian tigers (South Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong, and Singapore) successfully industrialized in the second
half of twentieth century while other countries in the region are currently underway or have yet to begin.
The ratio of per capita GDP between the most developed country and the least developed country in Asia
is over 25:1. We ask to what extent might contrasting systems of property rights account for differential
growth?
The case of Palau – an island country in Micronesia – provides a quasi-experimental setting,
which shows that secure private property defining institutions provided a foundation for economic
development. Japan controlled Micronesia from 1914 to 1945, and in Palau surveyed and registered
private ownership from 1939 to 1941, classifying land into four categories: public, clan, lineage, and
individual. In 1941 Japan began to survey other Micronesian countries, but the process was interrupted
by World War II. After the war the U.S. controlled Micronesia, and in Palau, American judges upheld
land titles originating from the Japanese land registers. The American judges consistently concluded that
clans or lineages did not have any authority over private land. In other Micronesian countries, the
American judges lacked legal proof of private ownership and following the tradition of common law,
upheld customary ownership rights that allowed a village or clan leaders to confiscate or deny land-use
rights if a resident neglected customary obligations to the village. As a result foreigners only invested in
private lands that were protected in an absolute way, as in Palau. In 2007, Palau was three times richer
than other Micronesian countries.
The Asian experience suggests that the Japanese land survey was initially motivated by public
finance. Land has two special characteristics which distinguish it from other assets: it is "immovable" and
2

"everlasting." Generally it is easier for the government to tax land as opposed to other assets that can be
readily "hidden." Effective land taxation, however, requires registers and maps to identify parcels, as
well as a system linking taxpayers to the registers (Cho 2003). In many countries, land taxes are evaded
because the government cannot link registers, maps, and taxpayers. The Japanese land survey and
registration system secured land taxation and thus promoted public finance.
The solution of a public finance problem eventually was important for private finance. The
characteristics of land make it attractive to banks as collateral for loans. Our analysis shows, however,
that banks accept land as collateral only if secure title and well-defined boundaries were part of a central
ownership verification system. The Japanese land registration system was designed to preempt ownership
and boundary disputes and was well integrated to the ownership updating system and the citizen identity
system.1 Thus, it promoted private capital markets. Because land was the most abundant and important
asset in these agricultural economies, its collateralization provided a major boost for economic
development. Especially, when farmers obtained access to credit, they invested in irrigation systems that
increased agricultural productivity.
A review of the history of land reforms shows that establishing a good land tenure system was
more difficult than one might expect. First, reforms had to contend with rough boundaries used in the
past. Landowners tended to exaggerate the size of their land parcels in private land transactions, thus
most plots carried a history of boundary disputes. Second, the core of secure land transactions and
collateralization is a centralized ownership verification system, which required not only land registration,
but also a citizen identity system and an ownership updating system. Most governments, however, did
not fully understand the importance of these components. Finally, land reforms usually change the whole
structure of a society, and thus governments potentially face huge costs from socioeconomic and political
destabilization.

1

Feder et al. (1986), SMERU Research Team (2002), Do and Iyer (2008) find that land titling has positive impacts
on credit markets but some studies ignore the importance of secure title and central verification, and reach the
opposite conclusion, as do Boucher, Barham, and Carter (2002), Field and Torero (2004), and Galiani and
Schargrodsky (2006).

3

In order to understand the conditions under which governments undertake effective land reforms
that can promote long-run growth, we construct a simple model. The analytical model based on the
stylized facts of land reforms shows that a short-sighted government chooses an interior solution,
surveying only a portion of land, and does not create a citizen identity system or an ownership updating
system. In sharp contrast, a far-sighted government chooses a corner solution having all the major
components of well-defined property rights. The model shows that the main difference between the
short-sighted reform and the far-sighted reform is future tax revenue. The real tax revenue from the
interior solution without the updating system decreases over time because state‘s land registers gradually
become obsolete. Conversely, the real tax revenue from the corner solution is stable because the updated
land registers and the citizen identity system maintain current information for tax collection. The model
also shows that stable tax revenue enables the government to reduce tax rates, to be less arbitrary, and to
engage in long-range planning. Moreover, the creation of the updating system and the citizen identity
system provides the institutional foundation for land collateralization.
Finally, the paper estimates the impact of institutions on economic growth by using 2 Stage Least
Squares (2SLS) and an instrumental variable that is directly related to the property defining institutions.
Japan acquired its colonies though wars from the 1890s to the early 1940s, including Taiwan and South
Korea. Japan lost all of these colonies after World War II and its land survey was interrupted in some
places by the war. We argue that whether Japan conducted and completed a formal land survey is an
appropriate instrument for property defining institutions (i. e. land tenure system). Our estimates show
that property-defining institutions stimulated financial markets that contributed to economic
development.2 Our results are confirmed when using a similar approach with British Colonies in Asia.
2. The Evolution of Property Rights in Japan and its Colonies
According to Wakita (1991), the Taiko land survey of the late sixteenth century established a
secure land tenure system in Japan, whose main purpose was separation of the warrior and peasant
classes (Asao 1991). Before unification by Toyotomi Hideyoshi in the 1590s, a samurai owned peasants
2

We have research underway on Taiwan and Korea, which substantiates our argument based on micro-level data.

4

in his fief. Thus, the samurai could turn the peasants into soldiers, which provoked many revolts. In
order to prevent the frequent rebellions, Toyotomi Hideyoshi separated the two classes. Because the
warrior class collected taxes in his fief, the separation required a new tax collection system. Therefore,
the Taiko land survey identified the cultivator for every plot, which made clear who was responsible to
pay the tax.
About 300 years later Japan further modernized the land tenure system. New tax laws
promulgated in 1873 provided a uniform land tax, which was payable in money rather than rice and was
assessed on the value of land, not the size of the harvest. Thereafter, peasants not only received title to
the land, but gained the ability to buy and sell land, grow vegetables or fruit instead of rice as they saw fit,
and even abandon their land if they wished (Duus 1976).
Between 1895 and World War II Japan occupied dozens of countries or territories in Asia. The
map given in figure 1 presents a rough time line of territorial acquisitions3, beginning with Taiwan,
acquired at the conclusion of the Sino-Japanese war in 1895. Japan invaded the Liaodong peninsula
during the Russo-Japanese war of 1904-1905, and by terms of the Treaty of Portsmouth retained
Liaodong peninsula and the southern portion of Sakhalin Island. In 1905 Japan declared Korea as a
protectorate, and completed the process of colonization by annexation in 1910. Japan supported the
Allies in World War I and was later rewarded with Germany‘s colonies in the Pacific (Palau, the Northern
Mariana Islands, the Marshall Islands, and the Federal States of Micronesia). Japan became increasingly
militaristic in the 1930s and 1940s, invading Manchuria in 1931 and occupying the remaining territories
in the south, from the Philippines to Indonesia and Indochina, during World War II.
Table 1 summarizes important aspects of pre-colonial land rights in Taiwan and Korea. The first
column repeats the salient features of the modern Japanese system: single owner; universal land
registration that is updated as transactions occur; titles linked to a central registration system; and
cadastral surveys (i. e. official boundary surveys). Other areas that became Japanese colonies might have
had single owners (Korea) but much of the land was either unregistered or the registers were outdated,
3

Japan acquired Okinawa, the Kuril and other islands from 1886 - 1895.

5

titles were not linked to a central system and surveys were based on landmarks. The systems in Taiwan
had similar problems and were even more complex than found in Korea with separate top-soil and subsoil owners.
Japanese colonial governments completed land surveys in Taiwan (1898 - 1905) and Korea (1911
-1918) by which land ownership was identified and registered. After the survey, registered land increased
by 215% in Taiwan (Ka 1995) and by 80% in Korea (Kwon 1989). The main purpose of these land
surveys was to facilitate tax collection, which was needed to offset costs of colonial administration. Two
years after the completion of the land survey, tax revenue increased more than three fold in Taiwan (Ka
1995) and two fold in Korea (Kwon 1989).
3. A Natural Experiment in Micronesia
One might suspect that we emphasize the completion of a land survey in Taiwan and South Korea
because these countries later became rich. In identifying the long-run economic effects of property rights,
one must consider the problem of reverse causality, i. e. secure property rights can be a result of economic
development.
Reverse causality is not an issue in the case of Palau, a Pacific island that enjoys three times the
GDP per capita ($7,600 in 2007) compared to other countries in Micronesia (the Marshall Islands, $2,900
and the Federated States of Micronesia, $2,300 in 2007). The case of Palau is illustrative because the
Pacific islands have quite similar initial economic conditions (isolated geographic location and extremely
limited land area) and a tradition of clan ownership.
Arguably Palau can be interpreted as an outcome of a natural experiment. Because of its
favorable geographic location – for observing British activities in New Guinea as well as American
activities in Guam and the Philippines – relative to other Japanese interests in the region, Palau became
the civil headquarters of Micronesia in 1922 (Mangefel and Caldwell 2005, 41). One might suspect that
Palau was chosen for its economic potential. This was not the case. Japanese evaluation of Micronesia in
1916 failed to mention economic potential (Purcell 1967, 153). As a matter of fact, during the German
era (1899 – 1914) the Marshall islands, which had abundant coconuts, was the economic center of
6

Micronesia, and Truk (a state of the Federated States of Micronesia) had a large population based on
favorable fishing conditions. Moreover, the Germans dug a canal and installed an undersea cable station
in Yap (a state of the Federated States of Micronesia next to Palau), but neglected development in Palau
(Etpison 2004).
In Micronesia, the Japanese colonial government first identified the boundaries between public
lands and private lands from 1923 to 1937. Then, Japan identified owners and boundaries of private lands
and made land registers in the Northern Mariana Islands from 1937 to 1939 and in Palau from 1939 to
1941 (Purcell 1967). However, in the Federated States of Micronesia and the Marshall islands, the
Japanese land survey, begun in 1941, was curtailed and eventually stopped by the onset of World War II
(Damas 1994, McGrath and Wilson 1971). Consequently, the Federated States of Micronesia and the
Marshall islands still operate under the clan ownership system.
Legal cases in Micronesia clearly show the legacy of the Japanese land registration system. From
1945-1981 Micronesian countries became the Trust Territory of the United States and during this era
courts consistently upheld land rights defined by the Japanese land survey in Palau. The American judges
consistently concluded that clans or lineages did not have any authority over private land. (Orrukem v.
Kikuch, Trust Territory Reports (T.T.R.) vol. 2, 533).4
In sharp contrast, in the Federated States of Micronesia and the Marshall Islands, American
judges were unable to find any basis or evidence of private land ownership and therefore customary land
law applied. In Micronesia land tenure was based on clan, lineage or group ownership and most
customary law allowed the chief to confiscate (customarily assigned) land if an individual violated village
traditions. Consequently, the courts allowed (or sometimes enforced) the confiscation of land if a
plaintiff provided clear evidence of violation of the customs by, for example, failing to attend important
village activities (for example, Amon v. Tobeke T.T.R. vol. 6, 36; Tamaggimed v. Bathin, T.T.R. vol. 2,
499; Phillip v. Carl, T.T.R. vol. 3, 330; Mita v. Piriska, T.T.R. vol. 3, 168). With the exception of Palau,
4

See also Ngiruhelbad v. Merii, Imesei, and Tarkong, T.T.R. vol. 1, 367; the opinion of the Appellate Division in
that action affirming the decision of the Trial Division, T.T.R. vol. 2, 631; the opinion in the case of Lusii Orrukem
v. Kikuch and Issak; Palau District Civil Action No. 194.

7

this kind of legal tradition remains in Micronesia. In Yap, Civil Action No. 2008-043 states that
―Generally, land titles in Yap … do not have the same meanings as land titles held elsewhere. … the titles
are generally subject to various conditions or interests whether or not the conditions or interests are
mentioned in the certificates of title‖ and the municipal judges can nullify land titles if the land owner
violates the traditional customs (Yap state government, Section 7 of Yap State Law 2-38).
One might suspect that other factors such as education, health or infrastructure investments that
were either unique or relatively more important to Palau led its economic growth. However, from 1945 to
1981, U. S. policy treated these countries as one political entity, the Trust Territory of the Pacific
Islands.5 In fact, Japan and the United States built and repaired roads, harbors, and airfields not only in
Palau but also in the Marshall Islands and the Federated States of Micronesia (Close up Foundation 2000,
Boecker 1993). Moreover, there was a large expansion of American-style education6 and significant
sanitation improvements in Palau, the Marshall Islands, and the Federated States of Micronesia after
1945. Economic growth, however, was robust only in Palau where Japan transferred its land tenure
system completely.
One can also study the relationship between secure land tenure and development within Palau.
Three of the 16 states in Palau – Aimeliik, Airai, and Ngardmau – lack the Japanese land registers
because they were apparently misplaced in storage or lost in transit to Guam (Trust Territory of the
Pacific Islands Office of Land Management, Note on Duplication 1967). Court records from 2000 to
2010 show that in Babledaob Island, where ten out of sixteen states are located, the three states lacking
the Japanese land registers have more disputes (58.9%) in issuing land certificates than other states
(27.2%) (table 2).
The relationship between the lack of a land register and low development is most clearly
observed in the state of Ngardmau, which sank from one of the most to the least developed states in Palau
after the land registers were lost. During the colonial era the state became relatively prosperous after the
5

Palau and the Marshall Islands voted for independence, declining to join the Federated States of Micronesia.
The U. S. navy estimated that about 90% of primary school age children were enrolled in schools and 95% of them
were attending in 1950s (Mangefel and Caldwell 2005).
6

8

Japanese opened bauxite mines. In the 1960s, many Japanese companies wanted to reopen the mines, but
the unclear boundary between public and private lands discouraged this (Petrosian-Husa, Miko, Smaserui
2002). Vague boundary and the slow process of land titling were the main obstacles to reopening the
mines and invigorating economic development.7
4. Comparison of Land Reforms
Comparing the traditional land tenure system of Taiwan during the Qing period and colonial land
tenure system of Taiwan during the Japanese colonial period helps to identify the relationship between
secure land tenure and economic development. According to Lin (2008), although the Qing government
supported economic development, its system had little success in attracting outside capital and modern
technology due to insecure and complex property rights. In southern China and Taiwan, custom
recognized top-soil and sub-soil rights. The former were permanent tenancy contracts that the community
recognized as a kind of property (the tenant leased the land for three or four generations). Both top-soil
and sub-soil rights could be leased. The dual owner system provided security for tenants, but made land
transactions and tax collection very difficult (Macauley 2009). Only the native Taiwanese could control
every aspect of complex property rights: multiple owners and potentially numerous rental contracts (Ka
1995).
From June of 1886 to December of 1889 (10 years before the Japanese occupation), a Chinese
general Liu Ming-chuang reformed the land tenure system of Taiwan, an effort that cost 426,635 ounces
of silver. Notably the general did not create an updating system to register land sales, new land
reclamation or other changes from that point onward. Consequently, this new system gradually lost its
effectiveness, as had happened with earlier reforms. Their priority was to determine which landowner
should be taxed under the new system (Lin 2008).
7

One may suspect that destruction during World War II might be the cause of slow development in Ngardmau,
which is one of the states on Babeldaob island. In 1947, the U. S. Geological survey evaluated Ngardmau‘s
potential for bauxite mining (Petrosian-Husa, Miko, and Smaserui 2002). They concluded that the principle asset
remaining were the roads and railway grades, which could be restored and used to good advantage. The water
mains, reservoirs, causeway, pier and also possibly the aerial tramway could be rehabilitated at moderate expense. In
Palau, war destruction was heaviest in the adjacent islands of Peleliu and Angaur, which were the only areas of
Palau the United States invaded.

9

In contrast, the Japanese colonial government introduced the modern, single owner, land tenure
system based on accurate cadastral surveys. Its total expenditures in surveying land and making registers
were about 4,230,905 ounces of silver (ten times of the expenses of Liu‘s reform; the original expenditure
was 5,357,188 yen; the annual budget of the traditional Taiwanese government was about 1 million yen).
More importantly, coupled with a series of land registry regulations, household registry rules, and other
administrative measures, the government could now record all changes in land distribution and household
composition (Lin 2008). In order to introduce a single ownership system, the Japanese colonial
government bought all sub-soil rights and gave legal title to top-soil owners, at a of about 2 million yen
(Ka 1995).
After the land reform, land yields and agricultural productivity increased by 81% from 1901
through 1938 (Lin 2008) and Taiwanese landlords who benefited from the land-tax reform continued to
save and to invest in commercial enterprises such as sugar and rice processing (Ka 1995). Moreover, a
large amount of Japanese capital flowed to Taiwan (Myers and Peattie 1984).
The comparison of Japanese and American land reforms in Micronesia also helps to indentify the
conditions crucial to success. Japan occupied Micronesia from 1919 to 1945 and the U. S. succeeded from
1945 to 1981. After occupation, Japan implemented a citizen identity system that included finger prints, a
land reform, and a tax reform, as they had done earlier in Taiwan and Korea. When Japan officially
occupied Micronesia in 1919, they conducted a complete census on October 1, 1920. In fact, Japan was
so adamant about accuracy, it was made a general rule to carry out the census twice and double-check the
results. Japan also introduced a system to register titles and update the register following transactions.
When the Japanese colonial government introduced land registration in Micronesia, they compensated or
planned to compensate chiefs. Consequently, Japan‘s land reform in Micronesia was more successful
than the one undertaken by Germany (occupied 1899 – 1914), which surveyed only prosperous areas such
as coconut and pineapple plantations, and prohibited land transactions.
In contrast, after occupying Micronesia, the U. S. faced difficulties in implementing an effective
citizen identity system and a land tenure system. The Trust Territory government clearly acknowledged
10

the critical roles of ‗land surveying‘ and ‗registration and updating‘ for secure land tenure. For example,
Trust Territory Policy Letter, P-1, clearly states ―the long range plan includes cadastral survey of all land,
registration of titles, and recording of all land transfers‖ (Wright 1947, 55). At the planning stage,
however, the government did not recognize the importance of citizen identity system. After the initiation
of land registration, the American promoters realized that ―Micronesians as a whole do not appreciate the
need for signatures and correct spelling of names‖ (Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands 1971, 23). The
first land registration project in Micronesia was abandoned by 1951 (McGrath 1971). In the 1970s, the
Trust Territory government reinstated a land reform, but its speed was painfully slow (McCutcheon
1981).
5. Land Surveys Contribute to Public and Private Finance
Generally it is easier for the government to tax land because it cannot be readily "hidden" as other
assets could be. However, effective land taxation requires registers and maps to identify parcels, as well
as a system linking taxpayers to the registers (Cho 2003). In many countries, land taxes are evaded
because the government cannot link the three together. Governments appoint local authorities to make the
links based on local information, giving them a percentage of the tax receipts as payment. This remedy is
imperfect, however, because principal-agent problems often lead to corruption.
Traditionally Asian countries had land registers, but given the lack of surveys and ownership
updates, the land registers were not very useful in collecting land taxes directly from the taxpayers. Sng
(2009) argues that it was difficult for the central government to increase tax revenues assigned to local
authorities because the poor usually shouldered a heavy tax burden. The Japanese land survey linked the
registers, maps, and taxpayers. Moreover, the Japanese colonial government also introduced a citizen
identity system in Korea and Taiwan as a way to control the population, but this facilitated tax collection
by identifying particular individuals as taxpayers. The Japanese colonial governments faced large budget
deficits during the land reform, but the new land tax system was cost effective and much more successful
than expected. The total cost of land reform in Taiwan was 5.3 million yen, but the annual land tax

11

revenue increased by 2 million yen.8 In Korea, the Japanese colonial government was able to decrease the
land tax rate from 3% (planned) to 1.5% as a result of higher-than-expected revenues. Finally, it should
be noted that stable tax revenue expands the state‘s ability to undertake public projects by selling bonds
(Furguson 2001). Government can issue bonds only if they have predictable tax revenue.
Interestingly, the solution of a public finance problem eventually was important for private
finance. Because land is immovable and everlasting, banks are more willing to accept it as collateral
relative to other assets that can be stolen, hidden, or readily destroyed. Tapping land as collateral,
however, is more difficult than one might expect. Legally, land ownership is an abstract concept and what
the seller of land owns and offers is ―the right to sell‖ (tenants and squatters have the right to use but lack
the right to sell). However, ―the right to sell‖ is justified only by the law (Simpson 1976). In most
cultures, traditionally land was considered to be held either directly or indirectly from the King.
Therefore to prove ownership the title had to be traced back to the original Crown grant (or state grant).
For example, in the U. S., title insurance links the deed through an unbroken chain to the original state
grant. Therefore, a centralized information exchange system such as a record of deeds or registration of
title is a very efficient way of proving ownership. Moreover, land ownership has a very special problem,
i. e. boundary disputes. Therefore, banks are more willing to accept land as collateral if secure title and
well-defined boundaries are part of a central ownership verification system. A land survey clarifies the
boundary and makes abstract land ownership more concrete and secure by reducing boundary disputes.
Experiences in Asia suggest that the following are effective links of a chain: land surveys, a
citizen identity system, land titles, recording of deeds or registration of titles, and acceptable collateral.
First, banks are reluctant to accept land titles as collateral if the document does not clearly specify the
boundaries. In developing countries, many land titles vaguely describe the boundaries, often based on
landmarks, not a cadastral survey. Thus, if the landmark is destroyed or moved, boundary disputes
follow. Without clear boundaries, the size and value of land is vague and consequently using land as
collateral becomes risky. For example, in Thailand 55 percent of land is held under a certificate of
8

The land tax revenue increased from 0.92 million yen in 1903 to 2.98 million yen in 1905.

12

utilization, which is a quasi-formal land title having rough boundaries, but banks do not accept this as
collateral. In Thailand, only 15 percent of land has a legal title based on a cadastral survey acceptable to
banks (Angus-Leppan and Williamson 1985).
Second, governments must provide a centralized ownership verification system. Korea‘s legal
history provides a good example. Prior to 1918 there was no official registration system and Koreans
could not register titles in land transactions. Before this step, the Japanese colonial government issued a
verification letter for land transactions. The law, however, implicitly stated that the letter did not
guarantee ownership to a third person (Cho 2003). Foreigners could buy land in Korea after 19059 and the
colonial government tried to promote land transactions by verification letters, but ownership was not fully
guaranteed. After the land survey, the registration-of-title system started and the law explicitly indicated
that the government guaranteed ownership of such land. Consequently, banks began to accept land titles
as collateral with more confidence.
Finally, it should be noted that a well established citizen identity system should be combined with
a centralized ownership verification system. In many cultures, people have multiple names for different
purposes. For example, in traditional Korea a man was given names at birth, as an adult, an official name
for governments, a name for the family history, and a nickname. Thus, the Korean government had
difficulty in identifying the owner of land from the name used on the traditional land register. Without a
system that identifies a person with a single name, land cannot be used as secure collateral.
At the time of Japanese conquest, Korea and Taiwan were heavily agricultural and land was the
most abundant asset. By accepting land as collateral, banks solved a problem of private finance. In
Korea, for example, Chosun bank – which played a major role in the 1910s – depended mainly on credit
collateral and faced many loan default problems in the 1920s, and thereafter decreased its credit loans. In
contrast, Siksan bank – which played a major role in the 1920s – required land as collateral and did not
face such problems (figure 2) (Oh 1996). After the official land registration system was operational,
access to credit became easier and interest rates declined. The total amount of collateralized loans from
9

The Japanese colonial government also introduced laws for house and land collateral in 1905.

13

banks increased in Korea (table 3) after 1918 and the total number of collateralized parcels of land
increased in Taiwan after 1905 (table 4) because land titles became reliable. After the Japanese land
survey and registration in Korea, the private interest rate decreased to 30% and kept falling over the next
20 years (figure 3a).10 A similar pattern is observed in Taiwan (figure 3b). Figure 2 shows that the total
amount of bank loans increased in Korea and figure 4 shows that value added in the financial sector
increased dramatically after the land survey was completed.
Various features of land tenure explain why land titling might have little impact on credit markets
in some cases. Many African countries do not require a clear boundary map in land titling (Dale 1976)
and fail to provide a centralized ownership verification system. It is worth noting that limited impacts on
credit markets are reported in land titling for squatters in urban areas (Field and Torero 2004, Galiani and
Schargrodsky 2006). Land titles issued to squatters are intrinsically less secure because ownership
disputes can occur between the original legal owners and squatters who obtained land titles (or ownership
can be restored to the original legal owners by political changes). In fact, Galiani and Schargrodsky
(2006) report disputes between the original legal owners and the government in the processes of land
titling and land expropriation from original legal owners. Thus, it is plausible that banks are less willing
to accept recently issued land titles to the squatters in the short run. Additional barriers to credit markets
originate from a poor citizen identity system, and lack of an updating system and a reliable centralized
ownership verification system.
6. Pathways between Property Rights and Economic Growth
Historical evidence suggests that good property defining institutions stimulate land transactions;
capital investment; lower interest rates through the development of financial markets; improve the inflow
of outside capital; and facilitate the transfer of technology.
On the first point, good property defining institutions facilitate land transactions and mortgaging.
A well established land registration system allows sub-division of land, which helps to match parcel size
with collateral needs. This might seem unimportant, except under many customs and laws, all of the
10

Traditionally, the private interest rate was about 50% in Korea.

14

collateralized property can be forfeited to the creditor, regardless of the difference between the value of
the property and the amount of the debt (Kim 2008). In addition, with effective land transactions, land
values tend to rise because the size of the market increases and resources are more likely to flow into their
highest valued use (Alston, Libecap and Mueller 1999).
Second, the inflow of outside capital is very sensitive to property defining institutions as
illustrated by the case of Hawaii. In Hawaii most land was owned by the government or a small number
of landlords. Before 1967, most people leased property for 55 years rather than buying the land and
houses (La Croix 1995). Consequently, mainland Americans were reluctant to invest in Hawaii because
the land tenure system was unfamiliar and perhaps subject to arbitrary change. Similarly, Etpison (2004)
explicitly describes that ―land title disputes scared off legitimate investors, and make high-end hotel
development a real challenge [in Micronesia].‖
Finally, transfer of technology is also sensitive to property defining institutions. Observers have
suggested, for example, that the collective land tenure system in Africa is an obstacle to adapting Western
irrigation technology, which operates most efficiently on a large scale. Collective ownership of land
complicates decision making by creating hold outs and assorted groups with diverse if not adversarial
interests. Customary (tribal) law, therefore, impedes the adoption of this complex and expensive
technology (Slabbers 1990).
The process of irrigation investment in Korea illustrates a clear pathway from a secure land
tenure system to economic development. According to Rhee et al. (1992) irrigation investment was
possible because the land survey clearly identified the boundaries and owner of the land. After the land
survey, the board for the new irrigation system could use the land register to identify and gain permission
from the relevant land owners.11 Moreover, the board could identify the land owners who needed
compensation resulting from making new reservoirs and water distribution ditches. When the permission
and compensation processes were finished, the relevant farmers could finance the cost for the new
11

In order to create a cooperative, the board was required to obtain permissions from a majority of land owners who
owned at least two-thirds of the land area. Free riding was not a problem in setting up the cooperative because large
landlords received the greatest benefit.

15

irrigation system by getting loans from banks. Banks founded by Japanese capital accepted land titles as
collateral and the farmers received a low interest rate (However, the irrigation investments were such big
projects that farmers often paid back their loans over twenty to thirty years).
After the completion of irrigation projects and subsequent adjustments12, agricultural productivity
in paddy land increased by 67 to 200 percent in Korea (Rhee et al. 1992).13 On average, there was a
drought every eight years (figure 5) and extremely severe drought every twenty five years in Korea (Rhee
and Cho 2005, Rhee 2009). Thus, it is clear why the farmers invested in the irrigation system when they
first obtained access to credit. After 1918 one can observe that agricultural loans increased (figure 6) and
the portion of land as collateral also grew (figure 7). The irrigation investments in Taiwan doubled the
quantity of arable land from 1898to 1940 (Ka 1995).
The case of Korea shows why the transfer of a western irrigation system is very difficult under
conditions faced in many African countries. Even though an irrigation project may be financed by
international organizations, the permission and compensation processes are stymied by the clan
ownership system.
7. Stylized Facts of Land Reforms
Why do many developing countries fail to implement a secure land tenure system that solves
public and private finance problems and leads to economic development? According to Simpson (1976)
―[Land registration] is a device which may [be] essential to sound land administration but
it is merely part of the machinery of government. It is not some sort of magical [device]
which will automatically produce good land use and development; nor is it a system of
land holding; it is not even a kind of land reform, though it may be a valuable
administrative aid to land reform. In short, land registration is only a means to an end. It
is not an end itself. Much time, money, and effort can be wasted if that elementary truth
be forgotten (Simpson 1976, 3).‖
Unfortunately, a review of the history of land reforms suggests that many governments either did not
learn or forgot this elementary truth, and thus waste much time, money, and effort.

12

Agricultural productivity does not increase immediately partly because micro-organisms in the soil must adjust to
more water.
13
Land reforms that led to irrigation investments and rising agricultural productivity are also reported in Botswana
(Machacha 1986) and Kyrgyzstan (Akramov and Omuraliev 2009).

16

The review identifies some stylized facts that underlie land reforms. First, the variable cost
function is convex, but most promoters of reform do not recognize this structure at the outset. Instead
they may anticipate a concave function because the administrative effort of registering a parcel of land
decreases with volume. The realized function, however, is convex because the most costly aspect is
surveying the boundaries, which increases convexly. In the example of figure 8, one can observe that the
number of boundaries to be identified increases by n2-2n where n is the total number of parcels. For
example, if there are 4 parcels of land, then the surveyor needs to identify 4 boundaries between 4 parcels.
However, for 9 parcels it is 12 boundaries and for 16 parcels it is 24 boundaries. In short, if the number
of parcels increases by one, then the number of boundaries to be identified increases by one or more.
Second, creating and implementing an updating system and a citizen identity system are very
difficult and costly. Governments understand the importance of an ownership updating system but
typically underestimate or do not want to bear the cost. The simplest (and cheapest) system periodically
resurveyed ownership by visiting the plot, as was done in China and Korea every five years. However,
the resurveyed register gradually lost its information value as transactions made it obsolete. Moreover,
given a principle-agent problem, government officials frequently copied and resubmitted the old land
registers rather than expending effort to resurvey ownership.
A record of deeds—sometimes called an abstract of title that shows the history of transactions-- is
a better system but also has limitations. Over time it may become obsolete unless ownership is
systematically verified after transactions occur.14 A central registration of titles is the most effective
system, but it was not implemented until the mid nineteenth century.15 A record of deeds and registration
of title require centralized recording, a systematic coordination system, and legal regulations that update
the validity of ownership. Moreover, transferring old records to a new system was not a simple task. In
14

A deed does not in itself prove title; it is merely a record of an isolated transaction. A deed does not confirm that
the parties were legally entitled to carry out the transaction and by itself does not prove the transaction valid. It
follows therefore that investigation of its validity and legal effect will still be necessary before any further
transactions can be safely conducted on the strength of it (Simpson 1976, 15).
15
A register of title is an authoritative record kept in a public office. The register is at all times the final authority
and the State accepts responsibility for the validity of transactions, which are affected by making an entry in the
register and only by this means (Simpson 1976, 15-16).

17

many cases the importance of a citizen identity system was not recognized until land reform was well
underway. Consequently, the unexpected high costs discouraged complete implementation of systems
that were critical for centralized ownership verification.
Third, the land reform usually changed the whole structure of a society, imposing political costs.
Most land reforms in developing countries created individual ownership from communally owned land,
which heavily affected not only current but future economic activities. This confronted traditions of
multiple or clan ownership.16 With the exception of the new registered owners, other traditional owners
of land lost use rights forever. Eliminating clan ownership meant that the chief – the political leader –
would lose his control in managing the clan‘s land. The experience in Yap in 1970s shows how the
political leaders fought the change and nullified the effect of land reform (Marksbury 1979). In addition,
landowners who were unsatisfied with the boundaries were against the land reform. The review suggests
that these political costs existed for colonizers but were much higher or difficult to overcome if
undertaken by traditional governments.17 Colonizers that succeeded in imposing land reform, such as
Japan, compensated the chiefs and other traditional land owners who lost land-use rights. 18
Finally, the review shows that whether a government is short-sighted or far-sighted is critical for
the success of a land reform. A short-sighted government can be defined as one that is interested in shortterm tax revenue. In contrast, a far-sighted government promotes long-run economic growth. For
example, the conflict between Pierre Poivre and the French mercantilists shows the different viewpoints
between the short-sighted and far-sighted government. From 1767 to 1772, Pierre Poivre served as
governor in Mauritius. He accurately estimated population and the island‘s natural resources and
instituted a land tribunal to survey and adjudicate concessions (Vaughan 2005, 69). ―Poivre brought the
island to self-sufficiency, in opposition to the prevailing mercantilist doctrine that colonies should be
exploited for the benefit of the mother country. By the time he left Mauritius in 1772, Poivre and his
16

In fact, the duality of ownership in land even existed in the sixteenth century England, as a way to avoid feudal
dues.
17
Many colonizers tried to implement land registration systems. For example, the first land register of England –
the Doomsday Book – was made by the William who conquered England in 1066.
18
Similarly, when the Hawaiian government introduced the land registration, the government compensated chiefs.

18

supporters were finding themselves outmaneuvered by mercantilist governors and ministers who were
more interested in short-term profits than long-term prosperity‖ (Maverick 1941).
When short-sighted governments realized it was very costly in the near term to survey, register
and update all land ownership, they restricted the process to prosperous areas. For example, the Germans
surveyed and registered only coconut and pineapple plantations in Micronesia and the British did the
same only for white settler‘s farm land in sub-Saharan Africa. Limited and isolated surveys required less
investment in boundary identification. Moreover, these limited surveys usually did not heavily depended
on creating an updating system, because transactions occurred infrequently or were prohibited by the
colonizers.
8. A Model of Land Reform
We construct a simple model based on the stylized facts. The goal is to understand the conditions
under which governments undertake effective land reforms that can promote long-run growth.
8.1. Cost and Revenue Functions of Land Reform
The cost function of a land reform is defined as follows:
Cost =
where

denotes a fixed cost of implementing land reform (

land by the land reform (

> 0),

> 0),

denotes total amount of registered

denotes the cost of creating an updating system (

denotes the cost of creating a citizen identity system (
denotes the degree of political dominance (

),

),

denotes a political cost, and
.

For simplicity, we assume a linear tax revenue function (the analysis is consistent with a concave
revenue function). The revenue function of the land reform is defined as follows:
Revenue =
where denotes tax rate (

),

denotes the average price of registered land, which is normalized

.

19

denotes tax revenue under the current taxation system, and
revenue that the government desires to collect.

denotes minimum tax

denotes the portion of valid information of the land

register in the following year. With the updating and identity systems

(all information in the land

register is valid and is linked to the taxpayers). Without two systems,

(the land register becomes

obsolete over time).

is the discount factor of the short-sighted government,

the far-sighted government, and

is the discount factor of

is one plus the rate of inflation. We assume that the average price of

registered land increases by the rate of inflation. For a simple calculation, we assume that the discount
factor of the far-sighted government is
assume that

for the deficit, but

area of land in the country,

for both of the tax revenue and the deficit. Moreover, we
for the tax revenue where

.

denotes the total

denotes the optimal level of land registration, and

denotes the

number of years required to complete the land reform, which is an increasing function of
that the government collects

before the completion of the land reform and collects

. We assume
after the

completion of the land reform.
8.2. Interior Solution of Short-sighted Government
Historically, land was the main source of wealth, thus the main source of revenue. When the tax
revenue under the current taxation system (
government desires to collect (

) becomes smaller than the minimum tax revenue that

), a government considers a land reform to increase its income.

The marginal revenue of land reform is and the marginal cost of land reform is
the existence of an interior solution, the short-sighted government chooses

. Assuming

(figure 9).

After determining the optimal level of land registration, the government considers three factors:
the cost, the budget deficit during the reform, and the increased revenue after completion. First, the cost
of land reform for the short-sighted government – only interested in a short term profit – is

20

because it is unwilling to spend much money for creating the updating system and the citizen identity
system and the discount factor of the deficit (
government during

) is

. Second, the deficit of the short-sighted

years of land reform is

Finally, the present value of increased tax revenue after the completion of land reform is,

because the discount factor of tax revenue (

) is

.

The short-sighted government completes the land reform if

and

In other words, the expected profit of the land reform should be positive and the annual deficit of the
government during the land reform should be lower than the deficit tolerance level of the government.
Otherwise, the government stops the land reform.
The first condition explains why the colonial governments or conquerors are more likely to
implement land reforms than traditional governments. The degree of political dominance (

) of

colonizers is more likely to be larger than that of traditional governments because military power
accompanied colonization. Moreover, the tax revenue from the old system (
21

) for a colonizer can be,

in effect, zero. Thus, the first condition is more likely to be satisfied. In addition, the colonial government
cannot but endure the deficit after the colonization.
Two conditions of the land reform also explain why the short-sighted government is less likely to
create the updating and identity systems. Creating two systems increases the costs of land reform
significantly, increasing the annual deficit. Moreover, the government is very likely to face higher
political costs due to the loss of political support after the initiation of the land reform. Thus, even if the
government realized the importance of those two systems after the initiation of the land reform, it is
unable to impose those two systems.
8.3. The Corner Solution of the Far-sighted Government
A far-sighted government is interested in long-term growth, and thus creates both the updating
system and the citizen identity system, if it realizes the importance of those systems.
The cost of land reform of the far-sighted government is

However, the revenue structure from the land reform depends upon the package adopted. The updating
and identity systems continuously validates the land register and taxpayers ( =1). Sng (2009) argues that
increasing tax revenue for traditional governments is very difficult due to a principle-agent problem.
Under a corrupt tax collection system operated by local authorities, the poor shouldered heavy burdens
and a riot could ensue if the government imposed higher tax rates. With the updating and identity
systems, the government can collect revenue directly from taxpayers. Therefore, the tax system becomes
relatively fairer and the government is effectively able to grow tax revenue by the rate of inflation.
The present value of revenue of the land reform is

In other words, after the completion of the land reform, the government‘s real tax revenue does not
decrease over time. In this case, the conditions of performing the land reform are

22

and

The first condition is always satisfied even though
government registers all land (

is very large. Thus, the

) to maximize the real tax revenue (figure 9). In addition, the

review of land reforms indicates that the updating system works more efficiently when all land is
registered. The government, however, endures a larger deficit for a longer period of time in the interim.
8.4. Tax Rate and Discount Factor
In the previous section, the tax rate is assumed to be exogenous. Experience in Asia, however,
suggests that after the completion of the land reform, the far-sighted government is able to lower its tax
rates because the registered land in the corner solution is larger than that of the interior solution (
). In this section, we assume that the probability of a riot is an increasing function of the tax rate and
the discount factor of the government is a function of the probability of a riot. In other words, a high tax
rate decreases the discount factor of the government. For example, we may suppose that

where
government, if

denotes the tax rate that government will not face any riot. For the far-sighted
, then, the discount factor of the far-sighted government becomes

.

In contrast, the tax revenue of the short-sighted government keeps decreasing over time as the land
register becomes obsolete. When the tax revenue becomes less than its minimum spending level (

),

the short-sighted government needs to increase its tax rate, suggesting that the government faces a higher

23

probability of potential resistance and becomes more short-sighted over time (or the government becomes
more arbitrary in taxation to increase its tax revenue).
9. Empirical Estimation: Two State Least Squares
In this section, we estimate the long-term effects of good property defining institutions. We
address reverse causality by using instrumental variables that measure the degree of institutional transfer.
We argue that whether Japan conducted and completed a formal land survey is a valid instrument because
the Japanese occupation and the completion of the land surveys were determined opportunistically, and
Japan abruptly lost all of its colonies after World War II.19 We maintain that the new property defining
institutions (i.e. Japanese land tenure system) persisted. In fact, the current land tenure systems of
Taiwan, South Korean, and Palau are based on Japanese land surveys. For example, in South Korea the
original Japanese land registers are still in daily use (Gragert 1994). Consequently, the completion of a
Japanese land survey affects current GDP per capita only through institutions of land rights.
In Asia, secure land tenure systems are found not only in Taiwan, Korea, and Palau, but also in
Hong Kong and Singapore. In the latter cases the British colonial government transferred institutions of
land rights. These historical facts enable us to extend the scope of institutional analysis and provide a
consistent explanation for the origins of economic growth in Asia.
Hong Kong and Singapore began as British colonies, with British legal and administrative
systems. Both are densely populated cities and land is a scarce resource. However, less well known is the
fact that the state owns all the land in Hong Kong, and four-fifths of the land in Singapore (Phang 2000).

Japan‘s early interest in Taiwan, Korea, and Palau had little to do with industrial potential. Taiwan was acquired
largely for reasons of honor and prestige from the Sino-Japanese War. In 1895 Taiwan was viewed ―as unimportant
to China and as quite abhorrently un-Chinese‖ (Hong and Murray 2005, 61). In fact, the Chinese general Li
Hongzhang, who ceded Taiwan to Japan, informed the Emperor that the loss was trivial because it was a land of
brigands, murderers, and pirates (Hong and Murray 2005). Korea was acquired largely because Japan felt that
another power having a military presence on the peninsula would have been detrimental to Japanese national
security. At that time Korea was described as "a dagger pointed at the heart of Japan." Also, it is clear that Japan
was not able to predict the division of Korea in 1945 and the consequent poor economic performance of North
Korea. Japan occupied Micronesia including The Northern Mariana Islands and Palau because the British requested
them to attack the German naval bases in Asia during World War I. Finally, Japan‘s loss of all colonies after World
War II makes the end of occupation an exogenous event in the colonies.
19

24

In Hong Kong and Singapore, the governments own and lease property. If the leasing contracts
provided good property defining institutions for land, then we can apply the analysis of land tenure to
these places. The following excerpt from Phang (2000) shows that British colonial leases, in fact were
secure.
The British government, on taking over Hong Kong Island in 1841, recognized
immediately the importance of controlling land. In 1843, it proclaimed that all land
belongs to the Crown and that the government would not allow any private ownership of
land. Leases were sold at public auctions or granted directly for the payment of an annual
rent. Enforcement powers for land use decisions are found in the Building Ordinance and
contractual powers in Crown leases.
In 1826, English statutes in force on November 26, 1826, and the principles of common
law and equity were received as part of the law in Singapore. This meant that English
doctrines of tenure and estates operated in Singapore. (Phang 2000)
In contrast, the British occupied India, Bangladesh, Pakistan, and Sri Lanka for an extended
period, but their colonial government failed for some time to transfer the British land tenure system. A
history of Sri Lanka's cadastral survey clearly shows that the British failed to transfer its land tenure
system.
After the occupation of the country by the British, several attempts had been made for the
establishment of a cadastre based on cadastral surveys. The proclamation by Governor
North in the year 1800 for land owners to appear before the 'Land raad' (a judicial
official) to produce evidence of title and get their lands surveyed was the first attempt.
This failed.
Systematic cadastral surveys commenced in three sub urban villages within the capital
Colombo itself based on an Act passed in 1877 for the purpose. However, this activity
was abandoned in 1891, after three years of operation, mainly due to the high costs
involved. Subsequent attempts in the form of several studies, recommendations and draft
acts prepared for the purpose did not borne fruit.
There is at present, what can be described as, a limited cadastre. About eighty percent of
the country is covered by village plans prepared by the Surveyor General demarcating
State (Crown) land. These plans are [...] prepared after 1910.
Source - Cadastral Template, Country report: Sri Lanka (2003)
http://www.cadastraltemplate.org
As the above excerpt shows, the British colonial government attempted to implement a modern
land tenure system in Sri Lanka, but it failed in 1800, and failed again in 1891 due to the high cost.
Although the British occupied Sri Lanka for 153 years, the British colonial government could not transfer
25

the crucial British institutions (i. e. the land tenure system based on cadastral surveys) for 114 years. Thus
a huge difference existed between Sri Lanka and the two city-states, Hong Kong and Singapore.
Considering this difference, we suggest two more instruments. The first is whether a country is a
city-state (CITY) that has a small land area to survey and register. The second instrument is the number
of years of British occupation after the successful introduction of the British land tenure system
(REVISED LENGTH OF BRITISH OCCUPATION), which is directly related to the transfer of a land
registration system and operational experience. For example, if we count the number of years of British
occupation in Sri Lanka after 1910 (when the village plans enabled a limited cadastre), REVISED
LENGTH OF BRITISH OCCUPATION for Sri Lanka is 39 years. Since most of the countries clearly
recorded when the laws for the land tenure system were enacted, REVISED LENGTH OF BRITISH
OCCUPATION can be calculated with less concern of subjectivity (See appendix 2).
By using the completion of a Japanese land survey, whether a country is a city-state, or revised
length of British occupation as instruments, we can estimate the impact of institutions on economic
growth without concern for reverse causality and measurement errors of institutional quality. Table 5
contains the basic information on 30 former Japanese and British colonies in Asia. Thailand, a Southeast
Asian country that did not experience any colonial occupation, is also included in the regression.20 Data
on the log of GDP per capita (Purchasing Power Parity) are taken from the CIA World Fact Book (2007),
which covers all of the Pacific Islands. The World Bank and IMF's GDP per capita (PPP) figures,
however, are very similar to the CIA World Fact Book estimates.
We consider various measures of current institutional quality assembled under the auspices of the
World Bank (Kaufmann, Kraay, and Mastruzzi 2007). The World Bank's governance indicators provide
annual measures of six institutions, which we averaged over the years 1996-2007:
A. Voice and Accountability; B. Political Stability & Absence of Violence/Terrorism; C. Government
Effectiveness; D. Regulatory Quality; E. Rule of Law; F. Control of Corruption.

20

Since Japan colonized only parts of China and Russia, those countries are excluded (robustness checks are
discussed later).

26

Measure E, Rule of Law – measuring perceptions of the extent to which agents have confidence
in and abide by the rules of society, and in particular the quality of contract enforcement, property rights,
the police, and the courts, as well as the likelihood of crime and violence – is used as the main measure of
institutions. The other measures are used to check for robustness, which is confirmed.
In this paper, we replicated the methodology of Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2001) who
emphasized property protecting institutions, because one of our main purposes is showing that property
defining institutions are equally important in the long run. However, we use instruments that are directly
related to the property defining institutions (i. e. LAND SURVEY, CITY, or REVISED LENGTH OF
BRITISH OCCUPATION) to avoid pitfalls of weak instruments. Mortality rates and population density
that are relevant to migration and transfer of institutions are not used as instruments because we believe
land is a more fundamental and concrete determinant than those two variables, given that most migrants
were farmers.21 For example, Ferguson (2003) clearly describes that ―the lure [of migration] was the
offer of 160 acres of virgin real estate in Saskatchewan, free of charge.‖ The history of Japanese
migration also indicates that the land was the most important motivating factor (Purcell 1967).
The first task is to estimate the relationship between institutions and GDP per capita, for which
we use the following specification:
LGDP = a1 + a2 INSTITUTION + a3 PACIFIC ISLAND + e

(1)

where LGDP is the log GDP per capita (PPP in 2007) of the country, INSTITUTION is the governance
indicator of the country (E. Rule of Law; high score denotes secure property rights in the standard normal
distribution setting), and PACIFIC ISLAND equals one if the country is a Pacific island, zero otherwise.
The specification is motivated by work of Hall and Jones (1999) who maintain that institutions
are the primary and fundamental determinant of economic growth. This conviction is based in part on the
finding that human capital and physical capital explain a modest portion of cross-country differences in
productivity. They observe, for example, that of the 35-fold difference in output per worker between the

21

REVISED LENGTH OF JAPANESE OCCUPATION is not used because its correlation with LAND SURVEY is
0.974

27

United States and Niger, only a factor of 1.5 is explained by physical capital and only a factor of 3.1 is
explained by human capital. The remaining difference - a factor of 7.7 – is a productivity residual.
The Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) regressions are given in table 6. As can be seen,
INSTITUTION and PACIFIC ISLAND are significant at the 1% level.
Next, we address the reverse causality and measurement error problems using the completion of a
Japanese land survey, whether or not the entity is a city-state, and revised length of British occupation as
instruments for estimating the degree of institutional transfer. We also use the length of British
occupation for a comparison. The equations for the first stage are as follows:
INSTITUTION = b1 + b2 LAND SURVEY + b3 PACIFIC ISLAND
+ b4 CITY + u

(2a)

INSTITUTION = c1 + c2 LAND SURVEY + c3 PACIFIC ISLAND
+ c4 REVISED LENGTH OF BRITISH OCCUPATION + t

(2b)

INSTITUTION = d1 + d2 LAND SURVEY + d3 PACIFIC ISLAND
+ d4 LENGTH OF BRITISH OCCUPATION + n

(2c)

where LAND SURVEY equals one if the Japanese colonial government completed a land survey in the
country, CITY equals one if a country is a city-state, REVISED LENGTH OF BRITISH OCCUPATION
is the number of years of British occupation of the country after the successful introduction of the British
land tenure system, and LENGTH OF BRITISH OCCUPATATION is the number of years of British
occupation.
The first stage regression results are given in table 7. In order to check the strength of
instruments, this paper uses four weak instrument tests suggested by recent econometric studies: 1) Shea's
Partial R-squared (a weak instrument test, low R-squared means weak instruments); 2) Anderson's
Canonical Correlation LM statistic (an under-identification test, H0: under-identified); 3) Stock-Yogo
statistics (a weak instrument and size distortion test); and 4) Sargan statistics (an over-identification test,
H0: instruments are valid). These tests suggest that LAND SURVEY, CITY, and REVISED LENGTH OF
BRITISH OCCUPATION are valid instruments.
28

As can be seen in table 6, the effect of institutions is greater in the 2SLS regression if LAND
SURVEY and REVISED LENGTH OF BRITISH OCCUPATION are used as instruments (regression
results are similar when LAND SURVEY and CITY are used). The coefficient on institutions from the
OLS estimates is 1.102 (significant at 1% level) and from the IV estimate is 1.421 (significant at 1%
level). A Hausman test confirms that there is a systematic difference (at 5% level) between OLS and IV
estimates.22 This empirical result is consistent with the findings of Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson
(2001) who focus on property protecting institutions and shows that property defining institutions were
important in Asia.
Our empirical results also indicate that the methodology suggested by Hall and Jones (1999) and
Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2001) should be adopted with caution. For example, using LENGTH
OF BRITISH OCCUPATION, which is possibly related to property rights institutions may lead to a
different conclusion. Here, we suggest that focusing on property defining institutions is a better strategy
in finding reliable instruments.
10. Concluding Remarks
The historical record provides an excellent laboratory for study of institutions and economic
growth, but existing work tends to exclude Asia and focuses on property protecting institutions.
Japan began to establish a secure land tenure system in the late sixteenth century and completed
the process in 1873. Its colonial governments transferred the Japanese land tenure system to Taiwan and
Korea – two growth miracles – and Palau – a leading economy in the Pacific. Abundant and reliable data
in Asia from the early twentieth century allow us to identify the mechanism linking property defining
institutions to economic growth. Instrumental variable estimates suggest that secure property rights
stimulated economic growth.

22

The regression result is roughly similar when we control for the length of American, French, German, Portuguese,
Spanish occupation in Asia. However, those colonizers were not effective in transferring their land tenure systems
(the coefficients are insignificant and very close to 0 in the first stage), thus we did not control for other colonizes in
the main regression. Also, Stock, Wright, and Yogo (2002) report that a combination of strong and weak
instruments can be weak.

29

Historical analysis shows that a thorough land tenure system solves a public finance problem by
linking land registers, maps, and taxpayers. Moreover, the solution to a public finance problem spills
over to private finance. A proper land survey defines boundaries and registration of titles enables banks to
readily verify ownership. Because land is the most abundant asset in agricultural economies, its
collateralization can provide a major boost for financial markets that nurture economic development. In
Asia, a secure land tenure system combined with financial market developments encouraged investment,
promoted new technology such as irrigation systems, and consequently increased agricultural
productivity.
The identified pathways in Asia suggest that property defining institutions were a major stimulus
to economic development. Although property defining institutions and property protecting institutions are
closely related, we think the reverse causality problem is less severe in property defining institutions. The
motivation of land reform was solving a budget deficit and raising tax revenue. In order to solve the
budget problem, the government surveyed available assets such as land and population. The survey and
updating system made the economy of country more manageable by the government. Historical and
political viewpoints on the emergence of modern nation-states also emphasize increasing the taxation
capacity of governments (Tilly 1990, Furgerson 2001, and Besley and Persson 2009).
Our review of the history of land reforms suggests that success requires a clear understanding of
the importance of clear boundary lines, the citizen identity system, and the ownership updating system.
The analytical model shows that a far-sighted land reform is more costly than the short-sighted version
but solves the long-term problem of public finance. The review suggests that the skills to establish and
maintain a secure land system are a form of institutional capital.

30

References
Statistics on Land Registration in Taiwan (臺灣土地登記集計表). 1915
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson. 2001. The Colonial Origins of Comparative
Development: An Empirical Investigation. The American Economic Review 91 (5): 1369-1401.
———. 2002. Reversal of Fortune: Geography and Institutions in the Making of the Modern World
Income Distribution. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 117 (4): 1231-1294.
Akramov, Kamiljon T. , and Nurbek Omuraliev. 2009. Institutional Change, Rural Services, and
Agricultural Performance in Kyrgyzstan. IFPRI Discussion Paper 00904.
Alchian, Armen A., and Harold Demsetz. 1973. The Property Right Paradigm. The Journal of Economic
History 33 (1):16-27.
Alston, Lee J., Gary D. Libecap, and Bernardo Mueller. 1999. Titles, conflict, and land use : the
development of property rights and land reform on the Brazilian Amazon frontier Ann Arbor:
University of Michigan Press.
Angus-Leppan, P. V., and I. P. Williamson. 1985. A Project for Upgrading the Cadastral System in
Thailand. Survey Review 28:2-14.
Asao, Naohiro. 1991. The Sixteenth-Century Unification. In The Cambridge History of Japan, edited by
G. Editors. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Banerjee, Abhijit, and Lakshmi Iyer. 2005. History, Institutions, and Economic Performance: The Legacy
of Colonial Land Tenure Systems in India. The American Economic Review 95 (4): 1190-1213.
Besley, Timothy, and Torsten Persson. 2009. The Origins of State Capacity: Property Rights, Taxation,
and Politics American Economic Review 99 (4):1218–44.
Boecker, Rebecca Reid. 1993. Yap State History: Yap State Department of Education.
Boucher, Stephen R., Bradford L. Barham, and Michael R. Carter. 2005. The Impact of "MarketFriendly" Reforms on Credit and Land Markets in Honduras and Nicaragua. World Development
33 (1):107-128.
CIA. 2007. The World Factbook. Washington D.C.: CIA.
Close Up Foundation. 2000. Micronesia: A Guide through the centuries. Alexamdria: Close Up
Foundation.
Cho, Sukgon. 2003. Hankuk Geundae Tojijedoui Hyungsung (in Korean). Seoul: Haenam.
Dale, P. F. 1976. Cadastral Surveys within the Commonwealth. London: Her Majesty's Stationery Office.
Damas, David. 1994. Bountiful Island: A Study of Land Tenure on a Micronesian Atoll. Waterloo:
Wilfrid Laurier Unversity Press.
Demsetz, Harold. 1967. Toward a Theory of Property Rights. The American Economic Review 57
(2):347-359.
Do, Quy-Toan, and Lakshmi Iyer. 2008. Land Titling and Rural Transition in Vietnam. Economic
Development and Cultural Change 56:531-579.
Duus, Peter. 1976. The Rise of Modern Japan. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Engerman, Stanley L., and Kenneth L. Sokoloff. 2002. Factor Endowment, Institutions, and Differential
Paths of Growth among New World Economies: A View from Economic Historians of the United
States. In How Latin American Fell Behind, edited by S. Harber, 260-304. Stanford: Stanford
University Press.
———. 1997. Factor Endowments, Inequality, and Paths of Development among New World Economics.
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper Series No. 9259.
Etpison, Mandy T. 2004. Palau - Cultural History. Koror: Tkel Corp.
Feder, Gershon, Tongroj Onchan, Yongyuth Chalamwong, and C. Hangladoran. 1986. Land Policies
and Farm Productivity in Thailand. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Ferguson, Niall. 2003. Empire: The Rise and Demise of the British World Order and the Lessons for
Global Power. New York: Basic Books.
———. 2001. The cash nexus : money and power in the modern world, 1700-2000. New York: Basic
Books.
31

Field, Erica, and Maximo Torero. 2004. Do Property Titles Increase Credit Access among the Urban
Poor? Evidence from Peru.
Galiani, Sebastian, and Ernesto Schargrodsky. "Property Rights for the Poor: Effects of Land Titling."
2006.
Gragert, Edwin H. 1994. Landownership under Colonial Rule: Korea’s Japanese Experience, 1900-1935.
Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press.
Hall, Robert E., and Charles I. Jones. 1999. Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much More Output Per
Worker Than Others? The Quarterly Journal of Economics 114 (1): 83-116.
Hong, Keelung, and Stephen O. Murray. 2005. Looking through Taiwan: American anthropologists'
collusion with ethnic domination. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.
Hori, Kazuo. 1982. Colonial Industrial Finance and Economic Structure - Analysis of Korean Colonial
Industrial Bank. Korean Economic History Association.
Joo, Ikjong. 2005. Financial Industry and Other Services. In Economic Growth in Korea 1910-1945 (in
Korean), edited by N. Kim. Seoul: Seoul National University Press.
Ka, Chih-ming. 1995. Japanese Colonialism in Taiwan: Land Tenure, Development, and Dependency,
1985-1945. Oxford: Westview.
Kaufmann, Daniel, Aart Kraay, and Massimo Mastruzzi. 2007. Aggregate and Individual Governance
Indicators 1996-2007. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 4654: 803-832.
Kim, Jaeho, and Ki-joo Park. 2004. Nogchon Yijayoolui Janggi Byundong, 1742 - 1953. In Suryang
Kyungjesarobon Chosun Hugi (in Korean), edited by Y. Rhee. Seoul: Seoul National University
Press.
Kim, Seong-Hak. 2008. Ume Kenjirō and the Making of Korean Civil Law, 1906-1910. The Journal of
Japanese Studies 34 (1): 1-31.
Kwon, Tae-Uk. 1989. Iljeui Chosun Chimryaksa (in Korean).
La Croix, Sumner J. 1995. The Political Economy of Urban Land Reform in Hawaii. Urban Studies 32
(6):999-1015.
La Porta, Rafael, et al. 1998. Law and Finance. The Journal of Political Economy 106 (6): 1113-1155.
———. 1997. Legal Determinants of External Finance. The Journal of Finance 52 (3): 1131-1150.
Lin, Wen-Kai. 2008. Land Property and contract in Taiwan: During the Qing and Japanese Colonial
Period.: Unpublished manuscript.
Macauley, Melissa. 2009. A World Made Simple: Law and Property in the Ottoman and Qing Empires. In
Shared Histories of Modernity: China, India & Ottoman Empire, edited by H. Islamoglu and P.
C. Perdue. New Delhi: Routledge.
Machacha, B. 1986. Botswana's Land Tenure: Institutional Reform and Policy Formulation. In Land
Policy and Agriculture in Eastern and Southern Africa, edited by J. W. Arntzen, L. D. Ngcongco
and S. D. Turner. Tokyo: The United Nations Unversity.
Mangefel, John A., and Michael F. Caldwall. 2005. A Caroline island cultural perspective on disability:
the six history of education in the Federated States of Micronesia. Quezon City: Centralbooks.
Marksbury, Richard. 1979. Land Tenure and Modernization in the Yap Islands, Anthropology, Tulane
University.
Maverick, Lewis A. 1941. Pierre Poivre: Eighteenth Century Explorer of Southeast Asia. The Pacific
Historical Review 10 (2):165-177.
McGrath, William A., and Scott W. Wilson. 1971. The Marshal, Caroline and Mariana. In Land Tenure in
the Pacific, edited by R. G Crocombe. London: Oxford University Press.
McCutcheon, M. S. "Resource Exploitation and the Tenure of Land and Sea in Palau." University of
Arizona, 1981.
Myers, Ramon H., and Mark R. Peattie. 1984. Japanese Colonial Empire 1895-1945. Cambridge:
Princeton University Press.
North, Douglass C. 1990. Institutions, Institutional Change and Economic Performance. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
North, Douglass C., and Barry R. Weingast. 1989. Constitutions and Commitment: The Evolution of
32

Institutional Governing Public Choice in Seventeenth-Century England. The Journal of Economic
History 49 (4):803-832.
Nunn, Nathan. 2008. The Long-Term Effect of Africa's Slave Trades. The Quarterly Journal of
Economics 123 (1): 139-176.
Oh, Duhwan. 1996. Economic Development and Finance of Korea in the Colonial Period. Kyungsang
Nonjip 10:165-189.
Perosian-Husa, Carmen C. H., Melson Miko, and Moline Smaserui. 2002. Inventory of Cultural and
Historical Sites and Collection of Oral History Ngardmau State: Bureau of Arts and Culture Historic Preservation Office, Republic of Palau.
Phang, Sock-Yong. 2000. Hong Kong and Singapore. Journal of Economics and Sociology 59 (5): 337352.
Purcell, David Campbell. 1968. Japanese expansion in the South Pacific, 1890-1935.
Rhee, Younghoon. 2009. Hankukui Yuksa Tonggye.
Rhee, Younghoon and Youngjoon Cho. 2005. 18-19 Segi Nonggaui Gagye Gyesheung Chuyi, Gyungje
Sahak, 39.
Rhee, Younghoon, Siwon Jang, Hiroshi Miyajima, and Takenori Matsumoto. 1992. Hankuk Guendae
Suri Johap Yongu. Seoul: Iljogak.
Simpson, S. Rowton. 1976. Land Law and Registration. London: William Clowes & Sons, Limited.
Slabblers, P. J. 1990. Western and Indigenous Principles of Irrigation Water Distribution. In Design for
Sustainable Farmer Managed Irrigation Scheme in Sub-Saharan Africa.
SMERU, Research Team. 2002. An Impact Evaluation of Systematic Land Titling under the Land
Administration Project (LAP). In SMERU Research Report.
Sng, Tuan-Hwee. 2009. Agency Problem and Dynastic Decline: The Case of Late Imperial Chian 17001850: Unpublished Manuscript.
Stock, James H., Jonathan H. Wright, and Motohiro Yogo. 2002. A Survey of Weak Instruments and
Weak Identification in Generalized Method of Moments. Journal of Business & Economic
Statistics 20 (4): 518-529.
Tilly, Charles. 1992. Coercion, Capital and European States, AD 990-1992. Cambridge: Blackwells.
Trust Territory of Pacific Islands. 1969 - 1989. Trust Territory reports: containing opinions of the High
Court of the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands, Appellate and Trial Divisions. Vol. 1 - 6.
Oxford: Equity Pub. Corp.
Trust Territory of Pacific Islands: Office of the High Commissioner and Dept. of the Interior United
States. 1971. Annual report, Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands to the Secretary of the Interior.
Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands Office of Land Management. 1967. Note on Duplication.
Vaughan, Megan. 2005. Creating the Creole Island: Slavery in Eighteenth-Century Mauritius. Durham:
Duke University Press.
Wakita, Osamu. 1991. The Social and Economic Consequences of Unification. In The Cambridge History
of Japan, edited by G. Editors. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Wright, C. H. 1947. Trust Territory Policy Letter P-1. Department of High Commissioner of the Trust
Territory of the Pacific Island. Washington D. C.
Yap State Government. 2008. Yap Civil Action No. 2008-043.
Yap State Government. Yap State Law 2-38 Section 7.

33

Figure 1. Japanese Colonies and a map of Micronesia

Figure 2. Total amount of loan and the decomposition of loan amount by banks

Source. – Oh (1996)

Figure 3a. Public and Private interest rates (%) in Korea, 1910 – 1944

Source. – Kim and Park (2004)
Note. – Public interest rate: Chosun, Siksan, Botong; Private interest rate: Daegeum, Youngam(chaip),
Youngam(1), Youngam(2); Inflation was high in early 1920s due to aftermaths of World War I.
Figure 3b. Public and Private interest rates in Taiwan, 1903 – 1945
0.3
0.25

利率

0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0

1945

1942

1939

1936

1933

1930

1927

1924

1921

1918

1915

1912

1909

1906

1903

年
台中 (個人)

嘉義 (個人)

台中 (日本勸業銀行)

嘉義 (日本勸業銀行)

吳 (1995)

Source. – Olds (2010)
Note. – Private interest rate: 個人; Public interest rate: 日本勸業銀行, 吳; Inflation was high in early
1920s due to aftermaths of World War I.

Figure 4. Value-added by Year in Finance Services in Korea
(Unit: Thousand Yen)

Source. – Joo (2005)
Note. – Sub-total of valued added in finance services including special banks, commercial banks, oriental
reclamation company, financial cooperative, moneylenders and pawnshops, stock exchange, trusts,
other financial companies

Figure 5. Rainfall 1770-1910 in Korea

Source.– Rhee (2009)
Note.– 100% denotes the average rainfall from 1770 to 1990. Drought is defined as 50% of the average
rainfall from April to June. Flood is defined as more than 200% of the average rainfall from July to
September.

Figure 6. Purpose of Loans

Source. – Oh (1996)
Note. – In order to prepare World War II, Japan focused on industrial investments in the late 1930s in
Korea.

Figure 7. Decomposition of Collateral in Korea

Source. – Oh (1996)
Note. – Loans for industrial investments in the late 1930s were given without collateral because it was
given for World War II preparation.

Figure 8. The number of boundaries to be identified
1
2
3
4
Total number of boundaries between parcels = 4 (the number segments of solid lines)

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Total number of boundaries between parcels = 12

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
Total number of boundaries between parcels = 24
If the number of parcels increases by 1, then the number of boundaries to be identified increases by 1 or
more.

Figure 9. Costs and Benefits of Land Reforms

Table 1. A comparison of land tenure systems
Country
Japan
(1873)
Ownership
Single owner

Land register

Updating system

Official registers
(100% of land was
registered)
Yes;
Registers were updated
and connected to
taxpayers

Title

Official titles;
All titles were linked to
a centralized system

Boundary (map)

Taiko survey (1590s);
Cadastral survey (1873)

Tax system

Based on the value of
land;
Payable in money;
Uniform tax rate

Source. – Duus (1976), Lin (2008), Rhee et. al. (2004)

Korea
(before 1918)
Single owner

Official registers for tax
(50% of land was
registered)
No;
Registers were
outdated and not
informative to indentify
taxpayers
Official and private title;
Private titles were not
linked to a centralized
system
Boundary was
described vaguely
based on landmarks
Based on the size of the
harvest;
Payable in rice;
Tax rate varied locally

Taiwan
(before 1905)
Multiple owner
(sub-soil owner, top-soil
owner)
Official registers for tax
(30% of land was
registered)
No;
Registers were
outdated and not
informative to indentify
taxpayers
Official and private title;
Private titles were not
linked to a centralized
system
Boundary was
described vaguely
based on landmarks
Based on the size of the
harvest;
Payable in rice

Table 2. Disputed and undisputed cases in issuing land titles in Babeldaob 2000 – 2010
Disposed
Pending
Disposed + Pending
Disputed

Undisputed

Disputed

Undisputed

Disputed

Undisputed

Total

% of Disputed

States with the Japanese land registers in Babeldaob island
Ngchesar
Ngaremlengui
Ngarchelong
Ngaraard
Melekeok
Total

17
11
46
24
5
103

50
14
154
234
15
467

16
2
7
57
7
89

29
7
5
4
3
48

33
13
53
81
12
192

79
21
159
238
18
515

112
34
212
319
30
707

29.5
38.2
25.0
25.4
40.0
27.2

19
1
1
21

98
31
23
152

67
11
28
106

165
42
51
258

59.4
73.8
45.1
58.9

States without the Japanese land registers in Babeldaob island
Airai
Aimeliik
Ngardmau
Total

4
24
4
32

48
10
27
85

94
7
19
120

Source. – Palau Land Court
Note. – Two states that have fewer than five cases are excluded.

Table 3. Total amount of collateralized loan (collateral type: land) in Korea, 1918 – 1930
(Unit: 1,000 yen)
Collateralized (land) regular loan

Collateralized (land) Short-term loan
Total

Siksan

Dongchuk

Geumjo

Choeun

Siksan

Botong

1918

6,621

11,371

1,253

5,049

3,320

6,590

34,204

20

28,216

30,571

10,639

12,037

5,820

17,557

104,840

22

61,326

37,927

18,128

19,438

12,426

28,164

177,407

24

70,075

39,806

18,749

21,417

14,813

32,253

197,113

26

83,817

35,609

25,518

17,003

15,520

36,033

213,600

28

110,399

38,743

25,642

9,070

16,669

34,429

234,952

30

140,120

44,430

38,076

20,538

8,996

46,423

298,583

Source. – Hori (1982)
Note. – 1) Siksan, Dongchuk, Geumjo, Choeun, and Botong are the names of financial institutions.
2) The formal land survey was completed on November 1918.

Table 4. Land transaction in Taiwan (Collateralization / Sales)
Year
Parcels of land registered as
Parcels of land registered as changing
collateral in Taiwan
hands through sales in Taiwan
1905
4848
4499
1906
43731
51137
1907
38040
62043
1908
39798
64210
1909
46279
68466
1910
54474
74815
1911
53718
86286
1912
67335
151125
1913
83341
121328
1914
92130
93759
Source. – Statistics on Land Registration in Taiwan (臺灣土地登記集計表) (1915)
Note. – Registration began in July of 1905.

Table 5. Former Japanese Colonies and British Colonies, Descriptive statistics
Country
GDP
INSTITUTION PACIFIC JAPANESE CITY LENGTH OF
REVISED
per capita
ISLAND
LAND
BRITISH
LENGTH OF
($, PPP)
SURVEY
OCCUPATION
BRITISH
OCCUPATION
in 2007
Bangladesh
1300
-0.84
0
0
0
172
44
Brunei
51000
0.47
0
0
0
93
86
Cambodia
1800
-1.10
0
0
0
0
0
Cook Islands
9100
0.84
1
0
0
83
81
Fiji
5500
-0.14
1
0
0
97
96
Hong Kong
42000
1.25
0
0
1
157
155
India
2700
0.12
0
0
0
191
44
Indonesia
3700
-0.79
0
0
0
5
0
Kiribati
3600
0.43
1
0
0
88
44
Laos
2100
-1.06
0
0
0
0
0
Macau
28400
0.67
0
0
1
0
0
Malaysia
13300
0.51
0
0
0
128
76
Marshall Islands
2900
-0.18
1
0
0
0
0
Federated States
of Micornesia
2300
0.21
1
0
0
0
0
Myanmar
1900
-1.46
0
0
0
60
29
Nauru
5000
0.73
1
0
0
52
41
Pakistan
2600
-0.81
0
0
0
105
44
Palau
7600
0.64
1
1
0
0
0
Papua New Guinea
2000
-0.86
0
0
0
77
2
Philippines
3400
-0.45
0
0
0
2
0
Singapore
49700
1.68
0
0
1
141
134
Solomon Island
1900
-1.05
1
0
0
80
10
South Korea
24800
0.73
0
1
0
0
0
Sri Lanka
4100
0.02
0
0
0
153
39
Taiwan
30100
0.81
0
1
0
0
0
Timor Leste
2500
-0.97
0
0
0
0
0
Tonga
5100
0.15
1
0
0
71
54
Tubalu
1600
1.28
1
0
0
88
44
Vanuatu
3900
0.07
1
0
0
37.5
6
Vietnam
2600
-0.53
0
0
0
0
0
Thailand
8200
0.20
0
0
0
0
0
Source. - CIA World Factbook (2007), Kaufmann, Kraay, and Mastruzzi (2007)

Table 6. OLS and 2SLS regression
Dependent variable: LogGDP per capita
OLS
instruments: LAND SURVEY
PACIFIC ISLAND
CITY
INSTITUTION (B)
1.102**
(S.E)
(.149)
PACIFIC ISLAND
-.929**
(S.E)
(.250)
Adj R-square
0.6534
Weak Instruments Tests
Shea Partial R-square in the 1st stage
Anderson canonical correlation LM statistic
H0: Under-identified (p-value)
Cragg-Donald Wald F statistic
Stock-Yogo weak ID test critical values:
10% maximal IV size
15% maximal IV size
20% maximal IV size
25% maximal IV size
Sargan statistic
H0: Instruments are vaild (p-value)
Number of observations
31
NOTE. - * p < .05; ** p < .01

1.449**
(.228)
-1.064**
(.268)
0.4642
14.389
(0.0008)
11.695
19.93
11.59
8.75
7.25
0.243
(0.6223)

2SLS
LAND SURVEY
LAND SURVEY
PACIFIC ISLAND
PACIFIC ISLAND
REVISED LENGTH OF
LENGTH OF BRITISH
BRITISH OCCUPATION
OCCUPATION
1.421**
1.122**
(.222)
(0.303)
-1.053**
-.937**
(.264)
(.260)
0.4766
14.776
(0.0006)
12.294
19.93
11.59
8.75
7.25
0.311
(0.5770)
31

0.2199
6.817
(0.0331)
3.806
19.93
11.59
8.75
7.25
2.36
(0.1245)
31

Table 7. First stage regression
Dependent variable: INSTITUTION
LAND SURVEY
PACIFIC ISLAND
CITY
REVISED LENGTH OF BRITISH OCCUPATION
LENGTH OF BRITISH OCCUPATION
R-squared
Shea Partial R-square
F statistics (partialed out)
Number of observations
NOTE. - * p < .05; ** p < .01

(2a)
.978*
(.373)
.650**
(.236)
1.669**
(.385)
0.4835
0.4642
11.69**
31

(2b)
1.236**
(.380)
0.384
(.226)
0.012**
(0.003)
0.5053
0.4776
12.29**
31

(2c)
1.126*
(.474)
0.450
(.278)
0.005*
(0.002)
0.2626
0.2199
3.81*
31

Appendix 1. Japanese Occuapation
Country
JAPANESE OCCUPATION PERIOD
BRITISH OCCUPATION PERIOD
Brunei
1941.12.22-1945.6.10
1888 - 1984
Cambodia
1945.3.9-1945.8.15; troop 1940.9.22-1945.8.15
China
1932-1945 (Manchuria)
Hong Kong
1941.12.25-1945.8.15
1841-1997
India
1945 (Andaman and Nicobar Islands)
1757-1947
Indonesia
1942.3.8-1945.8.17
1811-1816
Kiribati
1941.12.9-1943.11.23
1892-1979
Laos
1945.3.9-1945.8.15; troop 1940.9.22-1945.8.15
Macau
1943.8-1945.8.14
Malaysia
1942.1.31-1945.9.11
1826-1957
Marshall Islands
1914.10.3-1944.2
Micornesia
1914.10.7-1944.2
Myanmar
1942.8.1-1945.5.3
1886-1948
Nauru
1942.8.26-1045.9.13
1914-1920
Palau
1914.10.8-1944.10.11
Papua New Guinea
1942.1.21-1944.8
1914-1921
Philippines
1942.1.2-1945.10.14
1762-1763
Russia
1918-1927 (Sakhalin)
Singapore
1942.2.15-1945.9.11
1819-1963
South Korea
1910.8.29-1945.8.15
Taiwan
1895.5.8-1945.10.25
Timor Leste
1942.2.20-1945.9.11
Tubalu
1941.12.9-1943.11.23 (not occupied)
1892-1979
Vietnam
1945.3.9-1945.8.15; troop 1940.9.22-1945.8.15
Note. - Kiribati and Tubalu were the same country (Gilbert and Ellice Islands) in the 1940s. Japan did not occupied Ellice Islands (Tubalu)

Appendex 2. British occupation dates and the year of introducing the British land tenure system
Country
Date (BRITAIN)
Year Law, Survey, or Committee
Brunei
1888 - 1984; autonomy 1959
1909 The Land Code
Saunders (1994), A History of Brunei, p.114-115
Cook Islands
1888-1900
1891 To settle disputes about Land (Aitutaki) - IC.
Crocombe (1964), Land Tenure in the Cook Islands
Fiji
1874-1970
1876 The Real Property Ordinance (Torrens Systems)
http://www.cadastraltemplate.org/fielddata/a4.htm
1875 The very first Department of Lands and Immigration was established
Hong Kong
1841-1997
1844 The Land Registration Ordinance
http://www.cadastraltemplate.org/fielddata/a4.htm
India
1757-1947
1904 The recommendation of the 1904 Committee of Govt.
Mishra, Cadastral surveys in India: A critique; http://www.gisdevelopment.net/application/lis/policy/lisp0001.htm
Kiribati
1892-1979; 1877 British jurisdiction
1936 The first Lands Commission
From Tuvalu; Kiribati and Tuvalu were the same country until 1975
Malaysia
1826-1957
1879 Introduction of the Torrens system
http://www.cadastraltemplate.org/fielddata/a4.htm
Myanmar
1886-1948
1907 The Settlement and Land Records Department
http://mission.itu.ch/MISSIONS/Myanmar/e-com/Agri/expind/agri-index/myanmar.com/Ministry/agriculture/Organi/slrd.htm
Nauru
1914-1920; 1921-1968 Australia
1928 The Nauru Lands Committee; Given legislative backing in 1956
MacSporran (1995), Land Ownership and Control in Nauru
Papua New Guinea 1884-1906; 1906-1971 Australria
1969 Surveying Ordinance
3rd FIG Regional Conference for Asia and the Pacific; http://www.fig.net/pub/jakarta/programme.htm
Curley and Boydell (2004), The Regulation, Registration and Representation of Surveyors in the Pacific Islands Countries
Singapore
1819-1963
1826 English statutes in force
Phang (2000), Hong Kong and Singapore
Solomon Island
1893-1978
1969 The Land and Titles Act
Sullivan (2007), Recognition of Customary Land in the Solomon Islands
Sri lanka
1796-1948
1910 village plans
http://www.cadastraltemplate.org/fielddata/a4.htm
Tonga
1900-1970
1927 An Act Relating To Land
Seminar on “Good Governance in Land Tenure and Administration”, Country Report Tonga; http://www.usp.ac.fj/index.php?id=7061
Tuvalau
1892-1979
1936 The first Lands Commission
Seminar on “Good Governance in Land Tenure and Administration”, Country Report Tuvalu; http://www.usp.ac.fj/index.php?id=7061
Vanuatu
1906-1980
1974 A Land Trust Board
Burlo (1989), Land Alienation, Land Tenure, and Tourism in Vanuatu

