                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




A REVEALED PREFERENCE APPROACH TO MEASURING HUNGER AND UNDERNUTRITION

                                           Robert T. Jensen
                                           Nolan H. Miller

                                         Working Paper 16555
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w16555


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2010




  We would like to thank Katie Naeve, Frank Mou, Dulles Wang and Fan Zhang for research assistance.
  We gratefully acknowledge financial support from the National Institute of Aging, the William F.
  Milton Fund at Harvard Medical School, the Dean’s Research Fund at the John F. Kennedy School
  of Government, the Center for International Development at Harvard University and the Hefner China
  Fund. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
  of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

  NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
  reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
  NBER publications.

  © 2010 by Robert T. Jensen and Nolan H. Miller. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
  exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
  © notice, is given to the source.
A Revealed Preference Approach to Measuring Hunger and Undernutrition
Robert T. Jensen and Nolan H. Miller
NBER Working Paper No. 16555
November 2010
JEL No. I32,O12,Q18

                                              ABSTRACT

Caloric intake and minimum calorie thresholds are widely used in developing countries to assess hunger
and nutrition, and to construct poverty lines. However, it is generally recognized that the sufficiency
of an individual's caloric intake cannot be determined, due to: a lack of consensus on the true thresholds;
the fact that any such thresholds are individual-varying and unobservable; imperfect nutrient absorption;
and the weak and non-monotonic empirical relationship between calories and wealth. We propose
a revealed preference approach to measuring hunger and undernutrition that overcomes these challenges.
Low caloric intake is associated with a large utility penalty (e.g., physical discomfort). The corresponding
high marginal utility of calories causes a utility-maximizing consumer to primarily consume the cheapest
available source of calories (a staple). Once they have surpassed subsistence, the marginal utility of
calories declines significantly and they substitute towards foods with higher levels of non-nutritional
attributes (e.g., taste). Thus, though any individual's requirements are unobserved, their choice to switch
away from the staple reveals they are above that requirement. Accordingly, the percent of calories
obtained from the staple can be used to indicate nutritional sufficiency. We also provide an application
for China that shows the desirable empirical properties of this approach.


Robert T. Jensen
UCLA School of Public Affairs
3250 School of Public Affairs Building
Box 951656
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1656
and NBER
robertjensen@ucla.edu

Nolan H. Miller
College of Business
University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign
4033 BIF
515 East Gregory Drive
Champaign, IL 61820
and NBER
nmiller@illinois.edu
                                          I. INTRODUCTION

        Caloric intake and minimum calorie thresholds are widely used in assessing well-being,
hunger and undernutrition in developing countries. For example, many governments and
international organizations directly track the fraction of a population meeting recommended
calorie thresholds. Similarly, the United Nation's first Millennium Development Goal includes
halving hunger, defined as the proportion of individuals falling below a calorie threshold.
Additionally, most developing countries explicitly define their poverty lines as the level of
income or expenditure at which households on average achieve a minimum calorie threshold
(see Ravallion 1992a, 1994 and Deaton 1997, 2006). Overall, a considerable amount of
attention, effort and resources are devoted to assessing and addressing the problem of low
caloric intake. This is a natural priority in countries where deprivation is great and where there
may even be relatively recent histories of famine.
        While energy intake is certainly an important component of nutrition, there are several
significant problems in using it to assess hunger or undernourishment. First, despite
considerable research effort, there is no consensus at all on what the correct minimum or
subsistence calorie threshold is, how it should be computed, or even whether such a threshold
exists (see Dasgupta 1995 and Svedberg 2000 for summaries). Second, any required or
recommended threshold would vary considerably across individuals (and for the same
individual over time), and depend on a range of characteristics such as age, sex, height, weight,
health status, level of physical activity, lean and muscle body mass, fitness level, stress levels
and basal metabolic rate. The fact that many of these characteristics are unobservable or too
difficult to measure in practice adds to the challenge in creating and applying such thresholds.1
As Svedberg (2000, p. 24) writes, “It is universally agreed that standardized calorie norms
cannot be used to identify undernutrition in the individual person … .”
        A third problem for assessing nutrition via caloric intake is that not all nutrients
consumed are absorbed before leaving the body. This problem is particularly pronounced in
poor countries where health is poor and there is a high incidence of diseases such as diarrhea
that can impair nutrient absorption. And even in the absence of disease, the efficiency of
absorption will vary considerably across individuals based on both observable and

1
 Ravallion (1992b) attempts to deal with the problem of unobserved, varying requirements by using statistical
dominance tests of distributions. However, this does not solve the problem of setting a threshold.


                                                                                                           1
unobservable characteristics. This makes it even more difficult to assess whether an individual
has attained their minimum threshold; they might appear to be consuming far more than their
"true" need, but absorbing only a fraction of that amount.2
        Overall, given that energy need and absorption vary considerably across individuals and
for a given individual over time, including in unobservable ways, and given the lack of
consensus over whether threshold needs exist or can be measured, it is extremely difficult to
assess sufficiency by means of comparing caloric intake to a required threshold.3
        A final challenge to calorie-based indicators of well-being is raised by the large
literature estimating the income elasticity of demand for calories (Strauss and Thomas 1995,
Deaton 1997). As incomes rise, households often choose to substitute towards foods with
higher non-nutritional attributes (e.g., taste), rather than emphasizing additional calories, even
at low levels of wealth or nutritional status (though elasticity estimates vary considerably
across studies). Such behavior reveals that consumers' desire to increase calories is often
weaker than their desire to improve other aspects of their meals. Further, our previous work
shows that highly impoverished households in China responded to price subsidies on staple
foods such as rice and wheat by substituting away from these cheap sources of calories (Jensen
and Miller 2011). Thus, even with a policy where the substitution effect should have further
encouraged greater caloric intake, we found no evidence that calories increased, and may have
actually declined. This is all the more striking given that individuals were originally consuming
on average 20−40 percent fewer calories than the recommended level. Finally, recent evidence
from both China and India indicates that despite decades of significant economic growth,
average caloric intake has actually decreased and the fraction officially undernourished has
increased (Deaton and Drèze 2008, Zhai et al. 2007, Meng et al. 2008). These results further
call into question whether the recommended calorie thresholds are relevant and whether
calories can provide the basis for a meaningful indicator of nutrition or welfare.

2
  This also adds to the problem of establishing minimum nutritional thresholds, since it will not be possible to
relate true nutrient absorption to any outcome appropriate for setting such thresholds (such as health).
3
  While one might then suggest that a threshold is not needed and that gains in nutrition simply be measured
through net or average changes in caloric intake (either for individuals or at the aggregate level), cut-offs are
needed to actually define and measure undernutrition or hunger, and to construct poverty lines. Net gains in
calories for an individual or average gains for a population tell us nothing about changes at the bottom of the
distribution, or whether someone has moved beyond their minimum needs. Further, without a threshold, it is not
possible to assess undernourishment at the individual level, which is needed for example to examine patterns or
covariates of hunger or undernutrition. Finally, thresholds are widely used in practice for communicating levels
and trends of nutritional status and for evaluating programs.


                                                                                                               2
           In this paper, we propose a new measure of nutritional sufficiency or hunger based on
consumer behavior and revealed preferences, without the need for minimum calorie thresholds.
The core of our approach derives from the fact that when a person is below their calorie or
subsistence threshold (or subsistence range, since there may be no true, single threshold), this
imposes a significant disutility, including the familiar physical sensations of hunger, headaches,
pain, dizziness, loss of energy, inability to concentrate, etc., that goes away after the threshold
is met. These adverse sensations have a physiological and biochemical basis that are directly
determined by the level of nutrients in the body.4 Because the marginal utility of additional
calories is so high when calorie-deprived, a utility-maximizing consumer who cannot afford to
meet their caloric needs will largely choose foods that are the cheapest available source of
calories, typically a staple like cassava, rice or wheat, in order to minimize the disutility of
hunger. However, if their income increases to the point where they are able to relieve their
hunger, the marginal utility of calories declines significantly and they will begin to substitute
towards foods that are more expensive sources of calories but that have higher levels of non-
nutritional attributes such as taste or variety. Thus, while the subsistence threshold or range is
individual-varying and unobservable, the consumer’s choice to switch away from the cheapest
source of calories reveals that their marginal utility of calories is low, and that they have
surpassed subsistence.5 In this setting, the percent of calories consumed from the staple food
source, or the staple calorie share (SCS), can be used as an indicator for nutritional sufficiency.
           SCS offers several advantages over calories in assessing nutritional sufficiency. First, as
noted, it avoids the problem of individual-specific and unobserved subsistence thresholds, since
a consumer's food choice will reveal when they have attained sufficiency. Second, it accounts
for imperfect absorption, since the biochemical basis and physical sensation of hunger is
regulated by available nutrient levels, which is determined by absorption, not consumption.
Thus, a person consuming more calories than needed but absorbing fewer than needed will still
act (in terms of food consumption patterns) as though they are calorie deprived. SCS also has
the appeal of being consistent with revealed consumer preferences and behavior and therefore
has intuitive public policy appeal. Caring about increasing caloric intake only to the extent that
consumers do (or to the extent that the marginal utility of calories is high) is arguably all a


4
    In particular, the liver and the lateral hypothalmus are responsible for the sensation of hunger and satiation.
5
    In fact, a high marginal utility of calories might be the most appropriate definition of hunger.


                                                                                                                      3
policy-maker should do, and potentially all they can do (since the literature shows that
consumers with a low marginal utility of calories may not increase caloric intake even when
encouraged to do so via price subsidies). This also switches the emphasis from calories, which
consumers do not maximize, to utility, which presumably they do. This is not only arguably a
better public policy goal in general, but even more appropriate given the difficulty in assessing
how many calories people really need. Relying on a consumer's behavior provides a better
indicator of how highly they value additional calories.
       In addition to its basis in consumer behavior, we also show that in practice, for a given
set of food choices and prices, it is possible to compute an SCS "threshold" that identifies when
an individual has moved beyond their region of high marginal utility of calories. The approach
uses a version of the minimum cost diet problem that closely approximates actual consumption
behavior among the poor, and that also takes into consideration protein needs that are as
relevant for health and the sensation of hunger as calories (Svedberg 2000). And significantly,
the threshold is very stable with respect to the factors that affect the level of caloric need (age,
height, weight, activity level, etc.), i.e., it is relatively "need neutral" compared to calories. In
essence, though a person who is younger, taller, heavier, more active, etc., may need twice as
much calories and protein as someone who is older, smaller, lighter and sedentary, calorie and
protein needs grow nearly proportionately. So the combination of foods that will achieve those
needs at minimum cost is largely invariant to scale. Thus, a very tight range of SCS values can
serve to identify hunger across all individuals, regardless of their attributes.
       Finally, we explore SCS patterns using household-level data from China. The data
reveal a clear, sharp threshold for SCS in wealth as predicted by our model. This threshold also
corresponds closely to that predicted by our diet minimization problem. Using this threshold
yields an estimate of undernourishment or hunger that is half of that estimated by the traditional
method using a minimum calorie threshold. The clear SCS threshold can also be used to
construct a poverty line for China, just as is currently done using calories. We also show that
SCS provides a better nutrition-based indicator of recent welfare improvements in China than
calories; SCS shows clear improvements over a 10 year period of high economic growth, while
the level of calories declined and the percent below the recommended threshold increased.
       Although it has numerous advantages, SCS will suffer from some of the same problems
that plague other nutrition-based indicators such as calories, such as ignoring other nutrients, or


                                                                                                   4
whether the body adjusts to long term deprivation. Two other limitations of SCS are that it is
less sensitive to the depth of deprivation than calorie-based indicators, and that it relies on the
assumption that households follow minimum cost diets when they are at very low levels of
wealth. Despite these concerns, SCS provides numerous advantages and can serve as a useful,
complementary indicator of hunger and/or well-being alongside calories.
        The remainder of this paper proceeds as follows. In section II, we provide a simple
model of consumption that motivates the use of SCS as a measure of nutritional sufficiency,
and discuss strengths and weaknesses of SCS. Section III provides an application of SCS using
data from China, and Section IV concludes.

                                 II. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
II.A. Model
        In this section, we briefly develop a theoretical model of how SCS might be expected to
vary with wealth, especially as the consumer’s wealth decreases to a point where it is difficult
to maintain subsistence consumption. This model helps motivate how SCS can help detect the
subsistence threshold or range.
        One approach to this problem would be to model consumers as facing both a budget
constraint and a subsistence constraint, i.e., requiring the caloric content of the bundle of goods
the consumer chooses to be above a certain threshold. However, subsistence requirements are
not physical constraints. Consumers can, and indeed do, choose consumption bundles that do
not meet their subsistence needs. The reason why consumers do not choose such points when
bundles that meet their needs are affordable is because of the adverse consequences of choosing
a bundle that does not meet subsistence needs. Because of this, we adopt the approach of
modeling consumers as if they face a utility penalty for letting caloric intake6 drop below
subsistence, where the size of the penalty increases as caloric intake drops.
        Specifically, we consider a consumer with a utility function over goods x1 and x2 of the
following form:
                                  v  x1 , x2   u  x1 , x2   f  c1 x1  c2 x2  s  ,




6
 When computing SCS thresholds later, we add protein intake as an additional factor affecting utility, consistent
with the emphasis in the nutrition literature on both calories and protein as the two most important nutrients.


                                                                                                               5
where x1 and x2 represent quantities of two goods, c1 and c2 represent the caloric content of a
unit of x1 or x2, respectively, and s is a constant that captures subsistence calories. The utility
function u(x1,x2) is an ordinary utility function. To facilitate the analysis, we will assume that
u(·) is homothetic. Among other things, this implies that the marginal rate of substitution
between goods x1 and x2 depends only on their ratio, x1/x2. In other words, we assume that, to
the extent that the consumer varies the proportion of the two goods as his wealth changes, this
is driven entirely by subsistence concerns.
       Function f   represents a penalty function. We assume that f   is decreasing and

convex. Letting z = c1x1 +c2x2 – s, we further assume that f '  z  increases to zero as z increases

above zero and decreases to negative infinity as z decreases below zero. Thus, for example,
f   could be a shifted hyperbolic curve. Figure 1 sketches a typical curve, f   .

                                               penalty
                                   f(z)




                                                                   z




                              FIGURE 1. THE PENALTY FUNCTION


       When the consumer is sufficiently wealthy, f '  z  will approach zero, and so the

consumer behaves approximately as if he maximizes u  x  subject to the budget constraint.

However, when wealth is so low that the consumer cannot easily afford a bundle with z > 0, the
penalty function becomes important. A sufficiently impoverished consumer will behave
approximately as if he maximizes calories subject to the budget constraint. For intermediate
wealth levels, the consumer will blend these two polar cases.
       Let good 1 be the staple good. The defining characteristic of the staple is that it is the
cheaper source of calories available to the consumer. Hence we assume:



                                                                                                   6
(A1)    Good 1 is the staple, c1/p1 > c2/p2.


where p1 and p2 are the prices of the two goods. Denoting the consumer’s exogenous wealth as
w, formally the consumer chooses x1 and x2 to solve:
                                        max x1 , x2 0 u  x1 , x2   f  c  x  s 
                                        s.t. p  x  w
Assuming an interior solution, the first-order conditions for the problem are given by:

                                    ui  x1* , x2*   ci f '  c  x*  s    * p1  0 ,

where λ is the Lagrange multiplier on the budget constraint, ui(x) denotes the partial derivative
with respect to xi, and asterisks denote optimized values of the variables. Combining the first-
order conditions for goods 1 and 2 gives:
                                          u1  x*   c1 f '  c  x*  s                         p1
                                                                                                     ,   (1)
                                         u2  x   c2 f '  c  x  s 
                                                        *                           *
                                                                                                   p2

the standard condition equating the marginal rate of substitution between the goods with the
ratio of their prices.7 Further rearranging this equation gives:
                                   u1  x*                 p1  c2 c1 
                                                                 f '  c  x*  s  .                (2)
                                   u2  x   *
                                                           p2  p2 p1 

        In the standard problem (without subsistence concerns represented by f(·)), the
consumer’s optimal bundle solves:
                                                              u1  x NS                p1
                                                                                          ,              (3)
                                                              u2  x   NS
                                                                                       p2

where “NS” denotes that these values are optimal when there are no subsistence concerns.
Hence the additional term on the right-hand side of (2) captures the impact of subsistence
concerns. When caloric intake is below s, f '(cx* – s) is large and negative. Since (c2/p2 – c1/p1)
< 0, equation (2) implies that:
                                                               u1  x*             p1
                                                                                
                                                               u2  x   *
                                                                                   p2

7
  Note that as caloric intake declines, the left-hand side of (1) approaches c1/c2, which is greater than p1/p2 by
assumption (A1). Thus, a sufficiently impoverished consumer will be driven toward the corner solution where x1 >
0 and x2 = 0. The remainder of the analysis extends this basic point.


                                                                                                                7
         The assumption of homotheticity implies that u1(x) / u2(x) is constant along rays from
the origin, and u1(x) / u2(x) declines as x1/x2 decreases. Hence if
                                              u1  x*   p1 u1  x 
                                                                  NS

                                                                     ,                              (4)
                                              u2  x*  p2 u2  x NS 

then x1*/ x2* > x 1NS/ x 2NS. And, when there are only two goods, the share of calories from good
1 increases as x1/ x2 increases. Hence, subsistence concerns increase the staple calorie share.
         Equation (4) establishes that the presence of subsistence concerns increase the staple
calorie share. In the absence of subsistence concerns, the consumer’s optimal bundle solves (3),
which, slightly rearranged, gives
                                                u1  x NS        u2  x NS 
                                                                               .
                                                     p1               p2
The consumer sets the marginal utility of spending another dollar equal across the goods. In the
presence of subsistence concerns, this becomes:
                          u1  x*   c1 f '  c  x*  s        u2  x*   c2 f '  c  x*  s 
                                                              
                                         p1                                         p2
Now, the effect on total utility of spending another dollar on good i consists of the usual
marginal utility, ui(x) /pi, and the marginal reduction in the penalty per dollar, − cif '(cx* – s) / pi.
Since c1/p1 > c2/p2, increasing expenditure on good 1 reduces the penalty more than increasing
expenditure on good 2. Hence, introducing subsistence concerns causes the consumer to
increase expenditure on good 1 relative to good 2, which, in turn, increases the staple calorie
share.
         The preceding analysis shows that the consumer’s staple calorie share is greater when
there are subsistence concerns than when there are not. This result can be extended to show that
the SCS of the consumer’s optimal bundle increases as his wealth decreases. The intuition is
that the poorer the consumer gets, the more pressing the subsistence concerns become. And, as
subsistence concerns become more salient, the consumer rebalances his optimal bundle to
contain relatively more of the staple good. Letting SCS(w) = c1x1(w) / cx(w), where x(w) =
(x1(w), x2(w)) denote the solution to the consumer’s problem when wealth is w, the following
proposition formalizes this intuition:




                                                                                                            8
Proposition: SCS(w) decreases in w.
   Proof: Since u(x) is homogenous, let r(w) = x1(w)/x2(w), and g(r) = u1(x(w))/u2(x(w)).
   Homogeneity of u(x) implies that g(r) is decreasing in r. That is, as x1/x2 increases, u1/u2
   decreases. The consumer’s budget constraint is:
                                             p1 x1  p2 x2  w ,

   which, in terms of r = x1/x2 and x1 is:
                                                        w
                                              x1             .
                                                     p1  p2r
   In terms of r and x1, (2) becomes:

                                       p1  c2 c1 
                            g r           f '  x1  c1  c2 r   s  ,
                                       p2  p2 p1 

   and eliminating x1 yields:

                                       p1  c2 c1   w  c1  c2 r     
                            g r           f '                  s.
                                       p2  p2 p1   p1  p2 r          
   Noting that r is a function of w, differentiating with respect to w and solving for r'(w)
   yields:
                                    c    c  c  c r   w  c1  c2 r  
                                    2  1  1 2  f ''                 s
                                     p2 p1  p1  p2 r   p1  p2 r       
               r ' w                                                             0.         (5)
                                      c2 c1  w   c1   w  c1  c2 r  
                         g '  r                      f ''            s
                                      p2 p1  p1  p2 r   r   p1  p2 r     
   That r'(w) is negative follows from the numerator of (5) being positive and the denominator
   being negative.
       Since r'(w) < 0, the ratio of x1 to x2 increases as wealth decreases. Staple calorie share is
                                                  c1 x1           1
                                   SCS                                  ,
                                             c1 x1  c2 x2       c2  1 
                                                               1  
                                                                 c1  r 

   and the latter expression clearly decreases in r. Hence SCS is decreasing in wealth. ■


       Thus, when consumers face subsistence concerns, the share of calories they receive
from the staple good increases as their poverty increases (i.e., w decreases). Figure 2 depicts a
typical Engel curve for this consumer. When wealth is high, the ratio of the consumer’s
demand for the two goods, x1*/x2*, approaches x1NS/x2NS, the ratio of the goods the consumer


                                                                                                      9
would choose if he did not face subsistence concerns. As wealth decreases and the consumer’s
budget constraint shrinks toward the subsistence-calorie level, x1*/x2* decreases even further.
As subsistence concerns become extremely important, the consumer shifts his demand almost
entirely to the staple good, x1.

                          x2                x1/x2 = x1NS/x2NS



                                                                  x1*/x2*



                                                                f(x) = c


                                                                       x1
              FIGURE 2: CONSUMPTION CHOICE AS A FUNCTION OF WEALTH


Figure 3 plots the staple calorie share (SCS) associated with preferences such as have been
discussed. Again, at high levels of wealth, SCS is relatively stable. As wealth decreases toward
the point where it is just possible to attain subsistence calories (labeled w*), SCS increases
rapidly. When wealth is well below w*, SCS is once again stable, only at a high level. This
level may be quite close to one, if consumers try to maximize caloric intake even though they
cannot obtain subsistence. However, it may continue to be less than one due to, for example,
cooking technology (e.g., even if the household eats only bread, bread requires a small amount
of oil or other fat in addition to wheat), or, as we argue below, the need for complete proteins.
                          SCS
                               1




                               0          w*                           w
                      FIGURE 3: STAPLE CALORIE SHARE AND WEALTH


                                                                                                    10
       Thus, we view getting a higher percentage of calories from the staple than the SCS
threshold as indicating a household is still in the region of rapidly increasing marginal utility of
calories, i.e., a likely indication they are below subsistence. Below, we will provide an
application to China with two methods for determining the SCS threshold.
                                                    Calories
                            NS      NS
 x2                x1/x2 = x1 /x2




                                         f(x) = c


                                                x1
                                                                                wealth
         FIGURE 4: CALORIES NEED NOT VARY MONOTOICALLY WITH WEALTH


       Figure 3 illustrates that SCS varies monotonically with wealth. While, as illustrated,
calories would also vary monotonically with wealth, this need not be the case. Figure 4
illustrates a case consistent with data from our study of nutritional intake among poor
consumers in China (Jensen and Miller 2011). In the study, we found that as consumers passed
from nutritionally deprived to nutritionally stable, there was a range of prices over which they
actually decreased caloric intake, as their increased purchasing power allowed them to
substitute from rice toward more expensive, taste-preferred foods like meat. This pattern,
driven by the fact that rice was an inferior good and meat a normal one, implies an Engel curve
such as the one in the left panel of Figure 4. The implied relationship between calories and
wealth is depicted in the right panel. Notice that caloric intake falls as consumers pass from
consuming fewer than c calories to more. Further, although calories consumed decreases over
this range, SCS, given by the slope of the ray from the origin to the Engel curve, increases
monotonically over the entire range.

II.B. Additional Points About SCS
       We note that the household staple budget share (SBS) offers a potential alternative to
SCS. The primary advantage of SBS is the ease of data collection, requiring only expenditure


                                                                                                 11
data, commonly collected as part of most household surveys, rather than a food intake diary, as
is required for SCS. However, SCS offers several advantages. First, food purchased will not be
the amount of food consumed if meals are provided by an employer (as is common for workers
in poor countries) or eaten away from home (e.g., visiting friends or relatives, eating at a
restaurant or food stall) or if purchased food is provided to others (e.g., meals provided to
visitors or relatives). Measuring food eaten would then require significantly more detailed data
than is commonly measured in expenditure surveys. SBS would also require detailed price data
in order to value those foods eaten but not purchased as above, as well as food they have grown
themselves, which is likely to be substantial in rural areas. Finally, while SBS can provide an
assessment of household welfare, SCS can be assessed at the individual level. Well-being may
not be equally distributed across household members, and the intrahousehold allocation of
resources is of considerable academic and policy interest (see Strauss and Thomas 1995).
       We also note that while our method in essence focuses on when the consumer begins to
substitute away from the cheapest available source of calories, we would not just want to look
at when they begin to eat (or purchase) a particular food such as meat. First, using SCS means
that we don't need to define the food that consumers substitute toward. This is an advantage
because such foods are likely to vary across individuals due to tastes, dietary restrictions (e.g.,
vegetarianism) or prices. In addition, focusing on SCS allows for the possibility that there are
multiple potential foods an individual may substitute toward. Second, as noted above, some
non-staple good consumption is needed even for the very poorest households, because it may
be required as part of cooking technology or to get protein, which will also cause clear
disutility if not consumed (protein and calories are the two most important nutrients (Svedberg
2000); while other nutrients are important for aspects of long-term health, they do not create the
clear utility penalties of calories and protein). Therefore, the SCS threshold will not be at going
from zero to positive consumption of the other good. Finally, SCS in effect normalizes by need;
once we recognize that some alternative food is needed even for those below subsistence
calories, the fact that different people have different requirements means we run into the same
problems establishing what meets minimum need. While, say, 40 grams of cooking oil may be
needed to prepare enough bread to provide enough calories for a young, active man, an older,
sedentary woman might only need 10 grams of oil. Using the calorie share, rather than an
absolute amount, will normalize for individual variation in total need (see Section III.A below).


                                                                                                12
II.C. Potential Challenges to Using SCS to Measure Subsistence
        There are a number of concerns with the use of SCS as a measure of subsistence or
hunger, some of which apply equally to calories. For example, SCS ignores other key nutrients
such as vitamins and minerals.8 And computing SCS requires food intake diaries, which is
typically not collected as part of standard income and expenditure surveys.9
        An additional concern is whether the body "adapts" to low nutrition levels. The
Adjustment and Adaptation Paradigm (AAP) argues that individuals can reduce energy needs
through physiological mechanisms such as increasing metabolic efficiency and reducing
thermogenesis, without impairing function (Sukhatme and Margen 1982, Svedberg 2000). For
example, if a person's calorie requirement is 2,000 calories, a prolonged period of consuming
only 1,800 calories may cause adjustments such that they now only require 1,800. If so, they
may start to substitute away from the staple at 1,800 calories, even though they are still
malnourished relative to their "true" calorie requirement. However, there are four important
points to be made. First, the literature is very unsettled on whether such adjustment takes place
(see Dasgupta 1995 and Svedberg 2000). Second, what is key from our perspective is whether
such adjustments affect at what point the marginal utility of calories exhibits a large decline.
There is little empirical evidence that the physical discomfort associated with hunger dissipates
with adaptation.10 Third, although adaptation may slow the rate at which individuals substitute
toward the staple good in order to increase calories, when deprivation becomes severe enough
that the individual can no longer maintain function without changing his diet, they will have no
choice but to increase intake of the staple, increasing SCS. Thus, while adaptation may change
the rate at which SCS increases, it will still be the case that individuals with an unusually high
SCS will be those who are most calorie deprived, and that significant movements in SCS will
mark the transition from nutritional sufficiency (net of the effects of adaptation) to deprivation.


8
   However, the literature emphasizes calories and protein are the most important. See, for example, Svedberg
(2000, p. 106): “On economic as well as common-sense grounds, one would think that the energy-protein content
of food is the most basic of all economically constrained needs people have.” As illustrated below, to the extent
that these other needs are important and not met by the staple, they will influence the maximum SCS consistent
with a healthy diet. Thus, even very poor consumers need not consume only the staple.
9
   One concern with food intake diaries is whether individuals can accurately recall all the foods they have eaten
over some reference period. However, when food intake is so low, consumers are likely to be acutely aware of
how much they have eaten. And a validation study by Zhai et al. (1996) finds that the food intake diary approach is
very accurate, yielding similar data than what is obtained from the more intensive "household inventory" approach
that uses enumerators to weigh individual ingredients before cooking and waste following each meal.
10
   Though certainly it could, if adjustment is via reduced energy expenditures by the body.


                                                                                                                13
Fourth, we note that if the AAP is correct and individuals suffer no consequences in adjusting
to lower caloric intake, then perhaps we should not consider the higher threshold to be the
relevant one for assessing undernutrition, and that in fact using the 2,000 calorie threshold
overestimates true undernutrition. Alternatively, we also note that under the AAP, a common
method for deriving minimum calorie thresholds, namely examining the health and functioning
of poorly nourished people, would yield estimates of the threshold that are too low, just as with
SCS; if the body adjusts to deprivation so that someone can be productive and healthy at the
adjusted intake as suggested by the AAP, then we will find the 2,000 calorie person functioning
well at 1,800 calories, and believe that is the true threshold. Thus, we would underestimate true
undernutrition with calories just as we would with SCS.
        The concerns discussed so far would apply to calories as much as to SCS.11 However,
there are a few concerns that may apply more to SCS. One is whether people systematically
substitute away from the staple even before their true calorie threshold is met. This concern is
often raised in the context of whether the poor or malnourished eat junk food. Such a person
would be classified as nutritionally adequate from our SCS measure, but a calorie threshold
may capture that they are not.12 However, empirically, there is little evidence that this happens
systematically.13 Our assumption, based on the literature on the body's physiological and
biochemical reactions to calorie deprivation, is that individuals suffer a strong penalty if they
do not get enough calories, which causes them to favor calories over other food attributes.
While an individual may deviate from this for a very short period of time (either by choice or
because other food is not available), they will not do so for an extended period.14 Additionally,
even if some individuals substitute before their calorie threshold, their behavior reveals they are
not interested in calories, so any policy efforts to improve caloric intake may have little impact
anyway. And again, policy should perhaps by definition only care about calories for those who
themselves are concerned with calories, and such behavior reveals they are not.


11
    While in light of these difficulties one might say we should abandon nutrition-based indicators, they remain
widely used, and they have the appeal of assessing as best as possible a minimum basic need. Further, unlike
income or expenditure, nutrition-based measures can be assessed at the individual level, which is important given
the literature indicating the unequal provision of resources within households (see Strauss and Thomas 1995).
12
   Though some junk food is very high in calories, and the person may appear calorie nourished.
13
   Though it is observed that poor people do consume junk food, testing whether those who are malnourished do so
is not possible, given the significant problems noted above in identifying whether someone is malnourished.
14
   However, we must rule out (as do calorie based measures) extreme irrational behaviors, due for example to drug
addiction or severe mental impairment.


                                                                                                              14
        A second and related concern is whether there is variation in the taste for the non-
nutritional attributes of foods. Some people may not care about the non-nutritional attributes as
much, so they may continue primarily eating the staple even after they have met their required
caloric intake.15 SCS would assign as undernourished those who are attaining enough calories
but prefer not to switch away from the staple. Alternatively, some people may care a great deal
more about the non-nutritional attributes of food, so they are willing to suffer a penalty to get
these other attributes. Our assumption is that people value the non-nutritional attributes of
foods, and will not continue to heavily consume the staple if they can afford to substitute. And
we note that deviating from the staple might not mean substituting towards a particular food
like meat, but just any food that is favored in some way but not as cheap per calorie as the
staple. Substitution towards some form of protein (such as meat or pulses) is in fact widespread
as wealth grows. Or, substitution may simply be not for the attributes of a specific food, but for
the sake of dietary diversity. Finally, since our approach is aimed at finding when a person has
attained their subsistence level, what matters most is that all individuals assign some non-zero
utility to the non-nutritional attributes of foods. Though some individuals may value those
attributes more than others, that will affect the rate at which they substitute once they have
passed the subsistence threshold--but the point at which they begin to substitute, which
identifies the subsistence region of interest, depends only on whether they value those attributes
more than additional calories, and will start to substitute away from the bare minimum of those
attributes associated with the calorie maximizing food choices.
        An additional limitation that applies to our method is the need for consumption to be
dominated by a low cost staple for the poor. While this fits the consumption pattern of most
poor countries, it may not be appropriate for wealthier countries. However, in these countries,
where true undernutrition is extremely low, calorie measures are likely to be inappropriate as
well, or at least uninformative. A final disadvantage with SCS is that it cannot assess the depth
of deficiency, since it remains constant until subsistence has been passed. For example, a
person who is below subsistence and consuming only the staple would be recorded as having
the same SCS regardless of whether they were consuming 1,000 calories or 1,200 calories. SCS
would indicate both are below subsistence, but would not distinguish the depth of deficiency.

15
   For example, perhaps the elderly don’t like meat as much as young people, either because they were born at a
time when incomes were much lower and meat was rarely eaten so they never developed a taste for it, or because
they preferred it less as they aged (e.g., loss of taste, dental problems, etc.).


                                                                                                            15
        Overall, then, there is a tradeoff, with advantages to SCS and advantages to calories as
indicators of nutritional sufficiency. Assigning a fixed, specific calorie threshold against which
to measure nutritional status, despite the difficulty in measuring, determining and assessing that
threshold, at least ensures households have enough nutrition to meet some minimum defined
standard. The SCS threshold provides an indicator that reflects how consumers behave and
eliminates the need to figure out the unobservable and highly varying thresholds (or whether
they even exist), but allows them to make decisions that may appear irrational from a nutrition
perspective, since it identifies as undernourished, by definition, those who do not value
marginal calories. Thus, the two measures may perhaps best be used in conjunction.
        A final issue to consider is whether anthropometric measures such as Body Mass Index
(BMI) might perform better than either calories or SCS. However, we note that BMI suffers
from many of the same problems as calories as an indicator of hunger or undernutrition. First,
there is no agreement on what the minimum, subsistence healthy BMI threshold is, or indeed
whether one even exists (and as with calories, average or net changes in BMI cannot be used
instead of a threshold to assess hunger or undernourishment).16 Second, any such threshold
would also vary considerably across individuals (and within individuals over time, such as due
to age, pregnancy, menstruation, etc.), due to differences in skeletal system and body shape
(e.g., wide frames vs. narrow), muscle and bone density, etc. Finally, we noted above that
calories may change only slowly, and even non-monotonically, with increases in wealth; since
calories determine weight, any changes in BMI would therefore follow those same patterns and
suffer from the same problems.


                             III. EXAMPLE APPLICATION FOR CHINA
III. A. Calculating the SCS threshold
        To gain insight into the practical application of SCS as a measure of subsistence, we
solve a version of the “diet problem” (Stigler 1945, Dorfman, Samuelson and Solow 1958,




16
   Again, a threshold is needed to measure undernutrition or hunger and to define a poverty line. And net, average
gains in BMI tell us nothing about changes at the bottom of the distribution, which is what we care about. Further,
without a BMI threshold we can't identify undernourishment at the individual level, which is needed for example
to examine patterns or covariates of undernutrition.


                                                                                                                16
Dantzig 1963).17 Since application of this problem requires the input of food items and prices to
yield a specific solution, we consider an application using diets and prices for China.
        The goal of the diet problem is to determine the minimum-cost diet that fulfills a
person’s nutritional needs. If we were to focus only on energy intake, the solution to this
problem would be simple: consume only the food that is the cheapest source of calories.
However, while calories are important, they are by no means a person’s only nutritional
requirement. Additional nutritional requirements, as well as cooking technology, will result in a
minimum-cost diet that features high, but not 100 percent, SCS. Thus, if we observe individuals
with SCS significantly above the SCS of the minimum-cost diet, that suggests that they are
likely to be malnourished, while those with SCS significantly below that of the minimum-cost
diet are likely to be meeting their nutritional needs. Thus, the solution to the diet problem
provides a natural benchmark against which to compare SCS and evaluate subsistence.
        Although there are questions about the real-world relevance of minimum cost diets,
households in many poor countries do closely approximate such diets (we consider China
below), subject to one caveat: there may be cheaper sources of calories that are almost never
consumed (e.g., millet). However, in the case we consider, the most widely consumed staple,
rice, is in fact the cheapest source of calories. Further, foods such as millet are not even
available in most markets (though of course this is endogenous), since it is not part of the
traditional diet, so many people aren't familiar with it and don't know how to cook it. Aside
from the specific case of China, however, the fact that impoverished households rarely
consume the very cheapest staples available remains a puzzle (Deaton 1997). But conditional
on widely available foods that are actually consumed, the poorest households in China do
appear to approximate a low-cost diet (see Jensen and Miller 2008). Households get a
significant portion of their calories from the staple good, and then substitute towards a food that
is favored for taste, meat or bean curd, when they can afford it. And the patterns of substitution
are clear, as demonstrated below.
        In principle, the solution to the diet problem should take into account all of a person’s
nutritional requirements, including energy, protein, vitamins, minerals, etc. However, for our
purposes it is enough to focus on a simplified version of this problem. As Svedberg (2000, p.


17
   This analysis draws on material in the unpublished working paper version and online appendix from our
previous study (Jensen and Miller 2008).


                                                                                                     17
106) notes, “the energy-protein content of food is the most basic of all economically
constrained needs people have.” Hence, a natural starting point for the analysis would be to
consider both energy and protein requirements. While calories is an adequate measure of the
energy intake of food, protein requirements are somewhat more complex, as different protein
sources will contain more or less of the various amino acids that form the “building blocks” of
protein. In particular, when considering the nutrition of people consuming traditional diets
consisting primarily of cereal grains, the amino acid most likely to be in short supply is Lysine.
Lysine is an essential amino acid, meaning that it cannot be produced by the body and must be
ingested in food. Further, it is in relatively short supply in cereal grains such as rice or wheat
but plentiful in pulses, legumes and animal proteins, which explains why the traditional diets
consumed by poor people throughout the world generally consist of a cereal grain and a pulse
(e.g., rice and beans, wheat noodles and tofu, etc.).
       To capture the importance of amino acids in nutrition, using information from the
National Research Council we imposed intake requirements for calories and the 11
“indispensible” amino acids for adults (NRC 2005, IOM 2006). We construct SCS thresholds
for a diet typical of much of southern China, where rice is the staple food. Rice is the cheapest
source of calories, but is relatively deficient in the essential amino acid Lysine. To account for
the fact that complementing rice with legumes such as bean curd is typically the cheapest way
to ensure that a person receives all essential amino acids, we construct diets consisting of rice
plus bean curd. Typically, only small amounts of bean curd are needed to complete the protein.
We do not directly include cooking oil as a choice variable in our model as oil is used primarily
as an input for the cooking process rather than consumed as an end food in itself. Rather,
consistent with our data from China, we instead assume that households receive 13 percent of
their calories from cooking oil (about one tablespoon per day).
       The data on the foods’ nutritional content come from the USDA National Nutrient
Database for Standard Reference. The individual nutrient requirements come from the
Estimated Energy Requirement equations from the Institute of Medicine (Gerrior et. al 2006),
which take into account the individual’s gender, age, weight and activity level.
       In our analysis of the simplified minimum-cost diet problem, we considered a number
of different representative “people” with a range of different height, weight and activity level
profiles. For each person, we solve for the diet that minimizes the cost of satisfying the


                                                                                               18
individual’s required daily intake of energy and protein/amino acids. Prices come from the data
gathered as part of a survey we conducted in 2006 in Hunan province (see Jensen and Miller
2008 for more detail on the survey). Although we consider all eleven required amino acids in
our analysis, in each case the binding constraint is for Lysine. Hence to conserve space, we do
not report the other amino acid requirements.
       Table 1 presents the recommended daily requirements of energy and lysine for the
various profiles, as well as the diet consisting of rice, bean curd and cooking oil that satisfies
these requirements at the minimum cost. We also report the cost of the diet as well as the SCS
of the minimum-cost diet.
       Scenario A computes the minimum cost diet for an active man 67 inches tall and
weighing 121 pounds, which is average for China. A person with these characteristics requires
2,554 calories per day. His minimum-cost diet consists of 586 grams of rice, 134 grams of bean
curd and 11.4 grams of cooking oil, and results in an SCS of 0.84, i.e., 84 percent of calories
come from rice. The remaining columns of the table vary these attributes. Columns B – D vary
the activity level from active (A) to very active (V), less active (L), and sedentary (S). Moving
from sedentary (S) to very active (V) increases the individual’s calorie requirement by
approximately 42 percent (from 2,112 to 2,996). However, the SCS associated with the
minimum-cost diet is much less variable, changing only from 0.86 to 0.81. Columns E and F
return to the attributes of the typical man in column A but vary his weight from 110 to 200 lbs.
Calorie requirement under these scenarios range from 2,464 to 3,202, a difference of about 30
percent. Yet despite this large change in weight and the corresponding calorie requirement,
SCS is again fairly stable, varying only between 0.85 and 0.80. Columns G and H vary the
individual’s height from 61 to 77 inches, while columns I and J vary the age from 30 to 67.
Again, the SCS associated with the minimum-cost diet remains much more stable than caloric
intake requirements.
       The stability of SCS can be seen even more strikingly under more extreme comparisons.
Column L represents an 85 year old, sedentary woman who is 62” and weighs 110 pounds,
while column K represents a 25 year old, very active man who is 74” and weighs 220 pounds.
The woman needs 1,1351 calories and 1,550mg of lysine, which under the minimum cost diet
can be purchased at a cost of 1.21 yuan, while the man needs 4,264 calories and 3,100mg of
lysine, costing 2.91 yuan. While the man’s calorie needs are more than triple those of the


                                                                                               19
woman’s and the cost of the bundle is almost 2.5 times greater, the SCS threshold for the man
is only 6 percentage points greater (0.85 and 0.79), and both are very close to the less extreme
cases in columns A through J. Now instead of the elderly woman in column L, consider a
woman aged 40 of the same height but weighing 121 pounds and who is active rather than
sedentary, and who would therefore need 2,174 calories and 1,698mg of lysine, which can be
purchased for 1.54 yuan (Column M). The man in column K's calorie and lysine needs, and the
cost of the food bundle, are all nearly twice as great, yet the calorie share thresholds at which
the two attain their needs are nearly identical (0.85 vs. 0.84). Thus, overall, the SCS of the
minimum-cost diet is much less sensitive to variation in attributes, i.e., it is more need neutral,
than calorie requirement. Finally, we note that the SCS thresholds are nearly identical if we
instead use a wheat-based diet typical of northern China (bottom panel). Using wheat rather
than rice, even with a completely different set of prices (drawn from our data for Gansu
province), the scenarios in Table 1 still yield SCS thresholds that vary only from 0.78 to 0.85.
For example, the cases of the tall, heavy, active man in column K and the lighter woman in
column J with only half the calorie needs yield SCS thresholds of 0.84 and 0.83, respectively.
This suggests SCS thresholds are likely to be applicable across individuals even when the
staple foods (and prices) vary.
       While the staple calorie share associated with the least-cost diet typically ranges
between approximately 0.80 to 0.85 in the scenarios we consider, we are interested in
identifying those who can satisfy their nutritional needs while eating something other than the
least-cost diet. These people will exhibit SCS lower than the SCS of the minimum-cost diet we
found above. Given our results, the minimum-cost diet problem suggests a cut-off of around
0.8. People who consume 80 percent or more of their calories from the staple are likely to be
undernourished, while those who receive less than 80 percent from the staple reveal through
their behavior that they have passed subsistence.

III.B. Empirical Distribution of SCS
       The model and discussion above argued that SCS could be used to identify when the
marginal utility of calories has declined significantly, as SCS will remain constant until the
threshold has been met, and then begin to change. We now consider whether it is possible to
empirically identify such a threshold with consumption data. For this exercise, we use data



                                                                                                20
from the China Health and Nutrition Survey (CHNS), a panel survey gathered by the Carolina
Population Center at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, the Institute of Nutrition
and Food Hygiene and the Chinese Academy of Preventative Medicine. The sample consists of
approximately 16,000 individuals in 3,800 households per round, drawn using a multi-stage,
random cluster strategy for 9 provinces. For our analysis, we use data from the 2000 survey, the
latest round for which we can compute calorie shares from food intake data.18 A key part of the
CHNS was a 24-hour food diary completed by each household member for three days.
Respondents were asked to report everything they ate and drank the previous day, whether
inside or outside the home, by specifically listing the components of all foods eaten. These
foods were recorded in detail in order to match with the 636 detailed food items listed in the
1991 Food Composition Tables constructed by the Institute of Nutrition and Food Hygiene at
the Chinese Academy of Preventative Medicine, which can be used to convert food
consumption into calorie intake.
        Figure 5 uses a locally-weighted regression smoother (LOWESS, Cleveland 1979) to
explore the bivariate relationship between SCS and log per capita income.19 While income is
likely to be a noisy measure of the ability to move beyond the calorie or SCS threshold, these
figures are presented just to provide a rough sense of the correlation. The graph provides clear
evidence consistent with the model. In particular, SCS among the poorest households is very
high, at almost 80 percent. This is very close to the range that arose from the minimum cost diet
problem in the previous subsection. We also note that for the very poorest households, SCS
does not change with additional income, consistent with their consuming mostly staple foods
and little else, and using additional income to just buy more of the cheapest source of calories.
However, once a threshold level of wealth is reached, SCS begins to decline rapidly. Overall,
there is clear evidence of an SCS Engel curve, i.e., as income increases, the share of the
calories consumed from the staple good decreases, with a clear threshold effect.
        Figure 6 shows the share of calories consumed from other major food categories. The
pattern here is consistent with the model of consumer substitution outlined above. After the
consumer has moved beyond the point of high marginal utility of calories, the substitution
away from cereals begins, with meat taking on a larger share of calories. The patterns are

18
   Rounds were also conducted in 2004 and 2006, but the food composition tables required for converting the food
diaries into nutrients have not been released (and the food codes used in the survey changed from earlier rounds).
19
   While it might be better to use expenditure data, the CHNS unfortunately did not gather these data.


                                                                                                               21
nearly symmetric. Similar time-series changes in consumption patterns, away from cereals and
towards meat, have been noted for China (Du et. al 2002, Zhai et. al 2007). Other contributions
to calories, such as fruits and vegetables, are fairly stable (and very low overall).
        We note that Figure 5 also shows the potential value of SCS in constructing a poverty
line, using the same approach currently used for calories. In our data, the income cut-off at
which households appear on average to move beyond subsistence is about 225 yuan per person.
Of course, while using SCS rather than calories to construct poverty lines is valuable for the
reasons outlined above, it does not solve many of the other problems in constructing poverty
lines, such as the need to adjust for adult equivalents or economies of scale, or consideration of
any non-economic aspects of well-being.
        We can also show that, as predicted by the model, using SCS to monitor changes in
nutrition and welfare over time in China offers advantages over calories. In particular, many
authors have noted that despite large increases in wealth, caloric intake in China appears to be
declining, even as malnourishment persists (Zhai et. al 2007 and Meng et. al 2008; Deaton and
Drèze 2008 document similar patterns for India).20 Figure 7A shows non-parametric, kernel
density estimates of the distribution of daily household per capita calorie consumption for
CHNS rounds collected in 1991, 1993, 1997 and 2000. These densities show that caloric intake
has systematically declined over this decade, with each density to the left of the previous round.
Using a threshold of 2,100 calories per person per day (the calorie threshold used by the
government of China to set poverty lines) we find that the fraction of calorie-undernourished
households increased steadily from 53 to 67 percent over this decade (statistically significant at
the 0.01 level), which on its own would be taken as evidence of a sharp decline in nutritional
status. As the distributions show, at almost any calorie intake threshold, a greater fraction of
households are undernourished in the later years.
        Figure 7B shows the distributions of household-level SCS along with our preferred 80
percent subsistence threshold.21 The figure shows that the distribution of SCS has steadily
shifted to the left, indicating that there has been an improvement in nutritional status (since we

20
   Though Deaton and Dréze (2008) argue that there may be some reduced need for calories (rather than
households just choosing to consume fewer calories) due to changes in the level of physical activity associated
with the mechanization of home production and formal production, and increased access to transportation. And
Meng et. al (2008) suggest price changes play a role in the nutrition decline in China.
21
   SCS is computed by summing calories from various sources across all household members and all diet diary
days, not the average of SCS for each member or for the whole household for each of the three days.


                                                                                                            22
argued both theoretically and empirically that SCS declines as wealth grows). The fraction of
households consuming more than 80 percent of their calories from the staple declines steadily
from 49 percent in 1991 to 32 percent in 2000 (statistically significant at the 0.01 level). This
same conclusion would also be seen for a wider range of choices of SCS (0.85, 0.75, etc.).
Thus, calories and SCS yield strikingly opposing conclusions about changes in nutritional
status during this period of substantial economic growth in China, with SCS better reflecting
that growth caused utility gains in food consumption via substitution away from the cheapest
sources of calories.
        Finally, it is also worthwhile to compare the levels of hunger or undernutrition from the
two approaches for a particular point in time. In the 2000 survey round, 67 percent of
households are hungry according to calories22 but only 32 percent are hungry according to SCS.
SCS in general provides an estimate of nutritional inadequacy that is much lower than that
using calories. The two measures are of course capturing different things, so we would not
claim that the calorie measure overstates malnutrition or hunger by a factor of two. The calorie
threshold measure is the fraction who meet a fixed, pre-defined threshold deemed a minimum
acceptable standard. Our measure indicates the fraction that behave as though their dietary
choices are guided by a priority of maximizing calories.


                                             IV. CONCLUSION

        We argue that the staple calorie share is a valuable tool for assessing whether
households have attained a subsistence level of nutrition. Under the assumption that the
marginal utility of calories is very high at low levels of intake and then declines, a person can
be inferred to have attained sufficient caloric intake when they are observed to substitute away
from the cheapest source of calories available to them. While the SCS threshold may not
capture whether a specifically defined calorie or nutrient threshold has been met (though as
noted, there is considerable debate over whether such thresholds exist and how accurate current
estimates of those thresholds actually are), it represents the point at which the consumer does
not place as much value on calories. Policy makers should perhaps not care about whether
someone meets a calorie threshold, which can't be determined precisely anyway, but instead

22
  The fact that this number is so high is perhaps in itself another indication that recommended caloric intakes may
not be meaningful.


                                                                                                                23
getting the consumer to the point where the marginal utility of additional calories is revealed to
be low, suggesting they are not a priority for the consumer, and thus should not be for the
policy maker (and since policies promoting increased caloric will not be very effective at that
point anyway). And the best way to determine when that unobservable, individual-varying
point has been met is when they begin to substitute towards other foods.
       We provide an application with data from China that shows that the threshold predicted
by theory is evident in the data, and that this empirical threshold closely matches what would
be estimated from a minimum cost diet calculation. Among nutrition-based indicators, which
are widely used, SCS offers several clear advantages, such as avoiding the problem of
individual-varying and unobservable thresholds, imperfect absorption, and a consistency with
revealed preferences. We believe SCS can play an important role alongside other nutrition-
based indicators. Future research should explore the properties of SCS in more detail, and
consider whether the patterns observed for China are found elsewhere.
       Subsequent research could also explore other uses for SCS. For example, because both
theoretically and empirically SCS is monotonic in wealth, it could be used in the same way as
the food budget share in Engel curves, such as to estimate economies of scale or adult
equivalents in consumption (see Deaton 1997). SCS could be used as a simple indicator of
consumption patterns for developing countries. SCS gives a sense of whether consumers have
begun the "dietary transition," away from a traditional diet dependent on a staple good, and
towards a more diversified or modern diet focusing on non-nutritional attributes of food. Of
course, SCS does not capture the full complexity of diets, but for a single, simple indicator that
can be compared over time and across countries (and without the need to define or measure
what they substitute towards (meat, processed foods, etc.), which will vary within countries,
across countries and over time), SCS may be valuable.

REFERENCES
Cleveland, William S. (1979). "Robust Locally Weighted Regression and Smoothing Scatter
      Plots," Journal of the American Statistical Association, 74, p. 829-36.
Dantzig, George B. (1963). Linear Programming and Extensions, Princeton University Press,
      Princeton, N.J.
Dasgupta, Partha (1995). An Inquiry into Well-Being and Destitution. Oxford University Press.
Deaton, Angus (1997). The Analysis of Household Surveys: A Microeconomic Approach to
      Development Policy. Baltimore, Maryland: The Johns Hopkins University Press.
-- (2006). “Measuring Poverty,” in Banerjee, Abhijit, Roland Benabou and Dilip Mookerjee,
      eds., Understanding Poverty, Oxford University Press: Oxford.

                                                                                               24
-- and Jean Drèze (2008). “Nutrition in India: Facts and Interpretations,” mimeo, Princeton
       University, Princeton, NJ.
Dorfman, Robert, Paul A. Samuelson, and Robert M. Solow (1958). Linear Programming and
      Economic Analysis. McGraw Hill: New York.
Du, Shufa, Bing Lu, Feng Zhai and Barry M. Popkin (2002). “A New Stage of the Nutrition
      Transition in China,” Public Health Nutrition, 5(1A), p. 169-174.
Gerrior, S. et al., (2006). “An Easy Approach to Calculating Estimated Energy Requirements,”
      Preventing Chronic Disease, October; 3(4): A129.
Institute of Medicine (IOM) (2006). DRI: Dietary Reference Intakes: The Essential Guide to
      Nutrient Requirements. Jennifer J. Otten, Jennifer Pitzi Hellwig, and Linda D. Meyers
      (Eds.) The National Academies Press, Washington DC.
Jensen, Robert T. and Nolan Miller (2008). “Giffen Behavior and Subsistence Consumption,”
      American Economic Review, 98(4), p. 1553 − 1577.
-- and -- (2011). “Do Consumer Price Subsidies Really Improve Nutrition?” forthcoming,
      Review of Economics and Statistics.
Meng, Xin, Xiaodong Gong and Youjuan Wang (2008). “Impact of Income Growth and
      Economic Reform on Nutrition Intake in Urban China,” Economic Development and
      Cultural Change.
National Research Council (2005). Dietary Reference Intakes for Energy, Carbohydrates,
      Fiber, Fat, Fatty Acids, Cholesterol, Protein, And Amino Acids (Dietary Reference
      Intakes), National Academies Press, Washington DC.
Ravallion, Martin (1992a). “Poverty Comparisons: A Guide to Concepts and Methods.” LSMS
      Working Paper No. 88. Washington, DC: The World Bank.
- - (1992b). “Does Undernutrition Respond to Prices? Dominance Tests for Indonesia.” World
      Bank Economic Review, 6, p. 109-124.
Stigler, Joseph J. (1945). “The Cost of Subsistence,” Journal of Farm Economics, 27, p. 303-
      314.
Strauss, John and Duncan Thomas (1995). “Human Resources: Empirical Modeling of
      Household and Family Decisions,” in Behrman, Jere R. and T.N. Srinivasan, eds.,
      Handbook of Development Economics, Volume 3, Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Svedberg, Peter (2000). Poverty and Undernutrition. Oxford University Press: Oxford.
Sukhatme, P.V. and Sheldon Margen (1982). “Autoregulatory Homeostatic Nature of Energy
      Balance,” American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 35(2), p. 335 - 365.
Zhai, Fengying, Huijun Wang, Shufa Du, Yuna He, Zhihong Wang, Keyou Ge and Barry M.
      Popkin (2007). “Lifespan Nutrition and Changing Socio-Economic Conditions in China,”
      Asia Pacific Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 16(Supplement 1), p. 374-382.




                                                                                         25
  TABLE 1.STAPLE CALORIE SHARE OF MINIMUM COST DIET


Scenario                     A          B          C           D          E          F          G          H       I      J     K      L          M
  Sex                        M          M          M           M          M          M          M          M      M      M      M      F          F
  Age                       40         40         40          40         40         40         40         40     30     75     25     85         40
  Height (inches)            67         67         67          67         67         67         61         77     67     67     74     62         62
  Activity                   A          V          L           S          A          A          A          A      A      A      V      S          A
  Weight (lbs.)             121        121        121         121        110        200        121        121    121    121    220    110        121

Nutrient Requirements
   Calories                 2554       2996       2309       2112       2464       3202       2457       2716    2651   2214   4264   1351       2174
   Lysine (mg)              275        275         275        275        250        455        275        275     275    275   3100   1550       1698

                                                                                      Southern-Style Diet
Least-Cost Diet
   Rice (g)                 586        703        521        469        571        699        561         629    612    496    996    291        503
   Bean Curd (g)            134         64        173        204         99        383        149         108    118    188    123    185         93
   Cooking Oil (g)          11.4       13.4       10.3       9.5        11.0       14.4       11.0        12.2   11.9   9.9    19.1   6.1        9.7
   Cost (yuan)              1.86       2.00       1.79       1.72       1.74       2.76       1.83        1.91   1.89   1.76   2.91   1.21       1.54
   Staple Calorie Share     0.84       0.86       0.82       0.81       0.85       0.80       0.83        0.85   0.84   0.82   0.85   0.79       0.84


                                                                                      Northern-Style Diet
Least-Cost Diet (Gansu)
   Wheat (g)                581        697        516        465        565         692        555        623    606    491    986    288        498
   Bean Curd (g)            178        116        212        239        142         435        191        155    164    225    198    207        131
   Cooking Oil (g)          11.4       13.4       10.3       9.5        11.0        14.4       11.0       12.2   11.9   9.9    19.1   6.1        9.7
   Cost (yuan)              1.73       1.84       1.67       1.62       1.61        2.60       1.71       1.77   1.76   1.65   2.69   1.15       1.43
   Staple Calorie Share     0.83       0.85       0.81       0.80       0.83        0.79       0.82       0.84   0.83   0.81   0.84   0.78       0.83
  1 cup uncooked rice = 185 grams. 1 cup uncooked flour = 125 grams. 1 tablespoon cooking oil = 13.6 grams.




                                                                                                                                             1
FIGURE 5. SCS AND LOG INCOME PER CAPITA




                                          1
FIGURE 6. CALORIE SHARES VS. LOG INCOME PER CAPITA



                         Cereals




                      Meat
                                             Fruit/Veg
                                                         Pulses   Other




                                                                          2
FIGURE 7A. DENSITIES OF HOUSEHOLD CALORIES PER CAPITA BY YEAR



               1991

             1993


        1997

      2000




  0                 1000            2000               3000    4000   5000

FIGURE 7B. DENSITIES OF SCS BY YEAR




                                           1991

                                    1993


                             1997


                      2000




        .2                   .4                   .6          .8      1



                                                                             1
