NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THEORIES OF HETEROGENEOUS FIRMS AND TRADE
Stephen J. Redding
Working Paper 16562
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16562

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2010

The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Stephen J. Redding. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Theories of Heterogeneous Firms and Trade
Stephen J. Redding
NBER Working Paper No. 16562
December 2010
JEL No. F1,L80
ABSTRACT
This paper reviews the recent theoretical literature on heterogeneous firms and trade, which emphasizes
firm selection into international markets and reallocations of resources across firms. We discuss the
empirical challenges that motivated this research and its relationship to traditional trade theories. We
examine the implications of firm heterogeneity for comparative advantage, market size, aggregate
trade, the welfare gains from trade, and the relationship between trade and income distribution. While
a number of studies examine the endogenous response of firm productivity to trade liberalization, modeling
internal firm organization and the origins of firm heterogeneity remain interesting areas of ongoing
research.

Stephen J. Redding
Department of Economics
and Woodrow Wilson School
Princeton University
Fisher Hall
Princeton NJ 08544-1021
and CEPR
reddings@princeton.edu

Contents
1

Introduction

3

2

Empirical Challenges

4

3

The Melitz Model

5

3.1

Preferences and Endowments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5

3.2

Production Technology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

6

3.3

Production and Exporting Decisions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

7

3.4

Steady-state Industry Equilibrium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

9

3.5

Trade Liberalization and Intra-industry Reallocation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

11

3.6

Welfare . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

12

3.7

Pareto Distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

13

3.8

Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

13

4

Integrated Equilibrium

13

5

Trade and Market Size

15

6

Gravity

18

7

Quantitative Analysis

20

8

Labor Markets

22

9

Endogenous Firm Productivity

25

9.1

Multi-Product Firms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

25

9.2

Technology and Skills . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

27

9.3

International Production Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

28

10 Firm and Aggregate Dynamics

29

11 Conclusion

30

2

1

Introduction

Theoretical research in international trade increasingly emphasizes the decisions of individual plants and firms
in understanding the causes and consequences of aggregate trade. This new theoretical emphasis is a response
to empirical studies using micro data, which revealed a number of features of producer behavior that were not
well explained by pre-existing theories of international trade. There is substantial heterogeneity in productivity,
size and other economic characteristics even within narrowly-defined industries. Participation in international
trade is relatively rare and is associated with superior values of productivity and other measures of economic
performance. Trade liberalization is accompanied by reallocations of resources within industries, which raise
average industry productivity, as low productivity suppliers exit and high productivity suppliers expand to enter
international markets. Trade liberalization is also accompanied by endogenous changes in firm productivity,
which in turn influence within-industry resource allocation.
This paper reviews the recent theoretical literature on heterogeneous firms and trade inspired by these
empirical findings. We begin in Section 2 by briefly summarizing the main empirical features of micro data on
plants and firms that have influenced the development of theoretical research. Section 3 introduces the Melitz
(2003) model, which accounts for these main features of the micro data, and has become a key benchmark
framework in international trade for analyzing a whole host of issues.1 The Melitz model can be embedded
within the integrated equilibrium framework of traditional trade theory, as shown in Section 4. The resulting
framework explains why countries export more in some industries rather than others (“inter-industry trade”),
why nonetheless there is two-way trade within industries (“intra-industry trade”), and why in industries engaged
in the two forms of trade some firms participate in international markets while many others do not.
Modeling firm heterogeneity leads to a number of new insights concerning the determinants and effects
of international trade, including the role of market size (Section 5) and the well-known gravity equation in
international trade (Section 6). These theories have also been quantitatively successful in explaining patterns
of aggregate and disaggregate trade, as reviewed in Section 7.
While theories of firm heterogeneity and trade stress reallocations of resources across firms, the benchmark
model of firm heterogeneity features a frictionless labor market. As a result, all workers are employed at a
common wage and are affected symmetrically by the opening of trade. More recent research has emphasized
labor market imperfections, such as search frictions, and the way in which these can influence the income
distributional effects of trade liberalization across workers, as discussed in Section 8.
1

While we focus on the Melitz model and other related approaches in the light of its theoretical influence and empirical success,
alternative approaches to modeling firm heterogeneity and trade include Bernard et al. (2003) and Yeaple (2005).

3

Although models of firm heterogeneity and trade often treat firm productivity as fixed and focus on selection
and reallocation across firms, a number of studies have modeled endogenous firm productivity and organization,
as discussed in Section 9. This line of research has considered several dimensions of firm decisions, including
the vertical integration decision, the choice of product mix, investments in new technologies, and adjustments
to the skill composition of the workforce. While the theoretical literature on heterogeneous firms and trade has
advanced rapidly in breadth and depth, there remain areas that are relatively unexplored, and Section 11 offers
some concluding comments about possible areas for further research.

2

Empirical Challenges

As micro data on plants and firms became increasingly available from the late 1980s and early 1990s onwards,
a number of empirical challenges for existing theories of international trade began to emerge.2 One of the
most striking features of these micro data is the tremendous heterogeneity in productivity, size and other economic characteristics, even within narrowly-defined industries. In influential work, Bernard & Jensen (1995,
1999) showed that this heterogeneity is systematically related to trade participation. Within an industry, some
firms export while many others do not and, even among exporters, the fraction of shipments exported is often
small. Exporters are larger, more productive, and pay higher wages than other firms within the same industry.3
Additionally, exporters are observed in both net exporting and net importing industries, although the fraction
of exporting firms and the fraction of exported output vary across industries with correlates of comparative
advantage.
None of these features of the data are well explained by existing theories of international trade, with their
assumption of a representative firm within industries. In comparative-advantage-based models, such as the
Heckscher-Ohlin model, the emphasis is on net trade across industries (“inter-industry trade”), and the assumptions of perfect competition and constant returns to scale often imply that firm size is indeterminate. In
variety-based models, such as Krugman (1980), firms specialize in distinct horizontally-differentiated varieties
and there is two-way trade within industries (“intra-industry trade”), but consumer love of variety typically
implies that all firms export.
Further evidence relating firm heterogeneity and trade participation comes from empirical studies of trade
2
For a more detailed discussion of this empirical literature, see Bernard, Jensen, Redding & Schott (2007). For complementary
theoretical reviews of the literatures on firms, organizations and trade, see Antràs & Rossi-Hansberg (2009) and Helpman (2006).
3
The finding that exporters are more productive than non-exporters within industries raises the question of the direction of causality
between exporting and productivity. While there is substantial evidence of selection into exporting, there is less evidence of “learning
by exporting.” This literature is reviewed in Lopez (2005) and, more recently, a number of papers have provided evidence that exporting
enhances incentives for technology adoption, as discussed in Section 9.

4

liberalization episodes. While traditional trade theories emphasize reallocation across industries, much of the
observed reallocation in the aftermath of trade liberalization is found to occur across firms within narrowlydefined industries (e.g. Levinsohn 1999). Trade liberalizations are accompanied by the exit of low productivity
plants and firms and increases in aggregate industry productivity through the resulting changes in industry
composition. While much of the evidence of these intra-industry reallocations comes from studies of largescale trade liberalizations in developing countries (e.g. Tybout & Westbrook 1991, Pavcnik 2003), similar
results hold for developed countries (e.g. Bernard, Jensen & Schott 2006, Trefler 2004).
Another related feature of micro data is ongoing reallocation and selection even in the absence of trade
liberalization or other large-scale changes. In U.S. Census Data, around one third of plants enter or exit every
five years, and there are systematic differences in productivity, size and other economic characteristics between
exiters and survivors (see in particular Dunne et al. 1989). Similarly, gross job creation and destruction at
the plant level are large relative to net changes in industry employment, and these rates of job creation and
destruction are positively correlated across industries (see in particular Davis & Haltiwanger 1992). None of
these features are well explained by existing theories of international trade, with their abstraction from firm and
industry dynamics.

3

The Melitz Model

The Melitz (2003) model addresses the above empirical challenges by combining a model of industry equilibrium featuring heterogeneous firm productivity, as in Jovanovic (1982) and Hopenhayn (1990), with a model
of trade based on love of variety preferences and increasing returns to scale, as in Krugman (1980).4

3.1

Preferences and Endowments

The world consists of many countries, such that each country trades with n ≥ 1 foreign countries. We begin by
considering the case of symmetric countries, before discussing in a later section country asymmetries. Labor
is the sole factor of production in inelastic supply L for each country and is immobile across countries.
Consumer preferences are defined over consumption of a continuum of horizontally-differentiated varieties
within an industry. Preferences take the Constant Elasticity of Substitution (CES) or Dixit & Stiglitz (1977)
form:
Z
C=

ρ

1

ρ

q(ω) dω

,

0 < ρ < 1,

ω∈Ω
4

Derivations of expressions in this and subsequent sections are contained in a web appendix.

5

(1)

where ω indexes varieties, Ω is the (endogenous) set of varieties, and the price index dual to (1) is:
Z
P =

1−σ

p(ω)



1
1−σ

dω

,

σ=

ω∈Ω

1
> 1,
1−ρ

where σ corresponds to the elasticity of substitution between varieties.
The model can be interpreted as capturing an industry within an economy. The assumption of CES preferences implies a strong “love of variety”: there is diminishing marginal utility from the consumption of any
given variety; utility is increasing in the measure of varieties consumed; and the marginal utility from consumption of any given variety approaches infinity as consumption approaches zero. Given these preferences,
the revenue for a variety supplied to the domestic market is:

rd (ω) = R

pd (ω)
P

1−σ
,

(2)

where pd (ω) is the price of variety ω in the domestic market; R denotes aggregate revenue, which equals
aggregate income, which equals aggregate expenditure; the price index P summarizes the prices of competing
varieties.

3.2

Production Technology

There is a competitive fringe of potential entrants that can enter by paying a sunk entry cost of fe units of
labor. Potential entrants face uncertainty about their productivity in the industry. Once the sunk entry cost
is paid, a firm draws its productivity ϕ from a fixed distribution, g(ϕ). As firms with the same productivity
behave symmetrically, we index firms from now on by ϕ alone. Productivity remains fixed after entry, but
firms face a constant exogenous probability of death δ, which induces steady-state entry and exit of firms in
the model. The assumption that the probability of firm death is uncorrelated with firm productivity is strong.
However, the model still captures empirical findings that exiting firms are on average of lower productivity than
surviving firms, because, among the cohort of entering firms each period, those that draw low productivity exit
immediately as discussed below.
The market structure is monopolistic competition. Production of each variety involves a fixed production
cost of fd units of labor and a constant variable cost that depends on firm productivity. The total labor required
to produce q(ϕ) units of a variety is therefore:

l(ϕ) = fd +

6

q(ϕ)
.
ϕ

With CES preferences, the fixed production cost is central to matching empirical findings that exiting firms are
on average of lower productivity than surviving firms, because firms that draw a sufficiently low productivity
cannot generate enough variable profits to cover the fixed production cost. If firms decide to export, they face a
fixed exporting cost of fx units of labor and iceberg variable costs of trade, such that τ > 1 units of each variety
must be exported in order for one unit to arrive in a foreign country. With CES preferences, the fixed exporting
cost is key to matching empirical findings that only the most productive firms export, because only firms that
draw a sufficiently high productivity can generate enough variable profits to cover the fixed exporting cost.
Otherwise, in the presence of only variable trade costs, all firms would export, since CES preferences imply
that the marginal utility of consuming any given variety approaches infinity as consumption of that variety
approaches zero.

3.3

Production and Exporting Decisions

As each firm supplies one of a continuum of varieties, it is of measure zero relative to the industry as a whole,
and hence takes the aggregate price index as given. The first-order condition for profit maximization yields
the standard result that equilibrium prices are a mark-up over marginal cost that depends on the elasticity of
demand. Given the same constant elasticity of demand in the domestic and export markets, equilibrium prices
in the export market are a constant multiple of those in the domestic market due to the variable costs of trade:

px (ϕ) = τ pd (ϕ) = τ

σ
σ−1



wd
τ
=
,
ϕ
ρϕ

(3)

where we choose the wage in one country as the numeraire and use country symmetry. Together these imply
w = 1 for all countries.5
Substituting the pricing rule into firm revenue (2), we obtain the following expression for equilibrium firm
revenue in the export market, rx (ϕ), and in the domestic market, rd (ϕ):
rx (ϕ) = τ 1−σ rd (ϕ) = τ 1−σ (ρϕ)σ−1 RP σ−1 .

(4)

In deriving this expression for equilibrium revenue, firm varieties were assumed to enter utility symmetrically
5
Horizontal product differentiation and the pricing rule (3) have implications for empirical measures of productivity. The representation of consumer preferences (1), in which varieties enter utility symmetrically, implicitly imposes a choice of units in which
to measure the quantity of each variety. There is no necessary relationship between this normalization and the units in which physical quantities of output are measured for each firm in the data. As a result, data on physical quantities of output cannot be directly
compared across firms, and revenue rather than quantity-based empirical measures of productivity are appropriate. Additionally, the
constant mark-up implied by CES preferences in (3) ensures that firm prices are inversely proportional to firm productivity. Hence
revenue-based measures of productivity, p (ϕ) q (ϕ) /l (ϕ), only vary across firms because of the fixed costs. More productive firms
have higher variable labor input and higher revenue, with the result that the fixed labor input is spread over more units of revenue.

7

in (1). However, it is straightforward to allow for different weights for each firm variety to capture, for example,
differences in product quality. With CES preferences and monopolistic competition, product quality enters firm
revenue in the same way as firm productivity.6
From equilibrium revenue (4), the relative revenue of any two firms within the same market depends solely
on their relative productivities:
rd (ϕ00 )
rx (ϕ00 )
=
=
rd (ϕ0 )
rx (ϕ0 )



ϕ00
ϕ0

σ−1
,

(5)

Additionally, from equilibrium revenue (4), the relative revenue of a firm with a given productivity in the
domestic and export markets depends solely on variable trade costs. Together these two features of relative
revenues greatly simplify the characterization of industry equilibrium.
Consumer love of variety and a fixed production cost imply that no firm would ever export without also
serving the domestic market. Therefore we can apportion the entire fixed production cost to the domestic
market and the fixed exporting cost to the foreign market.7 Adopting this convenient accounting device, the
pricing rule (3) implies that variable profits in each market are proportional to revenue, while firm profits in
each market equal variable profits minus the relevant fixed cost:

π x (ϕ) =

rx (ϕ)
− fx ,
σ

π d (ϕ) =

rd (ϕ)
− fd .
σ

(6)

The fixed production cost implies that there is a zero-profit cutoff productivity (ϕ∗d ) below which firms would
make negative profits if they entered, and hence they exit immediately:
rd (ϕ∗d ) = (ρϕ∗d )σ−1 RP σ−1 = σfd .

(7)

Similarly, the fixed exporting cost implies that there is an exporting cutoff productivity (ϕ∗x ) below which
surviving firms would make negative profits if they exported, and hence they serve only the domestic market:
rx (ϕ∗x ) = τ 1−σ (ρϕ∗x )σ−1 RP σ−1 = σfx .
6

(8)

An empirical literature has sought to use variation in unit values (revenue divided by physical quantity) to distinguish between
models of horizontal product differentiation featuring productivity and quality differences across firms, including Baldwin & Harrigan
(2007) and Johnson (2009). As discussed in footnote 5, there is no necessary relationship between the normalization imposed by
the symmetric demand representation (1) and the units in which physical quantities of output are measured for each firm in the data.
As a result, data on physical quantities of output cannot be directly compared across firms in the presence of horizontal product
differentiation, which complicates the interpretation of variation in unit values across firms.
7
This is merely a convenient accounting device. Instead of analyzing the decision to export by comparing export profits to the fixed
exporting cost, we could instead equivalently compare the sum of domestic and export profit profits to the sum of the fixed production
and exporting costs.

8

Combining the zero-profit and exporting cutoff conditions, (7) and (8), with the relationship between variety
revenues within the same market (5), we obtain the following relationship between the two productivity cutoffs:

ϕ∗x

=



Λϕ∗d ,

Λ≡τ

fx
fd



1
σ−1

.

(9)

Therefore, for sufficiently high values of fixed and variable trade costs, the model features selection into export
markets: Λ > 1.8 Only the most productive firms export, while intermediate productivity firms serve only the
domestic market, and low productivity firms exit.9

3.4

Steady-state Industry Equilibrium

The steady-state industry equilibrium is characterized by constant masses of firms entering, producing and
exporting, as well as stationary ex post distributions of productivity among producing and exporting firms.
With firm productivity fixed at entry and a constant independent probability of firm death, these stationary ex
post distributions for productivity take a particularly tractable form. The ex post productivity distributions in
the domestic and export markets, µd (ϕ) and µx (ϕ) respectively, are truncations of the ex ante productivity
distribution, g(ϕ), at the zero-profit and exporting cutoff productivities respectively:

µd (ϕ) =





g(ϕ)
1−G(ϕ∗d )


 0

if ϕ ≥

ϕ∗d

µx (ϕ) =

,





g(ϕ)
1−G(ϕ∗x )


 0

otherwise

if ϕ ≥ ϕ∗x

.

(10)

otherwise

In an equilibrium with positive firm entry, we require that the free entry condition holds, which equates the
expected value of entry to the sunk entry cost. The expected value of entry depends on the value of a firm
with each productivity ϕ, which equals the maximum of zero (if the firm exits) and the net present value of the
stream of future profits (if the firm enters). Assuming, for simplicity, no time discounting, the value of a firm
with productivity ϕ is:


π(ϕ)
v(ϕ) = max 0,
.
δ
The free entry condition therefore takes the following form:
ve = [1 − G(ϕ∗d )]

[π̄ d + χnπ̄ x ]
π̄
= [1 − G(ϕ∗d )]
= fe ,
δ
δ

(11)

8
Empirical estimates of the fixed costs of exporting are typically large: see for example Das et al. (2007) and Roberts & Tybout
(1997). Arkolakis (2008) argues that these large values for fixed costs are hard to reconcile with small export shipments and proposes
instead a model of endogenous market entry costs, which is discussed further below.
9
While the discussion here concentrates on exporting, Helpman et al. (2004) extend the analysis to consider exporting and horizontal
foreign direct investment (FDI) as alternative modes of serving foreign markets.

9

where the expected value of entry equals the probability of successful entry, [1 − G(ϕ∗d )], times expected
profits conditional on successful entry, π̄. Expected profits conditional on successful entry equal expected
profits in the domestic market conditional on serving that market, π̄ d , plus the probability of exporting, χ =
[1 − G(ϕ∗x )]/[1 − G(ϕ∗d )], times the number of export markets, n, times expected profits in each export market
conditional on serving that market, π̄ x . Expected profits in the domestic and export markets, π̄ d and π̄ x ,
themselves depend on the ex post productivity distributions (10).
In a steady-state equilibrium with a constant mass of firms producing, we also require that the mass of
successful entrants that draw a productivity above the zero-profit cutoff equals the mass of firms that die, which
yields the following steady-state stability condition:
[1 − G(ϕ∗d )] Me = δMd ,

(12)

where Me denotes the mass of entrants and Md denotes the mass of producing firms.
While aggregate variables, such as the price index, depend on integrals over values for firm productivity,
the assumption of CES preferences again greatly simplifies the analysis, because all aggregate variables can be
written in terms of a weighted average of firm productivity. As a result, aggregate variables in the Melitz model
take the same value as in a model in which all firms have a common productivity equal to weighted-average
productivity, but weighted-average productivity is itself endogenously determined by firm decisions.
Using the equilibrium pricing rule (3), the zero-profit and exporting cutoff productivities, (7) and (8) respectively, the ex post productivity distributions (10), and country symmetry, we obtain the following expression
for the price index:

P

=


 1
Md pd (ϕ̃d )1−σ + χnMd τ 1−σ pd (ϕ̃x )1−σ 1−σ
1

= Mt1−σ p(ϕ̃t )

where Mt = (1 + χn) Md ; weighted-average productivities in the domestic and export markets, ϕ̃d and ϕ̃x ,
are defined in the web appendix and depend solely on the zero-profit and exporting cutoff productivities, ϕ∗d
and ϕ∗x ; overall weighted average productivity, ϕ̃t , is itself a weighted average of ϕ̃d and ϕ̃x , as also defined in
the web appendix. These weighted-average productivities correspond to theoretically-consistent measures of
aggregate productivity derived from the CES ideal price index.10
10

From (4), qd (ϕ)/q(ϕ̃) = (ϕ/ϕ̃d )σ , which implies that ϕ̃d can be written as ϕ̃d =

R∞
ϕ∗
d

ϕ−1 [q(ϕ/q(ϕ̃))] [g(ϕ)/ (1 − G(ϕ∗d ))] dϕ.

Therefore, ϕ̃d is the weighted harmonic mean of the ϕ’s, where the weights (qd (ϕ)/q(ϕ̃)) are firms’ relative output shares. The
interpretation of ϕ̃x is directly analogous.

10

With symmetric countries, the steady-state industry equilibrium can be referenced by a quadruple {ϕ∗d , ϕ∗x , R, P },
in terms of which all other endogenous variables of the model can be written. As the model has a recursive
structure, it is straightforward to determine this steady-state equilibrium for a general continuous productivity
distribution, as shown in the web appendix.

3.5

Trade Liberalization and Intra-industry Reallocation

To examine the comparative statics of opening the closed economy to trade, we compare the steady-state
equilibria in the closed and open economy.11 Using the relationship between variety revenues and the zeroprofit and exporting cutoff conditions, the free entry condition (11) can be written as:
fd
ve =
δ

Z

∞

ϕ∗d

"

ϕ
ϕ∗d

σ−1

#

nfx
− 1 g(ϕ)dϕ +
δ

Z

∞

ϕ∗x

"

ϕ
ϕ∗x

σ−1

#
− 1 g(ϕ)dϕ = fe .

(13)

Substituting for ϕ∗x = Λϕ∗d from the relationship between the productivity cutoffs (9), a unique equilibrium
value of the zero-profit cutoff productivity, ϕ∗d , can be determined independently of the other endogenous
variables of the model. Having determined ϕ∗d , the exporting cutoff productivity, ϕ∗x , follows immediately from
the relationship between the productivity cutoffs (9).
The free entry condition (13) defines a downward-sloping relationship between ϕ∗x and ϕ∗d , where the closed
economy free entry condition corresponds to the limiting case of infinitely large trade costs, where ϕ∗x → ∞.
As the closed economy opens to trade and the exporting cutoff productivity, ϕ∗x , falls to a finite value, the zeroprofit cutoff productivity, ϕ∗d , must rise in order for the expected value of entry in (13) to remain equal to the
unchanged sunk entry cost. Intuitively, the opening of trade increases expected profitability in the industry, π̄,
because of the positive probability of drawing a productivity sufficiently high to export, which implies that the
probability of successful entry, [1 − G (ϕ∗d )], must fall to restore equality between the expected value of entry
and the sunk entry cost. While we have derived these results for the opening of the closed economy to trade,
similar results hold for reductions in variable trade costs in the open economy equilibrium.
The rise in the zero-profit cutoff productivity, ϕ∗d , induced by trade liberalization leads to within-industry
reallocations of resources across firms. There is exit by low-productivity firms with productivities above the
old but below the new zero-profit cutoff. Additionally, intermediate-productivity firms that serve only the
domestic market experience a contraction in revenue as a result of the rise in the zero-profit cutoff, since
rd (ϕ) = (ϕ/ϕ∗d )σ−1 σfd . While high-productivity exporting firms also experience a contraction in revenue in
11

Following the opening of trade, there are transition dynamics from the closed to the open economy steady-state equilibrium (see
for example Chaney 2005). In a later section, we follow much of the literature in considering a static version of the Melitz model, with
no exogenous firm death and no steady-state entry and exit of firms.

11

the domestic market, they enjoy an expansion in revenue in the export market. As shown in the web appendix,
the expansion in export market revenue dominates, so that the total revenue of high-productivity exporting firms
rises. Each of these firm responses induces reallocations of resources towards more productive firms, which
raises aggregate productivity.12
The mechanism behind these within-industry reallocations of resources is the differential impact of trade
liberalization on exporters and non-exporters. In the special case where fixed exporting costs are equal to zero
(fx = 0), all firms export and the opening of trade has no effect on the zero-profit cutoff productivity, because
the open economy free entry condition (13) takes exactly the same form as in the closed economy. Although
the opening of trade leads to entry by foreign varieties into the domestic market, which reduces the domestic
price index, this reduction in the price index has a symmetric effect on the domestic revenue of all firms in (4).
As a result, there is a change in the mass of firms at each productivity, Md g(ϕ)/[1 − G(ϕ∗d )], but no change in
the zero-profit cutoff productivity below which firms exit.13

3.6

Welfare

Indirect utility in both the closed and open economy can be expressed solely in terms of the zero-profit productivity cutoff below which firms exit:
1
V=
=ρ
P



L
σf

1/(σ−1)

ϕ∗d .

As the opening of trade raises the zero-profit productivity cutoff below which firms exit, ϕ∗d , there are necessarily welfare gains from trade in the Melitz model.
While theories of international trade have typically emphasized comparative advantage and product variety
as sources of welfare gains from trade, theories of heterogeneous firms and trade point to within-industry
reallocations of resources as a new channel through which trade can affect welfare. We discuss in Section 6
below the implications of the introduction of this new welfare channel for the overall magnitude of the welfare
gains from trade.
12

One caveat is that ϕ̃t takes into account output lost in transit (from τ ), which implies that it is possible for ϕ̃t to be lower than the
closed economy value of ϕ̃d when τ is high and fx is low. However, any productivity average based on output “at the factory gate”
is necessarily higher in the open economy equilibrium with selection into export markets than in the closed economy equilibrium, as
shown in Melitz (2003) and the web appendix.
13
From the relationship between the productivity cutoffs (9), there is a range of parameter values with positive fixed exporting costs
for which all firms export. For this range of parameter values, the opening of trade does affect the zero-profit cutoff productivity in the
free entry condition (13), but only because it increases fixed costs for all firms. As a result, some previously viable low productivity
firms can no longer generate enough revenue to cover fixed costs and exit.

12

3.7

Pareto Distribution

While the above analysis was undertaken for any continuous productivity distribution, the case of a Pareto
productivity distribution has received particular attention in the literature and will be considered in a later
section. In this case:


g(ϕ) = kϕkmin ϕ−(k+1) ,

G(ϕ) = 1 −

ϕmin
ϕ

k
,

(14)

where ϕmin > 0 is the lower bound of the support of the productivity distribution; lower values of the shape
parameter k correspond to greater dispersion in productivity; and we require k > (σ − 1) for the distribution
of firm revenue to have a finite mean.
The Pareto distribution has two key attractive features for the Melitz model. First a random variable with
this distribution remains Pareto distributed when it is truncated from below. Second the CES demand system
implies that firm variables, such as revenue, are power functions of productivity, and a power function of a
Pareto-distributed random variable is itself Pareto distributed. For these reasons, the model becomes particularly tractable for the case of a Pareto distribution, which has been found to provide a reasonable approximation
to the observed distribution of firm size (e.g. Axtell 2001).

3.8

Summary

Taken together, the Melitz model addresses each of the empirical challenges discussed above. The model
features producer heterogeneity, steady-state entry and exit of firms, and the accompanying steady-state job
creation and destruction. With positive fixed exporting costs, and for sufficiently large values of fixed and variable trade costs, only some firms export. These exporting firms are larger and more productive than firms that
only serve the domestic market. And for values of trade costs for which there is selection into export markets,
trade liberalization induces reallocations of resources across firms within industries, as low-productivity firms
exit and high-productivity firms expand to enter export markets.

4

Integrated Equilibrium

While the Melitz model emphasizes reallocations of resources within industries, traditional theories of international trade, such as the Heckscher-Ohlin model, stress comparative advantage and reallocation across
industries. In this section, we review Bernard, Redding & Schott (2007), which embeds the Melitz model
within the standard framework of general equilibrium trade theory using the concept of integrated equilibrium,
as used in Dixit & Norman (1980) and Helpman & Krugman (1985).
13

Consider a world of two countries (home and foreign), two industries (good one and good two) and two
factors of production (skilled and unskilled labor). Home is assumed to be skill-abundant relative to foreign.
Consumer preferences are identical and homothetic and for simplicity the upper-tier of utility across the two
sectors is assumed to take the Cobb-Douglas form. Within each sector, preferences are defined over consumption of a continuum of horizontally differentiated varieties as in the previous section:
Z
U=

ρ

 α Z
ρ

ρ

q2 (ω) dω

q1 (ω) dω
ω∈Ω1

 1−α
ρ

,

0 < α < 1.

ω∈Ω2

As in the standard Heckscher-Ohlin model, production technologies are the same across countries but differ
in factor intensity across industries. Good one is assumed to be skill-intensive relative to good 2. In each sector,
there is a fixed production cost and a constant variable cost that depends on firm productivity. The production
technology is assumed to be homothetic, so that the fixed and variable cost use the two factors of production
with the same intensity. Therefore the total cost of producing q(ϕ) units of a variety in sector i is:


qi (ϕ)
(wS )β i (wL )1−β i ,
Γi = fi +
ϕ

1 > β1 > β2 > 0

where wS is the skilled wage and wL is the unskilled wage.
When fixed and variable trade costs are equal to zero, the concept of integrated equilibrium can be used to
determine the set of factor allocations to the two countries for which trade in goods alone can equalize factor
prices. Within this factor price equalization set, the four theorems of the Heckscher-Ohlin model – the Factor
Price Equalization, Stolper-Samuelson, Rybczynski and Heckscher-Ohlin Theorems – continue to hold in the
presence of firm heterogeneity.
When fixed and variable trade costs are not equal to zero, factor price equalization breaks down and, for
parameter values for which there is selection into export markets, the opening of trade results in intra-industry
reallocations across firms. As these intra-industry reallocations are driven by the differential impact of the
opening of trade on exporters and non-exporters, they are stronger in the comparative advantage industry, where
export opportunities are relatively more attractive. Although there is a decline in the relative mass of firms in
the comparative disadvantage industry, as factors of production are reallocated in accordance with comparative
advantage, exit by low productivity firms is strongest in the comparative advantage industry. Thus the opening
of trade leads to a larger increase in the zero-profit cutoff and in average productivity in the comparative
advantage industry than in the comparative disadvantage industry. This differential impact of the opening of
trade across sectors according to Heckscher-Ohlin-based comparative advantage influences both the welfare

14

gains from trade and the income distributional consequences of trade liberalization.

5

Trade and Market Size

While the Melitz model captures reallocations of resources across firms within industries, the property of
constant mark-ups imposed by CES preferences stands at odds with empirical studies of trade liberalization
episodes, which typically find pro-competitive effects (see for example Tybout 2003). Relatedly, the CES
demand structure implies that the within-industry productivity distribution is invariant to market size, which
only affects the mass of firms. In contrast to these predictions, Campbell & Hopenhayn (2005) present empirical
evidence that retail establishments in larger markets have higher sales and employment. Similarly, Syverson
(2004) examines the concrete industry as an example of a good with high transport costs, and finds that larger
markets have both higher average plant size and higher average productivity.
In this section, we consider the Melitz & Ottaviano (2008) model of firm heterogeneity, which features
quasi-linear preferences between a homogeneous and differentiated sector and quadratic preferences across
varieties within the differentiated sector. As a result, mark-ups in the differentiated sector vary endogenously
with firm productivity, market size and trade integration.14 Labor is the sole factor of production and each
country i is endowed with Li workers. The representative consumer’s preferences in each country are defined
over consumption of a continuum of differentiated varieties, qωc , and consumption of a homogeneous good, q0c :

U=

q0c

Z
+α
ω∈Ω

qωc dω

1
− γ
2

Z

(qωc )2 dω

ω∈Ω

1
− η
2

Z

qωc dω

2
,

ω∈Ω

where higher α and lower η increase demand for differentiated varieties relative to the numeraire, while higher
γ implies greater love of variety, with γ = 0 corresponding to the special case of perfect substitutes. Each
country’s labor endowment is assumed to be sufficiently large that it both consumes and produces the homogeneous good, which is chosen as the numeraire, so that pc0 = 1. Using the first-order conditions for utility
maximization, the inverse demand curve for a differentiated variety is:
pω = α − γqωc − ηQc ,

Qc =

Z

qωc dω,

ω∈Ω

where demand for a variety is positive if pω ≤ α − ηQc , which defines a “choke price” above which demand
14

Other possible frameworks for modeling firm heterogeneity with endogenous mark-ups include Bertrand competition in Bernard
et al. (2003), translog preferences and monopolistic competition following Feenstra (2003), and Constant Absolute Risk Aversion
preferences and monopolistic competition following Behrens & Murata (2006).

15

for a variety is zero.
The homogeneous good is produced under conditions of perfect competition and constant returns to scale
with a unit labor requirement. Differentiated varieties are produced under conditions of monopolistic competition and constant returns to scale. To enter the differentiated sector, a firm must incur a sunk entry cost of fe
units of labor, after which its unit labor requirement or cost, c, is drawn from a cumulative distribution function
G (c) with support on [0, cM ], where this cost draw is the inverse of the productivity draw considered in Section
3 above. As firms with the same cost, c, behave symmetrically, firms are indexed from now on by c alone. If
a firm decides to export, it faces iceberg variable costs of trade, such that τ j > 1 units of a variety must be
exported to country j in order for one unit to arrive.
With quadratic preferences in the differentiated sector, the marginal utility of consuming a differentiated
variety is finite at zero consumption. Therefore fixed production costs and fixed exporting costs are not needed
to generate firm exit and selection into export markets respectively. Firms drawing a marginal cost above the
choke price in the domestic market exit in equilibrium, because they cannot generate positive profits from
production. Additionally, a firm’s marginal costs may lie below the choke price in the domestic market, but
may be above the choke price in the foreign market once variable trade costs have been taken into account.
Thus sufficiently high variable trade costs are enough to induce selection into export markets.
The consideration of equilibria where each country both consumes and produces the homogeneous good
greatly simplifies the analysis. As long as the homogeneous good is produced, productivity in this sector pins
down the wage in each country as equal to one. Additionally, as long as the homogeneous good is consumed,
quasi-linear preferences imply that the demand for differentiated varieties can be determined independently
of income. A key advantage of these features is the resulting tractability of the model, which means that it
can be used to consider multiple countries with arbitrary differences in country size and physical geography
(variable trade costs). A disadvantage is that changes in income are accommodated solely through changes in
consumption of the homogeneous good and have no general equilibrium effects in the differentiated sector.
As markets are assumed to be segmented and the production technology exhibits constant returns to scale,
the supplier of each differentiated variety maximizes independently the profits earned from domestic and export
sales.15 Using the first-order conditions for utility and profit maximization, firm variables such as the price in
the domestic and export market can be determined solely as a function of a firm’s own cost and the cost cutoff
15
Using the equilibrium pricing rules derived below, it can be shown that equilibrium variety prices are such that there exist no
profitable arbitrage opportunities across markets.

16

above which it is not profitable to serve a market:
pid (c) =


1 i
cd + c ,
2

pix (c) =


τj i
cx + c ,
2

where countries are indexed by i and j; cid is the cost cutoff in the domestic market for country i; cix is the cost
cutoff for firms exporting from country i to j; and cix = cjd /τ j .
From the above equilibrium pricing rule, more productive firms again charge lower prices, but linear demand implies that firms charging lower prices face more inelastic demand, and hence they choose optimally to
set a higher mark-up of price over marginal cost. As a result, the lower costs of more productive firms are not
fully passed on to consumers in the form of lower prices.16
To characterize the model’s comparative statics, we follow Melitz & Ottaviano (2008) in assuming that firm
productivity 1/c follows a Pareto distribution, as discussed in Section 3 above, with lower productivity bound
1/cM and shape parameter k > 1. In this case, the cumulative distribution function of firm costs is given by
G(c) = (c/cM )k for c ∈ [0, cM ].
We begin by considering the closed economy, which again corresponds to the limiting case of infinitely
large trade costs, where cix → 0. With quasi-linear preferences, market size (the measure of consumers L)
affects the closed economy cost cutoff. Larger markets are characterized by greater product market competition,
with lower cost cutoffs (cD ), lower average costs (c̄), lower average prices (p̄), and a larger mass of product
varieties (N ). Comparing a large to a small market, some low productivity firms have marginal costs above
the choke price in the larger market and exit, while surviving firms price on a more elastic segment of their
demand curve, and hence charge lower mark-ups than in the smaller market. Therefore consumers in larger
markets face lower average prices and enjoy higher welfare, because of both higher average productivity and
lower average mark-ups.
Opening the closed economy to trade has similar effects on the domestic market cost cutoff as an increase
in closed economy market size. Consumers experience welfare gains from trade through lower average prices,
because of both higher average productivity and lower average mark-ups. Once the economy is open to trade,
unilateral, multilateral and preferential trade liberalization have distinct effects on welfare, because they have
different effects on the entry and production decisions of differentiated-sector firms.
16
As firm prices now fall less than proportionately with firm productivity, revenue-based measures of productivity, p (ϕ) q (ϕ) /l (ϕ),
vary across firms even in the absence of fixed costs.

17

6

Gravity

One of the most successful empirical relationships in economics is the gravity equation, which relates the value
of trade between countries to their size and the economic distance between them. Models of firm heterogeneity
and trade have yielded new insights for the gravity equation by highlighting a distinction between the extensive
margin (the measure of exporting firms) and the intensive margin (average exports conditional on exporting).
To highlight this distinction, Chaney (2008) considers a version of the Melitz model with a Pareto productivity
distribution and a fixed measure of potential firms rather than free entry. Subsequently, Arkolakis et al. (2008)
have shown that the same results hold with free entry, and hence we follow their exposition.
The specification of entry and production is similar to that in Section 3. A static version of the Melitz
model is considered with a single differentiated sector; the world consists of many (potentially asymmetric)
countries;17 productivity follows the Pareto distribution (14); and fixed exporting costs are incurred in the
consuming rather than the producing country.18 Total exports from country i to destination market j can be
written in terms of the extensive and intensive margins of exports:
1 − G(ϕ∗ij )
Xij =
1 − G(ϕ∗ii )
{z
|


extensive



Z
Mi
}

∞

ϕ∗ij

(ρϕ)σ−1 (τ ij wi )1−σ Pjσ−1 wj Lj

|

{z

intensive

g (ϕ)
  dϕ,
1 − G ϕ∗ij
}

where Mi is the mass of producing firms in country i and wj Lj is total income, which equals total expenditure
on differentiated varieties, in destination market j; ϕ∗ij is the productivity cutoff for firms located in country i
and serving destination market j; τ ii = 1 and τ ij > 1 for j 6= i. Using the Pareto productivity distribution, we
obtain:

!k
σk
ϕ∗ii
Mi wj fij
.
Xij =
∗
ϕij
k{z
− σ + 1}
|
|
{z
}
intensive

(15)

extensive

Perhaps surprisingly, the intensive margin of trade is independent of variable trade costs with a Pareto productivity distribution. On the one hand, higher variable trade costs reduce exports of a given firm to a given country,
which reduces average exports per firm. On the other hand, higher variable trade costs induce low productivity
firms to exit the export market, which raises average exports per firm. With a Pareto productivity distribution
these two effects exactly offset one another, so as to leave the intensive margin independent of variable trade
costs.
17

For an analysis of asymmetries between a home and foreign country in a model with a differentiated and homogeneous sector, see
Demidova (2008).
18
While we follow the specification in Arkolakis et al. (2008), whether fixed exporting costs are incurred in the consuming or
producing country makes little difference.

18

Using total exports (15) and the equilibrium mass of producing firms in country i, the share of country j’s
expenditure on goods produced in country i, ϑij , can be evaluated as:
1−k/(σ−1)

Li ϕkimin (τ ij wi )−k fij
ϑij = P
.
−k 1−k/(σ−1)
k
fsj
s Ls ϕs min (τ sj ws )

(16)

This expression for the trade share takes a familiar gravity equation form, where trade between countries
i and j depends on both bilateral resistance (trade costs between i and j) and multilateral resistance (which
summarizes trade costs between all countries s and j), as in Anderson and Van Wincoop (2003). The elasticity
of the trade share with respect to variable trade costs depends not on the elasticity of substitution, σ, but on the
parameter determining the dispersion of productivity, k. This feature is closely related to the property of the
Pareto productivity distribution noted above, namely that changes in variable trade costs only affect trade flows
through the extensive margin, where the extensive margin response depends on the dispersion of productivity.
Notably, the trade share (16) takes a directly analogous form to that in Eaton & Kortum (2002), despite the stark
differences between the two models: monopolistic competition and increasing returns to scale versus perfect
competition and constant returns to scale. This similarity of the trade shares reflects the fact that, under the
distributional assumptions of both models, variable trade costs only influence trade flows through the extensive
margin.
As shown in Arkolakis et al. (2008), further insight into the welfare gains from trade can be garnered by
using the cutoff productivity conditions and the trade share (16) to write indirect utility as follows:


Vj =

wj
=
Pj

1−k/(σ−1)
k
−1/k 1/(σ−1)  ϕj min fjj
ϑjj Lj
 
k
σ
fe σ−1
σ k/(σ−1)

1/k
σ−1 

k−σ+1

.

Since in the closed economy ϑjj = 1, while in the open economy 0 < ϑjj < 1, we again obtain the result
that there are necessarily welfare gains from trade. Furthermore, a country’s trade share with itself, ϑjj , is
a sufficient statistic for welfare in the sense that estimating the welfare gains from trade relative to autarky
requires only a measure of a country’s trade share with itself, ϑjj , and an estimate of the elasticity of trade
flows with respect to variable trade costs, k, which can be obtained from bilateral trade data. Notably, the
property that the trade share is a sufficient statistic for welfare is shared with Eaton & Kortum (2002) and a
wider class of models.19
19

See Arkolakis et al. (2009) for an analysis of the class of models for which the trade share is such a sufficient statistic for welfare.
Given the same trade share and the same elasticity of trade with respect to trade costs, this class of models implies the same welfare
gains from trade. Of course, the trade share is an endogenous variable, which varies with the parameters of each model and in general
can differ across models within this class. Though Atkeson & Burstein (2010) show that the free entry condition constrains the overall

19

One of the striking features of the Melitz model is that welfare gains from trade still occur even if the mass
of varieties available for domestic consumption falls (even if trade reduces product diversity). As shown in
Arkolakis et al. (2008), total exports (15) and the definition of the trade share, ϑij = Xij /wj Lj , can be used
to express the total mass of varieties available for consumption in country j as:
X

Msj =

s

Lj
σk
fjj k−σ+1

+

Lj

X

σk
k−σ+1 s6=j


ϑsj

1
1
−
fsj
fjj


.

A sufficient condition for the mass of varieties available for domestic consumption to fall following the opening
of trade is that the fixed cost of exporting to each foreign country, fsj for s 6= j, exceeds the fixed cost of
supplying the domestic market, fjj , which generalizes a result for two countries reported in Baldwin & Forslid
(2004). The intuition for why the mass of varieties available for domestic consumption can fall following
the opening of trade is as follows. Since the opening of the closed economy to trade raises the domestic
productivity cutoff, average firm size rises, which with a given labor endowment implies a decline in the mass
of domestically-produced varieties. For the parameter values discussed above, this reduction in the mass of
domestically-produced varieties dominates the access to new varieties from foreign markets, so that the overall
mass of varieties available for domestic consumption falls.20

7

Quantitative Analysis

While the discussion above highlighted the ability of models of heterogeneous firms to account for the qualitative features of micro data, there is also evidence that they can account quantitatively for the observed pattern
of trade across firms and countries.
Eaton et al. (2008) use simulated method of moments to estimate an extended version of the Melitz model
using moments based on French trade data by firm and destination market. These data exhibit a number of
striking empirical regularities to be explained. First, the number of French firms selling to a market (relative
to French market share) increases with market size according to an approximately log linear relationship.
This pattern of firm export market participation exhibits an imperfect hierarchy, where firms selling to less
popular markets are more likely to sell to more popular markets, but do not always do so. Second, export
sales distributions are similar across markets of very different size and extent of French participation. While
magnitude of the welfare gains from trade in a model of product variety with CES preferences and monopolistic competition, as
discussed in a later section.
20
In contrast, in Krugman (1979), the opening of trade increases firm size and reduces the mass of varieties produced domestically,
but increases the mass of varieties available for domestic consumption. The underlying mechanism is quite different: in Krugman
(1979) firms are homogeneous and the rise in firm size occurs as a result of a variable elasticity of substitution.

20

the upper tail of these distributions is approximately Pareto distributed, there are departures from a Pareto
distribution in the lower tail where small export shipments are observed. Third, average sales in France are
higher for firms selling to less popular foreign markets and to more foreign markets.
In their econometric analysis, Eaton et al (2008) consider a static version of the Melitz model, with a Pareto
productivity distribution, and a fixed measure of potential firms, as in Chaney (2008). But to account for the
empirical regularities noted above, the model is extended in a number of directions. In order to explain variation
in export participation with market size in a model with CES demand, fixed market entry costs are required.
But to generate the departures from a Pareto distribution in the lower tail where small export shipments are
observed, these fixed market entry costs are allowed to vary endogenously with a firm’s choice of the fraction of
consumers within a market to serve, f , as in Arkolakis (2008). Additionally, to allow for imperfect hierarchies
of markets, fixed market entry costs are assumed to be subject to an idiosyncratic shock for each firm ω and
destination market j, εjω , as well a common shock for each source country i and destination market j, Eij .
Market entry costs are therefore:
Eijω = εjω Eij M (f ) ,
where the function M (f ) determines how market entry costs vary with the fraction of consumers served and
takes the following form, which is derived from microfoundations in Arkolakis (2008):

M (f ) =

1 − (1 − f )1−1/λ
,
1 − 1/λ

where λ > 0 captures the increasing cost of reaching a larger fraction of consumers. Any given consumer
is served with probability f , so that each consumer receives the same measure of varieties, but the particular
varieties in question can vary across consumers.21
Finally, to allow for idiosyncratic variation in sales conditional on entering a given export market for firms
with a given productivity, demand is also subject to an idiosyncratic shock for each firm ω and destination
market j, αjω :

Xijω = αjω fijω Xj

τ ij piω
Pj

1−σ
,

where Xj is total expenditure in market j and the presence of fijω reflects the fact that only a fraction of
21
To generate the observed departures from a Pareto distribution in the lower tail of the export sales distribution, one requires
0 < λ < 1, which implies an increasing marginal cost of reaching additional consumers. An alternative potential explanation for the
departures from a Pareto distribution in the lower tail is a variable elasticity of substitution, though such an explanation also needs to
be consistent with an upper tail of the export sales distribution that is well approximated by a Pareto distribution. Both endogenous
market entry costs and a variable elasticity of substitution provide potential explanations for empirical findings that most of the growth
in trade following trade liberalization is in goods previously traded in small amounts, as in Kehoe & Ruhl (2009).

21

consumers in each market are served. A firm’s decision to enter a market depends on the composite shock,
η jω = αjω /εjω , but a firm with a given productivity can enter a market because of a low entry shock, εjω , and
yet still have low sales in that market because of a low demand shock, αjω .
The properties of the model depend on five key parameters: a composite parameter that includes both the
elasticity of substitution and the Pareto shape parameter, the convexity of marketing costs, the variance of
demand shocks, the variance of entry shocks, and the correlation between demand and entry shocks. As shown
in Eaton et al. (2008), these parameters can be precisely estimated from moments of the French data and the
resulting parameterized model provides a good fit to the observed data. For the estimated parameter values,
firm productivity accounts for around half of the observed variation across firms in export market participation,
but explains substantially less of the variation in exports conditional on entering a market.
Given the estimated parameter values, the model can be used to examine counterfactuals, such as a 10
percent reduction in bilateral trade barriers for all French firms. In this counterfactual, total sales by French
firms rise by around $16 million, with most of this increase accounted for by a rise in sales of the top decile of
firms of around $23 million. In contrast, every other decile of firms experiences a decline in sales, with around
half of the firms in the bottom decile exiting. Taken together, these results suggest that the intra-industry
reallocations emphasized by theories of heterogeneous firms and trade can be quantitatively large, even for
empirically reasonable changes in trade frictions.22
Modeling the extensive margin of export participation also enables theories of heterogeneous firms and
trade to account for another important feature of international trade data, which is the prevalence of zero bilateral flows between countries. Helpman et al. (2008) develop a multi-country version of the Melitz model,
in which the productivity distribution is a truncated Pareto. In this case, no firm exports from country i to
destination market j if the productivity cutoff, ϕ∗ij , lies above the upper limit of country i’s productivity distribution. Estimating a structural gravity equation, they show that controlling for both the non-random selection
of positive trade flows and the extensive margin of exporting firms has quantitatively important implications
for estimates of the effects of standard trade frictions on trade flows.

8

Labor Markets

Although trade liberalization has uneven effects across firms in the Melitz model, all workers are affected in the
same way, because there is a frictionless labor market in which all workers are employed for a common wage.
22
For a quantitative analysis of European integration using a model of firm heterogeneity and trade, see Del Gatto et al. (2006).
For a quantitative analysis of the effect of China’s productivity growth on world welfare, see Hsieh & Ossa (2010). For a quantitative
analysis of the apparel sector in Bangladesh, see Cherkashin et al. (2010).

22

More recently, theories of heterogeneous firms and trade have begin to explore the implications of labor market
frictions for the impact of trade liberalization on the distribution of income across workers. One line of research
has considered models of fair or efficiency wages, including Davis & Harrigan (2007), Egger & Kreickemeier
(2009), and Amiti & Davis (2008). A second line of work has examined the implications of search frictions in
the labor market, including Felbermayr et al. (2008), Helpman & Itskhoki (2010), and Helpman et al. (2010).23
In the presence of labor market frictions, equilibrium unemployment can exist and provides a channel
through which trade can affect the distribution of income. While Helpman & Itskhoki (2010) emphasize reallocations across sectors with different degrees of search frictions, Felbermayr et al. (2008) stress the role
of productivity gains from trade liberalization in reducing effective search costs. Helpman & Itskhoki (2010)
consider a two-country, two-sector model of international trade, in which one sector produces a homogeneous
product, while the other sector produces differentiated products, and both are subject to search frictions. Differences in labor market institutions across countries and industries provide a source of comparative advantage
and shape the impact of trade liberalization on aggregate unemployment.24 Reductions in a country’s labor
market frictions in the differentiated sector raise its own welfare, by expanding the size of its differentiated sector and reducing its differentiated-sector price index. This expansion in the differentiated sector in one country
intensifies competition in the export market faced by firms in the other country’s differentiated sector. As a
result, the other country’s differentiated sector contracts, which reduces its welfare. In contrast, proportional
reductions in labor market frictions in the differentiated sector in both countries raise welfare in each country,
by expanding the size of the differentiated sector in each country. Variation in search frictions across sectors
generates differences in sectoral unemployment rates, which implies that the opening of trade affects aggregate
unemployment by changing the relative shares of the labor force searching for employment in each sector.
As well as introducing unemployment, labor market frictions can also give rise to equilibrium differences
in wages across firms. A large empirical literature finds that larger firms pay higher wages than smaller firms,25
and many empirical studies have found that exporters pay higher wages than non-exporters.26 Models of
heterogeneous firms and trade naturally generate these two features of the data if firm wages are systematically
related to firm revenue. In Egger & Kreickemeier (2009) and Amiti & Davis (2008), firm wages are assumed
to be related to productivity, revenue or profits, because of fair wage concerns. In contrast, in Helpman et al.
(2010), the relationship between firm wages and revenue is derived from search frictions and costly screening
23
The key early paper introducing search frictions into a general equilibrium model of trade is Davidson et al. (1988). For a synthesis
of the broader literature on search frictions and trade, see Davidson & Matusz (2009).
24
Another setting in which cross-country differences in labor market institutions can provide a source of comparative advantage is
where volatility varies across sectors, as in Cuñat & Melitz (2010).
25
See for example the survey by Oi & Idson (1999).
26
See in particular Bernard & Jensen (1995, 1997).

23

of workers to obtain information about worker ability. While workers are randomly matched to firms, more
productive firms screen their workers more intensively, and hence employ workforces of higher average ability,
which implies that they pay higher wages as the outcome of the bargaining game.
When wages vary with revenue across firms, within-industry reallocations of resources across firms provide
a new channel through which trade can affect income distribution. As shown in Helpman et al. (2010), the
opening of the closed economy to trade raises wage inequality within industries in a class of models satisfying
the following three conditions: wages and employment are power functions of productivity, only some firms
export and exporting raises the wage paid by a firm with a given productivity, and productivity is Pareto distributed. When these three conditions are satisfied, the distribution of wages across workers within an industry,
Gw (w), can be expressed as:


ζ

Sl,d Gw,d (w)
for wd ≤ w ≤ wd (ϕ∗x /ϕ∗d ) w ,



ζ
Gw (w) =
Sl,d
for wd (ϕ∗x /ϕ∗d ) w ≤ w ≤ wx ,





Sl,d + (1 − S l,d ) Gw,x (w) for w ≥ wx ,
where ζ w is the elasticity of firm wages with respect to firm productivity; wd is the lowest wage paid by
ψ

domestic firms; wd (ϕ∗x /ϕ∗d )ζ w is the highest wage paid by a domestic firm; wx = wd Υx w (ϕ∗x /ϕ∗d )ζ w is the
ψ

lowest wage paid by an exporting firm; Υx w is the increase in wages at the productivity threshold for entry
into export markets; Sl,d is the employment share of domestic firms; Gw,d (w) is a truncated Pareto distribution
of wages across workers employed by domestic firms; and Gw,x (w) is an untruncated Pareto distribution of
wages across workers employed by exporters. Both Gw,d (w) and Gw,x (w) have the same shape parameter,
which is determined by the elasticity of wages and employment with respect to productivity and the shape
parameter of the Pareto productivity distribution, as shown in the web appendix.
When the three conditions discussed above are satisfied, Helpman et al. (2010) show that there is strictly
greater wage inequality in the open economy when only some firms export than in the closed economy, and
there is the same level of wage inequality in the open economy when all firms export as in the closed economy.
It follows that wage inequality is at first increasing in trade openness and later decreasing in trade openness.
The intuition for these results stems from the increase in firm wages that occurs at the productivity threshold
above which firms export, which is only present when some but not all firms export. When no firm exports, a
small reduction in trade costs increases wage inequality, because it induces some firms to start exporting and
raises the wages paid by these exporting firms relative to domestic firms. When all firms export, a small rise in
trade costs increases wage inequality, because it induces some firms to stop exporting and reduces the wages

24

paid by these domestic firms relative to exporting firms.

9

Endogenous Firm Productivity

While treating productivity as a fixed parameter of the firm highlights the role of selection and reallocation
across firms, firm productivity is in general endogenous, and its response to trade liberalization influences the
within-industry allocation of resources.

9.1

Multi-Product Firms

One line of research has explored within-firm reallocation as a source of endogenous firm productivity growth.
Multi-product firms exhibit substantial heterogeneity across products with firms and dominate production
(Bernard, Redding & Schott 2010) and exports (Bernard, Redding & Schott 2006). Motivated by these empirical findings, a growing theoretical literature in international trade has modeled multi-product firms. As shown
in Bernard et al. (2006), the Melitz model in Section 3 can be extended to allow heterogeneous firms to optimally choose the range of products to produce and export.27 Suppose that the representative consumer derives
utility from the consumption of a continuum of symmetric products h defined on the interval [0, 1]:
Z
U=

1

 ν1

Chν dh

,

0 < ν < 1.

0

Within each product, a continuum of firms supply differentiated varieties of the product. Incurring the sunk
entry cost fe creates a firm brand and a blueprint for one horizontally differentiated variety of each product
that can be supplied using this brand. After incurring the sunk entry cost, a firm observes two components of
productivity: “ability” ϕ ∈ (0, ∞), which is common to all products and drawn from a distribution g (ϕ), and
“expertise” λh ∈ (0, ∞), which is specific to each product h and drawn from a distribution z (λ). The firm faces
fixed production and exporting costs for each product, fd and fx , in the domestic and export market. Similarly,
there is a fixed cost to becoming a firm and to becoming an exporter, Fd and Fx , which are independent of the
number of products supplied.
Industry equilibrium can be determined using a similar approach to that used in Section 3. There are cutoff
values for expertise for a firm of each ability ϕ at which the firm supplies a product to the domestic or export
27

Other recent models of multi-product firms and trade include Arkolakis & Muendler (2010), Eckel & Neary (2010), Feenstra &
Ma (2008), Mayer et al. (2010), and Nocke & Yeaple (2006).

25

market, λ∗d (ϕ) and λ∗x (ϕ):
rd (ϕ, λ∗d (ϕ)) = σfd ,

rx (ϕ, λ∗x (ϕ)) = σfx .

Using the fact that the relative revenues of any two firms and products depend solely on relative values of ability
and expertise, the product cutoffs for expertise for each firm ability can be expressed as:
λ∗d (ϕ)


=

ϕ∗d
ϕ



λ∗d (ϕ∗d ) ,

λ∗x (ϕ)


=

ϕ∗x
ϕ



λ∗x (ϕ∗x )

where λ∗d (ϕ∗d ) is the expertise cutoff for the lowest-ability firm and λ∗x (ϕ∗x ) is the expertise cutoff for the
lowest-ability exporter.
With a unit continuum of symmetric products and independent and identical distributions of product expertise, the law of large numbers implies that the fraction of products supplied to a market by a firm with a
given ability ϕ equals the probability of drawing an expertise above the relevant cutoff, [1 − Z(λ∗d (ϕ))] and
[1 − Z(λ∗x (ϕ))] for the domestic and export market respectively. Firms with higher abilities have lower expertise cutoffs in the domestic and export market, because they can generate sufficient variable profits to cover
product fixed costs, fd and fx , at lower values for ability. As a result, firms with higher abilities produce and
export a wider range of products.
While the decision whether to supply a product to a market is determined by the product expertise cutoffs,
λ∗d (ϕ) and λ∗x (ϕ), there are also firm ability cutoffs in the domestic and export markets, ϕ∗d and ϕ∗x , which
determine the firm’s decision whether to produce and export. A firm drawing an ability below these ability
cutoffs cannot generate sufficient variable profits across the small range of profitable products to cover the
fixed costs of operating in the domestic and export markets, Fd and Fx .
In this setting with multi-product firms, the opening of the closed economy to trade leads to reallocations of
resources both across and within firms. For parameter values for which there is selection into export markets,
the opening of trade raises the zero-profit cutoffs for firm ability, ϕ∗d , and for product expertise for a given firm
ability, λ∗d (ϕ). Low-ability firms exit and surviving firms drop marginal products and focus on more successful
higher-expertise products. As a result, even though firm ability and expertise are fixed parameters, there is a
reallocation of resources within firms, which raises firm productivity.
While the discussion here interprets expertise, λ, as a component of productivity, it can also be interpreted
as a component of demand, which could be specific to countries as well as products. As shown in Bernard et al.
(2009), the resulting framework provides a natural explanation for a number of key features of the distribution

26

of exports across firms, products and countries. While higher trade costs reduce exports of a given firm and
product, they also lead to changes in export composition towards higher export value firms and products.
Consistent with this, distance is negatively and statistically significantly related to exports of a given firm and
product, the number of exporters and the number of exported products, but has a positive and statistically
insignificant effect on average exports per firm and product.28
Finally, there is evidence of ongoing reallocation and selection within firms, even in the absence of trade
liberalization or other large-scale changes. As reported in Bernard, Redding & Schott (2010), around one half
of surviving U.S. firms add and/or drop products from their existing range every five years, and the contribution
of these added and dropped products to aggregate output is of around the same magnitude as the contribution
of firm entry and exit. Consistent with a natural generalization of models of industry dynamics to incorporate
selection with firms, the probability that a product is dropped within a surviving firm exhibits the same pattern
of age and scale dependence as the probability that a firm exits. Taken together, these findings suggest that
reallocation may be even more important than hitherto thought, in so far as it occurs across products within
firms as well as across firms.

9.2

Technology and Skills

The theoretical literature on heterogeneous firms and trade has also considered a number of other sources of
endogenous firm productivity growth. One key insight from this literature is that there is a complementarity
between entry into export markets and other revenue-enhancing investments that involve fixed costs. Exporting
expands the size of the market over which other fixed costs can be amortized, while at the same time other
revenue-enhancing investments raise the return to incurring the fixed costs of exporting.
One such revenue-enhancing investment that typically involves fixed costs is technology adoption. As
shown in Constantini & Melitz (2008), the complementarity between exporting and technology adoption complicates the interpretation of causality in the relationship between productivity and exporting. Anticipation of
trade liberalization can induce firms to bring forward the decision to adopt new technologies in advance of
export market entry. Empirical evidence of this complementarity between exporting and technology adoption
is found by Bustos (2010), using data on Argentinian firms and Mercosur, and by Lileeva & Trefler (2010),
using data on Canadian plants and the Canada-U.S. Free Trade Agreement.
Technological progress can take the form of product or process innovation, as emphasized in the endoge28
Modeling multi-product firms expands the number extensive margins of trade to include firms, products and destinations. As
shown in Bernard, Jensen, Redding & Schott (2009), these extensive margins together account for most of the cross-country variation
in bilateral trade.

27

nous growth literature.29 Atkeson & Burstein (2010) consider a dynamic heterogeneous firm model, which
features both product innovation, in the form of the introduction of new firm varieties, and process innovation,
in the form of stochastic reductions in firm costs. The central finding of their paper is that trade liberalization
can lead to substantial changes in firms’ exit, export and process innovation decisions, but the impact of these
changes on welfare is largely offset by the response in product innovation. The intuition for this result stems
from the free entry condition, which requires the increase in profits from product innovation induced by trade
liberalization to be offset by an increase in the real wage. To a first-order approximation, the increase in aggregate productivity required to sustain this increase in the real wage is independent of the channel through
which the increase in aggregate productivity is achieved. As a result, changes in firms’ exit, export and process
innovation decisions must be offset by adjustments in product innovation, so as to ensure that the response in
aggregate productivity is consistent with equilibrium. While these theoretical results are derived analytically
for symmetric countries and depend on the assumptions of CES preferences and monopolistic competition,
the paper highlights that introducing more disaggregate margins of firm adjustment does not necessarily imply
greater aggregate welfare gains from trade liberalization.
Other research has emphasized complementarities between technology and skills. In Yeaple (2005), firms
are ex ante homogeneous but ex post heterogeneous, because of endogenous choices about technology and
workforce skill composition. In Verhoogen (2008), more-productive plants produce higher-quality goods than
less-productive plants, and they pay higher wages to maintain a higher-quality workforce. Only the most
productive plants enter the export market, and Southern exporters produce higher-quality goods for export
than for the domestic market, to appeal to richer Northern consumers. An expansion of export opportunities
induces more-productive Southern plants to increase exports, upgrade quality, and raise wages relative to lessproductive plants within the same industry, increasing within-industry wage dispersion. In Bustos (2007), trade
liberalization induces more firms to enter the export market and to adopt skill-biased new technologies.

9.3

International Production Networks

Although theories of heterogeneous firms have largely focused on firm export behavior, recently available
transactions-level trade data have revealed that firm import behavior exhibits many of the same features.30
To account for these empirical findings, one line of theoretical research has incorporated firm importing into
theories of heterogeneous firms in an analogous way to firm exporting, as in Amiti & Davis (2008) and Kasahara
& Lapham (2008). More generally, the presence of both importing and exporting within firms suggests the
29
30

See, in particular, Aghion & Howitt (1992), Grossman & Helpman (1991), and Romer (1990).
See, for example, Bernard, Jensen, Redding & Schott (2007).

28

relevance of theories of the international fragmentation of production, including Dixit & Grossman (1982), Yi
(2003) and Grossman & Rossi-Hansberg (2008).31
While the international fragmentation of production relates to the decision whether to onshore or offshore
stages of production, another separate decision is whether to insource or outsource these stages of production:
i.e. whether to organize them within or outside the boundaries of the firm. Antràs & Helpman (2004, 2008)
develop a model of North-South trade with firm heterogeneity and incomplete contracts to jointly analyze the
onshoring/offshoring and insourcing/outsourcing decisions. Firms sort endogenously based on their productivity into integrated companies that produce inputs in the North (do not engage in foreign trade in inputs),
integrated companies that produce inputs in the South (engage in foreign direct investment (FDI) and intrafirm trade), disintegrated companies that outsource in the North (do not engage in foreign trade in inputs), and
disintegrated companies that outsource in the South (import inputs at arm’s length).

32

Another strand of the theoretical literature on organizations and trade emphasizes the international allocation of talent in assignment models, including Antràs, Garicano & Rossi-Hansberg (2006), Burstein & MongeNaranjo (2009), Dasgupta (2010), Ohnsorge & Trefler (2007), and Yeaple (2005). While these assignment
models address a variety of issues, and often do not take a stand on whether production activities occur within
or beyond the boundaries of the firm, this line of research provides another promising route for deriving firm
heterogeneity as the endogenous result of an underlying microeconomic mechanism.

10

Firm and Aggregate Dynamics

While the Melitz model focuses on the production and exporting decisions of firms of a given productivity, a
recent theoretical literature has begun to explore firm dynamics in models of international trade.
Using Colombian transactions-level trade data, Eaton et al. (2008) find that around one half of Colombian
exporters in any given year were not exporters in the previous year. Among these new exporters, most do not
survive into the next year. But conditional on survival, these new exporters grow rapidly and account for a
substantial proportion of export growth over longer time horizons such as a decade.
Theoretical models seeking to account for these export market dynamics have emphasized learning about
foreign markets and trade relationships, including Albornoz et al. (2010) and Eaton et al. (2010), and stochastic shocks to firm productivity, including Arkolakis (2009) and Ruhl & Willis (2008). Another somewhat
31

Recent empirical evidence suggests that imported intermediate inputs may play a prominent role in shaping the overall impact of
trade liberalization, as in Amiti & Konings (2007) and Goldberg et al. (2010), and in influencing measured firm productivity, as in
Halpern et al. (2009) and Kugler & Verhoogen (2008).
32
For empirical evidence on intra-firm versus arms-length trade, see for example Bernard, Jensen, Redding & Schott (2010) and
Nunn & Trefler (2008).

29

separate line of research has examined the relationship between disaggregate firm heterogeneity and aggregate
dynamics, including Alessandria & Choi (2007), Bilbiie et al. (2007), and Ghironi & Melitz (2005).

11

Conclusion

The literature on heterogeneous firms and trade has reconciled trade theory with empirical features of micro
data on plants and firms. In so doing, it has highlighted a new dimension of reallocation across firms within
industries and a new channel through which trade liberalization can affect income distribution.
While the theoretical literature on heterogeneous firms and trade has advanced in great breadth and depth,
there remain a number of open questions. One area for further research is gaining a deeper understanding of
the origins of firm heterogeneity and the role of internal firm organization. Another area for further work is the
microeconomic modeling of the trade costs that induce firm selection into export markets, including the role of
wholesale and retail distribution networks.
Finally, as noted in Neary (2010), most existing research has been undertaken within the framework of
monopolistic competition. But empirical findings that trade is concentrated in the hands of a relatively small
number of firms suggest that theories of strategic interaction and dynamic games could prove a promising
avenue for further inquiry.

30

Acknowledgements
This paper is forthcoming in the Annual Review of Economics: doi 10.1146/annurev-economics-111809125118. I am very grateful to a number of co-authors and colleagues for insight, discussion and comments,
including Andrew Bernard, Elhanan Helpman, Oleg Itskhoki, Esteban Rossi-Hansberg, and Peter Schott. I am
also very grateful to Costas Arkolakis, Giuseppe Berlingieri, Gilles Duranton, Marc Melitz, and Peter Neary
for very helpful comments and suggestions. I bear sole responsibility for the opinions expressed and any errors.

Literature Cited
Aghion P, Howitt P. 1992. A Model of Growth through Creative Destruction. Econometrica. 60(2): 323-51.
Albornoz F, Calvo Pardo H, Corcos G, Ornelas E. 2010. Sequential Exporting. CEP Discussion Paper. 974.
London School of Economics.
Alessandria G, Choi H. 2007. Do Sunk Costs of Exporting Matter for Net Export Dynamics? Quarterly Journal
of Economics. 122(1): 289-336.
Amiti M, Davis DR. 2008. Trade, Firms, and Wages: Theory and Evidence. NBER Working Paper. 14106.
Amiti M, Konings J. 2007. Trade Liberalization, Intermediate Inputs and Productivity. American Economic
Review. 97(5): 1611-38.
Anderson J, van Wincoop E. 2002. Gravity with Gravitas: A Solution to the Border Puzzle. American Economic Review. 93(1): 170-92.
Antràs P, Garicano L, Rossi-Hansberg E. 2006. Offshoring in a Knowledge Economy. Quarterly Journal of
Economics. 121(1): 31-77.
Antràs P, Helpman E. 2004. Global Sourcing. Journal of Political Economy. 112(3): 552-80.
Antràs P, Helpman E. 2008. Contractual Frictions and Global Sourcing. In The Organization of Firms in a
Global Economy, ed. E Helpman, D Marin, T Verdier, 1:9-54. Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press.
356 pp.
Antràs P, Rossi-Hansberg E. 2009. Organizations and Trade. Annual Review of Economics. 1:43-64.
Arkolakis C. 2008. Market Penetration Costs and the New Consumers Margin in International Trade. NBER
Working Paper. 14214.
Arkolakis C. 2009. A Unified Theory of Firm Selection and Growth. (Unpublished, Yale University).
Arkolakis C, Klenow P, Demidova S, Rodriguez-Clare A. 2008. Endogenous Variety and The Gains from
Trade. American Economic Review. Papers and Proceedings. 98(2): 444-50.

31

Arkolakis C, Costinot A, Rodriguez-Clare A. 2009. New Trade Models, Same Old Gains? NBER Working
Paper. 15628.
Arkolakis C, Muendler M. 2008. The Extensive Margin of Exporting Goods: A Firm-Level Analysis. (Yale
University, unpublished).
Atkeson A, Burstein A. 2010. Innovation, Firm Dynamics and International Trade. Journal of Political Economy: In press.
Axtell RL. 2001. Zipf Distribution of US Firm Sizes. Science. 293:1818-20.
Baldwin RE, Forslid R. 2004. Trade Liberalization with Heterogeneous Firms. CEPR Discussion Paper. 4635.
Baldwin RE, Harrigan J. 2007. Zeros, Quality, and Space: Trade Theory and Trade Evidence. NBER Working
Paper. 13214.
Behrens K, Murata Y. 2006. Gains from Trade and Efficiency under Monopolistic Competition: A Variable
Elasticity Case. CORE Discussion Paper, Université Catholique de Louvain. 2006049.
Bernard AB, Eaton J, Jensen JB, Kortum SS. 2003. Plants and Productivity in International Trade. American
Economic Review. 93(4): 1268-90.
Bernard AB, Jensen JB. 1995. Exporters, Jobs, and Wages in US Manufacturing: 1976-87. Brookings Papers
on Economic Activity: Microeconomics: 67-112.
Bernard AB, Jensen JB. 1997. Exporters, Skill Upgrading and the Wage Gap. Journal of International Economics. 42: 3-31.
Bernard AB, Jensen, JB. 1999. Exceptional Exporter Performance: Cause, Effect, or Both? Journal of International Economics. 47(1): 1-25.
Bernard AB, Jensen JB, Redding SJ, Schott PK. 2007. Firms in International Trade. Journal of Economic
Perspectives. 21(3): 105-30.
Bernard AB, Jensen JB, Redding SJ, Schott PK. 2009. The Margins of U.S. Trade. American Economic Review.
Papers and Proceedings. 99(2): 487-93.
Bernard AB, Jensen JB, Redding SJ, Schott PK. 2010. Intra-firm Trade and Product Contractibility. American
Economic Review. Papers and Proceedings. 100(2): 444-448.
Bernard A B, Jensen JB, Schott PK. 2006. Trade Costs, Firms, and Productivity. Journal of Monetary Economics. 53(5): 917-37.
Bernard AB, Redding SJ, Schott PK. 2006. Multi-product Firms and Trade Liberalization. NBER Working
Paper. 12782.

32

Bernard AB, Redding SJ, Schott PK. 2007. Comparative Advantage and Heterogeneous Firms. Review of
Economic Studies. 74: 31-66.
Bernard AB, Redding SJ, Schott PK. 2009. Multi-product Firms and Trade Liberalization. revised version of
NBER Working Paper. 12782. (Princeton University, Unpublished).
Bernard AB, Redding SJ, Schott PK. 2010. Multi-product Firms and Product Switching. American Economic
Review. 100(1): 70-97.
Bilbiie FO, Ghironi F, Melitz MJ. 2007. Endogenous Entry, Product Variety, and Business Cycles. (Harvard
University, Unpublished).
Burstein A, Monge-Naranjo A. 2009. Foreign Know-How, Firm Control and the Income of Developing Countries. Quarterly Journal of Economics. 124(1): 149-95.
Bustos P. 2007. The Impact of Technology and Skill Upgrading: Evidence from Argentina. (Universitat
Pompeu Fabra, Unpublished).
Bustos P. 2010. Trade Liberalization, Exports and Technology Upgrading: Evidence on the Impact of MERCOSUR on Argentinean Firms. American Economic Review. In press.
Campbell J, Hopenhayn H. 2005. Market Size Matters. Journal of Industrial Economics. 53: 1-25.
Chaney T. 2005. The Dynamic Impact of Trade Opening: Productivity Overshooting with Heterogeneous
Firms. (University of Chicago, Unpublished).
Chaney T. 2008. Distorted Gravity: The Intensive and Extensive Margins of International Trade. American
Economic Review. 98(4): 1707-21.
Cherkashin I, Demidova S, Kee HL, Krishna K. 2010. Firm Heterogeneity and Costly Trade: A New Estimation
Strategy and Policy Experiments. (Penn State University, Unpublished).
Constantini J, Melitz MJ. 2008. The Dynamics of Firm-Level Adjustment to Trade Liberalization. In The
Organization of Firms in a Global Economy, ed. E Helpman, D Marin, T Verdier, 4:107-41. Cambridge
MA: Harvard University Press. 356 pp.
Cuñat A, Melitz MJ. 2010. Volatility, Labor Market Flexibility and Comparative Advantage. Journal of the
European Economic Association. In press.
Das M, Roberts MJ, Tybout J. 2007. Market Entry Costs, Producer Heterogeneity and Export Dynamics.
Econometrica. 75(3): 837-73.
Dasgupta K. 2010. Learning, Knowledge Diffusion and the Gains from Globalization. (University of Toronto,
Unpublished).

33

Davidson C, Martin L, Matusz S. 1988. The Structure of Simple General Equilibrium Models with Frictional
Unemployment. Journal of Political Economy. 96: 1267-93.
Davidson C, Matusz S. 2009. International Trade with Equilibrium Unemployment. Princeton NJ: Princeton
University Press. 412 pp.
Davis SJ, Haltiwanger J. 1992. Gross Job Creation, Gross Job Destruction, and Employment Reallocation.
Quarterly Journal of Economics. 107: 819-63.
Davis DR, Harrigan J. 2007. Good Jobs, Bad Jobs, and Trade Liberalization. NBER Working Paper. 13139.
Del Gatto M, Mion G and Ottaviano GIP. 2006. Trade Integration, Firm Selection and the Costs of Non-Europe.
CEPR Discussion Paper. 5730.
Demidova S. 2008. Productivity Improvements and Falling Trade Costs: Boon or Bane? International Economic Review. 49(4): 1437-62.
Dixit A, Sitlitz JE. 1977. Monopolistic Competition and Optimum Product Diversity. American Economic
Review. 67(3), 297-308.
Dixit A, Grossman GM. 1982. Trade and Protection with Multi-Stage Production. Review of Economic Studies.
49(4): 583-94.
Dixit A, Norman V. 1980. Theory of International Trade: A Dual General Equilibrium Approach. Cambridge
UK: Cambridge University Press. 339 pp.
Dunne T, Roberts MJ, Samuelson L. 1989. The Growth and Failure of U.S. Manufacturing Plants. Quarterly
Journal of Economics. 104(4): 671-98.
Eaton J, Eslava M, Kugler M, Tybout JR. 2008. Export Dynamics in Colombia: Firm-level Evidence. In The
Organization of Firms in a Global Economy, ed. E Helpman, D Marin, T Verdier, 8:231-72. Cambridge
MA: Harvard University Press. 356 pp.
Eaton J, Eslava M, Kugler M, Tybout JR. 2010. A Search and Learning Model of Export Dynamics. (Penn
State University, Unpublished).
Eaton J, Kortum SS. 2002. Technology, Geography, and Trade. Econometrica. 70(5): 1741-79.
Eaton J, Kortum SS, Kramarz F. 2008. An Anatomy of International Trade: Evidence from French Firms.
(University of Chicago, unpublished)
Eckel C, Neary JP. 2010. Multi-product Firms and Flexible Manufacturing in the Global Economy. Review of
Economic Studies. 77(1): 188-217.
Egger H, Kreickemeier U. 2009. Firm Heterogeneity and the Labour Market Effects of Trade Liberalization.
International Economic Review. 50(1): 187-216.

34

Feenstra RC. 2003. A Homothetic Utility Function for Monopolistic Competition Models Without Constant
Price Elasticity. Economic Letters. 78: 79-86.
Feenstra RC, Ma H. 2008. Optimal Choice of Product Scope for Multiproduct Firms under Monopolistic
Competition. In The Organization of Firms in a Global Economy, ed. E Helpman, D Marin, T Verdier,
6:173-99. Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press. 356 pp.
Felbermayr G, Prat J, Schmerer H. 2008. Globalization and Labor Market Outcomes: Wage Bargaining, Search
Frictions and Firm Heterogeneity. IZA Discussion Paper. 3363.
Goldberg P, Khandelwal A, Pavcnik N, Topalova P. 2010. Imported Intermediate Inputs and Domestic Product
Growth: Evidence from India. Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming.
Ghironi F, Melitz MJ. 2005. International Trade and Macroeconomic Dynamics with Heterogeneous Firms.
Quarterly Journal of Economics. 120: 865-915.
Grossman GM, Helpman E. 1991. Innovation and Growth in the Global Economy. Cambridge MA: MIT Press.
359 pp.
Grossman GM, Rossi-Hansberg E. 2008. Trading Tasks: A Simple Theory of Offshoring. American Economic
Review. 98(5): 1978-97.
Halpern L, Koren M, Szeidl A. 2009. Imported Inputs and Productivity. (Central European University. Unpublished).
Helpman E. 2006. Trade, FDI, and the Organization of Firms. Journal of Economic Literature. XLIV: 589-630.
Helpman E, Itskhoki O. 2010. Labor Market Rigidities, Trade and Unemployment. Review of Economic Studies. In press.
Helpman E, Krugman PR. 1985. Market Structure and Foreign Trade. Cambridge MA: MIT Press. 271 pp.
Helpman E, Itskhoki O, Redding SJ. 2010. Inequality and Unemployment in a Global Economy. Econometrica.
78(4): 1239-83.
Helpman E, Melitz MJ, Rubinstein Y. 2008. Estimating Trade Flows: Trading Partners and Trading Volumes.
Quarterly Journal of Economics. 123(2): 441-87.
Helpman E, Melitz MJ, Yeaple SR. 2004. Export Versus FDI with Heterogeneous Firms. American Economic
Review. 94(1): 300-16.
Hopenhayn H. 1992. Entry, Exit, and Firm Dynamics in Long Run Equilibrium. Econometrica. 60(5): 112750.
Hsieh C, Ossa R. 2010. A Global View of Productivity Growth in China and India. (University of Chicago,
unpublished)

35

Johnson R. 2009. Trade and Prices with Heterogeneous Firms. (Dartmouth College, Unpublished).
Jovanovic B. 1982. Selection and the Evolution of Industry. Econometrica. 50(3): 649-70.
Kasahara H, Lapham B. 2008. Productivity and the Decision to Import and Export: Theory and Evidence.
CESifo Working Paper. 2240.
Kehoe T, Ruhl K. 2009. How Important is the New Goods Margin in International Trade? Federal Reserve
Bank of Minneapolis Research Department Staff Report 324.
Krugman PR. 1979. Increasing Returns, Monopolistic Competition, and International Trade. Journal of International Economics. 9: 469-79.
Krugman PR. 1980. Scale Economies, Product Differentiation, and the Pattern of Trade. American Economic
Review. 70: 950-59.
Kugler M, Verhoogen E. 2008. The Quality-Complementarity Hypothesis: Theory and Evidence from Colombia. NBER Working Paper. 14418.
Levinsohn J. 1999. Employment Responses to International Liberalization in Chile. Journal of International
Economics. 47: 321-44.
Lileeva A, Trefler D. 2010. Does Improved Market Access Raise Plant-Level Productivity. Quarterly Journal
of Economics. 125(3): 105199.
Lopez, RA. 2005. Trade and Growth: Reconciling the Macroeconomic and Microeconomic Evidence. Journal
of Economic Surveys. 19(4): 623-48.
Mayer T, Melitz MJ, Ottaviano G. 2010. “Market Size, Competition, and the Product Mix of Exporters,”
(Harvard University, unpublished).
Melitz MJ. 2003. The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate Industry Productivity.
Econometrica. 71: 1695-725.
Melitz MJ, Ottaviano G. 2008. Market Size, Trade, and Productivity. Review of Economic Studies. 75(1):
295-316.
Neary JP. 2010. Two and a Half Theories of Trade. The World Economy. 33(1): 1-19.
Nocke V, Yeaple SR. 2006. Globalization and Endogenous Firm Scope. NBER Working Paper. 12322.
Nunn N, Trefler D. 2008. The Boundaries of the Multinational Firm. In The Organization of Firms in a Global
Economy, ed. E Helpman, D Marin, T Verdier, 2:55-83. Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press. 356
pp.
Ohnsorge F, Trefler D. 2007. Sorting it Out: International Trade with Heterogeneous Workers. Journal of
Political Economy. 115(5): 868-92.

36

Oi WY, Idson TL. 1999. Firm Size and Wages. In Handbook of Labor Economics, ed. O Ashenfelter, D Card,
33: 2165-214. Amsterdam: Elsevier. 2939 pp.
Pavcnik N. 2002. Trade Liberalization, Exit, and Productivity Improvement: Evidence from Chilean Plants.
Review of Economic Studies. 69(1): 245-76.
Roberts MJ, Tybout J. 1997. The Decision to Export in Colombia: An Empirical Model of Entry with Sunk
Costs. American Economic Review. 87(4): 545-64.
Romer P. 1990. Endogenous Technological Change. Journal of Political Economy. 98(5): S71-S102.
Ruhl KJ, Willis JL. 2008. New Exporter Dynamics. (Unpublished, New York University).
Syverson, C. 2004. Market Structure and Productivity: A Concrete Example. Journal of Political Economy.
112: 1181-222.
Trefler D. 2004. The Long and Short of the Canada-U.S. Free Trade Agreement. American Economic Review.
94: 870-95.
Tybout JR. 2003. Plant- and Firm-Level Evidence on ‘New’ Trade Theories. In Handbook of International
Economics, ed. E Kwan Choi and J Harrigan, 13: 388-435. Oxford: Basil-Blackwell. 435 pp.
Tybout JR, Westbrook DM. 1995. Trade Liberalization and Dimensions of Efficiency Change in Mexican
Manufacturing Industries. Journal of International Economics. 39: 53-78.
Verhoogen E. 2008. Trade, Quality Upgrading and Wage Inequality in the Mexican Manufacturing Sector.
Quarterly Journal of Economics. 123(2): 489-530.
Yeaple SR. 2005. A Simple Model of Firm Heterogeneity, International Trade, and Wages. Journal of International Economics. 65: 1–20.
Yi K. 2003. Can Vertical Specialization Explain the Growth of World Trade? Journal of Political Economy.
111(1): 52-102.

37

