NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

IN SEARCH OF THE MULTIPLIER FOR FEDERAL SPENDING IN THE STATES
DURING THE GREAT DEPRESSION
Price V. Fishback
Valentina Kachanovskaya
Working Paper 16561
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16561

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2010

The authors would like to thank Shawn Kantor, John Wallis, and Paul Rhode for providing access
to data and their valuable advice. We benefitted greatly from extensive conversations with Robert
Barro. We also thank Harold Cole, Alfonso Flores-Lagunes, Benjamin Friedman, Claudia Goldin,
Kei Hirano, William Horrace, Shawn Kantor, Larry Katz, Aart Kraay, David Laibson, Emi Nakamura,
Ron Oaxaca, Valerie Ramey, Christina Romer, David Romer, Jon Steinnson, James Stock, John Wallis,
and participants at the following workshops and conferences for their helpful comments on the paper:
Harvard, Oxford, London School of Economics, Warwick, Michigan, UC San Diego, Vermont, Clemson,
Dartmouth, Guelph, Simon Fraser, University of British Columbia, Richmond, Federal Reserve Bank
of Chicago, University College London, NBER Summer Institute Development of the American Economy
2009, NBER Summer Institute Monetary Economics 2011, and the All-UC Economic History Conference
in Pasadena 2011. Ruth Penniston, Lisa Glasgow, and Omar Farooque provided excellent research
assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Price V. Fishback and Valentina Kachanovskaya. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

In Search of the Multiplier for Federal Spending in the States During the Great Depression
Price V. Fishback and Valentina Kachanovskaya
NBER Working Paper No. 16561
November 2010, Revised August 2011
JEL No. E62,H50,N12,N42,R11
ABSTRACT
If there was any time to expect a large peace-time multiplier effect from federal spending in the states,
it would have been during the period from 1930 through 1940. Interest rates were near the zero bound,
and unemployment rates never fell below 10 percent and there was ample idle capacity. We develop
an annual panel data set for the 48 states from 1930 through 1940 with evidence on federal government
grants, loans, and tax collections and a variety of measures of economic activity. Using panel data
methods we estimate a multiplier, defined as the change in per capita state economic activity in response
to an additional dollar per capita of federal funds. The state per capita personal income multiplier
with respect to per capita federal grants was around 1.1. Some point estimates for multipliers for nontransfer
grants and nonfarm grants were higher but not statistically significantly different from one. There
is some evidence that AAA farm grants had negative or no effect on personal income. Federal grants
had stronger effects on consumption than on personal income, but they had no positive effect on various
measures of private employment.
Price V. Fishback
Department of Economics
University of Arizona
Tucson, AZ 85721
and NBER
pfishback@eller.arizona.edu
Valentina Kachanovskaya
Department of Economics
University of Arizona
Tucson, AZ 85721
valentik@email.arizona.edu

In Search of the Multiplier for Federal Spending in the States
During the Great Depression
The Great Recession of 2007 to 2009 has been described as the worst downturn
since the Great Depression of the 1930s. In both periods the federal government sought
to combat the downturns with sharp increases in federal spending. The recent federal
stimulus package has led to a surge of interest in fiscal policy multipliers. The current
environment for fiscal multipliers is similar to the Great Depression in two important
ways. Short term interests are near the zero bound, and there is significant slack in the
economy with unemployment rates over 9 percent.
The unemployment challenge was greater in the 1930s because real GDP dropped
by 30 percent between 1929 and 1933 and unemployment rates exceeded 20 percent for
four years and stayed above 14 percent for most of the decade. In contrast to the recent
situation, in the 1930s the Hoover and Roosevelt administrations financed most of the
increase in federal spending with taxes and thus ran relatively small fiscal deficits.
However, as is the case today, there was substantial variation in the distribution of federal
funds per capita across states that can be used to examine multipliers for federal spending
in each state on state incomes.
In this paper, we construct measures of federal government spending in each state
for the period 1930 through 1940 and then estimate the impact of federal government
spending in the state on the state’s per capita incomes, employment, and other measures
of economic activity. In estimating the multipliers, we use several different measures of
federal spending: grants, grants and loans, nontransfer grants, nonfarm grants, and

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

1

Agricultural Adjustment Administration (AAA) payments to farmers to take land out of
production.
The multipliers are estimated using controls for time-varying weather patterns in
the states, state fixed effects, year effects, and state-specific time trends, as well as
instrumental variable techniques. Multipliers from most specifications with fixed effects
and no instruments were well below one. We use two different instrumental variable
(IV) strategies and multiple specifications and therefore report several estimates for each
multiplier. The IV estimates of the state per capita personal income multiplier with
respect to per capita federal grants were around 1.1. Some point estimates for multipliers
for nontransfer grants and nonfarm grants were higher but not statistically significantly
different from one. There is some evidence that AAA farm grants had negative or no
effect on personal income. Federal grants had stronger effects on consumption than on
personal income, but they had no positive effect on various measures of private
employment.

The Recent Literature on Multipliers
Much of the focus of the recent literature on multipliers has been on
macroeconomic multipliers for the national economy. The traditional Keynesian
macroeconomic model predicts relatively high multipliers associated with high marginal
propensities to consume, while neoclassical models predict low multipliers through
crowding out of investment and consumption in part due to anticipation of future tax
liabilities. Neo-Keynesian models that combine neoclassical modeling with frictions in
the economy suggest multipliers somewhere in between.

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

2

Most of the empirical macroeconomic estimates for short run multipliers imply
that a dollar increase in government spending is associated with an increase in income
that ranges from about 50 cents to $1.30, or multipliers of 0.5 to 1.3. Some estimates
range as high as 1.8. The variation comes in part from differences in strategies for
resolving endogeneity problems that arise when policy makers use fiscal policy to try to
counteract downturns. The methods range from use of Vector Autoregressive (VAR)
models to identification of changes in military spending and tax policy that might be
plausibly considered to be unrelated to the macroeconomy. Recent efforts examine the
impact of unexpected changes in these plausibly exogenous factors. The results also may
vary due to the period studied, as the multiplier is predicted to be larger in times of high
unemployment and in periods when interest rates are fixed or near the zero bound.2
It is difficult to estimate a national multiplier during the 1930s because it is hard
to argue that federal spending was not rising in response to the downturn, and finding an
instrument for federal spending in a national regression is difficult. Any estimate is
likely to be for a balanced-budget multiplier because the deficits were very small relative
to the size of the problem. Scholars have repeatedly shown that the New Deal was not a

2 See Valerie Ramey’s (2011) survey of multipliers for an upcoming issue of the Journal of Economic
Literature. The third edition of Dornbusch and Fischer’s Macroeconomics in 1984 (p. 148) reports
multiplier estimates for an increase in net government spending of 1.8 from DRI and 0.7 from the Federal
Reserve Bank of St. Louis. Key papers on the macroeconomic multiplier include Aiyagari, Christiano, and
Eichenbaum (1992), Barro (1981); Barro and Redlick (forthcoming 2011), Blanchard and Perotti (2002)
Blinder and Zandi (2010), Cogan, Cwik, Taylor, and Wieland (2009), Devereux, Head, and Lapham
(1996), Hall (1980), Pereira and Flores de Frutos (1999) Ramey (forthcoming 2011), Ramey and Shapiro
(1998), Romer 1992, Zandi (2009). Average tax multipliers tend to be somewhat higher (Romer and
Romer 2010). In estimates of the impact of fiscal and monetary policy for the 1920s and 1930s from a
panel of countries, Almunia, Benetrix, Eichengreen, O’Rourke, and Rua.find a multiplier for military
spending above 2. Ethan Ilzetski, Enrique Mendoza, and Carlos Vegh (2010) find smaller multipliers for
government consumption using panel SVAR methods on a modern panel of countries, although the
multipliers vary across conditions.

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

3

Keynesian attempt to deal with the Depression.3 On the other hand, there was
tremendous variation in the amount of per capita federal grants and loans distributed
across the states during the New Deal and federal funds to each state fluctuated over the
course of the decade. This variation can be used to identify the impact of distributing
additional federal funds within a typical state on the income in the state.
The state-level multiplier is not the same as the federal multiplier. Nakamura and
Steinsson (2011) suggest that state multipliers for federal spending are useful as estimates
of the multiplier in a small open economy in a currency union with free movement across
borders. However, there is likely to be cross-subsidization in the state multiplier for
federal spending that is not present at the national level. A national multiplier for federal
spending addresses a situation where all of the taxation and obligations to repay future
debt are centered within the economy where the money is spent (Barro 1982). In
contrast, a state can receive federal funds but might bear less than (or more than) its full
share of the tax and debt obligation associated with funds. They develop a model that
shows that the relationship between state multipliers and the overall national multiplier
can vary a great deal depending on a variety of assumptions, ranging from the extent of
national unemployment to the variability of interest rates. In a political economy model,
the state multiplier serves another purpose by determining the benefit that the state’s
residents anticipate receiving when seeking federal government funds.
Our estimates for the Depression therefore are most comparable to estimates
from a series of recent working papers on the impact of federal spending on state and

3 Keynes chastised Roosevelt in letters to the editor for not running deficits to finance the rise in federal
spending. E. Cary Brown (1956) and Larry Peppers (1973) both performed analysis to show that the
deficits run were very small relative to the size that Keynesians would have recommended.

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

4

local economies between 1980 and the present.4 Juan Carlos Suarez Serrato and Phillipe
Wingender develop local fiscal multiplier estimates for the modern era in the U.S. using
changes in the distribution of federal spending across districts driven by updated local
population estimates from the decennial Census. Using first-difference estimation on
panels at the county, state, and MSA level after 1983, they report an income multiplier
estimate of 1.88 and an estimated cost per job created of $30,000 per year.
Daniel Wilson (2011) estimates jobs multipliers for the federal distribution of
funds under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA) of 2009. He relied
on the exogenous formulas for allocation of spending as the source of identification and
finds that the ARRA saved roughly one job per $100,000 spent and had its strongest
impact on construction employment. Emi Nakamura and Jon Steinsson (2010) estimate
state level multipliers based on variations in military procurement spending during
periods of military buildups between 1966 and 2006. To control for endogeneity, they
construct an instrument based on regressing each state’s military procurement spending
on total U.S. military spending; therefore, the instrument for a state in year t is the
coefficient from that state’s regression times U.S. military spending in year t. Their
results suggest a multiplier of 1.5, which is not sensitive to how strongly monetary policy
leans against the wind.

4Another set of studies seek to estimate the impact of state government spending within the same
state. Daniel Shoag (2010) estimates multipliers within states for state government spending using
“windfalls” in returns on state pension assets as an instrument for state government spending. The
estimates suggest an income multiplier of $2.12 and the generation of an additional job per $35,000 spent.
Jeffrey Clemens and Stephen Miran (2011) examine the impact of state spending on state income using
budget rules for state deficit finance and differences between forecasted state budgets and actual state
budgets for identification. However, these sources of variation in state fiscal policy did not serve as strong
instruments.

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

5

Cohen, Coval, and Malloy (2010) use changes in federal spending related to
changes in key Congressional committee assignments to show that increases in federal
spending are associated with reductions in private investment and employment in the
states. In a study of low income countries Aart Kraay (2010) finds a multiplier of less
than one for World bank lending using fluctuations in approval of projects as a source of
variation in later spending that is uncorrelated with current output.
Regional scientists also have developed a broad range of theoretical models that
lead to multipliers for net income coming into a state.5 The models range from the early
Keynesian regional models to input-output models to economic base models to neoclassical models.6 The earlier empirical work on regional multipliers led to a broad
range of estimates of multipliers of between 0.5 and 2 depending on the technique used.
Some relied on simulations that derive multipliers using input-output models and surveys
5 There is a large literature on the impact of public infrastructure spending at the state level. Hulten and
Schwab (1991) conclude that the link between public infrastructure and states’ economic growth is weak,
as the states that expanded public infrastructure the most in the 1970s were not the ones that developed
faster during that period. Munnell (1992 192) finds a significant effect of public capital on state-level
output, investment and employment growth, although the effects of government spending at the state level
are smaller than at the national level. Garcia-Mila and McGuire (1992) constructed a panel of 48 states
from 1969 until 1983 to estimate input elasticity coefficients of regional Cobb-Douglas production
functions and concluded that government provided goods, such as highways and education, have a
significant and positive effect on state’s output. Costa, Ellison, and Martin (1987) consider a translog
production function and conclude that public capital and labor are complementary inputs. The estimated
elasticities of output with respect to public are around one in all states. Meanwhile, Blanchard and Katz
(1992) model the effects of negative one-percent employment shocks to a wide range of variables using
data from U.S. states from 1947 to 1990 and find sizeable effects on per capita income over an extended
number of years.
Duffy-Deno and Eberts (1991) study the effect of the public capital stock on the state’s economic
growth, first, without using capital expenditures as a proxy for capital stock, and second, considering public
capital both exogenous to the firm and endogenous to the local community positing a simultaneous
relationship of public capital and local economic growth. The authors find a positive and statistically
significant effect of public capital on state’s economic growth rate.
Assessing a link between public capital and economic growth, Fernald (1999) studies the direction
of causation between public capital and productivity and unsurprisingly concludes that road construction
(which is one of the biggest components of public spending) causes a surge in productivity in industries
with high motor-vehicle use. David Aschauer (1989) also finds that road construction bears the most
explanatory power of the change of local productivity, while military spending has almost none.
6 Richardson (1985) surveys all but the neoclassical models. Merrifeld (1987 and 1990) and
McGregor, McVittie, Swales, and Yin (2000) for examples of neoclassical multipliers for the economic
base.

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

6

that describe the degree to which different industries rely on local labor and external
inputs and capital. Others rely on Ordinary Least Squares regression estimates (Mulligan
(2005, 1987).
The coefficient on federal spending in a regional model will be determined by a
series of factors.7 It will have positive effects to the extent that it puts to work
unemployed resources; it is more productive than the private spending that is replaced by
the anticipation of future obligations for taxpayers; it produces social overhead capital
(like roads, sanitation, public health programs) that make the inputs in the state economy
more productive; and/or it leads to multiplier effects. The Keynesian multiplier model
arises as each income recipient purchases goods and services from others in the state
who, in turn, spend their receipts on goods and services produced by others in the state.
The regional neoclassical multiplier arises as labor demand is pushed out along an
upward sloping labor supply curve.
The positive benefits of the multiplier are diminished through a variety of
“leakages” when the money spent in the process is spent on goods and services outside
the state economy. Much of the federal grant spending on work relief programs, like the
FERA, WPA, or CWA, had small initial leakages because over 80 percent was spent on
wages for people in the state. Grants from the Public Works Administration and Public
Roads Administration had larger initial leakages because more than 50 percent of the
monies were spent on materials and equipment imported from other states. More

7The intuitive discussion of the multiplier is based on a Keynesian discussion of consumption and
imports. See Cullen and Fishback (2007) and Fishback, Horrace, and Kantor (2005b) for how this works in
a simple model. Nakamura and Steinsson (2011) have a neo-Keynesian model that leads to the same
implications.

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

7

leakages occurred to the extent that workers on federal projects spent their wages on
goods and services produced outside the state.
Federal spending will have smaller positive effects on the economy to the extent
that it leads people to save in anticipation that they will have to pay future taxes. The
federal spending will have an even weaker effect to the extent that it replaces local
production of goods and services. An influx of federal spending might bid up local
wages in ways that raised the costs of hiring labor to private producers. It may have also
bid up the prices for non-labor inputs with the same effect. The most obvious crowding
out came from the AAA payments to farmers to take land out of production. The stated
purpose of the act was to reduce output in hopes of raising prices enough to see an
increase in income. In other cases, the federal spending may have replaced state and
local projects that would have been built in the absence of federal spending. The impact
of the reduction in state and local spending was likely to be small because states were
generally required to run balanced budgets. Even when they ran deficits in the early
1930s, the deficits were relatively small as a share of state and local spending.

The Impact of Federal Spending in the 1930s.
There have been some estimates of the impact of New Deal spending on general
economic activity. At the macroeconomic level, Christina Romer (1992) calculated a
fiscal multiplier of only 0.23 in a difference-in-difference estimate that examined the
change in federal funds distributed after the Veterans’ Bonus was passed out in 1936. In
simulations from a dynamic structural general equilibrium model Gauti Eggertsson
(2008) finds that the combination of increased federal spending, the move off of the gold

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

8

standard, the zero interest bound, and government efforts to raise wages and prices
through the National Recovery Administration led to a strong turnaround in the economy.
In microeconomic studies using variation across time and place, Fishback,
Horrace, and Kantor (2005, 2006) showed a strong positive influence of public works and
relief spending on county-level retail sales and net-migration. In studies of panel data for
cities between 1929 and 1940 Fishback, Haines and Kantor (2007) and Johnson, Fishback
and Kantor (2010) show that relief spending contributed to reductions in mortality and
crime rates and increases in birth rates. On the other hand, Agricultural Adjustment
Administration (AAA) grants had a slightly negative effect on retail sales growth and net
migration. Garrett and Wheelock (2006) found similar positive effects of overall New
Deal spending in a cross-sectional analysis of the growth rate in state personal income per
capita for the entire period 1933 to 1939 and New Deal spending during that period.
However, neither paper shows the effects of a multiplier on income in the same year.
Studies of labor markets using panel data from 1930s have focused on the impact
of relief spending on labor markets. Neuman, Fishback, and Kantor (2010) examine
monthly data from 1933 through 1940 for over 40 cities and find that relief spending
raised private employment through 1935 but reduced it afterward. Benjamin and
Mathews (1992) find small crowding out effects of private employment from relief jobs
through 1935 and much larger crowding out effects in the second half of the New Deal.8

Federal Spending in the 1930s

8 We focus on the studies that use panel data here, see Neumann, Fishback, and Kantor (2010) for
citations to studies relying on cross-sectional estimation.

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

9

In response to the hard times between the fiscal years 1929 and 1933, the Hoover
administration and Congress increased nominal government spending by 52 percent, 88
percent after adjusting for the tremendous deflation.9 After a decade of no change in
annual real federal spending, Hoover sought to increase spending through existing
programs. As an example, the U.S. Department of Agriculture (1932, 49-50) described
the increase in highway spending in 1932 as a relief and stimulus measure: “Emergency
employment was directly provided for varying periods for nearly 200,000 men and
indirectly for a much larger number in industries that supply necessary materials and
services.”10 By fiscal years 1932 and 1933 the federal government was running a deficit
of -4.7 percent of a much reduced GDP as growth in tax revenues failed to keep pace
with the rise in government spending.
After Franklin Roosevelt and the new Democratic Congress took office in March
1933, government spending roughly doubled over the next 6 years. The rise in spending
did not lead to large budget deficits because tax revenues rose at roughly the same rate.
E. Cary Brown (1956) and Claude Peppers (1973) have documented that the federal
deficits as a share of GDP were small and fell well short of being Keynesian policies
designed to stimulate the economy.11 On the other hand, the distribution of the federal
spending varied enormously across states on a per capita basis. Figure 1 shows the large
9See series Ea584, Ea585, and Ea586 in Wallis (2006, 5-80 and 5-81). The federal fiscal year ran
from July 1 in year t-1 to June 30 in year t. Nearly all of the decisions made about fiscal year 1933 were
made by the Hoover administration and Congress. Roosevelt did not take office until early March 1933
and very little of the New Deal spending occurred before July 1, 1933.
10 In 1935 the U.S. Bureau of Agricultural Economics traced the path of $100 million of highway
spending through the economy until it was paid out as wage or salary income and calculated highway
spending multipliers of 2.7 for employment and 3 for economic activity.
11 After July 1931, it appears that monetary policy was relatively uniform across the 12 regional
federal reserve banks. Richardson Van Troost (2009) document differences in attitudes toward providing
reserves to banks in the St. Louis and Atlanta districts in 1930 and the first half of 1931, but St. Louis
began following similar policies to Atlanta’s in July of that year. Meltzer (2003) notes that there were
differences of opinion about how to proceed with open market operations but that nearly all open market
sales and purchases were made by the New York Federal Reserve Bank.

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

10

variation in the annual changes in per capita federal grants plotted against per capita
personal income across states for the years 1930 through 1940, all measure in 1967. The
changes over time within states after controlling for national shocks in each year is the
source of variation used to identify the multipliers.

The Composition of Federal Spending
Understanding of the impact of federal spending and taxation during the New
Deal era is complicated by the great diversity of programs. The New Deal funding
programs were divided into two major classifications: nonrepayable grants and repayable
loans.12 The Office of Government Reports (OGR) (1940) reported the total amount
spent by each program in each state in each year from July 1, 1932 through June 30,
1939. The OGR mimeos do not document where they obtained the spending figures. To
double check the OGR data and extend the series for programs back to 1930 and forward
to 1940, we went through a large number of reports from various agencies and the
Treasury department to double check the numbers. The data appendix describes the
sources we used and some of the inconsistencies we found. In addition, we added
information that the OGR did not report on the construction and maintenance spending
on Hoover (Boulder) Dam and the Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA) and the loans and
cash grants on the World War I adjusted service certificates that were associated with the
Veterans’ Bonus. The totals and the amounts per capita for the period 1933 through 1939
are reported in Table I to get a sense of the size of each program.

12The Office of Government Reports offered information on the value of housing loans insured
by the Federal Housing Administration. Since these loans were private loans, we do not incorporate these
into the analysis of net federal spending.

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

11

The main focus in the analysis is on nonrepayable grants from the federal
government. About 62 percent of the grants were associated with relief programs. All of
the Works Progress Administration (WPA), Civilian Conservation Corps (CCCG), and
Civil Works Administration (CWA) grants and roughly half of the Federal Emergency
Relief Administration (FERA) were spent on poverty relief projects with work
requirements and could be considered federal expenditures because they produced a good
or service. The Social Security Act Programs (SSA), and the rest of the FERA grants
were New Deal programs that offered transfer payments to alleviate poverty. The
Veterans’ Administration (VA) and Soldiers’ and Sailors’ Homes (SOLD) were grant
programs in place before the New Deal that provided pensions, disability payments, and
living support to military veterans. Grants from the SSA programs provided matching
grants to states that provided aid to dependent children (ADC), old-age assistance (OAA),
and aid-to-the-blind (AB). If we performed the analysis for the U.S. as a whole, the
transfer payments from the SSA, part of the FERA, the VA, and the SOLD, which
account for roughly 20 percent of the grants, would not necessarily be treated as
expenditures because they are net transfers within the system. However, at the state level
these transfer grants become income that influenced purchasing power within each state,
and therefore the Bureau of Economic Analysis included them in their personal income
estimates; therefore, we incorporate them into the analysis.
The second major grant category is public works programs, which accounted for
19.4 percent of the grants. The Public Works Administration Federal (PWAF) and
Nonfederal (PWANF) programs, Public Roads Administration, Public Buildings
Administration (PBA), Rivers and Harbors Grant (RH) and other smaller programs listed

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

12

as public works in the table were not poverty programs. All but the PWA programs were
long run federal programs established before the New Deal. Unlike the work relief
poverty programs, the public works programs could hire from the labor market and faced
fewer restrictions on hours worked. They also paid average hourly wages that were
roughly double those on the work relief programs.
Approximately 12 percent of the grants were devoted to agriculture from
programs run by the Agricultural Adjustment Administration (AAA), Soil and
Conservation Service (SCS), Farm Security Administration (FSA), and Agriculturual
Experiment Stations (AES). The AAA was the major New Deal program which was
devoted to payments to farmers to take land out of production. The initial AAA program
was funded with an agricultural processing tax until it was declared unconstitutional in
January 1936.13 The AAA also administered the replacement program adopted under
the Soil and Domestic Conservation Act of 1936, which continued to make payments to
farmers to take land out of production without the processing tax. The FSA started
within the FERA relief program and was more of a poverty relief program. The SCS
began before the AAA was declared unconstitutional and provided grants for training
farmers about soil conservation techniques.
It is not always clear how to treat the federal loans in terms of developing a
multiplier. They are not government spending because at the time the loans were made
they all required repayment. However, loan distributions are often listed in the budget
deficit figures. As one example, the OGR treated the loans for construction of irrigation
projects through the Bureau of Reclamation as grants. The loans were interest-free and

13AAA grants per capita were not very strongly correlated with processing tax receipts in crosssectional correlations. The correlation for 1934 was only 0.034 and for 1935 was 0.1677.

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

13

the repayments were often delayed for a long time period, and in a number of cases the
loans were forgiven. Following the OGR practice, we treated the Bureau of Reclamation
funds as grants in this analysis.
Nearly all of the rest of the loans were repaid, and thus were treated separately as
a loan category.14 There was a grant feature to the loans to the extent that they provided
subsidies in the form of lower interest rates and better lending terms. The Home Owners’
Loan Corporation (HOLC), for example, bought over 1 million mortgages that were on
the verge of foreclosure at close to the full book values of the loans and then refinanced
them for the original borrower at interest rates that were below market interest rates on
good loans. The HOLC also extended the standard repayment period, and allowed much
smaller down payments relative to the value of the home. The Farm Credit
Administration (FCA) loans provided good terms for farm mortgages and short-term
loans for crops, seed, and tools.15 The subsidies in Reconstruction Finance Corporation
(RFC) loans likely varied by type of loan. Given the measurement issues with loans, we
include multiplier estimates where we add 10 percent of the value of the loans as a
measure of the interest subsidy to the grants. We also run estimates where we add the
full value of the loans to the grants.
World War I service-adjusted certificates, associated with the Veterans’ Bonus of
1936, are divided into two categories, loans and death benefit grants before January 1936
14 There were some cases of loan forgiveness. In the case we know about, the RFC loans offered
to cities for poverty relief under the Hoover administration in fiscal year 1933 were eventually forgiven by
the Roosevelt administration. The HOLC likely experienced the highest loan default rate because it
foreclosed on 20 percent of the mortgages that it supported. Our sense from reading the reports of the
various agencies, is that they anticipated repayment and were active in seeking repayment or recovery of
assets to be sold when there was a default.
15The Commodity Credit Corporation loan program provided nonrecourse loans that established a
price floor for the commodities produced. The CCC loan information has been eliminated from the
analysis because the loans were not reported across states in fiscal 1934 and major portions of the loans
were not reported across states in other years.

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

14

and grants after that date. Since Cone and the BEA incorporated both the loans and
grants in their measure of personal income, these deserve direct attention. In 1924
Congress enacted an adjusted-service certificate program for men and women who served
in World War I. The program offered certificates that could be redeemed at face value
twenty years after receipt. The amount to be paid was $1 for each day served in World
War I inside the U.S. and $1.25 for each day overseas, and then the amount was
multiplied by 1.25 to take into account the delay in payment. Certificates valued at less
than $50 were paid in cash immediately and the cash value of the certificate was paid out
to heirs at the time of the veterans’ death. These payments are treated as grants
throughout.
Living veterans could also borrow from the Veterans’ Bureau against the
certificates by accepting a lien on the value of the certificate. They could pay back the
loan and receive the full certificate value in 1945 or not repay and accept the amount left
after interest was deducted in 1945. After Congress lowered the maximum interest on the
loans to 4.5 percent (and soon after to 3.5) and increased the amount that could be
borrowed to half of the value of the adjusted service certificate on February 27, 1931,
World War I veterans took out 2 million loans valued at $795 million within the next few
months. In January 1936 the Veterans’ Bonus Bill allowed veterans to convert the
adjusted-service certificates to cash at the full face value. If veterans held them for more
than one year they could receive the face value plus 3 percent interest per year until
maturity on June 15, 1945. The VA received 3.3 million applications with a face value of
$3.2 billion for settlement by June 30, 1936. After deducting outstanding liens from
loans, the VA paid out $1.7 billion in cash. Since the payment of liens released veterans

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

15

from making future payments on loans, we treat the entire $3.2 billion as grants
(Administrator of Veterans’ Affairs 1931, pp. 10, 42-44; 1936, pp. 1, 22-24). In the
analysis that combines loans and grants, however, the $3.2 million in grants was offset by
the repayment of $1.5 billion in loans, so the combined value of grants and loans for the
adjusted service certificates in 1936 is $1.7 billion.

Federal Tax Policy in the 1930s
Federal taxation in the 1930s was relatively simple in that all tax rates were the
same across all states for each activity in each year. However, the tax structure during
the 1930s was quite different from the post-War economy, in which the vast majority of
internal tax revenues come from taxes on income in the form of corporate, personal, and
employment (social security and unemployment insurance) taxes. Between 1930 and
1940 the sources of federal revenue shifted dramatically away from income taxes toward
excise taxes. Less than 10 percent of households earned enough to pay personal income
taxes throughout the 1930s.16 In 1930 personal income taxes accounted for 38% of total
internal revenue and corporate income taxes composed 42%. The Tax Revenue Act of
1932 led to several major changes. Even though income tax rates were increased, the
share of revenue from personal income taxes fell markedly to 16% in 1934 and 18% in
1940, while the share from corporate income taxes fell to 15% in 1934 before rising to
21% in 1940. The big revenue sources that arose from the 1932 tax changes was an
expansion in excise taxes to cover manufactures of autos, tires, gasoline, lubricants and
taxes on pipelines, telephones, telegraphs, and electricity. The share of internal revenue

16 Households did not begin paying income taxes before income hit $2,000 for individuals and
$5,000 for a family of four at a time when most workers were earning $1,000 or less.

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

16

from excise taxes rose from 19% in 1930 to 28% in 1933. In 1933 the Roosevelt
administration added in processing taxes on agricultural goods, a capital stock tax and
eliminated Prohibition. The excise tax share jumped to 48% in 1934. Over the rest of the
decade the excise tax share fell back to 35%, although the share of revenue from alcohol
taxes remained steady around 12%.17
Aside from tax rate changes, the driving force behind changes in tax revenue
within a state over time were changes in economic activity. Between 1930 and 1940 the
correlations across time between real per capita personal income and real per capita taxes
within the same state ranged from 0.95 in Georgia to 0.3624 in South Carolina. It was
above 0.8 for 22 states, between 0.7 and 0.8 in 18 states, between 0.6 and 0.7 in 5 states,
0.4913 in Nebraska, 0.4423 in Kansas, and 0.3624 in South Carolina. The taxation is so
strongly tied to income levels that it is difficult to find instruments for taxation that are
not also strong correlates of income.
We deal with federal taxation empirically in two ways. Since national tax rates
were the same across all states, the simplest way is to incorporate year fixed effects that
control for tax rate changes in a model of state per capita income as a function of national
government spending per capita in the state. Essentially, the model shows the multiplier
of federal spending for state personal income after controlling for the fiscal drag created
by the tax rate system. We also estimate the model with a dependent variable of per
capita state income as a function of real per capita national government spending minus
real per capita national taxes. This is the multiplier for income from federal government
spending net of taxes.

17Shares calculated from Wallis (2006, 5-86).

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

17

Measures of Economic Activity
The impact of federal spending is estimated for several measures of economic
activity. The broadest measure is state personal income per capita, which has been
estimated and reported by the Bureau of Economic Analysis since the 1930s. Frederick
Cone (1940, 3, 10, 13, 39), who helped develop the early estimates, described personal
income as a measure of the “ability of consumers to purchase the new goods and services
currently produced by business enterprises.” With that in mind personal income was
defined as national income after subtracting business savings, social security
contributions from employer and employee, contributions to the Railroad Retirement
Fund, and contributions to retirement systems for government employees on the grounds
that these were not available for spending. To capture purchasing power, the BEA added
back many transfer payments, including direct and work relief, federal pensions to
veterans, adjusted service benefits (both loans in the early 1930s and the Veterans’
Bonus), other government retirement allowances, unemployment compensation, railroad
insurance benefits, old-age insurance benefits, and agriculture benefit payments.18
Direct relief accounted for about 1.4 percent, retirement payments for veterans and
federal workers accounted for about 1 percent, and the World War I adjusted service
certificates payouts reached peaks of 1.4 percent of income (in the form of loans) in 1931

18Cone (1940, p. 8) made the following argument for inclusion of the World War I veterans’
loans and then 1936 cash payout on adjusted service certificates as personal income: “because these
disbursements of the Federal Government were in the nature of original receipts to the veterans and
because, owing to the large volume of the disbursements and their wide distribution among 3,000,000
veterans, they represented an important stimulus to consumption on two distinct occasions, they have been
incorporated.”

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

18

and 2.1 percent (in the form of cash) in 1936 with negligible amounts in between (Cone,
1940, 10, 24-5).19
We also estimate the model with measures of wage and salary income net of
payroll taxes and several other measures of economic activity. The wage and salary
income, which is net of pay-roll deductions for social insurance, accounted for about 62.5
percent of personal income in the 1930s (Martin and Creamer, 1942, p. 23).
Measurement error is also an issue with the wage and salary income personal income data
because the information on some components had to be interpolated between census
years and from scattered components. The most accurately measured information is the
wage component of wage and salary income because it relies heavily on the monthly
establishment surveys collected by the Bureau of Labor Statistics during this period. The
BLS suggested that about 48 percent of employment was covered by the survey in 1938
(Cone, 1940, 31).
To further reduce problems with measurement error and also examine in more
depth where the stimulus occurred, we examine several other series: census reports on
manufacturing payroll per capita in the odd years from 1929 through 1939, and the retail
census estimates of per capita retail sales for the years 1929, 1933, 1935, and 1939.
These two measures are particularly valuable because they are based on nationwide
censuses of all establishments. There are several additional measures of income and
spending that are not available in dollar terms, including per capita measures of John
19 We have been trying to develop a measure of income that does not include transfers and thus is
a more production based measure. The new measure starts with the BEA measure of personal income. We
have been collecting evidence by state that will allow us to subtract transfers without a work relief
component and add back payroll taxes for social insurance and contributions to government pension plans.
Work relief is treated as production income because it was related to production. Since we are not privy to
the exact sources used to construct personal income, there is a risk of adding measurement when we make
the adjustments.

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

19

Wallis’s (1989) broad-based employment index built up from BLS employer surveys for
1929 through 1939,20 newly computerized payroll indices for 1932 to 1939 for the same
group of industries, and per capita auto registrations, to capture the effect of government
spending on a major consumer durable. The employment and payroll indices rely very
little on interpolation but there may be sampling error in each state because the series are
based on month-to-month comparisons of the same employers from surveys that rotate
employers out of the sample (Wallis, 1989; Neumann, Fishback, and Kantor 2010).
Wallis (1989) used benchmarks to resolve some of these problems for the broad-based
employer index, but the payroll indices have not been benchmarked. The automobile
registrations also are measured well, as the states collected license revenue from the
automobiles.

Estimation Procedure
Despite the variety of different models that generate income multipliers of
government spending, the empirical estimations of multipliers tend to be similar and use
reduced form models with a sparse set of correlates. Both Barro and Redlick (2010) and
Romer and Romer (2006) express worries about omitted variable bias that might arise
from the absence of exogenous factors in the model. To estimate the multiplier, we use
panel data methods with a measure of real per capita state income (yit) in state i and year t
in 1967 dollars as the dependent variable as a function of a measure of real per capita
federal spending in state i and year t (git),

20 The broad-based index includes manufacturing wages only; mining wages only; street
railways; telephone and telegraph; electric light, power, and gas; insurance; brokerage; wholesale and retail
trade; year-round hotels; and laundry and dry-cleaning establishments.

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

20

yit = β0 + β1 git + β2 W + S +Y + S* t + εit.

To control for omitted variables that might have influenced government policy and state
income, we include several vectors. A vector of extreme weather (W) variables—days
with temperatures over 90, days with temperatures below 0, months of extreme or severe
drought, and months of extreme or severe wetness, and precipitation--controls for the
influence of these factors on crop production and prices in the farm sector, construction
activity, and other activities where weather was a factor. A vector of state fixed effects
(S) controls for factors like geography, state constitutions, and the basic economic,
cultural, and demographic structure of each state that did not change over time but varied
across states.

A vector of year fixed effects (Y) controls for national changes in the

economy that affected all states in each year, including monetary policy changes, changes
in federal tax rates, the introduction and elimination of the National Recovery
Administration and other changes in national regulation. A vector of state specific time
trends (S*t) control for differences in the trend paths of economic activity in each state,
including the shift away from state budget deficits in the early 1930s to budget surpluses
in the late 1930s. Under the complete model specification the identification of the
multiplier β1 for net New Deal spending comes from the deviation from trend across time
within states after controlling for nation-wide shocks.21
The model can also be estimated in year-to-year first differences to control for
time-invariant state effects. In the difference model state time trends are controlled with
the addition of state fixed effects.

Both methods lead to unbiased and consistent

21 We have also tried estimating the model while including squared terms. The estimates at the
mean of the sample are very similar and there is very little gain from adding the squared terms. In addition,
the instruments did not have adequate strength to separate the coefficients for the squared terms.

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

21

estimates of the multiplier in large samples, but the standard errors are more efficiently
estimated by the difference estimation if there is serial correlation (Wooldridge 2006,
491-2). Since the sample is relatively small with 48 states for 11 years each, we report
both sets of estimates. Following Barro and Redlick (2011), Kraay (2010) and Nakamura
and Steinsson (2010), we have also estimated the model as the growth rate in income
from the previous year as a function of the change in government spending divided by
lagged income. The use of the growth rate matches more common macroeconomic
specifications, while the normalization of government spending by dividing by lagged
income allows the coefficient to be interpreted as a dollar-for-dollar multiplier.
There are a variety of other factors that may have changed over time in non-trend
ways that may have influenced both net fiscal federal spending and per capita income in
the state. There are two problems that arise in trying to control for these other factors.
First, many that might be included as controls in a productivity model, such as wages,
employment, and interest rates, are themselves components of personal income.

By

controlling for them we would be restricting the measure of the impact of net federal
expenditures to the parts of state income for which we have not controlled. Second,
controls for age, race, ethnicity, population, and the structure of the economy are all
available typically only during the census years and thus measures would have to be
interpolated between census years to provide values.

Essentially, the interpolated

measures of the census-year structural variables between 1930 and 1940 would be linear
combinations of the state-specific time trends and/or the state effects.
Third, state and local government spending and taxation are currently controlled
for with the combination of the state fixed effects and state-specific time trends.

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

22

Thus

deviations in trend state fiscal activity is not being controlled. The multiplier estimate
therefore may incorporate influences on income that arise from correlations between
deviations from trend in state and local fiscal activity and federal spending. Since federal
spending drove some state decisions, this might not be a disadvantage. As it stands
today, comparable annual estimates of revenues and governmental cost payments in the
states are available only up through 1931 and after 1936 for all states; therefore, any
estimate incorporating controls for net state spending would miss a very large portion of
the New Deal period. Information is available on cities over 100,000 people throughout
the 1930s, but data for the rest of the governments is available only for 1932.22
There still remains the possibility of biases from simultaneity and endogeneity.
An ample literature on the geographic distribution of New Deal spending shows that the
Roosevelt Administration tended to distribute more New Deal grants to areas where
income was declining (see Wallis 1998, Fleck 2008, Fishback, Kantor, and Wallis, 2003;
Neumann, Fishback, and Kantor 2010). This tendency imparts a negative bias to the
multiplier coefficient. To eliminate the biases arising from the issues described above,
we follow an instrumental variable strategy. To be effective, the instrument must vary
annually both across time and across space and be strongly correlated with the measures
of federal government funds but not with the error term in the final-stage equation.

22The federal government stopped collecting the annual information from states for the volume
Financial Statistics of the States in 1933 after having collected information from 41 states for 1932. They
restarted by collecting the data for 1937 (U.S. Bureau of the Census 1940, p. vi). John Wallis, Richard
Sylla, and John Legler have posted information for 16 states for the period 1933 through 1937 with the
ICPSR, but it is taking longer than we anticipated to make the data for these states comparable with the
federal government’s categories. Working with John Wallis we have been collecting, computerizing, and
categorizing the information for the remaining states for 1933 through 1937 and for the seven states in 1932
that the Census Bureau had not worked with. We still have about two year’s worth of work to do on the
project.

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

23

We develop two instrument strategies each based on a similar logic about the
distribution of federal spending across states. Each year the federal government decides
to distribute a total number of grants while paying attention to the state of the economy
but not the economy within each state. In any one year each state’s share of the grants is
determined by a variety of factors, including economic problems within the state but also
long run differences across states unrelated to the economy. Our goal is to use these
factors unrelated to state-specific economic problems as instrumental variables.
Some scholars in the modern studies have tried to use federal rules for
distribution, but this will not work in the 1930s because the federal government routinely
ignored the original rules written into the acts setting up the emergency programs.
Nakamura and Steinsson (2010) follow a strategy of estimating a separate share
coefficient for each state. This is equivalent to estimating a first stage in our panel with
47 state dummies interacted with federal spending. When we tried this, the Stock-Yogo
tests for instrument strength suggested that we had weak instrument bias. We therefore,
experimented with interactions of regional dummies with federal grant spending per
capita based on 9 census regions and 4 census regions. The instrument tests suggested
that weak instrument bias was less of a problem with the 4 census region interactions, and
Hausman tests for over-identification in this case do not reject the hypothesis that the
instruments do not belong in the final stage regression.
The second instrument strategy relies more heavily on the finding in the New
Deal distribution literature that swing voting was the key factor influencing the crossstate distributions of funds (Wright 1974; Fishback, Kantor, and Wallis 2003; Fleck
2001, 2008, Wallis 1998, 2001). It also tries to eliminate potential correlations between

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

24

the state-specific portion of the total error for total federal spending and error term for the
state in the final stage regression. The instrument is the interaction of two variables: a
measure of swing voting in presidential elections up to the year t-1 and aggregate per
capita federal grant spending in year t in an area well outside the region where the state is
located. The swing voting measure is the standard deviation of the percentage voting
Democrat for president in the state between 1896 and the most recent presidential
election prior to year t. The variable varies across time because each state’s value
changes between 1932 and 1933 and again between 1936 and 1937. By using the
measure calculated up through the most recent presidential election before that year, we
eliminate contemporaneous correlation with factors that influenced income in the state.23
Given the controls for state fixed effects and state time trends, it seems unlikely that
swing voting in the presidential elections between 1896 and year t-1 would have been
correlated with the error for income in the state in year t except through the New Deal
distribution mechanism.
The second variable in the interaction term is federal grant spending in the area
outside an geographic “moat” around the state of interest. The moat includes the state’s
census region (of 9) and nearby census regions to avoid spatial correlation with the error
term from potential spillovers. For New England, for example, the moat includes any
states in New England, the Mid-Atlantic, the East North Central, or the states of Virginia,
Maryland, Kentucky, or West Virginia; therefore, the component of federal spending for
the instrument for that state is based on federal spending outside that moat.24 25

23 As an example, the instrument for the year 1932 would include the standard deviation of the
percent voting for the Democratic presidential candidate from 1896 through 1928.
24For more detail on the moats for each region, see the data appendix.

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

25

Since AAA grant spending differed markedly from other grant spending in its
purposes, we also estimate a model with AAA grants and nonAAA grants. In the first IV
strategy the instruments using region dummies interacted with federal grant spending per
capita are reasonably strong. In the second IV strategy we construct the instrument for
nonAAA grant spending in a way similar to the manner described above but based on the
AAA procedure for handing out grants. For each crop in each year the AAA considered
past crop output and current market conditions and set a price per acre to offer farmers to
take land out of production. Typically, the allotments of acreage for each state were
based on the average number of acres harvested and the yield per acre in the state over
the previous five years. We developed an instrument that partially mimics that process
while not including state-level information from the sample period on acreage, yields, or
prices in the area. We set the basic structure for AAA payments in 1928 before the
sample starts and then update the instrument each year based on changes in AAA
spending elsewhere in the country. AAA spending well outside the region where the
state was located is multiplied by an agricultural activity measure in 1928 based all crops
that received AAA subsidies by 1940.26 The 1928 activity measure is the share of U.S.
crop activity in that state in 1928. The instrument is expected to have strength because it
has similarity to the five-year averages that served as the basis of distribution in the
actual program. By fixing the share of agricultural activity in 1928 and updating with
information on AAA spending well outside the region, the instrument should not be

25 If the federal government had established a hard budget constraint nationwide, there might
have been a negative relationship between spending in the rest of the regions and spending in the state in
question. There did not appear to be a hard spending constraint at the national level because Roosevelt and
the Congress often approved additional funds throughout the years and ran budget deficits in most years.
26 The AAA started providing grants for different crops in different years. By using the crops in the
program as of 1940, we avoid any endogeneity related to the timing of when programs began for each crop.

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

26

correlated with the error in the final stage regression except through its impact on AAA
spending.

Multipliers for Per Capita State Personal Income
The state personal incomes are reported on a calendar year basis, while the federal
spending is reported on a fiscal year basis, covering the period from July 1 in year t-1 to
June 30 in year t. This automatically imparts a half-year lag into the model.27 Table II
shows coefficients and standard errors from a series of estimations with per capita state
personal income in $1967 as a function of per capita estimates of federal government
fiscal activity in the state. The first column shows the coefficient and standard errors for
per capita federal grants in the level specification as correlates are added cumulatively
and then IV methods using the region interactions with federal spending as instruments.
The raw Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) estimate of 1.04 with no correlates implies that a
one dollar increase in per capita federal grants increased per capita state income by $1.04.
Controlling for state fixed effects raises this multiplier estimate to 1.43, and adding
weather correlates raises it further to 1.56. The addition of year effects to control for
nationwide shocks reduces the multiplier to 0.45, and the addition of state-specific time
trends lowers the estimate further to 0.16. This last estimate suggests that the federal
spending crowded out a great deal of local economic activity and/or the impact is
weakened greatly because the spending quickly leaked out of the local economy. The

27 We investigated interpolating the federal spending in each state to a calendar-year basis by using state
level information on monthly employment in programs, but we could not do this for all programs. Without
such state-specific information, interpolation runs the risk of incorporating information on government
spending in the first half of year t+1 into the year t estimate. We did not carry the process further because
the interpolation might introduce biases to the extent that state income in year t influences the distribution
of federal government spending in year t+1.

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

27

results for the other regression specifications show the same pattern of changes in
coefficients as correlates are added to the analysis. This pattern typically appears when
using other measures of government funding and other measures of economic activity.
Given that the Roosevelt administration distributed more grants to areas where the
economy was in trouble, we instrument to try to eliminate negative bias in the coefficient.
The transition to instrumental variables is consistent with negative endogeneity bias, as
the instrumental variable (IV) coefficients are more positive than the non IV coefficients
from equations with the same correlates. The IV estimates that both control for a great
deal of omitted variable bias and also meet the strongest criteria for instrument strength
are the ones with controls for weather, state effects, and year effects. If we are willing to
accept up to 15 percent weak instrument bias in the size of the coefficient, the critical
value for rejecting the hypothesis of weak instrument bias at the 10 percent level
developed by Stock and Yogo (2002a, 2002b) for the Kleibergan-Paap (2006) (KP)
version of the Donald F-statistic when using robust standard errors is 12.83 with three
instruments instrument for one right-hand side variable. The values if one is willing to
accept 20 and 25 percent bias are 9.54 and 7.80. The critical values are lower if weak
instrument bias is measured relative to the bias of the OLS coefficient at 9.08 for 10
percent relative bias and 6.46 for 20-percent relative bias.
The IV estimates without year fixed effects generate very high F-statistics that
reject the hypothesis of weak instrument bias, but the absence of year effects means that
the effects of monetary policy, federal tax rate changes, the National Recovery
Administration, and other changes, which were correlated with both income and federal
grant spending, are incorporated into the coefficient of federal grant spending. The

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

28

addition of year fixed effects eliminates this potential problem and the KP statistics reject
the hypothesis of 15 percent weak instrument bias when state and year fixed effects are
included. The addition of state-specific time trends serves to eliminate potential omitted
variable bias but at the cost of losing instrument strength, as the F-statistic of 5.03 is not
high enough to reject 15 to 25 percent weak instrument bias. Therefore, we will focus the
discussion on the IV estimates with state and year effects.
The per capita personal income multiplier estimates for per capita federal grants
using the IV of region interactions with federal totals vary only slightly when using
different estimating equations. The coefficient is 1.11 using level estimation, 1.10 in the
first difference specification, and 1.13 in the growth rate specification. Under the
moat/swing instrument strategy, the level specification leads to a multiplier estimate of
1.39. We do not report the difference specifications for the moat-swing instrument
strategy because the instrument F-statistics are all less than 3, suggesting weak
instrument bias. Although each of the estimates is greater than one, we cannot reject the
hypothesis that the multiplier is equal to one. Thus, an additional dollar of federal grants
may well have increased personal income by no more than the dollar of grant spending
with no additional benefit in the private sector.

Personal Income Multipliers for Different Types of Federal Funding
The estimates of multipliers for different federal funding measures in Table III
show variations in the point estimates for different types of spending. The multiplier for
grants net of federal taxes paid from the state hovers around one. When a dollar in
federal loans is treated like a dollar in grants and we estimate the effect of the combined

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

29

total of grants and loans, we might expect smaller multipliers for the combination of
grants and loans. There was a huge surge of loans on World War I adjusted service
certificates in 1931 when the economy was falling apart, and the size of the Veterans’
Bonus was cut nearly in half in 1936 when the economy was growing the cash grants of
over $3 billion was offset by the repayment of the earlier loans. The estimates under the
level specifications in Table III are consistent with this expectation with values of .86 and
.89. On the other hand, the difference and growth specifications lead to estimates of 1.54
and 1.93. When the loans are treated as providing a subsidy of 10 percent of the loan
value, the multipliers for grants and 10 percent of loans are very close to the multiplier
for grants alone reported in Table II and at the top of Table III.
There is some sign that specific types of grants may have had stronger effects.
When direct transfers to the poor are removed from the grants and the focus is on
government purchases, the multiplier estimate is as high as 2.18 in the level specification
using the moat-swing instrument strategy and exceeds 1.4 in two other specifications. On
the other hand, the estimate is also only 0.38 in the first-difference specification.
Given that the AAA farm grants were designed to take land out of production, we
expected that the nonAAA grants would have stronger effects than all grants and that the
AAA potentially had negative effects on personal income. Three of the four sets of
estimates are consistent with this view. The multipliers for nonAAA grants vary from
0.94 to 1.79, while the AAA grant coefficients are negative in three specifications
although very large and positive in the level specification using the region interaction
instruments. The findings of the positive effect of nonAAA grants and negative effects
of AAA grants are similar to Fishback, Horrace, and Kantor’s (2005, 2006) findings

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

30

using county level data. Using a different instrument strategy, they find that public works
and relief were associated with higher retail sales and net in-migration, and that AAA
grants were associated with slightly lower retail sales and net out-migration. The
payments would have benefitted farm owners and those tenants who received a share of
the AAA payments. On the other hand, the likely reduction in the demand for farm labor
would have reduced wages and employment for farm workers and share croppers
(Fishback, Horrace, and Kantor (2005, 2006).28
Even though the results in Table III show variations in the multiplier for different
forms of spending, it is important to note that the standard errors of the estimates are
large enough that we cannot reject a multiplier of one for nearly every estimate. Further,
the comparisons of multipliers for different types of government funding do not match
for each estimation procedure. For example, in looking down the columns for the growth
rate specification, the largest multiplier of 1.93 is the one for grants and the full value of
loans. In contrast, the multiplier for grants and the full value of loans is lowest in the two
level specifications.

The Impact of Federal Grants on Various Measures of Economic Activity

28The policy was designed to raise prices for farmers. The negative effect on real personal
income from the price rise was likely to have been felt nationwide for crops with national markets. This
change would have led to a rise in the CPI and a reduction in real income nationwide that would show up in
the coefficients of the year dummies. In that sense, the multiplier estimate will be overstated. There may
have been differential effects within states due to differences in the consumer prices based on distance
between farmgate and final market. Much of this effect would be controlled for by the state fixed effects.
For some crops that sold in local markets, like corn and hay, the local prices might have risen more than at
the national level with the reduction in output as long as they stayed within a price range set by
transportation costs to other markets (Fox, Fishback, Rhode, 2011). This localized rise would show up in
the measure of state personal income but the effect of the rise in limiting purchasing power would not
because we have not adjusted for localized differences in the cost of living. Here again the multiplier effect
will be slightly overstated.

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

31

Federal grants had differential effects on various economic measures that are
aggregated into per capita personal income. Table IV shows dollar-for-dollar IV
estimates for retail sales per capita, wage and salary income per capita and manufacturing
payrolls per capita. Data for retail sales per capita and manufacturing payrolls per capita
data were reported for only some years; therefore, the table includes estimates for per
capita personal income for the same years to make comparisons on the same set of
observations. Dollar-for-dollar estimates cannot be developed when the dependent
variables are employment and durable good consumption in the form of automobile
registrations, so we report the effects as elasticities evaluated at the mean of the sample
along with elasticities for per capita state income.
The estimates suggest that the distribution of government funds had strong effects
on consumption but virtually no effect or even a negative effect on employment. The
dollar-for-dollar coefficient in the retail sales per capita analysis for the four years in
which it was available is in the 0.8 to 0.9 range. The coefficient is similar to the
coefficient in the per capita personal income estimation for the same four years. Given
that the ratio of retail sales to income during this period was roughly 0.5, it appears that
the grants had a relatively much stronger effect on retail consumption than it did on
income per capita.
The grants also contributed to increases in automobile purchases. The estimates
of the elasticity of automobile registrations with respect to grants range from 0.047 to
0.081 while the elasticity estimates for personal income with respect to grants range from
0.086 to 0.108. To put this in dollar terms, value each car at the price of a new Ford in
1934, which was about $500 then and $1,247 when adjusted to the 1967 Consumer Price

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

32

Index values used to control for the price level. An additional dollar of federal spending
raised the value of car registrations by between 10 and 22 cents.
The effect of grants on wage and salary income was small relative to the effect on
all personal income. The dollar-for-dollar coefficients for wage and salary income are
relatively low, ranging from 0.09 to 0.66. These are much smaller than the coefficients
above 1 for personal income. Wage and salary income accounts for roughly 60 percent
of all income during this period, and the wage and salary grant coefficients are less than
60 percent of the coefficients for personal income.
In contrast to their generally strong positive effects on personal income and
consumption, the effects of grants on per capita employment and manufacturing payrolls
are mostly negative and relatively small in size.29 30 These findings for private
employment and payrolls are in the same range as the results for the impact of New Deal
relief spending found by Neumann, Fishback, and Kantor (2010) for a city-level monthly
panel from 1932 through 1939 and Benjamin and Mathews’ (1992) findings for a state
panel from 1932-1939. Both find that relief spending was associated with crowding out
of private employment after 1935. Neumann, Fishback, and Kantor found some positive
effects of relief spending on employment from 1932 to 1935, while Benjamin and
Mathews find crowding out of about 20 percent. Wallis and Benjamin (1982) also
29We put all measures on a per capita basis for consistency. We have also estimated the models
for the payrolls and employment without putting them on a per capita basis and the magnitudes of the
results are only slightly larger.
30It is possible that the statistically insignificant effect of government spending on manufacturing
payrolls might reflect the fact that most manufacturing was selling to national and international markets. If
so, a rise in federal spending within a state would only stimulate the demand in that state, which might be a
small share of the demand for the product. We checked this hypothesis by estimating the impact of
spending on manufacturing payrolls in the bread industry for the years 1929, 1931, 1933, 1935, and 1937.
The bread industry was found in every state and tended to sell locally. The bread industry results also show
small and statistically insignificant effects of federal spending. The dollar-for-dollar effects 0.2 cents per
dollar spent, while the elasticities are smaller than the elasticities reported for manufacturing payrolls per
capita in Table IV. The findings for the bread industry are therefore inconsistent with the idea that the
small effects on manufacturing are being driven by the dispersed nature of manufacturing consumption.

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

33

provide cross-sectional estimates that cast doubt on any positive effects of New Deal
spending on private employment.

State by State Estimates
The identification in the state and year fixed effects IV model comes from
changes over time within the same state in the part of federal spending correlated with the
instrument after controlling for nation-wide shocks in each year. The coefficient is
therefore an average across the states. We also estimate the relationship for each
individual state over the period using a difference model to reduce problems with nonstationarity. The major issue with the state-by-state estimation is how well the model can
control for national shocks common to all states. Our solution is to include the difference
in the real per capita national money supply (M2) and a dummy variable for the National
Recovery Administration (NRA) period from 1933 through 1935. Cole and Ohanian
(2004) argue that the NRA’s codes of competition held wages and prices high and
contributed greatly to the underemployment of resources. On the other hand, Eggertsson
(2008) argues that the NRA push for high prices and wage stimulated the economy as
part of a program to reverse inflationary expectations. Changes in tax rates were
important but there were multiple changes over the period and there are few degrees of
freedom. To capture the impact of taxes we estimate the model with grants net of federal
taxes in each state. Results are reported for estimates without the taxes for comparison
purposes. In this analysis we use the moat/swing instrument, which has fewer problems
with weak instrument bias than when total grants spending is used.

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

34

Table V shows the dollar-for-dollar effects on per capita state personal income of
a one dollar increase in per capita grants net of federal taxes in each state. For
comparison, when the model specification is estimated for the panel of all states, the
multiplier coefficient is 0.605 with a t-statistic of 3.19 and the instrument strength tests
suggest that it is strong. The instrument strength varies for each state. There were 33
states where the hypothesis of weak instrument bias of 10 percent was rejected, 7 more
estimates that met the 15 percent or less criteria, and 8 with very weak instruments. The
estimates were generally consistent with a view of negative endogeneity, as the IV
multiplier estimates were more positive, by an average of about .25, than the OLS
coefficients in 35 of the 40 states where weak instrument bias is not a problem.

The

average dollar-for-dollar coefficient for those states was 0.80. For the 40 states with no
more than 15 percent weak instrument bias, the average coefficient was .79 and the
values ranged from -1.27 in Kansas to 3.4 in Idaho. The multiplier estimates for states
that where weak instrument bias could not be rejected included 5 of the 7 largest values
in absolute value.
There was not much of a discernable pattern in the estimates across states.
Among the states with less than 15 percent weak instrument bias, the extreme values over
2 were found in Pennsylvania, New Jersey, and Idaho. Pennsylvania was probably the
most self-sufficient state but Idaho was one of the smallest states. States with values
between one and two included states of all sizes from several regions. Some had large
populations, like New York, Massachusetts, and California, but most were in the bottom
half of the population distribution, including West Virginia, Oregon, Utah, Mississippi,

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

35

Washington, Maine, and Florida. Negative multipliers were found in Kentucky,
Oklahoma, Minnesota, and Kansas.

Conclusions
If there was any time to expect a large peace-time multiplier from federal
spending in the states, it would have been during the period from 1930 through 1940.
Interest rates were at or near the zero bound for nearly the entire decade, a situation in
which macroeconomic models predict stronger fiscal multiplier effects. Unemployment
rates with work relief workers treated as unemployed were never below 14 percent during
the decade. Even if people on work relief were treated as employed, the unemployment
rate never fell below 9 percent (Darby 1976). There was idle capital in nearly every
industry. As a result, there were clearly a large number of underemployed resources that
could have been soaked up by federal spending without crowding out private activity.
Estimates controlling for weather shocks, state and year fixed effects, and in some
cases state-specific time trend but without using instruments imply that state fiscal
multipliers were in the 0.1 to 0.5 range. Given that New Deal funds were distributed in
part in response to drops in economic activity, there is ample reason to believe that the
non-IV multiplier estimates are biased downward even in models with state and year
fixed effects and time trends. The estimates for the state multipliers that we think are
most accurate are the IV estimates controlling for state and year fixed effects. The IV
estimates without controls for state and year effects are likely too high because they do
not control for nationwide monetary and tax rate shocks, nor do they control for

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

36

fundamental time-invariant features of the states. The addition of state-specific time
trends leads to weak instrument bias.
The dollar-for-dollar multiplier estimates show the dollar change in the measure
of economic activity in response to a one dollar increase in the measure of government
spending. Nearly all of the state per capita personal income multiplier estimates are not
statistically significantly different from one. In some estimating strategies, the point
estimates of the multipliers for nonfarm grant spending and nontransfer grants are as high
as 1.79 and 2.18, but other estimates are below one for the same measure, and the
standard errors of the estimates in all of those cases are high enough that a multiplier of
one cannot be rejected. Three of four point estimates for coefficients on AAA grants to
farmers to take land out of production were negative but not statistically significant. As a
general statement, the distribution of a dollar of federal funds to a state led to about a
dollar increase in personal income in the state.
Federal grants had a stronger impact on consumption than on personal income.
The per capita retail sales multiplier was roughly the same size as the personal income
multiplier in the same sample even though retail sales are typically only about 50 percent
of income. An additional dollar in federal grants contributed to an increase of about 10 to
20 cents in the value of automobiles registered in the state.
On the other hand, there were no signs that increased government grants raised
nonfarm private employment or manufacturing employment. Most of the coefficient
estimates were negative with small elasticities. The results are consistent with the
findings by Neumann, Fishback, and Kantor (2010) and Benjamin and Mathews (1992)
using alternative data sets.

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

37

If we apply the lessons of the New Deal to the federal fiscal stimulus today, it is
important to realize that the estimates for the states are not for a national multiplier.
Instead, they describe the impact within the state of additional federal funding in the state
after all leakages are considered.31 In both periods interest rates are near the zero bound
and unemployment rates are well above long run averages, although the problems of the
Depression were far worse. The New Deal results suggest that federal fiscal stimulus
during a modern recession would stimulate income in the states roughly dollar-for-dollar
but have little impact on private nonfarm employment in the state.

References
“$75,000,000 for Roads”, The New York Times, November 20, 1921.
Administrator of Veterans’ Affairs. Various Years. Annual Report of the Administrator
of Veterans’ Affairs. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office.
Aschauer, D. A. 1989. “Is public expenditure productive?” Journal of Monetary
Economics, Vol. 23, pp. 177-200.
Administrator of Veterans’ Affairs. Various years. Annual Report of the Administrator of
Veterans’ Affairs for the Fiscal Year Ended June 30. Washington: Government
Printing Office, Various Years.
Aiyagari, S. R., Christiano, L. J., and Eichenbaum, M. 1992. “The output, employment,
and interest rate effects of government consumption,” Journal of Monetary
Economics, Vol. 30, pp. 73-86.
Almunia, Miguel, Augustin Benetrix, Barry Eichengreen, Kevin O’Rourke and Gisela
Rua. 2009. “From Great Depression to Great Credit Crisis: Similarities,
31 Given that the states are part of a large open economy, the impact of federal spending can spill over into
other states. The direction of the bias could plausibly go in either direction. The multiplier estimate might
be overstated to the extent that a rise in government spending in a neighboring state leads to more spillover
spending in the state of interest and federal spending in the neighboring state is positively correlated to
government spending in the state of interest. The multiplier would be understated with a positive spillover
from government spending in the neighboring state but a negative correlation between federal spending in
the neighboring state and the state of interest. As a first cut, we estimated a model with a spatial lag for
income in neighboring states. The nonIV and IV results lead to substantially smaller multipliers, but we
have not yet found a strong instrument for the income in the neighboring states.

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

38

Differences, and Lessons.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working
Paper 15224 (November).
Arellano, M. and Stephen Bond. 1991. “Some Tests of Specification for Panel Data:
Monte Carlo Evidence and an Application to Employment Equations.” The
Review of Economic Studies 58: 277-297.
Barro, R. J. 1981. “Output effects of government purchases,” The Journal of Political
Economy, Vol. 89, No. 6., pp. 1086-1121.
Barro, Robert. 2009. “Voodoo Multipliers.” The Economists’ Voice (February).
Barro, R. J., and King, R. G. .1984. “Time-separable preferences and intertemporalsubstitution models of Business Cycles,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 99
(November): 817-839.
Barro, Robert and Charles Redlick. Forthcoming 2011. “Macroeconomic Effects from
Government Purchases and Taxes.” Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Barro, R., Sala-i-Martin, X. 2004. Economic Growth, Second Edition. MIT Press:
Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Basavarajappa, K.G. and Bali Ram. 2009. “Section A: Population and Migration.”
Historical Statistics of Canada downloaded on June 28, 2009 from http://dsppsd.pwgsc.gc.ca/Collection/Statcan/11-516-XIE/11-516-XIE.html
Benjamin, Daniel and K.G.P. Mathews. 1992. U.S. and U.K. Unemployment Between the
Wars: A Doleful Story, Institute for Economic Affairs, London.
Bird, Richard. “Section H: Government Finance. Historical Statistics of Canada
downloaded on June 28, 2009 from http://dsppsd.pwgsc.gc.ca/Collection/Statcan/11-516-XIE/11-516-XIE.html
Blanchard, Olivier and Lawrence Katz. 1992. “Regional Evolutions.” Brookings Papers
on Economic Activity 1: 1-56.
Blanchard, Olivier and Roberto Perotti. 2002. “An Empirical Characterization of the
Dynamic Effects of Changes in Government Spending and Taxes on Ouput.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics: 1329-1368.
Blinder, Alan and Mark Zandi. 2010. “How the Great Depression Was Brought to an
End.” Report downloaded September 7, 2010 from
http://www.economy.com/mark-zandi/documents/End-of-Great-Recession.pdf
Brown, E. Cary. 1956, “Fiscal Policy in the ’Thirties: A Reappraisal,” American
Economic Review, 46 (December): 857-79.

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

39

Bureau of Economic Analysis, 2010. U.S. Department of Commerce, Regional Economic
Information System, http://www.bea.gov/regional/spi/SA1-3fn.cfm
Bureau of Economic Analysis. 1999. State Personal Income, 1929-97. Washington,
D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Chief of Engineers, U.S. Army. Various years. Annual Report of the Chief of Engineers.
Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1999.
Civilian Conservation Corps. “Distribution of Members of the Civilian Conservation
Corps by State in Which Enrolled, as of [the last day of the month].”
Mimeographed tables from the file on “State Statistical Summaries ECW
Covering Operations from April 1 1933 to August 31, 1936,” in the Civilian
Conservation Corps Records at the National Archives II in College Park,
Maryland. Record Group 35, Entry 46.
Civilian Conservation Corps. “Civilian Conservation Corps Monthly Statistical
Summary.” Mimeographed reports from “Operations Statistics Monthly
Statistical Summary Issued by the CCC Director, 1936-1941, in the Civilian
Conservation Corps Records at the National Archives II in College Park,
Maryland. Record Group 35, Entry 46.
Clemens, Jeffrey and Stephen Miran. 2010. “The Effects of State Budget Cuts on
Employment and Income.” Unpublished Working Paper. Harvard University.

Cogan, J. F., Cwik, T., Taylor, J. B., and Wieland, V. 2009. “New Keynesian versus old
Keynesian government spending multipliers,” NBER Working Paper N. 14782.
Cohen, Lauren, Joshua Coval, and Christopher Malloy. 2010. “Do Politicians Cause
Corporate Downsizing? National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
No. 15839.
Cone, Frederick M. 1940. Monthly Income Payments in the United States, 1929-40.
Economic Series No. 6 for Bureau of Foreign and Domestic Commerce.
Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office.
Costa, J. S., Ellson, R. W., and Martin, R. C. 1987. “Public capital, regional output, and
development: some empirical evidence,” Journal of Regional Science, Vol. 27,
No. 3, pp. 419-437.
Couch, J., Shughart, W., 1998. The Political Economy of the New Deal. Edward Elgar,
New York.
Creamer, Daniel. 1956. Personal Income During Business Cycles. A Study by the
National Bureau of Economic Research, New York. Princeton, New Jersey:

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

40

Princeton University Press.
Creamer, Daniel, and Charles Merwin. 1942. “State Distribution of Income Payment,
1929-41.” Survey of Current Business July 1942, pp. 18-26.
Cullen, Joseph and Price Fishback. 2008. “Did Big Government’s Largesse Help the
Locals? The Implications of WWII Spending for Local Economic Activity, 19391958, with Joseph Cullen.” NBER Working Paper Number 12801. Also,
University of Arizona Working paper. No. 06-15 2008.
Devereaux, M. B., Head, A. C., and Lapham, B. J. 1996. “Monopolistic competition,
increasing returns, and the effects of government spending,” Journal of Money,
Credit and Banking, Vol. 28, No. 2, pp. 233-254.
Devereux, M. B., and Love, D. R. .1995. “The dynamic effects of government spending
policies in a two-sector endogenous growth model,” Journal of Money, Credit
and Banking, Vol. 27, No. 1, pp. 232-256.
Director of the Veterans’ Bureau. Various years. Annual Report of the Director of the
Veterans’ Bureau. Washington, D.C. Government Printing Office.
Dornbusch, Rudiger and Stanley Fischer. 1984. Macroeconomics, Third Edition. New
York: McGraw-Hill, 1984.
Draffan, George. 2010. Taking Back Our Land: A History of Railroad Land Grant
Reform. www.landgrant.org, downloaded July 27, 2010,
Duffy-Deno, K. T., Eberts, R. W. 1991. “Public infrastructure and regional economic
development: a simultaneous equations approach,” Journal of Urban Economics,
Vol. 33, pp. 329-343.
Eggertsson, Gauti. 2008. “Great Expectations and the End of the Depression.”
American Economic Review 98 (4): 1476-1516.
“The Federal Aid Road Act.” Washington D.C., Government Printing Office, 1916.
Farm Credit Administration. Various Years. Annual Reports of the Farm Credit
Administration. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office.
Federal Farm Loan Board. Various years. Annual Report of the Federal Farm Loan
Board. . Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office.
Federal Home Loan Bank Board. 1935. Annual Report, 1935. Washington, D.C.:
Government Printing Office.

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

41

Federal Works Agency. 1940. First Annual Report, Fiscal Year Ended June 1940.
Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office.
Federal Works Agency. 1941. Second Annual Report, Fiscal Year Ended June 1941.
Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office.
Feldstein, Martin. 2002. “The role for discretionary fiscal policy in a low interest rate
environment,” NBER Working Paper No. 9203.
Fishback, Price. 2010. “U.S. Monetary and Fiscal Policy in the 1930s.” Oxford Review
of Economic Policy 26 (Autumn): 385-413.
Fishback, Price, Michael Haines, and Shawn Kantor. 2007. “Births, Deaths, and New
Deal Relief During the Great Depression.” Review of Economics and Statistics 89
(February): 1-14.
Fishback, Price, William Horrace, and Shawn Kantor. 2005. “Did New Deal grant
programs stimulate local economies? A study of Federal grants and retail sales
during the Great Depression,” The Journal of Economic History 65 (March): 3671.
_______. 2004. “Did New Deal grant programs stimulate local economies? A study of
Federal grants and retail sales during the Great Depression,” National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paper W8108
________. “The Impact of New Deal Expenditures on Mobility During the Great
Depression,” Explorations in Economic History,” 43 (April 2006): 179-222
Fleck, Robert. K., 2001b. Population, land, economic conditions, and the allocation of
New Deal spending. Explorations in Economic History 38, 296-304.
Fleck, Robert. 2008. “Voter Influence and Big Policy Change: The Positive Political
Economy of the New Deal.” Journal of Political Economy : 1-37.
Flores de Frutos, R., Pereira, A. M. 1999. “Public capital accumulation and private sector
performance,” Journal of Urban Economics 46: 300-322.
Garcia-Mila, T., McGuire, T. J. 1992. “The contribution of publicly provided inputs to
states’ economies,” Regional Science and Urban Economics, 22: 229-241.
Garrett, Thomas and David Wheelock, 2006. “Why did income growth vary across
states during the Great Depression?” The Journal of Economic History 66 (June):
456-466.
Haines. Michael. Historical, Demographic, Economic, and Social Data: The United
States, 1790-2000. ICPSR Dataset No. 2896.

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

42

Hall, Robert. 1980. “Labor Supply and Aggregate Fluctuations.” Carnegie-Rochester
Conference Series on Public Policy 12 (Spring): 7-33.
Ho, T. 2001. “The government spending and private consumption: a panel cointegration
analysis,” International Review of Economics and Finance 10: 95-108.
Hulten, C. R., Schwab, R. M. 1991. “Public capital formation and growth of regional
manufacturing industries,” National Tax Journal, Vol. 44: 121-134.
Ilzetzki, Ethan, Enrique Mendoza, and Carlos Vegh. 2010. “How Big (Small?)
are Fiscal Multipliers.” NBER Working Paper No 16479.
Johnson, Ryan, Price Fishback, and Shawn Kantor. 2010. "Striking at the Roots of Crime:
The Impact of Social Welfare Spending on Crime During the Great Depression,"
Journal of Law and Economics 53 (November): 715-740.

Kleibergen, F. Forthcoming. “Generalizing weak instrument robust statistics towards
multiple parameters, unrestricted covariance matrices and identification
statistics.” Journal of Econometrics.
Kleibergen, F., and R. Paap. 2006. “Generalized reduced rank tests using the singular
value decomposition.” Journal of Econometrics 133: 97-126.
Kraay, Aart. 2010. “How Large is the Government Multiplier? Evidence from World
Bank Lending.” Working Paper, World Bank (October)

Martin, Robert F. 1939 “National Income and Its Distribution, 1919-1938.
Conference Economic Record September 8): 81-92.

The

McGregor, Peter, Eric McVittie, J. Kim Swales, and Ya Ping Yin. 2000. “The
Neoclassical Economic Base Multiplier.” Journal of Regional Science 40(1):
1-31.
Meltzer, Alan. 2003. A History of the Federal Reserve, Volume I: 1913-1951. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Mulligan, Gordon F. 1987. “Employment Multipliers and Functional Types of
Communities Effects of Public Transfer Payments.” Growth and Change 18: 111.
Merrifield, John. 1987. “A Neoclassical Anatomy of the Economic Base Multipier.”
Journal of Regional Science 27: 283-294.

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

43

Merrifield, John. 1990 “A Practical Note on the Neoclassical Economic-Base Marginal
Multiplier.” Journal of Regional Science 27: 123-127..
Mulligan, Gordon F. and Lay James Gibson. 1984. “A Note on Sectoral Multipliers in
Small Communities.” Growth and Change (October): 1-6.
Mulligan, Gordon. 1987. “Employment Multipliers and Functional Types of
Communities: Effects of Public Transfer Payments.” Growth and Change
(Summer): 1-11
Munnell, Alicia, H. 1992. “Infrastructure investment and economic growth,” Journal of
Economic Perspectives 6: 189-198.
Nakamura, Emi and Jon Steinsson. 2011. “Fiscal Stimulus in a Monetary Union:
Evidence from U.S. Regions.” Unpublished Working Paper, Columbia
University. March.
Neumann, Todd, Price Fishback, and Shawn Kantor. 2010. “The Dynamics of Relief
Spending and the Private Urban Labor Market During the New Deal.” Journal of
Economic History 70 (March): 195-220.
Ohanian, L. E. 1997. “The macroeconomic effects of war finance in the United States:
World War II and the Korean War,” The American Economic Review 87: 23-40.
Peppers, Larry. 1973. “Full Employment Surplus Analysis and Structural Change: The
1930s,” Explorations in Economic History 10 (Winter), 197-210.
Public Roads Administration. Federal Works Agency. 1947. Highway Statistics:
Summary to 1945.. United States Government Printing Office: Washington, D. C.
Ramey, Valerie. Forthcoming 2011. “Identifying Government Spending Shocks: It’s
All in the Timing.” Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Ramey, Valerie. A., and Matthew Shapiro. 1998. “Costly capital reallocation and the
effects of government spending,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on
Public Policy 48: 145-194.
Reading, D. C., 1973. New Deal activity and the states, 1933 to 1939. Journal of
Economic History 33: 792-810.
Reconstruction Finance Corporation. 1933a. Report of Reconstruction Finance
Corporation October 1 to December 31 1932, and February 2 to December 31,
1932. U.S. House Document No. 538, 72d Congress, 2nd Session. Washington:
Government Printing Office, 1933a.

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

44

Reconstruction Finance Corporation. 1932. Report of Reconstruction Finance
Corporation: Letter from the Reconstruction Finance Corporation Transmitting
Pursuant to Law, A Report of the Corporation Covering Its Operations for the
Period from the Organization of the Corporation on February 2, 1932 to June 30,
1932, inclusive. Senate Document No. 135, 72d Congress 1st Session.
Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1932
Reconstruction Finance Corporation 1933. Letter from the Chairman and Secretary of
the Reconstruction Finance Corporation Transmitting Its Report Covering Its
Operations for the Second Quarter of 1933, April 1 to June 30, 1933, Inclusive
and for the Period from the Organization of the Corporation on February 2, 1932
to June 30, 1933, inclusive.. Senate Document No. 200, 73d Congress 2nd
Session. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1933
Reconstruction Finance Corporation. 1933b. Report for the Period Covering Its
Operations for the Third Quarter of 1933, and for the Period from the
Organization of the Corporation on February 2, 1932, to September 30, 1933,
Inclusive. U.S. House Document No. 199, 73d Congress, 2d Session.
Washington: Government Printing Office..
Richardson, Gary and William Troost. 2009. “Monetary Intervention Mitigated Panics
During the Great Depression: Quasi-Experimental Evidence from a Federal
Reserve District Border, 1929-1933.” Journal of Political Economy (December):
1031-1073.
Richardson, Harry. 1985. “Input-Output and Economic Base Multipliers: Looking
Backward and Forward.” Journal of Regional Science 25: 607-661.
Romer, Christina. 2009. “The Case for Fiscal Stimulus: The Likely Effects of the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act. February 2009.
Romer, Christina D. 1992. “What Ended the Great Depression?” Journal of Economic
History 52 (December): 757-84.
Romer, Christina and Jared Bernstein. 2009. “The Job Impact of the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Plan.” (January)
Romer Christina and David Romer. 2006. “The Macroeconomic Effects of Tax Changes:
Estimates Based on a New Measure of Fiscal Shocks.” NBER Working Paper
No. W13264..
Romer, David and Christina Romer. 2010. “The Macroeconomic Effects of Tax
Changes: Estimates Based on a New Measure of Fiscal Shocks.” American
Economic Review 100: 763-801.

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

45

Rosenbloom, J. L, Sundstorm, W. A. 1999. “The sources of regional variation in the
severity of the Great Depression: evidence from U.S. manufacturing,1919-1937,”
The Journal of Economic History (December): 714-747.
Serrato, Juan Carlos Suarez and Phillipe Wingender. 2010. “Estimating Local
Fiscal Multipliers.” Unpublished Working Paper. University of California
Berkeley. November.
Shoag. Daniel. 2010. “The Impact of Government Spending Shocks: Evidence
on the Multiplier from State Pension Shocks.” Unpublished Working Paper.
Harvard University.
Sinnot. N.J. 1926. Oregon & California Railroad Grant Lands. Report to Committee
on Public Lands. House of Representatives Report No. 1330. 69th Congress, 1st
Session. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.
Stromberg, David. 2004. “Radio’s Impact on Public Spending.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 119 (February): 189-221.
Social Security Board. 1938. Second Annual Report of the Social Security Board, 1937.
Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office.
Social Security Board. 1939. Third Annual Report of the Social Security Board, 1938.
Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office.
Social Security Board. 1940. Fourth Annual Report of the Social Security Board, 1939.
Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office.
Social Security Board, 1944. Seventh Annual Report of the Social Security Board, 1943.
Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office.
Stock, James and Motohiro Yogo. 2002a “Testing for Weak Instruments in Linear IV
Regression.” National Bureau of Economic Research Technical Working Paper
No. 284. Cambridge, Massachusetts: National Bureau of Research, October.
Stock, James, Jonathan Wright, and Motohiro Yogo. 2002b “A Survey of Weak
Instruments and Weak Identification in Generalized Methods of Moments.”
Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 20 (October ): 518-29.
Tennessee Valley Authority. Various Years.
Government Printing Office.

Annual Report.

Washington, D.C.:

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. Various months and years. Employment and Payrolls.
Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office.
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. Various months and years. Monthly Labor Review.
Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office.

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

46

U.S. Bureau of the Census. 1933??.
Biennial Census of Manufacturing, 1931.
Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office.
U.S. Bureau of the Census. 1935??. Biennial Census of Manufacturing, 1933.
Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office.
U.S. Bureau of the Census. 1939??. Biennial Census of Manufacturing, 1937.
Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office.
U.S. Bureau of the Census. 1940. Financial Statistics of States, 1937. Washington,
D.C.: Government Printing Office.
U.S. Bureau of the Census. 1941. Financial Statistics of States, 1938. Washington, D.C.:
Government Printing Office.
U.S. Bureau of the Census. 1942. Financial Statistics of States, 1939. Washington,
D.C.: Government Printing Office.
U.S. Bureau of the Census. Various Years. Statistical Abstract of the United States.
Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office..
U.S. Bureau of Public Roads. Various years. Report of the Chief of the Bureau of Public
Roads. Washington, D.C., Government Printing Office.
U.S. Bureau of Reclamation. Various Years. Annual Report of the Bureau of
Reclamation for Fiscal Year. Washington, D.C., Government Printing Office.
U.S. Bureau of Reclamation. 1948. Boulder Canyon Project Final Reports: Part I:
Introductory. Bulletin I. General History and Project Description. Washington,
D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1948
U.S. Department of Agriculture. Various Years. Agriculture Yearbook. Washington,
D.C.: Government Printing Office.
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Foreign and Domestic Commerce. 1936.
Consumer Market Data Handbook. (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing
Office.
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Foreign and Domestic Commerce. 1939.
Consumer Market Data Handbook. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing
Office.
U.S. Department of Labor. 1931. "Public Employment Services," Monthly Labor
Review (January): 10-32.

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

47

U.S. Secretary of the Treasury. Various Years. Annual Report of the Secretary of the
Treasury on the State of the Finances for the Fiscal Year Ended.
U.S. Secretary of Interior. Various years. Annual Reports for the U.S. Secretary of
Interior for Fiscal Year . Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office.
U.S. Office of Government Reports, Report No. 9-1939. 1939. Unpublished mimeos.
Office of Government Reports, Record Group 44, National Archives II in College
Park, Maryland.
United States Public Roads Administration. 1947. Highway Statistics, Summary to 1945.
Washington: Government Printing Office.
Wallis, John Joseph. 1989. “Employment in the Great Depression: new data and
hypothesis.” Explorations in Economic History 26 (January): 45-72.
Wallis, John Joseph. 1987 “Employment, Politics, and Economic Recovery during the
Great Depression.” The Review of Economics and Statistics 69, (August): 516520.
Wallis, John Joseph, and Daniel K. Benjamin. 1981. “Public Relief and Private
Employment in the Great Depression.” The Journal of Economic History 41
(June): 97-102.
Wallis, John, 1998. The political economy of New Deal spending revisited, again: With
and without Nevada. Explorations in Economic History 35 (January): 140-70.
Wallis, John. 2001. The political economy of New Deal spending, yet again: A reply.
Explorations in Economic History 38 (January): 305-14.
Wilson, Daniel. 2011. “Fiscal Spending Job Multipliers: Evidence from the 2009
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act.” Unpublished Working Paper,
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.
Wooldridge, Jeffrey. 2006. Introductory Econometrics:
Edition. New York: Thomson South-western.

A Modern Approach, 3rd

Works Progress Administration. 1939a. Analysis of the Civil Works Program.
Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office.
Works Progress Administration. 1936. Report on the Works Program, March 16, 1936,
1938. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office.
Works Progress Administration. 1938. Report on the Progress of the WPA Program,
June 30, 1938. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office.

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

48

Works Progress Administration. 1939b. Report on the Progress of the WPA Program,
June 30, 1939. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office.
Works Progress Administration. 1940. Report on the Progress of the WPA Program,
June 30, 1940. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office.
Works Progress Administration. 1942. Final Statistical Report of the Federal Emergency
Relief Administration. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office.
Works Progress Administration. 1940. Report on the Progress of the WPA Program,
June 30, 1940. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office.
Wright, Gavin. 1974. The political economy of New Deal spending: An econometric
analysis. Review of Economics and Statistics 56, 30-38.
Zandi, Mark. 2009. “The Economic Impact of the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act.” Report. January 21. Available at www.Moody’s.com.
United States Public Roads Administration 1947. Highway statistics, summary to 1945.
Washington: Government Printing Office.

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

49

Table I
Total and Per Capita Federal Spending by Program in Millions of Contemporay
Dollars for the period July 1, 1932 through June 30, 1939
Acronym

TOTAL TAXES COLLECTED
FROM STATES
NONREPAYABLE GRANTS
Works Progress Administration
Veterans' Administration
Federal Emergency Relief
Administration
Agricultural Adjustment
Administration1
Civilian Conservation Corps
Public Roads Administration
Rivers and Harbors and Flood Control
Public Works Administration-Nonfederal Projects
Civil Works Administration
Social Security Act
Public Works Administration--Federal
Projects
Balance from Relief Acts
Public Buildings Administration
Bureau of Reclamation
Farm Security Administration
National Guard
Public Works Administration-Housing Projects
Soil Conservation Service
Agricultural Extension Work
Vocational Education
U.S. Employment Service
Indian Service - Civilian Conservation
Corps

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

Category
Amounts Per
Capita
From
July 1,
1932 to
June 30,
1939
(Millions
$)
26,061 213.11

WPA
VA
FERA

6,844
3,955
3,059

AAA
CCCG
PRA
RHFC
PWANF

Ended
First
Before
Fiscal
Year with 1939
Significant
Spending

1936
Pre 1933
1934

2,863

55.97 Work Relief
32.34 Relief
25.02 Relief and
Work Relief
23.41 Agriculture

2,130
1,613
1,316
1,032

17.42
13.19
10.76
8.44

Work Relief
Public Works
Public Works
Public Works

1934
Pre 1933
Pre 1933
1934
1934

1934

CWA

807

SSA
PWAF

759
632

6.60 Relief/Public
Works
6.21 Relief
5.16 Public Works

BRA
PBA
BR
FSA
NG
PWAH

376
324
290
273
219
129

3.08
2.65
2.37
2.24
1.79
1.05

Relief
Public Works
Public Works
Agriculture
Military
Public Works

1936
Pre 1933
1934
1936
Pre 1933
1935

SCS
AE
VE
USES
CCCIS

100
94
90
80
51

0.82
0.77
0.74
0.65
0.42

Agriculture
Agriculture
Education
Relief
Relief

1934
Pre 1933
Pre 1933
1934
1934

50

Mar-37

1936
1934

Mar-34

Agricultural Experiment Stations
Forest Service (Roads)
Colleges of Agriculture and
Mechanical Arts
Forest Funds
Mineral Lease Act Payments
Land Utilization Program
State Soldiers' and Sailors' Homes
Special Funds
Office of Education--Emergency
Relief Act Funds
State Marine Schools
Books for the Blind
Federal Water Project Payments
Nonrepayable Grants Total
REPAYABLE LOANS CLOSED
Reconstruction Finance Corporation
Farm Credit Administration
Home Owners' Loan Corporation
Commodity Credit Corporation
Public Works Administration
Farm Security Administration
Home Owners' Loan Corporation and
Treasury Investments in Bldg. and
Savings and Loans Associations
Federal Reserve Banks.
Rural Electrification Administration
U.S. Housing Authority
Farm Tenant Purchases
Disaster Loan Corporation
Total Repayable

AEX
FSR
CAM

36
34
24

0.29 Agriculture
0.28 Public Works
0.19 Education

Pre 1933
1937
Pre 1933

FF
ML
LUP
SSS
SF
OE

17
11
11
4
2
2

0.14
0.09
0.09
0.03
0.02
0.02

Pre 1933
Pre 1933
1939
Pre 1933
Pre 1933
1936

SMS
BFB
FWP

1
a)
a)
27,180

RFC
FCA
HOLC

4,782
3,957
3,158

CCCL
PWAL
FSAL
HOLCT

1,186
508
337
266

FRB
REA
USHA
FTP
DLC

125
123
56
33
17
14,549
0

Value of Loans Insured by Federal
Housing Administration
Title I --Refurbishing and
Maintanence Loans
Title II--Home Mortgages.

834

Total Housing Loans Insured
a

Under 500,000 dollars.

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

51

Public Works
Public Works
Public Works
Relief
Miscellaneous
Education

0.01 Education
0.00 Education
0.00 Public Works
222.26
39.11 All
32.35 Agriculture
25.83 Home
Finance
9.70 Agriculture
4.15 Public Works
2.76 Agriculture
2.17 Home
Finance
1.02
1.01
0.45
0.27
0.14
118.97
0.00

Finance
Agriculture
Public Works
Agriculture
Relief

Pre 1933
Pre 1933
Pre 1933

1932
Pre 1933
1934
1934
1934
1934
1934

1935
1936
1939
1938
1937

6.82 Home

1936

1,855

Finance
15.17 Home
Finance

1936

2,689

21.99

1936

Table II
Estimates of Dollar-for-Dollar Effect of Per Capita Grants on State Per Capita
Personal Income, 1930-1940
t-statistics Listed Below Coefficients

Level/Difference
LEAST SQUARES
No controls

Level

Coeff.
t-stat.

Controls state effects

Coeff.
t-stat.

Controls state effects
and weather
Controls year effects,
state effects, and
weather
Controls state time
trends, year effects,
state effects, and
weather
TWO-STAGE LEAST
SQUARES

Coeff.
t-stat.

Coeff.
t-stat.

Coeff.
t-stat.

Instruments
Controls Weather and
state Effects

Coeff.

Estimation Specification
Difference
Growth
Rate

Level

1.04

1.04

2.70

2.70

1.43

1.00

1.21

1.43

7.24

7.22

9.17

7.24

1.56

1.09

1.33

1.56

7.10

6.95

9.56

7.10

0.45

0.73

1.18

0.45

2.29

3.40

5.61

2.29

0.16

0.75

1.23

0.16

0.69

3.07

5.18

0.69

Instrument Choice
Interaction of National with 3 Region Moat times
Dummies
Swing
1.94
1.28
1.29
2.16

t-stat.

15.28

7.23

11.10

15.41

Instrument
F-stat.

198.67

189.66

71.86

192.72

1.11

1.10

1.13

1.39

6.14

2.30

3.16

3.44

Controls year effects,
state effects and
weather

Coeff.
Instrument
F-stat.

13.07

8.15

8.59

7.09

Controls state time
trends, year effects,
state effects, and
weather

Coeff.

0.50

1.12

1.14

0.97

t-stat.

2.41

2.33

3.38

1.80

Instrument
F-stat.

5.03

6.94

7.49

4.14

t-stat.

Sources: See Data Appendix.
Notes: This is a balanced panel with information for 48 states for each year from 1930
through 1940. Estimation used the STATA 10 reg and ivreg2 programs. For the
calculations of t-statistics, standard errors are based on White corrections using the
robust command with standard errors clustered at the state level. The instrument F-

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

52

statistic is the Kleibergen-Paap rank Wald (KP) F statistic. When compared with
the Stock-Yogo critical values, the Kleibergen-Paap rank Wald (KP) F statistic can
be used to test for weak-instrument bias based on the maximum weak-instrument
bias that one is willing to accept. In the analyses with one instrument for one
government activity measure, the critical value is 16.38 at the 10 percent confidence
level if someone is unwilling to accept more than 10-percent weak instrument bias,
8.96 for unwillingness to accept more than 15 percent bias and 6.66 for 20 percent
bias. When using three instruments the critical values for maximal size of weak
instrument bias are 22.30 at the 10 percent level if someone is unwilling to accept
more than 10-percent weak instrument bias, 12.83 for unwillingness to accept more
than 15 percent bias, 9.54 for 20 percent bias, and 7.80 for 25-percent bias. The
critical values for willingness to accept 10-percent weak instrument bias relative to
the bias from OLS estimation is 9.08 and for willingness to accept 20% bias is 6.46.

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

53

Table III
Estimates of Dollar-for-Dollar Effect of Per Capita Measures of Government
Funding on State Per Capita Personal Income, 1930-1940
t-statistics Listed Below Coefficients
Level

First
Growth
Difference
Rate
Interaction of National with 3 Region
Dummies

Grants only

Coeff.
t-stat.

Grants plus all
loans
Grants Plus 10
% of Loans

Grants Minus
Taxes

Level

Moat
times
Swing
Controls Weather, State and Year Effects
1.11
1.10
1.13
1.39
6.14

2.30

3.16

3.44

Instrument Fstat.

13.07

8.15

8.59

7.09

Coeff.

0.89

1.54

1.93

0.86

t-stat.

5.54

2.20

2.78

1.98

Instrument Fstat.

16.38

6.46

4.48

9.41

Coeff.

1.05

1.14

1.20

1.08

5.19

1.91

3.13

1.94

Instrument Fstat.

12.74

7.97

8.58

7.85

Coeff.

0.93

1.06

1.14

1.08

t-stat.

3.59

1.99

3.04

1.49

Instrument Fstat.

12.01

7.52

8.46

5.55

Coeff.

1.67

0.38

1.46

2.18

4.14

0.52

3.64

1.97

Instrument Fstat.

12.45

9.86

12.56

6.86

Coeff.

0.94

1.26

1.42

1.79

3.00

2.13

2.08

2.70

Instrument Fstat.

11.88

7.36

7.42

4.44

Coeff.

3.68

-2.17

-0.84

-0.41

2.19

-0.74

-0.32

-0.62

Instrument Fstat.
combined Fstat.

17.58

12.07

11.91

10.28

15.68

7.34

3.06

4.27

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

54

Grants Minus
Transfers

Grants minus
AAA

AAA

t-stat.

t-stat.

t-stat.

t-stat.

Controls Weather, State and Year Fixed Effects, and
State-Specific Time Trends

Grants only

Grants plus all
loans

Grants Plus 10
% of Loans

grants minus
taxes

Grants minus
AAA
AAA

Coeff.

0.50

1.12

1.14

0.97

t-stat.

2.41

2.33

3.38

1.80

Instrument Fstat.

5.03

6.94

7.49

4.14

0.77

1.72

2.20

0.86

2.94

2.16

2.72

1.26

Instrument Fstat.

11.72

4.04

3.44

7.73

Coeff.

Coeff.
t-stat.

0.65

1.19

1.22

1.08

t-stat.

2.30

1.83

2.86

1.23

Instrument Fstat.

6.28

6.40

7.38

4.04

0.47

1.08

1.13

1.21

t-stat.

2.17

1.95

2.99

1.37

Instrument Fstat.

4.76

6.42

7.98

2.06

0.51

1.30

1.54

1.73

t-stat.

2.32

2.01

1.73

1.98

Instrument Fstat.

4.49

6.11

6.60

1.87

2.95

-2.08

-1.47

-3.52

Coeff.

Coeff.

Coeff.
t-stat.

Grants minus
AAA

1.44

-0.63

-0.39

-1.39

Instrument Fstat.
combined Fstat.

10.39

9.17

8.86

4.29

7.71

5.24

1.85

2.06

Coeff.

0.52

1.35

1.34

1.73

2.20

2.21

2.42

1.98

-0.73

-3.89

-2.93

-3.52

-0.75

-2.75

-1.76

-1.39

6.62

20.45

8.45

2.06

t-stat.
Instrument Fstat.

AAA

Coeff.
t-stat.
Instrument Fstat.
combined Fstat.

All analyses are from individual regressions except for the nonAAA and AAA results,
which are estimated in the same regression. The instrument F-statistic is the
Kleibergen-Paap rank Wald (KP) F statistic. See notes to Table II for instrument
strength critical values with one variable that requires instruments. In the analysis
with nonAAA and AAA grants the critical values with 10 percent confidence are
7.03 for 10 percent bias, 4.58 for 15 percent bias, and 3.95 for 20 percent bias.
When loans are included the panel drops 1940 due to problems in obtaining data for
loans in 1930. The measures of economic activity are on a calendar year basis
Fishback and Kachanovskaya

55

while the measures of government activity are on the July t-1 to June t fiscal year
basis. Commodity Credit Corporation loans were dropped from the loan figures
due to inaccurate measurement of the distribution of loans across states.

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

56

Table IV
Estimates of Impact of Government Grants on Measures of Economic Activity
t-statistics Listed Below Coefficients
Level

Per Capita State
Income
Per Capita Wage
and Salary Income

Coeff.
t-stat.

3.44

Instrument Fstat.

13.07

8.15

7.09

Coeff.

0.27

0.09

0.66

2.01

0.56

1.59

13.07

8.15

t-stat.

stat.

Income per capita
29,31,33,35,37,39

Moat times
Swing
1.39

2.30

retail sales per
Coeff.
capita, 1929, 1933, t-stat.
1935, 1939
Instrument F-

Manufacturing
payroll per capita
29,31,33,35,37,39

Level

6.14

Instrument Fstat.

Income per capita,
1929, 1933, 1935,
1939

First
Difference
Interaction of National
with 3 Region Dummies
1.11
1.10

7.09

0.822

0.884

1.62

2.05

6.13

4.36

0.853

0.941

t-stat.

3.73

1.83

Instrument Fstat.

6.13

4.36

-0.21

-0.01

-3.09

-0.03

9.91

6.84

Coeff.

Coeff.
t-stat.
Instrument Fstat.

Coeff.

0.89

1.05

t-stat.

4.39

2.37

Instrument Fstat.

9.91

6.84

ELASTICITIES
Per Capita State
Income

Coeff.
t-stat.
Instrument Fstat.

Nonfarm
Employment per
Capita
Manufacturing
employment per

Coeff.

0.086

0.086

0.108

6.14

2.3

3.44

13.07

8.15

7.09

-0.019

0.001

-0.013

t-stat.

-1.41

0.06

-0.47

Instrument Fstat.

13.07

8.15

7.09

-0.082

-0.003

-0.066

-3.51

-0.03

-2.38

Coeff.
t-stat.

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

57

capita
29,31,33,35,37,39
Auto Registrations
Per Capita

Instrument Fstat.

Coeff.
t-stat.
Instrument Fstat.

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

13.07

7.09

7.09

0.075

0.047

0.081

3.81

2.08

2.38

13.07

8.15

7.09

58

Table V
Dollar-for-Dollar Estimates by State from Differenced Regressions
Using OLS and IV
Dollar-forDollar-forDollar
tDollar
tState
Coefficient statistic
Coefficient statistic
Rejects 10-percent Weak Instrument Bias at the 10-percent Level
New Jersey
0.95
0.83
2.21
2.85
Pennsylvania
0.78
0.62
2.06
2.62
West Virginia
1.26
1.66
1.80
6.13
Oregon
1.40
2.48
1.59
4.58
Utah
0.96
1.10
1.26
2.20
Massachusetts
0.54
1.48
1.22
1.88
Mississippi
0.97
2.11
1.07
2.98
Washington
0.84
1.15
1.06
2.28
California
0.85
1.04
1.03
1.76
North Carolina
0.62
0.85
0.86
1.93
Vermont
0.66
1.62
0.78
2.91
Colorado
0.79
1.61
0.76
1.98
Tennessee
0.47
0.57
0.73
1.69
New
Hampshire
0.63
1
0.70
2.1
Arkansas
0.59
1.39
0.70
2.2
Ohio
0.47
0.45
0.66
0.77
New Mexico
0.51
1.10
0.64
2.27
Rhode Island
1.29
1.94
0.61
1.18
Alabama
0.56
1
0.61
1.55
Connecticut
0.57
0.5
0.61
3.19
Louisiana
0.47
0.97
0.58
1.36
Indiana
0.33
0.24
0.57
0.61
Wyoming
0.23
0.28
0.52
0.75
Georgia
0.48
1.33
0.51
1.98
Illinois
0.16
0.12
0.49
0.44
Wisconsin
0.26
0.27
0.37
0.5
South Carolina
0.55
1.84
0.37
1.67
Missouri
-0.06
-0.07
0.32
0.52
Virginia
0.00
0
0.12
0.26
Kentucky
-0.82
-0.12
-0.03
-0.06
Oklahoma
-0.14
-0.19
-0.09
-0.15
Minnesota
-0.82
-0.81
-0.50
-0.65
Kansas
-0.92
-1.03
-1.27
-1.32
Rejects 20-percent Weak-Instrument Bias at 10 percent Level
Idaho
4.02
4.26
3.46
4.26
New York
0.34
0.47
1.50
1.51
Maine
0.84
1.08
1.29
1.69

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

59

KPF
19.32
41.24
28.82
26.02
79.67
30.50
37.68
68.63
21.15
22.05
83.26
81.61
41.54
61.47
25.75
25.94
44.83
259.36
44.83
144.60
31.52
68.43
19.37
67.28
23.97
118.42
70.08
36.11
62.49
35.22
58.38
28.48
25.50
10.20
9.33
15.30

Florida
0.83
0.92
1.19
1.24
Texas
0.10
0.13
0.67
0.79
Maryland
0.08
0.14
0.50
1.20
Arizona
0.01
0.00
0.28
1.07
Cannot Reject 20-percent Weak-Instrument Bias at 10 percent level.
South Dakota
3.42
3.24
17.54
0.82
Nevada
0.54
1.35
3.51
1.15
Delaware
0.63
1.05
1.29
1.18
Michigan
-1.11
-1.68
1.09
0.62
Montana
1.14
1.65
-0.52
-0.68
Nebraska
0.40
0.26
-6.32
-1.53
Iowa
-3.76
-1.15
-8.30
-2.85
North Dakota
2.81
2.08
-24.79
-0.34

11.06
10.49
10.53
14.81
0.26
0.73
1.58
3.30
5.97
2.94
3.94
0.08

Notes. The estimates come from difference regressions of the change in real per capita
personal income on the change in real per capita federal grants minus taxes, the change in
the real money supply, a dummy for the NRA period, and a year trend. The estimates
cover the period 1930 through 1940 for each state.

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

60

Figure I
Annual Changes in Per Capita New Deal Grants and Changes in Per Capita Personal
Income for the years 1930 through 1940 by State in 1967 Dollars
450

NV
ID

DE
IO
DE

NE

DE

SD
CA
MT
MI
CT
NV
CONV
MI ND OR
MN
NY WY
PA
ND CT NJIL
CT WI
OR
FL
ME WA
UTCOKS
ID
UTOH
IL
DE
NJ MI SD
MD
OH
NJMA
MI
RI MA
OH
MT
IN
RI
IL
WA
IN
IL
IL CA DEOH
IN
IN
CT
WI
PA
FL
VT
SD
WVWY
MA
NH
WV
MS
NY
OR
PA
NM AZNVAZ
MNINMIMI
AZ
CA
MO
TX
PAIL
DE
MD
MO
WA
VA
FL
NM
MD
VT
OK
OK OHNY
MN
AL
CA
NC
NJWA
ND
WA
MS
TNAR
CTMD
VA KS
WI
VA
LA
NE
NH
TN
MO
ME
VT
KYOH
NY
GA
NH
OR
NJ
WY
WY
MA
TX AL
LA
NC
AL
ND
RI
MN
KS
SC
TX
WY
GA
MT
ME
SC
WI
IN
SD
VA
K
Y
ME
NY
NVSC
SC
KYND
SC
TX
ARNM
TN
NC
NV
PA
OK
GA
CT
RI
MD
WV
NC
IO
NM
GA
MOKS
CO
MO
VT
MT
RI
KS
VA
ID
FL
KY
OK
VT
FL
IO
CA
AR
OK
UT
FL
MA
MN
GA
LA
AZ
TX
UT
CO
TN
OK
MT
VAWI
WV
CO
AR
NM
VA
LA
VA
WV
WY
ID
TN
NC
GA
TX
RI
WV
SC
TN
NM
WI
WVNJ
NC
AL
NH
PA
MD
NH
ME
KY
SD
KY
AL
NH
LA
MS
OR
MO
IO
MT
AZ
WA
UT
AR
WY
NHNEMS
AR
ID
MS
NM AL
NC
UT
CO UT
K
Y
OH
TX
ME
DE
ND
AZ
KSOK
AR
AL
NE
SD
MSMA
LA
LA
MN
IN
ARGA SC
LA
NYNE
OR
MT
KS
CAVT
CA
CT
WA
KY
ID
LA
TX
DE
RI
WA
VT
MA
CA
PA
MS
OR RI
MT
MD
WI
MO
FL
MEMS
SC
OR
NE
NENMNE
NY
NC
AZ
C
FL
OVTWV
SC
NM
GA
AL
TN
MD
AL
MS
ND
MO
AR
MT
MD
GA
NH
OK
MO
KS
MA
NC
IL
VA
SC
TX
CO
FL
SD
TN
ME
IO
NH
MI
UT
ME
IN
ID
MS
NV
GA
UT
NY
NJ
OK
WI
WY
MN
NJ
ND
AR
NJ
KS WV
MNIO
CT
NDAZ
KYNC
OH
NV
AL
FL
MN
OR
LA
RI
PA
MA NM
TX
VT
VA
SD
CO
MN
WY
KY
NE
IO TN
WY
OK
MI
CA
IO
NY
MD
WI
WI
WA
IL
ID
PA
VT
SD
ID
WV
ME
RI
IO
IN
NE
MT AZ
IL MA
CO
UT
OH
NJ
CT
NH
OR
MO
WA
SD ID
ND
IN
PA
KS
NV
MI
CA
CT
MIOH
DE
NY
IL
IO

dfrpcsty

AZ

NV

DE

-450
-250

250
drpcgrantogr

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

61

DATA APPENDIX
IN SEARCH OF THE MULTIPLIER FOR FEDERAL SPENDING IN THE
STATES DURING THE GREAT DEPRESSION
State Personal Income
There are different concepts of government spending used in the literature and in
national income accounting. Many macroeconomic models refer to government
purchases of goods and services when examining real GDP estimates. They exclude
transfer payments.
In the analysis in this paper the state personal income and state populations are
from the current BEA website. Bureau of Economic Analysis, U.S. Department of
Commerce, Regional Economic Information System,
http://www.bea.gov/regional/spi/SA1-3fn.cfm. The definitions reported there are very
similar to the original BEA estimates from the late 1930s and early 1940s from Creamer
and Merwin (1941). Their definition of personal income is based on the definitions used
for monthly personal income described in Cone, 1940. The focus was on consumer
purchasing power “Consumer purchasing power” signifies the ability of consumers to
purchase the new goods and services currently produced by business enterprises.
The definition of income payments is National Income after subtracting business
savings, social security contributions from employer and employee, contributions to the
Railroad Retirement Fund and contributions to retirement systems for government
employees and then adding direct relief, federal pensions to veterans, World War I
Adjusted Service Compensation (ASC) benefits in the form of loans or cash payouts,
other government retirement allowances, unemployment compensation, railroad
insurance benefits and old-age insurance benefits. Agriculture benefit payments are
included in income (Cone 1940, pp. 3, 4, 8, 10, 13, 39).
In addition, the following items were excluded from state personal income:
capital gains; earnings from odd jobs due to lack of data; Illegal earnings because they
have “no economic value within the legal framework of the producing economy;” and
imputed income from ownership of durable consumers’ goods is excluded.
Cone (1940, p. 8) explained the logic for incorporating the World War I ASC
loans and payouts in the following way:
“Prior to June 1936 payments to World War veterans took the form of
cash loans on the security of their adjusted service certificates; in that
month the Federal Government, in discharge of its obligations on amount
of adjusted service legislation, remitted to the veterans more than
$2,000,000,000 worth of adjusted service bonds and some cash. The
larger portion of these bonds were liquidated during the year 1936, but the
Treasury has been redeeming them in smaller amounts during the past 3
years; the present rate is about $2,000,000 a month. More properly , then,
the payments to veterans represent in the first instance loans on existing
assets and in the second the gradual liquidation of these assets rather than
the actual payment of income as here defined. Nevertheless, because
these disbursements of the Federal Government were in the nature of
original receipts to the veterans and because, owing to the large volume of

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

62

the disbursements and their wide distribution among 3,000,000 veterans,
they represented an important stimuls to consumption on two distinct
occasions, they have been incorporated into the monthly series.
Since the personal income payments include transfers, transfers have been
incorporated in the federal government distribution of grants (Cone 1940, p. 8, 39).
Other Measures of Economic Activity
State wage and salary income is from Creamer and Merwin (1942). Cone (1940)
provides an overview of the series used to construct the data. Manufacturing Payrolls for
1929, 1931, 1933, 1935, 1937, and 1939 are from the Biennial U.S. Manufacturing
Censuses of 1931, 1933, 1935, 1937, and from the Manufacturing Volumes in the
Fifteenth and Sixteenth Censuses of the United States and Haines (ICPSR 2896). Retail
Sales data are from retail censuses conducted by the Bureau of the Census and reported in
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Foreign and Domestic Commerce, 1936 and
1939. The 1929 and 1939 retail sales are from Haines (ICPSR 2896).
Wallis (1989) constructed the index for the broad measure of employment, which
covers establishments in manufacturing, mining, retail, wholesale, laundries, and street
railroads, and does not include railroads, construction, or government workers. The
index is built up from the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics monthly establishment surveys
collected by various agencies around the country. Wallis then benchmarked the series to
census employment figures. The index of payrolls for the broad measure of employment
is constructed from the same information and is built up from the Monthly Labor Review
and a series of monthly reports Employment and Payrolls. We have not benchmarked the
payroll indices. In the payroll index we substituted information from Milwaukee from
the Neumann, Fishback, and Kantor (2010) dataset for information for Wisconsin
because the Wisconsin series led to extremely unusual figures. Wallis (1989) also
mentions this issue). We have also created the unbenchmarked employment index from
this data and have used it to create an estimate of average monthly earnings.
Automobile registrations for each state were collected from U.S. Public Roads
Administration (1947).
Measuring Government Spending
We have compiled a data set of the key components of federal spending and loans
identified by the U.S. Office of Government Reports (OGR) between 1933 and 1939.
Starting with the OGR data we then checked the spending in each category from 1933
and 1939 and then extended the data forward to 1940 and backward to 1930 using reports
of the U.S. Treasury and many federal agencies.
The Path of Federal Spending in the States through 1932
Prior to the New Deal there were relatively few federal programs that distributed
grants and loans to the states, local governments, or individuals within states. By the
early 1920s the grants came in the form of federal highway grants to the states through
the Department of Agriculture, public health grants for children under the ShephardTownsend legislation; grants for state and city soldier and sailors homes; education grants

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

63

to state agricultural and mechanical universities, for books for the blind, marine schools,
and vocational education; grants under the Department of Agriculture to Experiment
Stations and Extension Services. The Army Corps of Engineers was building, improving,
and maintaining rivers and harbors and flood control works. The Veterans’ Bureau was
paying out pension and death payments to veterans or their dependents. There were also
payments to replace lost property taxes to counties in Oregon associated with the Coos
Bay wagon trail and to the state of Oregon for the loss of property taxes on land that the
federal government had taken back over from the original Oregon and California
Railroad land grant. Finally, there were payments to Oklahoma for gas and oil royalties.
The Shephard-Townsend grants wound down after 1930.
The Veterans’ Bureau provided extensive vocational rehabilitation training for
disabled veterans from World War I with expenditures peaking $166 million in 1922
before slowly declining over the decade to $20 thousand in 1930. The Bureau also
provided pensions to veterans, payments to widows of veterans, various forms of
insurance, and hospital and medical services.
The Bureau of Reclamation was providing no interest loans for building dams and
irrigation works and Boulder Dam had begun construction. In the paper we treated these
as grant expenditures because the payments on the loans were often delayed for long
periods of time and in a number of cases were forgiven.
The loans came in the form of Federal Land Bank mortgage loans to farmers and
a series of special appropriations for emergency crop and feed loans. After 1926 loans
were available to veterans based on collateral in the form of World War I Adjusted
Service Certificates (ASCs) that would mature after 20 years from the date of receipt of
the ASC.
Between the fiscal years 1929 and 1933 Congress and the Hoover Administration
raised federal government outlays by 52 percent in nominal terms and 88 percent after
adjusting for inflation. Mostly this came in the form of expansions of existing programs.
In February 1932 the Reconstruction Finance Corporation was established and made a
broad range of loans to financial institutions, industry, and lower levels of government.
Franklin Roosevelt and the Democratic Congress took office in early March, 1933 and
introduced the broad range of programs seen in Table 1 of the paper. The Public Roads
Administration took over the highway grants formerly distributed by the USDA and the
Federal Credit Administration
Veterans’ Bonus.
The World War I Veterans’ Bonus that was associated with the Bonus Army
March of 1931 and the cash payout in 1936 was based on an insurance certificate that
would mature in the mid 1940s. Through 1936 World War I veterans could obtain loans
against the certificates, which they did quite actively. In 1936 over Roosevelt’s veto
Congress passed a law that allowed cash payments on the certificates and thus a very
large cash payout.
On May 19th, 1924, Congress enacted a law providing for adjusted service
compensation for veterans of World War I. The act provided for a basic service credit of
$1 per day served and a $1.25 for each day served overseas with a maximum credit of
$625 for overseas service and $500 for home service. For veterans with credits less than
$50 the payments would be made in cash. Otherwise, the veteran would receive an

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

64

insurance certificate of the amount multiplied by 1.25 that would pay out the amount on
the certificate at the end of 20 years. Apparently, the 25 percent increase was added to
take into account the delayed nature of the payment. If the beneficiary died before 20
years, his beneficiary would receive the amount on the certificate (Veterans Bureau,
1924, p. 688). In the original act, the veteran could borrow from banks or trust
companies using the certificate as collateral an amount up to 90 percent of the present
value of the certificate at the end of the year in which the loan was made using a discount
rate of 4 percent and adjusting for likely mortality. This turned out to be about 40 percent
of the value of a certificate maturing in 20 years. If the veteran failed to pay interest and
the face value, the bank could receive payment from the Veterans’ Bureau to cover the
loan, and the certificate was passed to the Veterans’ Bureau (Administrator of Veterans’
Affairs, 1924, pp. 688-672; 1932, p. 36). The interest rate on loans was established as 2
percent about the Federal rediscount rate for 60 days’ paper in the Federal Reserve
District where the loan was made. Many people ignore the life insurance value of the
certificates that were issued. The Veteran’s Administration suggested in 1932 that in 80
percent of the cases of veterans dying, the insurance payout from the ASC was the only
material asset left to the dependents (Administrator of Veterans’ Affairs, 1932, p. 36-37).
Between 1925 and 1936 the Veterans’ Bureau issued roughly 3.7 million
adjusted-service certificates (ASCs) with maturity value of $3.69 billion. About $3.1
billion had been issued in certificates by June 30, 1926, while the rest trickled in over
time as the deadline for application was consistently extended.
On March 3, 1927, Congress authorized the Veterans’ Bureau to loan directly on
the ASCs. By 1928, as seen in Table A-1, nearly 700,000 veterans borrowed against
their ascs. By 1930 the Veterans’ Bureau had made about 2.4 million loans with a value
of $215 million against the ASCs.
On Feb. 27, 1931 Congress passed Public No. 743 over Hoover’s veto. It
provided that the loan basis of the asc shall at no time be less than 50 percent of the face
value of the asc after the certificate has been in effect for 2 years. The law also capped
the maximum interest rate at 4.5 percent. The new law led to an explosion of new loans
as the cumulative dollar value of loans on certificates rose from $215 million to nearly
$1.1 billion (Administrator of the Veterans’ Bureau, 1931, pp. 10, 42-43). The loans had
a nice feature that the veteran could forgo repayment and just allow the repayment plus
accumulated interest to be taken out of the payment made when the certificate matured.
The Veterans’ Bureau estimated this would lead to a payout of about $188 for a a typical
certificate (the average was roughly $1,000) on which 50 percent had been borrowed and
no principal and interest repaid. Of course, the veteran received the intial $500 up front.
A law of July 21, 1932 eliminated the two-year waiting period between issuance of the
certificate and the loan and cut the maximum interest rate to 3.5 percent (Administrator
of the Veterans’ Bureau (1932, pp. 10, 36-38). After the burst in 1931, the value of loans
on the certificates rose by roughly $300-350 million in fiscal 1932 and 1933, declined
some during as the recovery began and rose again until 1935.

Table A.1
Loans on World War I Adjusted-Service Certicates through June 30 of Fiscal Year

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

65

Fiscal
Year
Ending
June 30
1927
1928
1929
1930
1931
1932
1933
1934
1935

Cumulative
Number of
Loans on
Certificates
689,805
757,706
1,429,946
2,357,697
2,265,345
2,584,582
2,836,922
2,884,504
2,904,525

Cumulative
Dollar Value of
Loans on
Certificates
64,433,625
73,884,775
133,653,488
215,435,144
1,087,195,525
1,396,042,679
1,750,000,000
1,614,220,289
1,679,669,884

Change in
Change in
Number of
Value of Loans
Loans on
on Certificates
Certificates
689,805
64,433,625
67,901
9,451,150
672,240
59,768,713
927,751
81,781,656
-92,352
871,760,381
319,237
308,847,154
252,340
353,957,321
47,582
-135,779,711
20,021
65,449,595

Cone's
Estimate of
Loans in
Personal
Income
included in
Personal
Income

795,000,000
181,000,000
181,000,000
34,000,000
24,000,000

Sources: Administrator of Veterans’ Affairs. 1927, p. 44; 1928, 26-27; 1929, pp. 5, 30;
1930, pp. 30; 1931, pp. 10, ; 1932, pp. 11, 36-68; 1933, pp. 24-25; 1934, pp. 28-29; 1935,
pp. 22-23. Cone, 1940, p. 44.
Frederick Cone (1940, 44) provided monthly estimates of loans on ASCs that he
included as part of his estimates of personal income. Table A-1 lists the fiscal year totals
of loans from 1931 through 1935. His amounts differ from the ones in the veterans’
bureau reports, as he has no loans listed in fiscal year 1930. When the transition is made
to grants and the loans paid off in 1936, his totals don’t match the veterans’ bureau totals.
We used Cone’s estimates for the ASCs to subtract out the ASCs from the personal
income measures to obtain production income numbers. His calendar year totals after
paying off loans in millions for 1936 are 1,427, for 1937 are $120, for 1938 are $58, and
for 1939 are $34. He does not report a value for 1940. In measuring grants and loans,
we used the information from the Administrator of Veterans’ Affairs Reports.
We have been unable to find descriptions of the amount of the loans on ASCS or
the value of the veterans’ bonus on the ASCs in 1936 through 1941 by state for each year.
However, there are several sources for specific years that give good descriptions of the
share of World War I veterans in the states in several years. The 1926 report of the
Veterans’ Bureau Administrator reported the distribution of the ASCs across states
distributed to that time, but no reports were made after that. By June 30, 1926
approximately 84 percent of the certificates had been issued. The 1930 Census reported
the number of World War I veterans, and we used the Integrated Public Use Microdata
Sample for 1930 to get an estimate of the number of World War I veterans in each state.
We also have information on the number of living World War I veterans receiving
pensions in 1934 through 1941 Administrator of Veterans’ Affairs, 1926, pp. 312-313;
1934, pp. 78-79; 1935, pp. 80-81; 1936, pp. 90-91; 1937; pp. 80-81; 1938, pp. 93-94 ;
1939, pp. 93-94; 1940, pp. 101-102; 1941, pp. 89-90). The correlations between the

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

66

1934 through 1941 numbers were all above .99. The correlations between the 1926
numbers and these numbers were in the 0.93 to 0.94 range, the correlations between the
1930 number and the 1934-1941 numbers were in the .92 range, which might be expected
if people were moving around the country. We calculated the share of veterans in each
state (taking into account veterans living elsewhere and in Washington, D.C in the total)
in each year where we had information. For the years 1927 through 1929 and 1931
through 1933 we used straight-line interpolations of the shares between the values in
1926 , 1930, and 1934. We then multiplied the values by the national totals to get loan
values for the ASCs in each state in 1927 through 1935 and by the cash payouts in 1936
through 1941.
In response to pressure from veterans’ groups, Congress overrode a Roosevelt
veto on January 27, 1936 to create a new payment structure for the ASCs. The World
War I veterans could turn in the ASCs for payment of the face value in cash (the famed
Veterans’ Bonus) after their outstanding loans and accumulated interest to that date had
been deducted. The veteran could also choose a bond dated June 15, 1936 to mature June
15, 1945 with interest at the rate of 3 percent per annum but no interest to be paid on any
bond redeemed before June 15, 1937. As of June 30, 1936, during the life of the
program, the veterans’ bureau had issued a total 3,757,259 ASCs with a maturity value of
$3.692 billion. Of these 231,109 had matured on account of death and $229.5 million
had been awarded to the designated beneficiaries. This left 3.52 million certificates in
force with maturity values of $3.462 billion. Payments of less than $50 had been made in
165,184 cases to the value of $5.206 million. Cash settlements were made to the
beneficiaries of 135,615 veterans who died in service for an amount of $44.669 million.
After the passage of the 1936 act, the VA received 3.264 million applications for
settlements of which 98.9 percent had been certified and the rest were in the process. The
face value of the certificates was $3.206 billion. After deducting outstanding liens for
loans the net value was $1.764 billion.
In constructing the data, we used the change in the cumulative value of the
Veterans’ Bureau’s loans on the ASCs as the value of loans in each fiscal year through
the end of fiscal year 1935. Hardly anybody held on to their loans after the passage of
the cash opportunity in 1936. The issue arises as to how to treat the cash out of the
veterans’ bureau. We treated the full $3.206 billion in cash and bond payouts in fiscal
year 1936 as a grant, while the value of loans was treated as a repayment with a value of
minus $1,679,699,884 for that year. Additional cash disbursements were made of $282.6
million in fiscal 1937, $13.8 million in 1938, $7.4 million in 1939, $9.2 million in 1940,
and $2.657 million in 1941 (Administrator of Veterans’ Affairs 1941, p. 87).

Tennessee Valley Authority Spending
From examining the OGR figures for spending on rivers and harbors and the
Bureau of Reclamation in Tennessee and Alabama, it is clear that the Tennessee Valley
Authority expenditures on the construction of a series of Dams and Canals along the
Tennessee River are not included. The TVA was a quasi-government corporation that
was supposed to repay construction expenditures eventually with electric power revenues
but these were very slow to repay the full bill. The expenditures were included in the

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

67

Federal Budget expenditure figures listed in the Statistical Abstract of the United States
in various years, so they likely belong as expenditures. Another reason to include them is
that the Office of Government Reports included the Bureau of Reclamation expenditures
on Dams and irrigation projects in their estimates. We constructed estimates of the
expenditures on the TVA project, which started in fiscal year 1934 using information
from the Federal budget line item for the TVA (U.S. Bureau of the Census, Statistical
Abstract of the United States, 1935, p. 169, 1936, p. 170, 1937, p. 168, 1938, p. 174,
1939, p. 172, 1940 p. 198, 1941, p. 184, and 1942, p. 198) and from the TVA annual
reports.
We divided up the line item for each year by projects using the TVA Annual
Reports for the years 1935 through 1942. The TVA reported a net investment figure for
each Dam project for the fiscal years 1934, 1935, 1936, and 1937 (Reports of 1935, pp.
63-68; 1936 123-129; 1937, 103-109). National defense and fertilizer net investments
were all assigned to the Muscle Shoals, Alabama area. Mapping and future project
expenditures were split evenly between Alabama and Tennessee. In 1938, the TVA
began reporting the cumulative cost over the years for each of the following dams:
Wilson, Norris, and Wheeler Dams. In 1939, Pickwick was added. (Reports of 1938,
pp. 20-26; 1939, 15-22). In 1940 an evaluation of the fixed assets for Wilson, Norris,
Wheeler, Pickwick, Hiwassee, Guntersville, and Chickamauga was reported (Report of
1940, 61-63). The 1941 Report (pp. 41-43) then reported the cumulative cost again.
Prior to 1939 the construction costs for Hiwassee, Guntersville, and Chickamauga were
reported together. Using information on the amount of construction completed (Reports
of 1938, pp. 20-26, 1939, 15-22, and 1940, p. 16-18) we could divide up the expenditures
across the years. In late 1939 the TVA began reporting aggregate values of constructions
o the Watts Bar and Kentucky Dam projects. We split the total expenditures evenly
between the two projects through 1940 and then used information on the construction
costs of the projects in 1941 (pp. 41-43) to calculate the differences. The annual
estimates of expenditures from these various cumulative measures appear consistent with
the narrative descriptions of the progress of construction on each project. In the process
of developing the figures, a large estimate for Wilson dam in Muscle Shoals, Alabama
appears for the first time in 1937. Wilson Dam was built before the 1930s and
transferred to the TVA when it was started. A transfer value was not developed until
1937, and that is when it appears in the records. To get the final value for each state we
added up the total annual expenditures for all projects and then calculated the ratio of the
expenditures from the line item for the TVA in the federal expenditures to the total value
we calculated. We then multiplied that ratio by the annual values we estimated in each
state.
Table A.2
Estimates of TVA Annual Spending by Project and State

Year
1934
1935
1936
1937

TVA
Annual
Spending
85,641
332,773
383,611
239,268

Project
General maps and map work
General maps and map work
General maps and map work
General maps and map work

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

68

State
Alabama
Alabama
Alabama
Alabama

1938
1939
1940
1934
1935
1936
1937
1938
1939
1940
1935
1936
1937
1938
1939
1940
1934
1935
1936
1937
1938
1939
1934
1935
1936
1937
1938
1939
1940
1934
1935
1936
1937
1938
1939
1940
1941
1941
1935
1936
1937
1938
1939
1940
1939
1940

General maps and map work
General maps and map work
General maps and map work
General Program
General Program
General Program
General Program
General Program
General Program
General Program
Guntersville Dam and Reservoir
Guntersville Dam and Reservoir
Guntersville Dam and Reservoir
Guntersville Dam and Reservoir
Guntersville Dam and Reservoir
Guntersville Dam and Reservoir
Other dam projects
Other dam projects
Other Dam projects
Other Dam projects
Other Dam projects
Other Dam projects
Wheeler Dam and Reservoir
Wheeler Dam and Reservoir
Wheeler Dam and Reservoir
Wheeler Dam and Reservoir
Wheeler Dam and Reservoir
Wheeler Dam and Reservoir
Wheeler Dam and Reservoir
Wilson Dam and Reservoir
Wilson Dam and Reservoir
Wilson Dam and Reservoir
Wilson Dam and Reservoir
Wilson Dam and Reservoir
Wilson Dam and Reservoir
Wilson Dam and Reservoir
Wilson Dam and Reservoir
Wilson fertilizer plant
Hiwassee Dam and Reservoir
Hiwassee Dam and Reservoir
Hiwassee Dam and Reservoir
Hiwassee Dam and Reservoir
Hiwassee Dam and Reservoir
Hiwassee Dam and Reservoir
Kentucky Gilbertsville Project
Kentucky Gilbertsville Project

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

0
0
0
94,521
227,930
387,443
302,004
0
0
0
23,927
2,659,358
8,976,602
20,293,793
9,738,410
1,967,208
0
34,035
350,431
325,355
0
0
2,090,454
13,165,198
12,890,593
3,285,043
626,956
395,905
0
2,396,583
4,866,477
8,237,822
3,843,698
1,671,786
1,055,686
1,353,059
1,018,167
882,948
138,856
254,474
2,554,688
2,560,249
4,824,822
5,925,531
7,469,486
9,573,543

69

Alabama
Alabama
Alabama
Alabama
Alabama
Alabama
Alabama
Alabama
Alabama
Alabama
Alabama
Alabama
Alabama
Alabama
Alabama
Alabama
Alabama
Alabama
Alabama
Alabama
Alabama
Alabama
Alabama
Alabama
Alabama
Alabama
Alabama
Alabama
Alabama
Alabama
Alabama
Alabama
Alabama
Alabama
Alabama
Alabama
Alabama
Alabama
North Carolina
North Carolina
North Carolina
North Carolina
North Carolina
North Carolina
Kentucky
Kentucky

1941
1941
1935
1936
1937
1938
1939
1940
1941
1934
1935
1936
1937
1938
1939
1940
1934
1935
1936
1937
1938
1939
1940
1941
1934
1935
1936
1937
1938
1939
1940
1934
1935
1936
1937
1938
1939
1934
1935
1936
1937
1938

Kentucky Gilbertsville Project
Cherokee Dam
Chickamauga Dam and Reservoir
Chickamauga Dam and Reservoir
Chickamauga Dam and Reservoir
Chickamauga Dam and Reservoir
Chickamauga Dam and Reservoir
Chickamauga Dam and Reservoir
Ft. Loudon
General maps and map work
General maps and map work
General maps and map work
General maps and map work
General maps and map work
General maps and map work
General maps and map work
General Program
General Program
General Program
General Program
General Program
General Program
General Program
Hales Bar
Norris Dam and Reservoir
Norris Dam and Reservoir
Norris Dam and Reservoir
Norris Dam and Reservoir
Norris Dam and Reservoir
Norris Dam and Reservoir
Norris Dam and Reservoir
Other dam projects
Other dam projects
Other Dam projects
Other Dam projects
Other Dam projects
Other Dam projects
Pickwick Landing Dam and
Reservoir
Pickwick Landing Dam and
Reservoir
Pickwick Landing Dam and
Reservoir
Pickwick Landing Dam and
Reservoir
Pickwick Landing Dam and
Reservoir

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

18,097,817
11,142,725
35,831
2,250,697
7,403,995
4,618,291
9,853,205
7,803,115
2,531,536
85,641
332,773
383,611
239,268
0
0
0
94,521
227,930
387,443
302,004
0
0
0
549,962
6,619,639
14,579,302
12,349,029
3,285,274
0
0
0
0
34,035
350,431
325,355
0
0

Kentucky
Tennessee
Tennessee
Tennessee
Tennessee
Tennessee
Tennessee
Tennessee
Tennessee
Tennessee
Tennessee
Tennessee
Tennessee
Tennessee
Tennessee
Tennessee
Tennessee
Tennessee
Tennessee
Tennessee
Tennessee
Tennessee
Tennessee
Tennessee
Tennessee
Tennessee
Tennessee
Tennessee
Tennessee
Tennessee
Tennessee
Tennessee
Tennessee
Tennessee
Tennessee
Tennessee
Tennessee

0 Tennessee
2,542,933 Tennessee
7,845,057 Tennessee
11,251,447 Tennessee
12,021,925 Tennessee

70

Pickwick Landing Dam and
1939 Reservoir
Pickwick Landing Dam and
1940 Reservoir
Pickwick Landing Dam and
1941 Reservoir
1939 Watts Bar Project
1940 Watts Bar Project
1941 Watts Bar Project

0 Tennessee
0 Tennessee
2,721,983
7,469,486
9,573,543
14,229,862

Tennessee
Tennessee
Tennessee
Tennessee

Extending the OGR Expenditures back to Fiscal Year 1930 and forward to Fiscal
Year 1941.
We were able to extend the federal grant spending by state back to fiscal year
1930 and forward to fiscal year 1941 using information from the Annual Reports of the
Treasury Department, which reported direct payments made to states under cooperative
arrangements and grants to and expenditures within states providing direct relief, work
relief, and other aid, exclusive of loans (U.S. Department of Treasury, Annual
Report,1930, 623-626; 1931, 566-569; 1932,443-446; 1933, 382-385 ; 1934, 397-401;
1935, 432-4351936, 474-477; 1937, 474-479; 1938, 520-531; 1939, pp. 519-525, 1940,
821-829, 1941, 651-659). In the fiscal years 1934-1939 when both the OGR and
Department of Treasury of estimates were both reported, the data by program matched up
perfectly for the following programs for all years: Agricultural Experiment Stations,
Agricultural Extensions works, Colleges of Agricultural and Mechanical Arts, Forest
Funds, Forest Service Grants, Public Roads Administration (after summing across roads
programs in Treasury reports), Mineral Lease Payments, Special Funds grants,
Vocational Education and Rehabilitation Grants, Office of Education Grants, State
Marine School Grants, Books for Blind Grants, Federal Water Power Grants, Soldier and
Sailor Homes Grants, and National Guard Grants. All of these programs were programs
that existed before, during, and after the New Deal.
Veterans’ Bureau Spending
The Office of Government Reports reported Veterans’ Administration expenditures for
the years 1933 through 1939 by state. The loans to living veterans on the World War I
Adjusted Service Certificates prior to 1936 and the Veterans’ Bonus payouts on the ASCs
in 1936 and after were not included in the Veterans’ Administration expenditures. The
expenditures included pension payouts for Navy and Army veterans, VA homes,
Maintenance, military and naval insurance payouts for adjusted service certificates of less
than $50 in cash and payments to dependents from ASCs where the veteran has died, We
found that these matched the information reported by the Administrator of Veterans’
Affairs in Annual Reports for 1934, pp. 78-83; 1935, pp. 80-85; 1936, pp. 90-95; 1937;
pp. 80-85; 1938, pp. 93-98 ; 1939, pp. 93-98. We therefore used information from the
1940 and 1941 Reports to add the data for those years (1940, pp. 101-106; 1941, pp. 8994). The distributions across states in each year were pretty stable with pair-wise

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

71

correlations between one year and the next of .98 or higher throughout the period from
1933 through 1941.
For the period prior to 1933 the Veterans’ Administration (VA) reported national
expenditures but did not report the total spending by state. However, the VA did report
“the number of pensioners on the roll and the annual value of said roll” for war pensions
in 1931 and 1932 in the Annual Report of the Administrator of Veterans’ Affairs (1931,
p. 127; 1932, p. 95). Prior to 1931 the information was reported in the annual reports of
the U.S. Commissioner of Pensions (1920, p. 16; 1921, p. 21; 1922, p. 18; 1923, p. 12;
1924, p. 19; 1925, p. 14; 1926, p. 15; 1927, p. 14; 1928, p. ???; 1929, p. 15; 1930, p. 14)
and in the Statistical Abstract of the United States (1919, p. 380). In 1928 the
information was reported in the Secretary of Interior, Annual Report, 1928 (p. 292).
For the years through 1932 the veterans’ administration reports the number of
pensioners on the rolls and the value of the pensions to be paid by state. This does not
represent all of the types of funds for the VA grants used in the data set from 1933 to
1939. We also have the number of veterans reported by state in the Census in 1930
from the Integrated Public Use Microdata Sample (IPUMS). The correlations across
states between these measures and the 1933 veterans’ bureau spending were .952 for the
IPUMS distribution for 1930, .943 for the distribution of pension amounts in 1932 and
.945 for the distribution of pension amounts in 1931.
In the measure we used in the analysis we used the shares of the national totals
from the IPUMS data in 1930 and the shares for the VA spending in 1933 and developed
estimates of the shares in 1932, 1931, 1929, and 1928 using straight-line interpolations.
We then multiplied the national totals after subtracting out spending that is covered in
other categories (spending on state and territorial homes, vocational training, government
life insurance, seamen’s insurance, allotments and allowances, loans to vets for
transportation, medical and hospital services, and miscellaneous factors). The national
totals were $546,255,828 in 1932, $695,951676 in 1931, $626,485,964 in 1930,
$620,504,069 in 1929, and $611,396,308 in 1928 (calculated from Veterans
Administrator, 1934, p. 76, Table 40) We made the adjustments to the national totals
after comparing totals for 1934 with the OGR reports.
The U.S. Employment Service grants reported by the OGR were much bigger
than those reported by the Treasury. For example, the OGR reported a total for the U.S.
of $24.556 million, while the Treasury reported $4 million. However, the Treasury
figures for 1940 look more like the OGR figures. In fact, they were substantially larger
than the 1939 OGR figures at a total around $60 million. They then fall off markedly to
$3.1 million in 1940. We looked at the Monthly Labor Review reports on public
employment agencies and we cannot explain this sudden rise and fall. Relative to the
total spending in those years, the fluctuations would be in the neighborhood of 1.5
percent of total spending in 1939. No grants were listed prior to fiscal year 1934, but we
know that the U.S. Employment Service operated in the early 1930s with a few offices
and a small staff in several states. Based on the descriptions of the size of the offices and
their tasks, we do not believe the expenditures were larger than $30,000 in those states
prior to 1934. U.S. Department of Labor, "Public Employment Services," Monthly
Labor Review (January 1931): 10-32. We chose to leave a value of zero for the U.S.
employment service prior to 1934.

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

72

Among major New Deal programs, the Agricultural Adjustment Administration
OGR and Treasury values matched in 1939 and there were small differences in 1938, and
1937, and no listings in 1934-1936 in the Treasury Reports. The Civilian Conservation
Corps matched perfectly in 1937 and 1938, the treasury reports were 1.18 times the OGR
reported amount in each state in 1939.
The Public Works Administration total for non-federal and for federal grants
matched up with the total in the Treasury in 1939. However, comparisons of the
Treasury information with information from the First and Second Annual Reports of the
Federal Works Administrator shows that the Treasury only reported the grants for nonfederal projects in 1940 and 1941. We filled in the grants for federal projects from PWA
expenditures form Federal Works Agency. First Annual Report, 1940, pp. 328-329 and
the Second Annual Report, 1941, pp. 318-19.
For the Works Progress Administration, the sum of the Treasury’s National Youth
Administration and the WPA matched in 1939 and the sums were off a little in 1936,
1937, and 1938. The WPA figures from the OGR matched exactly the WPA annual
reports of federal expenditures from WPA, Report on the Progress of the Works
Progress Administration, various years. In 1940 and 1941 the Treasury expenditures
were slightly larger than the WPA expenditures reported in the Federal Works Agency,
Second Annual Report, 1941, pp. 452-453, and First Annual Report, 1940, pp. 436-437.
The Federal Emergency Administration Grants in the OGR and Treasury Reports
matched in 1935, 1937, 1938, and 1939 and differed slightly in 1936. The FERA
expenditures were not listed in the Treasury Reports of 1934, so no comparisons could be
made between the OGR and Treasury Reports that year.
The Social Security Administration Expenditures reported by the OGR matched
the Treasury Reports and the grants listed for fiscal 1936 and 1937 in the Social Security
Board’s Second Annual Report of the Social Security Board, 1937, pp. 99-100. These
included grants for old-age assistance (74 percent of total in 1937) , aid to the blind
(2.8%), aid to dependent children (14.8%), unemployment compensation administration
(5.5%), as well as Department of Labor grants for maternal and child health services
(1.8%), services for crippled children (1.2%), and child welfare services (0.6%), and
Treasury department grants for public health work (4.6%). The OGR reports had lower
totals in 1938 and 1939 than those listed in the Treasury reports, while the Treasury
reports listed in 1938 and 1939 matched exactly the reported amounts in the Social
Security Board’s Fourth Annual Report of the Social Security Board, 1939, pp. 195-196.
We therefore used the Treasury and Social Security grant estimates for 1938 and 1939
instead of the OGR estimates.
The Treasury Department figures for the Farm Security Administration were
similar to the OGR figures for 1938, but were much larger in 1937 and 1939. It appears
that the Treasury was including the value of FSA loans in the grant figures. For 1940 and
1941 we adjusted the Treasury figures downward based on the ratio of the OGR grant in
1939 to the Treasury listing in 1939.
The Public Building Administration spending is not reported in the Treasury
Reports until 1940 but is reported in the OGR Reports. The data for the OGR matches up
exactly for 1934 with the data reported for the Public Buildings Administration in Federal
Works Agency, Annual Report, 1940, pp. 264-265, and are similar in most other years.
The Treasury data for 1940 are similar to and strongly correlated with the data reported in

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

73

the Federal Works Agency Annual Report, 1940 , pp. 264-265. There are some
substantial differences between the Treasury and the Federal Works Agency report in
1941 (Federal Works Agency, Annual Report, 1941 pp. 247).
The sources for Public Works Administration loans in fiscal years 1940 and 1941
are Federal Works Agency, First Annual Report, 1940. Washington, D.C.: Government
Printing Office, 1940, pp. 328-329 and Federal Works Agency, Second Annual Report,
1941. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1941, pp. 318-319. These were
loans on non-federal projects. Negative numbers means that bonds were cancelled in lieu
of payments.
Bureau of Reclamation
One of the main questions to address is how to deal with the Spending on
construction of dams and irrigation projects by the Bureau of Reclamation. Technically,
all Bureau of Reclamation projects were interest-free loans to the users of the irrigation
works or the electric works associated with dams. However, the repayments on the loans
were generally delayed and in a number of cases the scheduled payments were pushed
back even further. This was particularly true during the 1930s. On some projects the
loans were forgiven. Thus, a case could be made that the Bureau of Reclamation
spending could be treated as similar to grants. Certainly, in terms of net flow of funds
they lie somewhere in between the non-repayable grants of the WPA and the loans with
repayment schedules. The OGR reports Bureau of Reclamation grant spending. These
estimates in most cases are pretty similar to estimates of construction costs reported
separately in the annual reports of the Bureau of Reclamation after the construction
spending for the Boulder Dam project (begun in fiscal year 1931), the All-American
Canal (begun in fiscal year 1935), and the Marshall Ford Dam (Mansfield after 1941 and
begun in fiscal year 1938) are added to the construction statistics listed in the Bureau of
Reclamation Annual Reports (see Bureau of Reclamation, Annual Reports for Fiscal
Year for the period 1921 through 1932) and Secretary of Interior Annual Reports for
Fiscal Year for the period 1933 through 1941.
We constructed two different versions of the Bureau of Reclamation spending. In
one we used the OGR estimates of Bureau of Reclamation grant spending for fiscal years
1934 through 1939 and then added in estimates using the Bureau of Reclamation
Construction Spending for fiscal years 1930 through 1933 and 1940 and 1941 plus
construction spending for the Boulder Canyon Project, the All-American Canal and the
Marshall Ford Dam. These were added because it was clear from comparisons during
1934 through 1939 of the spending by state listed by the OGR and Reclamation Bureau
that those three projects were included in the OGR estimates but not the Reclamation
Bureau estimates. The Reclamation Bureau reported separate accounting for the Boulder
Canyon projects and the All-American Canal in their reports (Secretary of Interior 1933;
pp. 40-1; 1934, pp. 50-51; 1935, pp. 80-81; 1936, pp. 84-85; 1937, pp. 28-29; 1938, pp.
77-79; 1939, pp. 225-227; 1940, pp. 120-122; 1941, pp. 45-47).
In a second set of estimates we used the Bureau of Reclamation Report estimates
of spending plus the spending on the Boulder Canyon Project, the All-American Canal
and the Marshal Ford Dam. We constructed estimates of Boulder Canyon spending from
the following material. For the fiscal years 1934 through 1940 the Reclamation Bureau
reported accounting summaries for the Boulder Canyon Project that showed an estimate

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

74

of fixed capital under construction and also total cumulative disbursements by the fiscal
agents of the project. For Boulder Canyon the difference between the two cumulative
numbers was roughly $8 million out of around $60 million total in 1934 and 1935 and $3
million thereafter, for percentage differences of 13.6 in 1934, 9.3 in 1935, 5.6 in 1936,
3.3 in 1937, 2.7 in 1937, 2.3 in 1938, and 1.7 in 1939. The same figures were provided
for the All-American Canal from 1935 through 1940. The differences were 142,000 in
1935 and less than 850,000 thereafter with percentage differences of 6.3 in 1935, 12.3 in
1936, 5 in 1937, 2.6 in 1938, 2.3 in 1939 and 3 in 1940 (Secretary of the Interior 1934,
pp. 54-56; 1935, 84-87; 1936, 88-92; 1937, pp. 30-33; 1938, pp. 80-83; 1939, pp. 228231; 1940, pp. 123-126). For fiscal year 1941 we used the appropriations estimates
reported in Secretary of Interior 1941, pp. 32-33 for Boulder Canyon and listed on p. 557
in the U.S. Department of Treasury, Budget of the United States, 1942, printed in 1943 ).
For the Boulder Canyon Project, the Bureau of Reclamation (1932, p. 88 provided an
estimate of cumulative construction costs by the end of fiscal year 1932 of $21,745,004.
And information on expenditures in fiscal year 1931 suggests that roughly $5.5 million
was spent on constructing railroads, highways, Boulder City, and electric transmission
lines that year (about $3.1 million on railways, $300,000 on highways, $1.5 million on
transmission lines, and $600,000 on the initial parts of Boulder City (U.S. Bureau of
Reclamation. Boulder Canyon Project Final Reports: Part I: Introductory. Bulletin I.
General History and Project Description. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing
Office, 1948, pp. 84-85). To get an estimate of cumulative construction costs in 1933, we
subtracted the line item amount of $19,526,000 for the Boulder Canyon Project in the
Treasury report on expenditures of (Stat. Abstract, 1935, p. 170) from the 1934 estimate.
The spending for the All American Canal was allocated to California and the Boulder
Canyon project was split evenly between Arizona and Nevada because it sits astride their
border. The split seems to be the way the OGR also allocated the Boulder Canyon funds.
For the Marshall Ford Dam for the years 1935 through 1939, we used the
estimates for the Bureau of Reclamation provided by the Office of Government Reports
for Texas. The Bureau of Reclamation reported no construction estimates for Texas
during the period and we had no separate information on the Marshall Ford dam prior to
1941. For 1941 we used a figure of $3 million that came from an appropriations request
by Roosevelt for Marshall Ford Dam in 1941. For 1940 we assumed a figure of $ 4
million based on the decline in annual spending between 1939 and 1941. Marshall Ford
Dam was allocated to Texas.
Table A.3
Estimated Annual Spending on Major Dam Projects for Fiscal Years, 1930-1940
Estimated Annual Spending for Fiscal Years
Boulder Canyon Dam

All American Canal

Based on
Fiscal
Year

Based on
Capital
Capital
Under
Under
Disbursements Construction Disbursements Construction

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

75

Marshall Ford
Dam
Based on
OGR and
appropriations

1930
1931
1932
1933
1934
1935
1936
1937
1938
1939
1940
1941

0
5,500,000
14,640,028
13,682,429
19,526,000
21,965,333
18,896,056
7,792,162
6,076,856
5,407,545
4,693,698
6,500,000

0
5,500,000
14,640,028
22,106,181
19,526,000
21,313,868
16,719,814
5,630,729
5,608,865
5,082,650
4,050,808
6,500,000

0
0
0
0
0
2,248,138
4,332,560
8,580,700
7,769,657
3,018,729
1,910,080
1,500,000

0
0
0
0
0
2,105,904
5,287,203
8,549,162
7,576,826
3,035,664
2,152,418
1,500,000

0
555,731
796,291
5,569,261
5,255,993
4,000,000
3,000,000

Rivers, Harbors, and Flood Control
The Office of Government Reports offered estimates of spending on rivers and
harbors and flood control by the Army Corps of Engineers for the fiscal years 1933
through 1939. To push these estimates back to 1928 and forward to 1941 we examined
the reports of the Chief of Engineers, U.S. Army, Annual Report of the Chief of
Engineers for the years 1919 through 1941. The reports listed the net expenditures by
project from the Chief of Engineers budgets as well as separate estimates of net spending
from budgets provided under the National Industrial Recovery Act through the Public
Works Administration and from budgets provided by the Federal Emergency Relief Acts.
We found that a number of the state expenditures did not match up well for 1933;
therefore, we also created an alternative estimate for the rivers and harbors spending
based on the annual reports. Some projects were associated with multiple states, like the
various sub-districts of the Mississippi River and sub-districts of the Ohio River. In the
cases where we could identify specific locations within the sub-districts we used the
amounts spent in those locations to divide the spending between states. In situations
where specific information was not available we divided the expenditures based on rough
estimates of the mileage of the rivers measured with maps and rulers. In most of the
districts the spending was not divided by project for the following types of spending:
preliminary examinations and reports, plant allotments, preliminary examinations and
reports for flood control and plant allotments for flood control. For the first two we
distributed the spending on those categories across states based on the spending in the
district on the projects in the states in that year. For the third and fourth categories we
distributed the spending based on the state distribution of flood control projects. The
expenditures we use are net expenditures after net receipts from sales are subtracted. We
treated negative values as zeroes in this situation on the grounds that when the area had
negative net expenditures, they were not pulling money out of the area.
The Mississippi River Commission covered the Mississippi River from the Head
of Passes at the end of the river as it flowed into the Gulf of Mexico to northern parts of
the river. For 1922 through 1940, the Mississippi River Commission information for
Rivers and Harbors spending by the Army Corps of Engineers was reported by district
and for specific spots where money was spent. We used a variety of maps, Wikipedia,

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

76

and other sources on the internet to locate the specific spots reported and assigned the
expenditures to the states. These are the numbers that we used in the basic statistics with
and without negative numbers for the period 1922 through 1930. All funds contributed
by local levee districts and governments were excluded.

Splitting the Reconstruction Finance Corporation Loans between fiscal 1932 and
fiscal 1933.
We used information from Reconstruction Finance Corporation (1932x, pp. 3-4 and
1933x, pp. 8-9, 14-15). The RFC did not report the total loans by state for fiscal year
1932 or for fiscal year 1933 in their monthly and quarterly reports of 1932 and 1933.
They did report the number of borrowers by state for fiscal year 1932 for each category:
banks and trust companies, credit unions, building and loan association, insurance
companies, mortgage-loan companies, joint-stock land banks, livestock credit
corporations, agricultural credit corporations and railroads (including receivers). In the
1933 report they reported the cumulative number of borrowers in the categories above
plus the additional categories under the expanded range for the RFC after June 1932. The
added categories included Federal Land Banks, Federal Intermediate Credit Banks,
Regional Agricultural Credit Corporations, Self-liquidating projects, Financing of
Agricultural Commodities and Livestock, Relief and Work Relief, Loans on Preferred
Stock of Banks, and Purchases of Capital Notes and Debentures of Bonds. Using this
information we determined the number of borrowers (B32js) in each category (j) in each
state (s) as of June 30, 1932 (32) and the additional borrowers added in fiscal year 1933
(B33js). The two reports also reported the total loans in each category as of June 30, 1932
and June 30, 1933. From that information we determined the value of loans of loans in
each fiscal year for loans. We calculated the average loan size for each category of loan
(l32j)
l32j = L32j/Σs B32js.
Σs is the summation sign over all states s.
To get an estimate of the amount of loans in state s in 1932 (EL32s) we multiplied the
number of borrowers in the state in each category (B32js) by the national average loan size
(l32j) and then summed across all categories.
EL32s = Σj l32j* B32js
We followed the same procedure for each state in 1933.
EL33s = Σj l33j* B33js
The proportion of loans in state s from February 2, 1932 to June 30, 1933 that was in
fiscal year 1932 (P32s) is then
P32s = EL32s/ (EL32s + EL33s).

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

77

This was then multiplied by the reported amount of loans from the Office of Government
Reports to get the 1932 figure. The RFC reported Loans allotted, the amount disbursed,
the amount repaid, and the amount outstanding. The Office of Government Reports
appears to have used loans outstanding in their reports, so we used that definition here.

Agricultural Loans through Federal Land Banks 1917 through 1932, Emergency
Crop Loans, 1921-1932 and Farm Credit Administration (Federal Land Banks,
Land Bank Commissioner, Production Credit Associations, and Emergency Crop
and Feed Loans) from 1933 forward.
Federal Land Bank Mortgage Loans through 1932. In 1917 12 Federal Land
Banks were organized and authorized to “extend long-term mortgage credit to farmers on
security of first mortgages on farm lands.” The loans could be made for a period from 5
to 40 years. The loans almost entirely were made through national farm loan association,
corporations charted under the 1917 act and organized by farmers on a cooperative basis.
The membership of the cooperatives was made up exclusively of borrowers from the
Federal land banks. The banks were organized on a cooperative bases because nearly all
of the stock was owned by the borrower-owned national farm loan associations. Each
bank was liable for its own bond issues and the bond issues of the 11 other Federal land
banks. As of 1930 the Federal Land Banks held about 12 percent of the farm mortgage
indebtedness in the U.S. The administration oversight of these banks was taken over by
the Farm Credit Administration in 1933 (Federal Farm Loan Board. Annual Report,
1930, pp. 2, 12). Interest rates on bank loans were limited to a maximum of 1 percent
over the interest rate at which the federal land bank sold its most recent issuance of
bonds. For example, in 1925 Federal Land Banks were marketing their bonds at 4.5
percent, which implied a maximum interest rate on the mortgages to farmers of 5.5
percent. Some of the larger banks charged on 5.25 percent (1925, p. 5).
In May 1921 the Federal Land Banks resumed operation after a cessation of
lending that lasted roughly 15 months, which seemed to occur between the beginning of
December 1919 and the end of April 1921. The stoppage was a result of litigation over
the constitutionality of the Federal Farm Loan Board lending system established in 1917.
( pp. 2-3, Federal Farm Board. Fifth Annual Report of the Federal Farm Board, 1921.
Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1922).
We collected information on the value of loans closed by the federal land banks
in each year from the Federal Farm Loan Board Annual Reports for the years 1918, pp.
25-27; 1919, pp. 25-27; 1920, p. 5; 1921, p. 12; 1922, p. 20; 1923, p. 21-22; 1924, p. 2122; 1925, pp. 27-28; 1926, p. 32; 1927, p. 71; 1928, p. 122; 1929, pp. 162, 163; 1930, pp.
121, 124, 1931, p. 124, 1932, p. 106-7. The reports reported the amounts loaned through
December 31, of the year of the report back through 1922. Between 1922 and 1928 only
the cumulative totals to December 31 were reported, so the annual amounts were based
on the change in the cumulative totals. From 1918 through 1921, the cumulative totals
through November 30 of the year was reported. In checking the data we discovered some
discrepancies in 1929 between the value of loans reported for that calendar year and the

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

78

value determined by subtracting the 1928 cumulative total from the 1929 cumulative
total. Most were less than 5 percent but Georgia and Florida had sizeable discrepancies.
We used the 1929 calendar year reported values. (Fdldbk.xls). In the analysis we
converted the calendar year data to a fiscal year basis for year t by taking half of the
calendar amount in year t and half of the calendar year amount in year t-1.
Farm Loan Board (1931, p. 121; 1929, p. 158; 1928, p. 116; ) showed that
roughly 60 to 66 percent of the amount of federal land bank loans closed in the calendar
years 1929 and 1931 were closed in the first half of the year. 53 percent in 1930,
Joint Stock Land Bank Loans. The Annual Reports of the Federal Farm Loan
Board first reported loans granted by joint-stock land banks in 1923. The joint-stock land
bank loans were privately organized corporations chartered by the federal government to
provide farm loans. Interest rates on bank loans were limited to a maximum of 1 percent
over the interest rate at which the federal land bank sold its most recent issuance of
bonds. For example, in 1925 joint stock land banks were marketing their bonds at 4.5 to
5 percent, which implied a maximum interest rate on the mortgages to farmers of 5.5 to 6
percent (1925, p. 5).
“Based on the results of actual experience, the board deems it wise not to charter
additional joint-stock land banks, except and unless it shall be shown by a careful survey
that there is a need for the bank and reasonable assurance of a profitable volume of
business and evidence that the financial responsibility and competency of the personnel
of the proposed organization will afford satisfactory and efficient operation. Such a bank
must function so as to insure conservatism in its lending activities and at the same time
accumulate legitimate profits to absorb necessary charges for expenses and still afford
reasonable dividends to stock holders.(1925, p. 8).” Between 1923 and 1926 the amounts
of loans granted from time of organization to October 31st of the year in question were
reported (1923, p. 29; 1924, pp. 29-30; 1925, p. 40; 1926, p. 45. From 1928 onward the
amounts closed from date of organization through December 31st of the year were
reported (1928, p. 122; 1929, p. 163; 1930, p. 125; 1931, pp. 125-127; and 1932, pp. 107109). In 1927 only the loans submitted for approval as collateral for bond issues were
reported (1927, p. 78). The same values were also reported for 1928 through 1931 (1928,
p. 141; 1929, p. 182 ; 1930, p.145 ; 1931, p. 146). To get a figure for the 1927 loans
closed, we multiplied the cumulative number of loans submitted for approval for
collateral in 1927 by the ratio in 1928 of the cumulative loans closed to the cumulative
loans submitted for approval as collateral in that year for each state. This estimate is
likely to be a good estimate because in 1928 the ratio of loans closed to loans submitted
for approval as collateral ranged from .978 in Tennessee to 1.115 in California with an
average of 1.043 and a standard deviation of 0.047. The ratios in 1929 for each state
were close to the same, as the ratio of the ratio in 1928 to the ratio in 1929 was within
one percent of one in all but two states. In 1929 the change in cumulative loans was
negative for Missouri, and we inserted the annual amount reported on p. 162 in the
volume. In 1931 the change in the cumulative total of loans was negative for Ohio and
Pennsylvania. We inserted the annual amount reported on p. 124 in the 1931 volume
instead. In general, we used the change in the cumulative amounts rather than the

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

79

reported annual amounts because only the cumulative amounts were reported in the
earlier years.
Emergency Crop and Feed Loans through 1932. Congress made funds available
for emergency crop production and seed loans in several different years between 19211932 under special appropriations. We also had precise information on the distribution
across states of the funds in 1922 (Agriculture Yearbook, 1922, p. 51; 1923, p. 120) and
in 1924 (Yearbook of Agriculture, 1924, p. 91). We had information on the states that
received the emergency loans in 1921, 1929, and 1930. Using the information from the
total distribution of loans over the period 1921 through 1930 (FCA, 1933, pp. 115-117),
we could do a reasonable job of figuring out the distribution of loans across states within
those years (see fca3337.xls and fca3841.xls). There were loans in 1921 of $1,935,125
and in 1922 of 1,481,988. An Act of March 3, 1921 allowed for $1,954,929 in seed-grain
loans to Montana, North Dakota, Idaho, and Washington. An Act of March 20, 1922
authorized lending of $1,481,988 seed-grain loans in crop-failure areas for the crop of
1922. The loans were for $24,685 in Idaho, $756,213 in Montana, $661,548 in North
Dakota, $37,812 in South Dakota, and $1,730 in Washington (Agriculture Yearbook,
1922, p. 51; 1923, p. 120). USDA financial statements from 1924 report appropriations
of $1 million for seed and farm loans to farmers in New Mexico (Yearbook of
Agriculture, 1924, p. 91). The total loans reported for 1921-1930 to New Mexico in
FCA, 1933, pp. 115-117 were $433,849, so we believe that was the amount spent in
1924. The USDA financial statement in 1926 included $22,560 in seed grain loans
(Yearbook of Agriculture,1926, p. 121). At some point between 1921 and 1930 there
was another distribution of loans in the range of $1.6 million, but we have not found the
description of that loan distribution. It likely occurred in 1927. In 1929 Congress made
available $6 million for the USDA to make emergency loans to farmers for seed, feed,
and fertilizer. About $5.5 million was loaned in Virginia, North Carolina, South
Carolina, Alabama, Georgia and Florida for staple crops. About $200,000 was loaned in
southern Florida on vegetables. By June 30, 1930 about $4.6 million had been repaid. In
spring 1930 under the first deficiency act of March 26, 1930, loans were made to other
farmers in Virginia, North Carolina, South Carolina, Alabama, Georgia and Florida and
crop financing was aided in Indiana, Illinois, Missouri, Oklahoma, New Mexico,
Minnesota, North Dakota and Montana. Except in the Southeastern states and in North
Dakota and Montana, however, the amounts loaned were negligible. The total spring
loans amounted to $4,612,136. In August and September roughly $500,000 was loaned
in Florida on winter vegetables and another $170,000 was loaned on fall pasture crops in
Alabama, Missouri, Oklahoma, and Virginia (Yearbook of Agriculture, 1931, pp. 5, 6).
We had precise information on the distribution of the emergency crop and feed
loans made during the calendar year for 1931 and 1932 from the annual reports of the
Federal Credit Administration (First, 1933, pp. 115-117). The 1932 loans were made
from funds provided by the Reconstruction Finance Corporation but were administered
by the Federal Farm Bureau of Loans and were reported there and not in the RFC reports.
Roughly $120 million was advanced in 1931 and 1932. Although reported on a calendar
year basis, nearly all of the loans, with the exception of late loans were made prior to July
1 of each year. In nearly all cases the fiscal year value and the calendar year value were

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

80

similar. Where they were not, we subtracted the loan values in fall year t from the year t
calendar value and added it to the year t+1 value.
Farm Credit Administration from 1933 onward. The Farm Credit Administration
was created in 1933 and the duties of various farm loan activities were merged into its
administrative realm. The FCA continued the Federal Land Banks. A new program
under the Land Bank Commissioner was authorized under the Emergency Farm
Mortgage Act of 1933 with a fund of $200 million. The funds were used to refinance
indebtedness, for providing working capital for farm operations, and for enabling farmers
to redeem or repurchase property which has been foreclosed since July 1, 1931. The
loans were granted on security of first or second mortgages on land and permanent
improvements. The maximum amount of loans per farmer was to be $5,000 with no
indebtedness to exceed 75 percent of the appraised normal value of the property. These
loans were focused on farmers who could not obtain Federal land bank financing ( Farm
Credit Administration, First Annual Report, 1933, p. 10).
FCA Federal Land Bank and Land Bank Commissioner Loans. Federal Land
Bank and Land Bank Commissioner Loans made during the calendar year were reported
in the Farm Credit Administration Reports (First, 1933, pp. 78-79; Second, 1934, pp. 9192; Third, 1935, pp. 119-120; Fourth, 1936, pp. 115-116; Fifth, 1937, pp. 113-114;
Sixth, 1938, pp. 187-9; Seventh, 1939, pp. 138-139; Eighth, 1940, pp. 155-156; Ninth,
1941, pp. 145-146). The FCA annual report provided information on the number of
loans closed by the Federal Land Banks and Land Bank Commissioner during the 11
months through November 1933. However, 59.5 percent of the loans closed in the full
calendar year of 1933 were closed in December of 1933( Farm Credit Administration
First Annual Report, 1933, p. 7). Therefore, we multiplied each figure by 1.6809 to
determine the total loans for the calendar year. Thus, we are assuming that the
percentage of loans in each state was the same in December as it had been in the first 11
months of the year.
FCA Production Credit Division. The crop production loans made during the
calendar year were reported in the Farm Credit Administration Reports, (First, 1933, pp.
118-119; Second, 1934, pp. 152-154; Third, 1935, pp. 133-134; Fourth, 1936, pp. 136137; Fifth, 1937, pp. 136-137; Sixth, 1938, pp. 187-9; Seventh, 1939, pp. 165-166;
Eighth, 1940, pp. 201-202; Ninth, 1941, 189-191). The Farm Credit Act of 1933 also
created the Production Credit Division, a system of cooperative credit institutions
chartered by the Farm Credit Administration and operating under rules set up by 12
Production Credit Corporations (PCC), one in each Federal land bank city. The local
associations made loans directly and were capitalized partly by the production credit
corporations and partly by the borrowers. They could borrow and rediscount with the
Federal intermediate credit banks. The PCCs provided part of the capital for the loans
and set the regulations. Their initial capital stock of $7.5 million each was subscribed by
the Governor of the FCA, and the Governor could raise and lower the capital stock. The
funds of the PCCs were not loaned directly to farmers but provided paid-in capital for the
creation of the PCCs. Production Credit Associations (PCAs) could be organized by 10
or more farmer-borrowers after a meeting of interested farmers living in the territory to
be served. As of December 31, 1933 there were 322 PCAs, each with a specified

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

81

territory. Class A stock in the PCAs was nonvoting but preferred upon liquidation and
was purchased primarily by PCCs but could be bought by private investors. The Farm
Credit Act called for the value of Class A stock to be roughly 20 percent of the volume of
loans. Class B stock was purchased primarily by farmer-borrowers and was paid in as
loans were made. Each borrower was required through the local PCA to own class B
stock equal to 5 percent of the value of his loan. Each Class B stock holder had one vote.
The PCAs could rediscount loans in an amount equal to about 5 times their paid-in
capital. When the rediscounts were equal to 5 times paid-in capital, the PCCs could
provide added capital by purchasing more Class A stock. The plan was to have onefourth of the capital stock be owned by borrowers as Class B stock, and the rest as class
A stock owned by the PCCS (FCA, First Annual Report, 1933, pub. 1934, pp. 33-36). In
1933 the state distribution for loans by the PCAs was reported only through November
31st of the year. However, the total for the entire period from January 1 through Dec. 31
was very close to the amount reported through November 1933 (see FCA, First Annual
Report, p. 2 and pp. 119-120). Therefore, we used the total through November for each
state.
FCA Emergency Crop and Feed Loans. The administration of the original
emergency crop and feed loans made by Congressional appropriation was transferred to
the FCA. In 1933 $90 million was authorized for loans to purchase feed, finance crop
production, and cover the costs of administering the loans. Security on the loans was a
first lien on the crop to be harvested and/or livestock fed. The 1933 maximum for each
feed loan was $250, the individual maximum for crop production purposes was $300 and
the maximum that could be advanced to all tenants of any one landlord was $2,000 (
FCA, First Annual Report, 1933, pub. 1934, pp. 51-52). We had precise information on
the distribution of the emergency crop and feed loans made during the calendar year for
each year from 1931 through 1941 from the annual reports of the Federal Credit
Administration (First, 1933, pp. 115-117; Second, 1934, pp. 168-170; Third, 1935, pp.
155-157; Fourth, 1936, pp. 165-167; Fifth, 1937, pp. 174-6; Sixth, 1938, pp. 187-9;
Seventh, 1939, pp. 205-207; Eighth, 1940, pp. 232-234; Ninth, 1941, 221-223).
FCA Drought Relief Loans. In 1934 and 1935 the Farm Credit Administration
passed out Drought Relief Loans authorized by a Congressional Act approved June 19l,
1934. Congress appropriated $525 million for relief in agricultural areas seriously
affected by drought. Of that amount the FCA was allocated $96,785,000 to make loans
to farmers of purchase of seed and feed, summer fallowing, and similar purposes. The
Emergency Crop and Feed Loan Section administered the loans. The first loans were
disbursed on July 3, 1934 and were made continuously until June 30, 1935 when the
appropriation expired. The loans were made principally to care for cattle and other
livestock in the drought areas. They were made on “extremely liberal” terms, based on a
borrower’s unsecured not and on a nondisturbance agreement to expire at the end of
1935, executed by all holders of liens and other livestock to be fed. The borrower could
not increase the lien without permission of the FCA Governor. Most were made at 5.5
percent interst. Loans were also made for orchard rehabilitation in Washington, citrus
rehabilitation and truck loans related to a freeze in Florida, and strawberry loans. (FCA
Third Annual Report, 1935, pp. 75-76). The drought relief loans made during the fiscal

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

82

year 1934-1935 are reported in (FCA Third Annual Report, 1935, pp. 158). We can
separate them into calendar year loans using information on the loans made during the
fiscal year 1934 in FCA, Second Annual Report, 1934, p. 168).
The Commodity Credit Corporation (CCC) loans from the Office of Government Reports
do not match up well at all with CCC loan information reported for 1939, 1940, and
1941. One problem in the OGR reports is there is missing information for 1934. On
many state sheets they say that the state by state loans are not available, but then the OGR
reports CCC loans for Illinois, Indiana, Ohio, Iowa, Kansas, Minnesota, Missouri,
Nebraska, and South Dakota. In the 1939 state by state report from Department of
Agriculture (Agriculture Statistics, 1940, p. 632), the cumulative numbers for 1933
through 1939 don’t match the cumulative numbers from the OGR, in part because of the
missing 1934 data in many states. However, the numbers are substantially different for
the states where the OGR did report the 1934 numbers. Also in the Agricultural statistics
for 1939, they state that approximately $159 million in loans were not included because
they went to cooperative associations. The CCC numbers are so problematic that we
removed them from the analysis.
Moat Areas for Instrument Using Spending Outside Region
When constructing one of the instrumental variables, we used a measure of
federal grant spending in the area outside an geographic “moat” around the state of
interest. The moat includes the state’s census region (of 9) and nearby census regions to
avoid spatial correlation with the error term from potential spillovers. For New England,
for example, the moat includes any states in New England, the Mid-Atlantic, the East
North Central, or the states of Virginia, Maryland, Kentucky, or West Virginia; therefore,
the component of federal spending for the instrument for that state is based on federal
spending outside that moat.For the Mid-Atlantic states the area used for the instrument
does not include any states from New England, the Mid-Atlantic, the East North Central,
the South Atlantic, or the states of Alabama, Georgia, Kentucky, Maryland, North
Carolina, South Carolina, Tennessee, Virginia, and West Virginia. The area used for the
instrument for the East North Central states does not include any states from the MidAtlantic, the East North Central, the West North Central, or the states of Alabama,
Arkansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maryland, Mississippi, North Carolina, South Carolina,
Tennessee, Texas, Virginia, or West Virginia. The area used for the instrument for the
West North Central states does not include any states from the East North Central, the
West North Central, the East South Central, the West South Central, and the Mountain
States. The area used for the instrument for the South Atlantic states does not include
any states from the Mid-Atlantic, the South Atlantic, the East North Central, the East
South Central, or the West South Central. The area used for the instrument for the East
South Central does not include any states from the Mid-Atlantic, the South Atlantic, the
East North Central, the East South Central, the West South Central, or the states of Iowa,
Kansas, Missouri, or Nebraska. The area used for the instrument for the West South
Central states does not include any states from the East North Central, the West North
Central, the East South Central, the West South Central, or Mountain regions. The area
used for the instrument for the Mountain states does not include any states from the West

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

83

North Central, the West South Central, the Mountain, or the Pacific regions. The area
used for the instrument for the Pacific states does not include any states from the
Mountain and Pacific regions or the states of Oklahoma, Texas, Kansas, North and South
Dakota, and Nebraska.
References
“$75,000,000 for Roads”, The New York Times, November 20, 1921.
Administrator of Veterans’ Affairs. Annual Report of the Administrator of Veterans’
Affairs for the Fiscal Year Ended June 30. Washington: Government Printing
Office, Various Years.
Benjamin, Daniel and K.G.P. Mathews. U.S. and U.K. Unemployment Between the
Wars: A Doleful Story, Institute for Economic Affairs, London, 1992 (174 + xvi).
Bird, Richard. “Section H: Government Finance. Historical Statistics of Canada
downloaded on June 28, 2009 from http://dsppsd.pwgsc.gc.ca/Collection/Statcan/11-516-XIE/11-516-XIE.html
Bureau of Economic Analysis. State Personal Income, 1929-97. Washington, D.C.:
U.S. Government Printing Office, 1999.
Cone, Frederick M. 1940. Monthly Income Payments in the United States, 1929-40.
Economic Series No. 6 for Bureau of Foreign and Domestic Commerce.
Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office.
Creamer, Daniel. 1956. Personal Income During Business Cycles. A Study by the
National Bureau of Economic Research, New York. Princeton, New Jersey:
Princeton University Press.
Creamer, Daniel, and Charles Merwin. 1942. “State Distribution of Income Payment,
1929-41.” Survey of Current Business July 1942, pp. 18-26.
Draffan, George, Taking Back Our Land: A History of Railroad Land Grant Reform.
Seattle, Washington: Public Information Network, 1998.
http://www.landgrant.org/forfeiture.html downloaded July 27, 2010.
Federal Farm Loan Board. Annual Report. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing
Office, various years.
Federal Home Loan Bank Board. Annual Report, 1935. Washington, D.C.: Government
Printing Office, 1935.
Federal Works Agency. First Annual Report, Fiscal Year Ended June 1940.
Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1940.

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

84

Martin, Robert F. “National Income and Its Distribution, 1919-1938. The Conference
Economic Record (September 8, 1939): 81-92.
Public Roads Administration. Federal Works Agency. (1947) Highway Statistics:
Summary to 1945.. United States Government Printing Office: Washington, D. C.
Reconstruction Finance Corporation. Report of Reconstruction Finance Corporation:
Letter from the Reconstruction Finance Corporation Transmitting Pursuant to Law,
A Report of the Corporation Covering Its Operations for the Period from the
Organization of the Corporation on February 2, 1932 to June 30, 1932, inclusive.
Senate Document No. 135, 72d Congress 1st Session. Washington, DC:
Government Printing Office, 1932x, pp. 3-4.
Reconstruction Finance Corporation . Letter from the Chairman and Secretary of the
Reconstruction Finance Corporation Transmitting Its Report Covering Its
Operations for the Second Quarter of 1933, April 1 to June 30, 1933, Inclusive and
for the Period from the Organization of the Corporation on February 2, 1932 to
June 30, 1933, inclusive.. Senate Document No. 200, 73d Congress 2nd Session.
Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1933x, pp. 8-9, 14-15.
Reconstruction Finance Corporation. Report of Reconstruction Finance Corporation
October 1 to December 31 1932, and February 2 to December 31, 1932. U.S.
House Document No. 538, 72d Congress, 2nd Session. Washington: Government
Printing Office, 1933a.
Reconstruction Finance Corporation. Report for the Period from the Organization of the
Corporation on February 2, 1932, to June 30, 1932, Inclusive. U.S. Senate
Document No. 135, 72d Congress, 1st Session. Washington: Government Printing
Office, 1932.
Reconstruction Finance Corporation. Report for the Period Covering Its Operations for
the Third Quarter of 1933, and for the Period from the Organization of the
Corporation on February 2, 1932, to September 30, 1933, Inclusive. U.S. House
Document No. 199, 73d Congress, 2d Session. Washington: Government Printing
Office, 1933b.
Rosenbloom, J. L, Sundstorm, W. A. (1999). “The sources of regional variation in the
severity of the Great Depression: evidence from U.S. manufacturing,1919-1937,”
The Journal of Economic History, Vol. 59, pp. 714-747.
Secretary of Interior. Annual Report of the Secretary of Interior.
Government Printing Office, Various Years.

Washington, D.C.:

Sinnot, N.J. Oregon & California Railroad Grant Lands. Report to Committee on
Public Lands. House of Representatives Report No. 1330. 69th Congress, 1st
Session. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1925.

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

85

Social Security Board, Third Annual Report of the Social Security Board, 1938.
Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1939.
Social Security Board, Fourth Annual Report of the Social Security Board, 1939.
Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1940.
Social Security Board, Seventh Annual Report of the Social Security Board, 1943.
Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1944.
U.S. Bureau of the Census. Financial Statistics of States, 1937. Washington, D.C.:
Government Printing Office, 1940.
U.S. Bureau of the Census. Financial Statistics of States, 1938. Washington, D.C.:
Government Printing Office, 1941.
U.S. Bureau of the Census. Financial Statistics of States, 1939. Washington, D.C.:
Government Printing Office, 1942.
U.S. Bureau of Public Roads. Report of the Chief of the Bureau of Public Roads.
Washington, D.C., Government Printing Office, various years.
U.S. Commissioner of Pensions. Report of the Commissioner of Pensions. Washington,
D.C.: Government Printing Office, various years.
U.S. Department of Agriculture. Various Years. Agriculture Yearbook, 1932.
Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1932.
U.S. Department of Agriculture. Various Years. Agricultural Statistics. Washington,
D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1932.
U.S. Office of Government Reports, Report No. 9-1939. Unpublished mimeos. Office of
Government Reports, Record Group 44, National Archives II in College Park,
Maryland.
Wallis, John Joseph. “Employment in the Great Depression: Data and Hypotheses.”
Explorations in Economic History 26 (March 1989): 45-72.
Works Progress Administration. Analysis of the Civil Works Program. Washington,
D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1939a.
Works Progress Administration. Report on the Progress of the WPA Program, June 30,
1938. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1938.

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

86

Works Progress Administration. Report on the Progress of the WPA Program, June 30,
1939. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1939b.
Works Progress Administration. Report on the Progress of the WPA Program, June 30,
1940. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1940.
Works Progress Administration. Final Statistical Report of the Federal Emergency
Relief Administration. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1942.
Works Progress Administration. Report on the Progress of the WPA Program, June 30,
1940. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1940.

Fishback and Kachanovskaya

87

