NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MAURITIUS: AFRICAN SUCCESS STORY
Jeffrey A. Frankel
Working Paper 16569
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16569

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2010

This paper was presented at the NBER Conference on African Successes, Accra, Ghana, July 18-20,
2010. The author would like to thank for research assistance Oyebola Olabisi, Jesse Schreger, Diva
Singh and Cristobal Marshall. Among many from whom he absorbed ideas are: Vinaye dey Ancharaz,
Abhijit Banerjee, Arvind Subramanian in academia; Central Bank Governor Rundheersing Bheenik,
Prime Minister Navin Ramgoolam, and Finance Minister Ramakrishna Sithanen in the government;
and others in Mauritius including Nando Bodha and Anubhava Katiyar. Above all, he is indebted
to Ali Mansoor, Financial Secretary of Mauritius. The author also thanks for comments on an earlier
draft Jorge de Macedo, other participants at the Accra conference, and Avnish Gungadurdoss. This
study was part of a NBER project on African Successes, organized by Sebastian Edwards, Simon Johnson
and David Weil. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2010 by Jeffrey A. Frankel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Mauritius: African Success Story
Jeffrey A. Frankel
NBER Working Paper No. 16569
December 2010
JEL No. O1,O55
ABSTRACT
What explains the success of Mauritius, a top performer among African countries? It has mostly
followed growth-enhancing policies, which can in turn be attributed to sound institutions. But from
where did the institutions come? Mauritius chose well around the time of independence in 1968,
for example opting for the rule of law over nationalization of its sugar plantations. Some fundamental
determinants that econometrically can explain success worldwide do not work within Africa: size,
remoteness, tropics, and ethnic fragmentation. An intriguing theory: small islands that were populated
entirely by immigrants escape the ethnic conflict that arises when one group is indigenous.

Jeffrey A. Frankel
Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
jeffrey_frankel@harvard.edu

Summary
Mauritius is a top performer among African countries. It developed a
manufacturing sector soon after independence and has managed to respond well to new
external shocks. What explains this success? This paper draws on the history of the
island, the writings of foreign economists, the ideas of locals, and the results of
econometric tests. Mauritius has mostly followed growth-enhancing policies. They
include:
 creating a well-managed Export Processing Zone,
 conducting diplomacy regarding trade preferences,
 spending on education,
 avoiding currency overvaluation,
 and facilitating business.
The growth-enhancing policies can in turn be traced back to sound institutions.
They include:
 forswearing an army,
 protecting property rights (particularly non-expropriation of sugar plantations),
 and creating a parliamentary structure with comprehensive participation (in the form
of representation for rural districts and ethnic minorities, the “best loser system,”
ever-changing coalition governments, and cabinet power-sharing).
But from where did the sound institutions come? They were chosen around the time of
independence in 1968. Why in Mauritius and not elsewhere? Luck?
Some fundamental geographic and historical determinants of trade and rule of law
help explain why average income is lower in Africa than elsewhere, and trade and rule of
law help explain performance within Africa just as they do worldwide. Despite these two
econometric findings, the more fundamental determinants are not much help in
explaining relative performance within Africa. Fundamental determinants that work
worldwide but not within Africa are remoteness, tropics, size and fragmentation.
(Access to the sea is the one fundamental geographic determinant of trade and income
that is always important.) A case in point is the high level of ethnic diversity in
Mauritius, which in many places would make for dysfunctional politics. Here, however,
it brings cosmopolitan benefits. The institutions manage to balance the ethnic groups;
none is excluded from the system. It is intriguing that the three African countries with
the highest governance rankings (Mauritius, Seychelles and Cape Verde) are all islands
that had no indigenous population. It helps that everyone came from somewhere else.

2

Mauritius: African Success Story
Some might be tempted to put a question mark after a title like “Mauritius:
African Success Story.” But this would only be because some ask if the country off the
eastern coast of Madagascar is truly African, in light of its unusual ethnic composition.1
There cannot be much doubt about the word “story.” The country’s story is a
fascinating one.
Nor can there by much doubt that it is a “success”: of all countries identified as
being in the geographical region of Africa, Mauritius appears at the top of the governance
rankings, as Table 1 shows. The Rule of Law index from World Governance Indicators
puts Mauritius first in sub-Saharan Africa, followed by Botswana and Cape Verde. The
Index of African Governance compiled by Rotberg and Gisselquist (2009), which
attempts to rely less on subjective measures, again puts Mauritius in the number one spot,
Mauritian growth in GDP per
followed by Seychelles, Cape Verde and Botswana.2
capita rate averaged 5.4% over the period 1970-2010, during which the growth rate in the
rest of Africa was only about 1%. By 2010 Mauritius had achieved a per capita income
of about $7,000 at current exchange rates. (The number is higher, of course, in PPP
terms: $11,000.) An oil-rich country such as Equatorial Guinea has higher income; but
as a result of poor governance few people outside the elite enjoy improved quality of life.
The Human Development Index from the United Nations Development Program, a more
comprehensive measure, classifies Mauritius in the “High Human Development” quartile
globally: It ranks number 81 out of 182 countries, well ahead of other African countries.3
Life expectancy is 72.8 years, for example.4
Others may wonder if the country is too small to hold important lessons for
typical-sized countries. The land area is only 1,865 square kilometers, or 720 square
miles. But given the population of 1 ¼ million and the current relatively high level of
income per capita, the country’s GDP puts it at the median among African countries in
economic size, ahead of Namibia.5

1

Today, 68 % of the population has Indian forbears. Even inside this share are ethnic cleavages between
Hindu and Muslim, and between those whose ancestors immigrated from the Ganges plain and those who
emigrated from elsewhere (especially Tamils). Major remaining shares include Creoles, FrancoMauritians, and Sino-Mauritians. An ethnic composition that features a small number of large ethnic
groups is usually considered a negative factor for development.
2
The next countries in the governance rankings are South Africa, Namibia, and Ghana, with the sequence
depending on the precise measure and year.
3
Tiny Seychelles is ahead, at 57. The next nearest competitors in sub-Saharan Africa are: Gabon at 103,
Equatorial Guinea at 118, Cape Verde at 121, Botswana at 125, South Africa at 129, and São Tomé and
Principe, at 131. Most fill out the bottom ranks. Human Development Report 2009, UNDP. At
http://hdr.undp.org/en/statistics/.
4

World Development Indicators (2009) and Rotberg and Gisselquist (2009) show the Seychelles as just
surpassing Mauritius in lifespan in 2007. Followed by Cape Verde, Western Sahara, São Tomé and
Principe, Comoros, Mauritania, Senegal and Ghana. Source: United Nations, for 2005-2010. Table 2
reports additional statistics for all African countries, standardized for the common year 2006.
5
Namibia has twice the population and 400 times the land area. Total GDP in Mauritius also surpassed
Mali, Madagascar and the Congo in 2009.

3

Table 1:

Sub-Saharan Countries Ranked by Governance, with other indicators

Index of African
World Governance
UN Human
GDP per capita,
Governance
Indicators,
Rule of Law
PPP in constant 2005 Development
Ranking (2007)
Country
Index Ranking (2008)
Ranking (2007)
Interntl. $ (2008)
1
Mauritius
11412
2
1
2
Seychelles
19758
1
5
3
Cape Verde
2957
5
3
4
Botswana
12537
6
2
5
Ghana
1351
18
7
6
Namibia
5909
7
4
7
South Africa
9343
8
6
8
São Tomé and Principe
1615
9
18
9
Gabon
13461
3
24
10
Benin
1361
27
22
11
Malawi
744
26
10
12
Gambia
1259
33
8
13
Senegal
1656
31
12
14
Madagascar
974
14
15
15
Burkina Faso
1072
41
14
16
Tanzania
1201
17
9
17
Mauritania
18101
20
30
18
Lesotho
1444
23
11
19
Zambia
1253
29
16
20
Comoros
1081
11
31
21
Rwanda
949
32
17
22
Kenya
1432
15
28
23
Uganda
1077
22
19
24
Niger
631
46
27
25
Mali
1043
43
13
26
Mozambique
774
37
25
27
Djibouti
1975
21
21
28
Cameroon
2027
19
29
29
Togo
767
25
26
30
Sierra Leone
723
45
32
31
Guinea-Bissau
496
38
40
32
Ethiopia
802
36
23
33
Nigeria
1939
24
34
34
Burundi
354
39
33
35
Liberia
358
34
36
36
Equatorial Guinea
31309
4
39
37
Swaziland
4551
12
20
38
Congo (Brazzaville)
3647
10
35
39
Guinea
975
35
45
40
Zimbabwe
1852
N/A
47
41
Angola
5375
13
38
42
Eritrea
592
30
37
43
C.A.R.
685
44
41
44
Cote d'Ivoire
1526
28
43
45
Congo (DR)
290
42
46
46
Chad
1234
40
44
47
Sudan
1990
16
42
48
Somalia
N/A
48
Notes: Ranking is among African countries excluding North Africa. 1Data from 2007 2 Data from 2005

4

Still others may wonder if the uniqueness of the story of Mauritius prevents
generalizing to lessons that can be useful elsewhere. Of course every country is unique.
Each has its own politics, culture and history. If econometricians have run “two million
cross section regressions” looking for the determinants of countries’ economic
performance,6 it sometimes seems that others have complained two million times that the
institutional, cultural and historical particularities of individual countries can never be
captured by the data fed into a computer. This paper uses cross-country regressions as
one input into the analysis – but only one. Two other kinds of inputs enter as well. One
is the relevant economic, political and historical literature. Another kind of input is what
the author -- with no previous background in Mauritius -- learned from exploring the
country.
The many global econometric cross-country studies have produced a variety of
important conclusions, notwithstanding their limitations and ambiguities. Some of the
more robust findings include that remoteness, landlockedness, tropical location, and
small population size7, are bad for economic performance, other things equal. These
variables help explain why incomes are lower in Africa than in other parts of the world.
Access to the sea, education, and national saving tend to be helpful for economic
performance. Two of the most consequential findings are that openness to trade and the
quality of institutions are major determinants of economic performance, but there are
valid questions regarding the measurement of those two variables, and about the
exogeneity of the relationships. Clearly a major reason that remoteness and
landlockedness hurt economies is that they impede international trade. A common
finding is a negative dummy variable for Africa. It often can be attributed to some of the
other variables, however, especially tropical location,8 as becomes evident when the
econometrician controls for them and the apparent Africa effect disappears.
While some of these variables may help explain the negative dummy for Africa,
they do not necessarily help explain variation within Africa. Indeed, when using
regression analysis to learn about differences in growth performance among African
countries, one major finding below is that many of the variables that are most significant
on global data sets do nothing for us within this continent.
The reader who has looked at Table 1 may have noticed a striking fact: not only is
the highest performer in Africa reported to be a small island country (Mauritius), but so
are numbers 2 and 3 (Seychelles and Cape Verde, respectively). Not until we get to
fourth place do we see a country on the mainland (Botswana) and not until fifth place a
country of substantial size (Ghana, in 2008).
Is it just a coincidence that the top

6

Sala-i-Martin (1997).
Frankel and Romer (1999, Table 3), to take just one example.
8
Probably the best interpretation of why tropical location seems to be bad for economic growth is the
presence of malaria and other tropical diseases. Sachs (2003) shows that specific determinants of malaria
are correlated with slow growth across countries.
7

5

performers are island countries? There exists at least one small African island country
with poor performance: the Comoros. What explains the difference?9
Island countries provide an intriguing sub-set of self-contained data points.
There is less likely to be an issue of endogenous borders, for example. The econometric
analysis of the determinants of economic performance in this paper includes a cross
section of island countries, before we turn to a within-Africa data set.
We begin with a short history of Mauritius, however. Next comes an overview
of the competing hypotheses that others have put forward to explain Mauritian success.
Then the econometrics, followed by an attempt to put everything together. When we are
done, we will not be able to claim a definitive answer as to the single reason for the
island’s success, nor will we ever attempt to answer whether it is African. But the story
will be of interest, or so the author hopes. Most importantly, notwithstanding the
uniqueness of the country, there are potentially valuable lessons for others seeking to
achieve economic development in Africa.
I.

A Brief History of the Island

Our account will just briefly hit the highlights, but will slow down a bit when we get
to the post-independence history.
1. Globalization at its Worst
The first two centuries of Mauritius’ history could be described as “globalization at
its worst.”10 The Dutch arrived in 1598 and the Dutch East India Company left a
settlement in 1638. They immediately stripped the island of its ebony trees, using slaves
imported from Madagascar for the work, and famously killed off the dodo birds. Today,
less than 1% of the indigenous forests are left. When the Dutch decamped for the Cape
Colony in 1710, they left the island nothing useful but its name.
In 1721 the French landed. A competent governor Bertrand Mahe de
Labourdonnais built a port/capital at Port Louis on the western coast and made many
improvements in the land that the colonizers called Ile de France. They began to grow
sugar for export – the first factory was built in 1744 -- and other crops. But the
expanding sugar economy depended on slavery, the ultimate evil of the age. As if to
complete a list of evils of globalization, passing ships occasionally brought either pirates
or cholera, wreaking havoc on the population.
The island officially passed from France to Britain with the defeat of Napoleon in
11
1814. The British valued their new possession, but as a coveted way station on the
9

Madagascar is an island, but we are not counting it as small. As noted, Equatorial Guinea shows high
income per capita, but consistent with Natural Resource Curse the benefits from its oil discoveries have
gone to the elite rather than the general population. In any case, only part of it is an island.
10
I am counting from 1638. The island was visited by Arabs one or more times in the seventh to ninth
centuries, but they did not stay. The same with the Portuguese in the early 16th century. This section of
the paper draws in part on Lutz and Wils (1990) and Selvon (2005).
11
Ironically, the French navy in 1810 scored the strongest of its very few victories of the Napoleonic Wars
in the Battle of Grand-Port, on the eastern edge of Mauritius. But de facto possession of the island passed
to the British later that year. 2010 is the 200th anniversary.

6

route to India and the Far East. They had no particular desire to settle the island, and
were happy to leave the Franco-Mauriciens in place as the land-owning elite. The French
Napoleonic code was retained, and still constitutes an important component of the legal
system.
Slavery had already been abolished in the British Empire in 1807. The French
landowners were reluctant to comply, however, and it wasn’t until 1835 that slavery was
finally ended on the island. The abolition of slavery marks the end of what I am calling
the period of globalization at its worst.12
2. Globalization at Its Best
The next phase of Mauritian history began with a problem for the sugar-based
economy. The abolition of slavery had left a shortage of labor. The freed slaves were
understandably reluctant to go to work for their former masters. Who would work the
plantations? The solution was a “Great Experiment”: indentured workers were brought
from India. From 1849 to 1923, a half million indentured Indian laborers passed through
the immigration depot at the dock called Aaprivasi Ghat, the Ellis Island of Mauritius.
Although their lot was hard, most of them chose it voluntarily because the conditions
were better than what they were leaving behind.13 Production and exports from the
plantations grew rapidly. The experiment was sufficiently successful that it was copied
in other sugar-growing parts of the world such as Fiji and the Caribbean.
Eventually locals and even non-whites gained some political rights. Under the
1886 Constitution, which lasted 60 years, the British governor allowed a Creole elite to
join the Franco-Mauritians among the national representatives. When a new constitution
extended the franchise to all adults who could write in 1948, the Indian-dominated
Labour Party suddenly won a majority in the Legislative Council seats. Its members
were mainly rural workers and its platform was mainly Socialist. It was opposed by the
Franco-Mauriciens, who accurately described themselves as “oligarchs,” and who feared
“Hindu hegemony.” This phrase referred to what the majority ethnic group were
expected to do if and when the country became independent, which the FrancoMauriciens opposed.
The Labour Party became more moderate under the leadership of Seewoosagur
Ramgoolam. By 1960 it had renounced its previous position that the sugar plantations
should be nationalized.14 This decision was to prove a key turning point in several
respects. First, it helped establish the important precedent of safeguarding property
rights. Second, it contrasted with other African countries that have either expropriated
natural resources, taxed them away, or discouraged production through other devices
such as marketing boards.15 Third, it eventually helped reconcile the Franco-Mauritians
to independence.
12

Many slaves had escaped to the wild over the years. Reportedly, when British soldiers came to bring
news of their liberation, some of the escapees thought they were to be arrested, and so instead jumped to
their deaths over the vertical sides of the mountain that was thenceforth called Le Morne.
13
In his novel Sea of Poppies, Amitav Ghosh describes a variety of circumstances that would inspire
residents of the Ganges Plain to seek a better life in far-off Mauritius.
14
Selvon (2005, p. 404) .
15
E.g., Frankel (1974).

7

3. Independence
In the early 1960s the British prepared for independence.16 But communal or
sectarian tensions were strong. Creoles, the descendants of the original slaves, many of
whom had acquired positions in the civil service and in the growing private sector,
aligned with Franco-Mauritians in their fears regarding independence, adding to the
voting strength of the latter. Chinese, Muslim and Tamil minorities too were afraid that
those Hindus descended of immigrants from the Ganges Plain would dominate an
independent country. The Mauritian Social Democratic Party (PMSD), composed of
Franco-Mauritians and Creoles, lost elections to the Hindu-dominated Labour Party in
1967. This election confirmed the narrowly drawn fault lines regarding the independence
issue: only 55% voted for the independence platform. Riots along ethnic lines took place
periodically in the 1960s, especially as the date of independence drew near. The Labour
Party government had to call in British troops to restore order in January 1968.
Mauritius became an independent country in March 1968, with Ramgoolam as Prime
Minister. He had won respect by avoiding divisive appeals and cooperating with all
factions. He was to serve in that post for 14 years.
The PMSD boycotted the independence ceremony. It soon became reconciled to
independence and the need for nation building, however, to some extent reassured by
minority rights, and especially pushed by two powerful constituencies who favored
stability: business leaders including plantation owners (who were financial backers of the
party) together with the foreign diplomatic community. The PMSD joined in a series of
changing coalition governments. All governments have been coalitions; each has
included either Labour, the PMSD, or often both. The precedent that the parties must
enter coalitions was set by the British governor, before independence.
The leftist niche was staked out by a new party, the Mouvement Militant Mauricien
(MMM). The government responded in a heavy-handed way in 1971, first by
postponing elections scheduled for the following year and then, when the MMM called
strikes, by imprisoning its leader, a Franco-Mauricien named Paul Bérenger. The
strategy seemed to work, at any rate. Bérenger subsequently moved to the right, perhaps
as the policies of the ruling party were seen to be successful. (Economic growth
averaged over 8% during the years 1970-75.) Eventually Bérenger entered a coalition
government with Anerood Jugnauth, when he was elected the second Prime Minister in
1982. Jugnauth served through 1995, in six coalition governments.
There are many parties, but two broad alliances usually dominate: one built around
Labour, the MLP, and the other built around the MMM. The son of the founding
premier, Navin Ramgoolam, at the head of Labour, became the third Prime Minister from
1995 to 2000 and was returned to office in 2005, where he is still serving.

16

This section draws on Bowman (1991, 33-42), Bräutigam (1997a; 1999a, b), Bunwaree and Kadenally
(2006), Selvon (2005) and Simmons (1982), among others.

8

4. Which colonial heritage?
Some economists and historians have sought to discern if one national brand of
colonialism in Africa and elsewhere left behind better institutions than another.17 This
test would be impossible to perform in the case of Mauritius, because of the impossibility
of saying who left the colonial heritage. The Dutch? They first colonized the island, and
named it. The French? They left the landowning elite and gave the island its dominant
language. The British? Cars drive on the left and, remarkably, the country’s Supreme
Court is Britain’s Privy Council, even though it became a Republic -- Queen Elizabeth
ceased to be the head of state – in 1992. Or perhaps it could be described as India’s
colony. Three languages appear on the money: English, Hindi, and Tamil.
5. Stages of development
The traditional three stages of development worldwide feature gradual shifts in the
composition of a country’s economy, from the primary sector to manufactures, and then
on to the service economy. This stylized model happens to fit Mauritius in a literal way.
The commodities at the primary stage were agricultural, particularly sugar, as we have
seen. Industrialization began in the 1970s, consisting largely of textiles and apparel.
More recently, the desired and actual share of services has risen, especially tourism but
also financial services, information and computer technology (ICT), and others. When
economists ponder the island’s success, they are usually talking about the solid
achievement of that critical first stage of development: labor-intensive manufacturing,
especially clothing exports.18 But we need equally to consider the subsequent phase of
adaptation to trade shocks, especially the decline of clothing export markets.
6. Adapting to external shocks
While globalization carries gains from trade and other benefits, it also can also
increase exposure to external fluctuations. Mauritius has experienced many external
shocks in its history, inevitably suggesting the metaphor of a small ship on stormy seas.
Whether through luck or skill, however, the country has usually been able to adapt to
changed circumstances over the years. Consider four.
(1) Labor shortage
We have already discussed the big adaptation to the labor shortage on the sugar
plantations that followed the abolition of slavery in 1835: the import of indentured
workers from India.
(2) Independence
The second big shock was independence in 1968, under inauspicious conditions
that will be elaborated in the next section of the paper. The country soon achieved tradeled growth in the 1970s, despite protectionist import policies.
17

For example, Feyrer and Sacerdote (2009).
Basic manufactures at the beginning also included wigs, toothpaste, and simple electronics, among other
things.

18

9

(3) The 1974-80 increases in world oil price.
Like most other oil-importing developing countries, Mauritius initially responded
to its higher import bill by borrowing, running large current account deficits in the late
1970s. But it undertook successful adjustment ahead of most of the others.19 The
adjustment took place in macroeconomic policy, when it devalued twice in compliance
with IMF programs,20 as well as in microeconomic policy, featuring an important trade
reform in 1984,21 consistent with a World Bank Structural Adjustment Facility. The
reforms were implemented over three successive governments; a number of observers
have highlighted what this says about the stability of the political system and its ability to
do what is best for the country even while simultaneously squabbling furiously over
personal and factional politics.22 There followed a period of strong economic
performance that can be said to have carried the country into tiger status by the end of the
1990s.
(4) Further trade shocks over the years 2004-09.
The worst of the latter day trade shocks was the end of favored treatment abroad
of its most important exports: the loss of sugar preferences in 2004 and the loss of MFA
clothing preferences around the same time, as the Multi-Fibre Agreement (MFA) system
was dismantled, the world market became free and open, and low-wage manufacturers in
China displaced textiles and apparel in many developing countries.23 In Mauritius the
sector suffered a 30 % fall in output and 25 % drop in employment. The balance of
payments deficit, budget deficit, and unemployment all deteriorated. The adverse trend
in the terms of trade continued with the rise in world prices of oil and food over the
period 2003-08. Finally the great global recession hit all export-oriented countries in
2008-09.
The incoming Labour government that was returned to power in 2005 responded
to the loss of trade preferences and current account deficit in several ways.24 A multifaceted reform program in 2006 included a Business Facilitation Act to eliminate
obstacles to investment and hiring, steps to make it easier for desired immigrants to
become citizens25, and a simplified tax system with a flat 15% tax rate for individuals and
companies. Soon the government was able to claim tangible results: (i) the country
climbed even higher in international rankings of climate for business26, and (ii) the
budget deficit fell, so that by 2007 the primary deficit was almost down to zero.27
19

Gulahati and Nallari (1990); Selvon (2005).
23-30% (depending on the measure) in 1979 and almost as much again in 1981. Ancharaz (2004, p.6),
Bräutigam (1999a, 156-157), Gulahati and Nallari (1990); Iman and Minoiu (2008).
21
Ancharaz (2004).
22
Bräutigam (1999a, pp.156-157) and Subramanian (2001).
23
Ancharez (2008), Imam and Minoiu (2008), and Subramanian (2010, p.10-12).
24
Imam and Köhler (2010). “When we came to power in 2005, the situation was awful.” -- Rama
Sithanen, Finance Minister (Labor Party), in “Economy: A Lesson in Reinvention,” Financial Times,
March 11, 2008.
25
Needless to say, most countries are less welcoming to immigrants. Think of South African attacks on
recent Mozambiquan and Zimbabwean immigrants in 2008, Ivoirian attacks on its immigrants in 2002, or
Uganda booting out its entire Indian population in 1972.
26
The Business Facilitation Act evidently succeeded in boosting the climate for business in Mauritius as
judged by the Doing Business Report of the World Bank and the Global Competitiveness measure from the
20

10

The government had achieved enough reduction in the budget deficit, and had
enough foresight when the US sub-prime mortgage crisis lingered a year after its origins
in mid-2007, to ease a bit fiscally as early as mid 2008, just in time for the global
recession.28 This sort of example of desirable counter-cyclical fiscal policy – allowing
deficits to fall in booms and rise in downturns -- had been rare among developing
countries in the past, but was newly achieved by some in 2008-09.
With the loss of MFN preferences for clothing exports, and the new competition
from China in all manufactures, Mauritians described the way forward as “the 3rd
sector,” that is, services. Tourism was already the leading service export, and was now
joined by banking and ICT, looking to Singapore as a model. (Join the club!)
Is the move to banking a wishful-thinking pursuit of a mirage in the desert? Not
quite. But neither can the island realistically see itself as the next Singapore.
Subramanian explains: “the offshore financial sector has grown because of the Indian
diaspora which led to the signing of a double taxation treaty between Mauritius and India.
As a result, Mauritian offshore centres have mediated large financial flows to India and
Mauritius has become the largest investor in India.” If the financial center is built on
Indians using a bilateral investment treaty for round-tripping, it is unlikely to be durable.
More recent plans call for expansion in a variety of other sectors: a seafood hub,
an “integrated resorts” scheme, and more. They are characterized as “pillars” of the new
economy.29
Even within the textiles and apparel sector, when a country loses low-end exports
to low-wage competition, a reduced subset of the industry can be reborn through
innovation. This describes northern Italy, for example, and it also describes Mauritius.
Subramanian (2010, p. 17) : “the observation that exports in the EPZ have picked up in
2006 even though employment has continued to decline suggests that the textile and
clothing sector in Mauritius is consolidating itself through investment in capital-intensive
spinning (and weaving) activities aimed at better integration of the supply chain, this with
a view to improving response to clients.”
One can see tangible evidence of precisely such adaptation if one visits the
successful Compagnie Mauricienne de Textiles. Rather than closing its clothing factory
when the MFA ended, the company brought in an experienced new manager from India,
opened a textile factory just across the parking lot, adopted current Asian technology, and
World Economic Forum (especially low barriers to trading across borders, such as days required for
importing and exporting).
27
Down from 1 ½ % of GDP in 2005/06. For example, subsidies on rice and flour were removed. African
Economic Outlook (2008, p. 434).
28
Ministry of Finance (2008).
29
When one hears of the sectors that have been designated as promising priorities for the future, it is
difficult to discern the balance of government versus private participation in these plans. The government
intervenes in many markets. (Lange, 2009, declares Mauritius a “developmental state” – for which he
credits direct British colonial rule!) The strategic documents describing “pillars” are from the
government; but officials deny that they are directing investment in the manner of socialist 5-year plans.
Perhaps the “administrative guidance” of some East Asian countries is a parallel. Perhaps, in a sufficiently
small country, a meeting to plan an integrated resort (a luxury hotel and villa development intended to
attract foreign investors), even though it is called by government officials, need not operate fundamentally
differently from the sort of meeting among private developers that would take place in a larger more purely
capitalist country.

11

is now fully integrated.30 On one side of the parking lot, the textile plant is so highly
automated that it requires only a few young workers, who get around the large building
on roller skates to tend the machines. Meanwhile, the apparel plant next door is still a
beehive of low-skilled workers. The textile factory takes raw cotton and turns it into
yarn, and fabric. The apparel factory takes the fabric and turns it into finished garments.
Although the integrated process can be run continuously from beginning to end, CMT
also keeps inventories of many kinds of cloth, so as to be able to respond even more
rapidly to the sort of sudden new requests that are standard in the world of fashion.
One plausible way forward for Mauritius is as a platform for firms from India and
China wishing to do business in Africa.31 Everyone’s favorite entrepot, Singapore, is an
obvious model. (Mauritius has the second biggest container cargo port in sub-Saharan
Africa). But another possible model is Hong Kong, which long had a favored position as
the window or platform for investing into China. Another possible analogy more recent
in origin is Dubai, which can be viewed as the platform for investing into the volatile
Middle East. These city states share the traits of being open, stable, well-functioning,
cosmopolitan, and adaptable.

II.

Economists’ Hypotheses Regarding Mauritian Economic Performance

We review six explanations that have been put forward for the success of Mauritius.
(This section owes much to the cataloging of theories in Subramanian, 2007.32) Each of
these explanations will be rejected at least in part, suggesting that the field is still open.
1. Initial conditions
After the fact, success often looks pre-ordained. Any recounting of the performance
of the pearl of the Indian Ocean must start by relating how two Nobel Prize winners,
around the time of independence, independently forecast doom instead of success. The
first, James Meade (1961), was later to win the Nobel Prize in Economics: “Heavy
population pressure must inevitably reduce real income per head…That surely is bad
enough in a community that is full of political conflict…the outlook for peaceful
development is poor.” The second, V.S. Naipaul (1972), had a more literary vantage
point, but came to the same conclusion: “The disaster has occurred… now given a thing
30

The primary motivation for integrated production was the African Growth and Opportunity Act
(AGOA), under which the United States decided in 2000 to grant duty-free access to African apparel
exports provided that the fabric or yarn not be imported from Europe, but rather be either home-made or
imported from the United States. Mauritius was one of the first two countries [with Kenya] to be
approved for AGOA, which has proven successful (Frazer and Van Biesebroeck, 2010, P.130) to a
surprising extent. The AGOA benefits are no longer relevant, but once established, CMT’s integrated
production is profitable regardless. (The manager told us that he knew this ahead of time, but that the
owners who hired him did not.)
31
Mathieu and Imam (2008). China has already begun to use Mauritius as a platform for investment into
Africa. Ancharez (2008, pp. 6, 19).
32
Also Bräutigam (1997a, 1999a); Alec Russell, “An Island Bridging Africa and Asia,” Financial Times,
March 11, 2008; and others.

12

called independence and set adrift, an abandoned imperial barracoon, incapable of
economic or cultural autonomy…”
There were excellent reasons for such fears. Three were perhaps uppermost in the
minds of observers at the time; three more would have been particularly worrisome
given empirical regularities that we know about today.
• Geography: A country that is small lacks internal economies of scale and a complete
array of endowments. Many small countries make up for these limitations through
international trade. But a country that is located remotely from the centers of
population and economic activity is at a disadvantage for trade. Mauritius ranks as
more disadvantaged than Madagascar, and alongside 11 South Pacific countries, as
the most remote in the world.33
• Ethnic tensions. Mauritius had, and has, a split of several major ethnic groups that
would normally be considered unconducive to growth. Social scientists generally
consider a low degree of ethnic fragmentation to be the best for growth (Sweden,
Japan, Botswana).34 A widely used measure of ethnic, linguistic, and religious
fragmentation shows Mauritius as far more split than all the other small African
island states, and remarkably similar to Trinidad and Tobago, and Fiji.35 As we saw
in the preceding section, ethnic riots accompanied the run-up to independence.
• Population density. The island has one of the higher ratios of population to land
area in the world. Unemployment was high in the 1960s, resulting in out-migration.
The apparent overpopulation, together with ethnic and political conflict, were major
reasons for the pessimism of Meade and Naipaul. Population density is often
considered bad for economic performance.
• Volatile monocrop. The economy of 1968 was considered highly dependent on a
single crop, sugar, that suffers from high volatility. Today, even more than then, we
are aware of the Natural Resource Curse. It is discussed in the next sub-section.
• Regression to the mean. The growth literature suggests that, although there is no
tendency for countries’ income levels to converge unconditionally, there is a
significant tendency for gradual conditional convergence. That is, if various factors
such as geographical suitability for trade suggest an income level above where a
33

Remoteness is measured as a weighted average of log distance from other countries, with shares of
either GDP or population used as weights.
34
One hypothesis is that the relationship is U-shaped, that a very high degree of fragmentation can also be
fine for growth (20 small groups, none of which dominate), and that it is the middle degree that is
dangerous. Collier and Bates (2008, 393-395), Bates and Yackolev (2002) and Collier (2000). They give
Botswana as their example of an ethnically homogeneous country and Tanzania as an example at the other
extreme. Carroll and Carroll (1997, p. 465) consider Botswana to be ethnically divided because, even
though 80% of the population is Tswana, they come from eight Tswana tribes; perhaps, then, the
distinction between very high and very low ethnic fragmentation is a subtle matter of definition. This
paper was brought to my attention by Prime Minister Navin Ramgoolam.
35
The remarkable part is that all three tropical islands, though located in three different oceans, got their
ethnic diversity in essentially the same way: Indians were brought to work the sugar fields. Trinidad and
Tobago subsequently enjoyed oil wealth, but suffered the natural resource curses of rent-seeking behavior
and Dutch Disease cycles in a way that Mauritius has been able to avoid by using rents from trade
privileges effectively (Auty, 2009, p. 2-3). Trinidad and Tobago fits right on the international Natural
Resource Curse line: 1970-2008 growth was a little sub-standard, in a way that can be statistically
associated with the high share of oil in its exports (Frankel, 2010, Figure 1). Fiji is discussed toward the
end of this paper.

13

•

country is at the beginning of a sample period, on average its income can be expected
to move slowly in the direction of that long-run equilibrium. But Mauritius in the
1960s had an income level above the Africa average, and perhaps above what would
be predicted from its geography. What had been a favorable location a century
earlier – a deepwater port well-placed for stopping off on the shipping route to India –
had become unfavorable when the Suez Canal opened in 1869. Looking forward
from the 1960s, one might have predicted downward convergence.
Last on the list of poor initial conditions at the time of independence were
distortionary trade barriers. It is not that the first government was especially antimarket in philosophy. But import substitution was the fashion of the day. Today it
is more widely believed that trade is positive for economic performance, less because
classical and modern trade theory say so, perhaps, than because of the demonstration
of trade-led growth in East Asia and elsewhere.

All in all, one must agree with Meade that the initial conditions were not auspicious.
2. Sugar wealth
The second possible explanation for the success of Mauritius is the sugar plantations.
But natural resources often have undesirable effects.36 For every Botswana, a
diamond-rich and successful state, there is at least one Congo, a mineral-rich and failed
state. Indeed, as already noted, dependence on a volatile monocrop economy is on the
list of poor initial conditions facing Mauritius at the time of independence. There are
many versions of the Natural Resource Curse. Perhaps a majority focus on mineral
commodities as the culprit, or more specifically oil; some of these explicitly exclude
agricultural products.37
But there is a version of the Natural Resource Curse, designed by Engerman and
Sokoloff (1997, 2000, 2002) to think about the Americas (Brazil versus the United
States), that explicitly includes sugar. The idea is that lands endowed with point-source
extractive industries (oil and mining) and plantation crops (sugar and cotton) developed
institutions of slavery, inequality, dictatorship, and state control, whereas those climates
suited to fishing and small farms (fruits and vegetables, grain and livestock) developed
institutions based on individualism, democracy, egalitarianism, and capitalism. When
the industrial revolution came along, the latter areas were well-suited to make the most of
it. Those that had specialized in extractive industries were not, because society had come
to depend on class structure and authoritarianism, rather than on individual incentive and
decentralized decision-making.
Several other versions of the Natural Resource Curse apply to agriculture products
in general as much as to minerals: external returns to manufacturing, the Dutch Disease,
and commodity volatility.
36

Frankel (2010) offers a survey of the Natural Resource Curse.
Sala-I-Martin and Subramanian (2003), Bulte, Damania, and Deacon (2005), and Mehlum, Moene and
Torvik (2006). The latter use the phrase “lootable” resources. Isham, et al, (2005) explicitly include
coffee and cocoa as plantation crops that are damaging to institutional development, alongside oil and other
point-source minerals, rather than as small-scale farm products. But in Africa cocoa and coffee should
perhaps count as small-scale farming.

37

14

Outside of classical economics, diversification out of primary commodities into
manufacturing in most circles is considered self-evidently desirable. Several dubious
arguments have been made for it. One is the “structuralist” or Prebisch-Singer
hypothesis of secularly declining commodity prices, which is not generally borne out by
the long-term data. Another is the mistaken “cargo cult” inference -- based on the
observation that advanced countries have heavy industries like steel mills -- that these
visible monuments are necessarily the route to economic development. But one should
not dismiss more valid considerations, just because less valid arguments for
diversification into manufacturing are sometimes made.
Is industrialization the sine qua non of economic development? Is encouragement
of manufacturing necessary to achieve high income? Classical economic theory says
“no:” countries are best off producing whatever is their comparative advantage, whether
that is natural resources or manufacturing. In this 19th century view, attempts by Brazil
to industrialize were as foolish as it would have been for Great Britain to try to grow
coffee and oranges in hothouses. But the structuralists were never alone in their feeling
that countries only get sustainably rich if they industrialize. Nor were they ever alone in
feeling that industrialization in turn requires an extra push from the government (at least
for latecomers), often known as industrial policy.
Matsuyama (1992) provided an influential model formalizing this intuition: the
manufacturing sector is assumed to be characterized by learning by doing, while the
agricultural sector is not. The implication is that deliberate policy-induced
diversification out of primary products into manufacturing is justified, and that a
permanent commodity boom that crowds out manufacturing can indeed be harmful.
On the other side, it must be pointed out that there is no reason why learning by
doing should be the exclusive preserve of manufacturing tradables. Nontradables can
enjoy learning by doing.38 Mineral and agricultural sectors can as well. Some
countries have experienced tremendous productivity growth in the primary sector.
American productivity gains have been aided by public investment since the late 19th
century.39 Attempts by governments in developing countries to force linkages between
the primary sector and processing industries, however, have been less successful.40
Some have suggested that the high volatility that afflicts most commodities is the
source of the natural resource curse.41 Highly variable prices on world markets, usually
attributable to low short-run elasticities, are the most obvious sort of volatility
experienced by agricultural and mineral products. But there are other sorts as well, both
on the demand side and the supply side. On the demand side, large swings in the trade
policies of the major markets for Mauritian sugar have been a bigger source of volatility
during its history than the variance in a world price of sugar. On the supply side,
cyclones have caused great damage to the crop, particularly several that hit in the 1960s.
38

Torvik (2001).
In such knowledge infrastructure institutions as the U.S. Geological Survey, the Agricultural Extension
program, and Land-Grant Colleges. Wright and Czelusta (2006).
40
Hausmann, Klinger and Lawrence (2008) warn of the pitfalls of assuming that South Africa, for
example, can move from diamond mining to diamond cutting. They are not opposed to industrial policy,
but rather believe that linkages are more likely where factor intensities and technological requirements are
similar across sectors, rather than to upstream or downstream industries.
41
Blattman, Hwang, and Williamson (2007), Hausmann and Rigobon (2003) and Poelhekke and van der
Ploeg (2007).
39

15

Over the 150 years during which Mauritius was overwhelmingly a sugar economy, it
suffered from periodic Dutch Disease cycles due to big changes in European
barriers/preferences toward its crop. Three booms related to the granting of preferences
occurred in the 1830s, 1919-20, and 1973-74. Ancharaz (p.5) sees in these Mauritian
booms the familiar Dutch Disease pattern of a rise in public spending “of dubious
economic value,” budget deficits, inflation (especially in the price of land), and real
appreciation of the currency.
Even leaving aside undesirable macroeconomic effects of commodity booms, cyclical
shifts of resources (labor, capital and land) back and forth across sectors may incur
needless transaction costs. Frictional unemployment of labor, incomplete utilization of
the capital stock, and incomplete occupancy of housing are true deadweight costs, even if
they are temporary. A diversified country is indeed probably better off than one
specialized in oil or a few other commodities, other things equal.
3. Openness
Subramanian (2009) attributes to Jeff Sachs42 the view that an open trade policy
contributed to Mauritian success, and then rejects it:
Mauritius was one of the countries that Sachs and Warner classified as being open or
following liberal trade policies. But this categorization of Mauritius as an open
economy was misleading, even incorrect. In Subramanian and Roy (2003: tables 4
and 5), we provide estimates of the restrictiveness of Mauritius’ trade policy regime.
During the 1970s and 1980s, Mauritius remained a highly protected economy: the
average rate of protection was high and dispersed. In 1980, the average effective
protection exceeded 100 per cent, and although this diminished by the end of the 1980s,
it was still very high (65 per cent). Moreover until the 1980s, there were also extensive
quantitative restrictions in the form of import licensing, covering nearly 60 per cent of
imports.

That Mauritius did not follow free trade policies, at least until relatively recently, does
not mean that trade was not a critical part of the story. It seems difficult to escape the
conclusion that it was. Exports and imports are each about 2/3 of GDP. But
Subramanian and Roy (2003) and Subramanian (2001, 2009) discuss two other particular
trade-related hypotheses, to which we now turn.
4. Export Processing Zone and Heterodox Trade Strategy
“Free trade” is normally taken to mean laissez faire, the absence of trade distorting
policies, whether anti-import (tariff or non-tariff barriers against imports) or pro-export
(export subsidies and other export-promoting policies, including privileged access to
imported inputs).43
But Rodrik (1997) has suggested that Mauritius’ success was the
result of a “heterodox” trade policy reminiscent of the East Asian tigers, a strategy that
created high returns to the export sector, while preventing resources from being diverted
42

Sachs and Warner (1997).
To the mercantilist-minded, import tariffs and export subsidies seem similarly designed: to increase the
trade balance. To a trade theorist, the trade balance is determined in other ways in general equilibrium
(national saving and investment) and in the very long run is zero; as a result, import tariffs lead to a lower
level of overall trade (exports as well as imports) and export subsidies to a higher level (again, on both
sides of the trade balance).

43

16

into the protected import-competing sector. The specific institutional mechanism was
the Export Processing Zone (EPZ), which was established in 1970.
It accomplished the successful promotion of exports by (i) giving EPZ firms tax
advantages, (ii) eliminating tariffs on the imported inputs used by manufacturers, and (iii)
setting laxer labor standards for EPZ workers and a lower minimum wage. Initially the
differential between sugar workers and EPZ workers was almost 50%. That the EPZ
factory workers were mostly women made discriminatory labor laws politically possible.
Although there is a strong a priori case that the development of a manufacturing sector
inside the EPZ was an important component of Mauritian success, there are two
counterarguments to Rodrik and his heterodox trade policy. First, many countries,
including a number in Africa, have established Export Processing Zones, without
similarly successful results.44 Second, Subramanian and Roy (2003) compute that the
various effective EPZ subsidies in Mauritius (encouraging resources to move into trade)
were substantially smaller than subsidies to import-competing sectors (discouraging
resources from moving into trade):
“[E]ffective protection for the import-competing sector averaged about 125 percent in the 1980s
and about 65 per cent in the 1990s…Even allowing for favourable tax breaks, it seems that
heterodox opening and intervention (in the form of subsidies in the export sector) did not offset
completely the anti-export bias of the restrictive import regime.”

5. Ideas and FDI
Paul Romer (1990, 1993) contributed an approach to growth theory based on ideas
(innovations in either products or production methods) as the key ingredient for
development, rather than capital, labor, or other factors of production. Romer (1992)
argues that importing ideas from abroad, through inward FDI, is an effective alternative
to growing them at home. Specifically in the case of Mauritius, Chinese businessmen
brought the idea of textile and apparel manufacturing to the EPZ, jump-starting the
country’s industrialization.45
Subramanian and Roy (2003) and Subramanian (2001; 2009, p.14) argue against
Romer’s explanation for Mauritian success, on the grounds that the share of foreign
companies in the EPZ was not all that large: “For example, in 1984, only 12 per cent of
the total employment in the EPZ was accounted for by wholly foreign-owned operations
compared with 72, 42, and 64 per cent, respectively, in Korea, the Philippines and
Malaysia. It is estimated that about 50 per cent of the total equity of firms in the EPZ was
owned by Mauritian nationals.” This criticism seems a trifle unfair. The idea of “ideas”
is that they can be emulated, when observed at close hand. So it is perfectly plausible
that local firms caught on quickly after the Chinese-owned apparel factories were
successful. Hausmann and Rodrik (2003) would call it the social benefits of selfdiscovery.
A more serious objection is that the idea of producing clothing is rather obvious – it is
famously the first rung on the ladder of industrialization (though, in fairness, this might
not have been so obvious in 1970) – and that something else beyond FDI and the EPZ is
44

Subramanian (2009): “Apart from Mauritius, EPZ facilities and the attendant incentives were provided
by a host of other African countries such as Zimbabwe, Senegal, Madagascar and Cameroon.…The EPZ
experiment failed in almost all these countries.”
45
Also Nath and Madhoo (2004) and Ancharez (2008).

17

needed to explain why it worked in Mauritius and not in other African countries. For
Subramanian (2009) a key ingredient is preferential treatment for Mauritian exports in the
markets of Europe and the United States. I agree that this was a sine qua non. Under the
Multi-Fiber Agreement (MFA) exports of textile and apparel were limited by quotas, but
Mauritius benefited from relatively lenient treatment.46 That Hong Kong had quickly
used up its export quotas, and had proceeded to fill the quotas in other Asian countries,
explains why its businessmen were willing to start apparel factories in such a far-off
country as Mauritius, which had not been using its quota.
Three more ingredients were useful. A key one was a competitively valued
exchange rate,47 which helped offset the anti-trade bias of the import tariffs. Another
was ethnic links between the Chinese and Chinese-Mauritians whose ancestors had
immigrated long before.48 Chinese-Mauritians had been instrumental in persuading the
government to set up the EPZ in the first place.49 Another ingredient was the capital of
the Franco-Mauritians, some of whom set up factories in parallel with the Chinese.50
6. Institutions
After poking holes in all the other hypotheses -- initial conditions, open trade policies,
a heterodox trade policy built around the Export Processing Zone, and the importation of
manufacturing ideas via Foreign Direct Investment -- Subramanian (2009) declares
himself for institutions as the explanation. This is the same verdict as Bräutigam (1997a,
1999a, b) and Sacerdoti, et al (2005). Subramanian says it was good institutions that
allowed Mauritius to develop the EPZ effectively, where others might have gotten mired
down in corruption. Mauritius ranks high in the standard measures of the quality of
institutions: political participation, rule of law, and control of corruption. As many have
noted, Mauritius and Botswana, two star performers, are also the only two African
countries to have been democratic continuously since independence.51
A prominent trend in thinking regarding economic development is that the quality of
institutions, especially property rights and the rule of law, is the fundamental factor that
determines which countries experience strong performance and which do not, 52 and that
it is futile to recommend particular macroeconomic or microeconomic policies if the
institutional structure is not there to support them.53 Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson
46

It could be argued that the US also gave favorable treatment to the exports of Korea and Taiwan during
the Cold War.
47
Imam and Minoiu (2008).
48
Global econometrics with the gravity model shows that bilateral trade links are significantly stronger
when two countries share some population that speaks the same language (perhaps especially so if the
language is Chinese). Frankel (1997, pp.74-75, 104).
49
Subramanian (2001). Particularly one E. Lim Fat (Bräutigam, 1999a, p.148). The government sent a
team to Hong Kong and Taiwan to investigate the export success of these newborn tigers, and the EPZ Act
of 1970 was the result of its recommendations.
50
Bräutigam (1999a, p.149) reports that from the beginning, half of the EPZ investment came from the
locals.
51
E.g., Carroll and Carroll (1991). (Anckar, 2008, finds that small countries are no more likely to be
democracies than large ones.)
52
North (1994). Four of the most important empirical contributions are Barro (1991), Hall and Jones
(1999), Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2001), and Rodrik, Subramanian, and Trebbi (2003).
53
Acemoglu, Johnson, Robinson, and Thaicharoen (2003).

18

(2001) famously use settler mortality rates as an instrumental variable for institutions.
Nath and Neti (2008) suggest that the settler story applies literally to Mauritius: success is
attributed to good institutions, which is attributed to European settlement, which is in turn
to suitable climate.

III.

Digging Deeper
Deeper determinants

Perhaps the most interesting part of the debate on growth over the past decade has
been: what are the deeper determinants? Yes, policies regarding taxes, government
spending, tariffs help determine investment, education and trade, which in turn help
promote growth. But what are the deeper determinants of those policies? Rodrik,
Subramanian and Trebbi (2004) pose the question well. In their view, there are three
emerging theories: (i) openness, (ii) geography -- which I prefer to interpret more
narrowly as tropical disease -- and (iii) institutions. Each theory can be captured by
some standard measures, such as trade volume, malaria incidence, and rule of law,
respectively. Each has serious endogeneity problems that must be addressed: when
countries grow richer they lower tariffs, drain swamps, and adopt accounting standards.
The endogeneity of trade has been largely addressed by geographic determinants such as
access to coastline. It ought to be possible to address malaria by purely topographic and
climatologic determinants.
That leaves institutions. The settler mortality measure of Acemoglu et al (1999)
is probably the best instrumental variable we have econometrically. But it is just a start
on the problem. The very aspects that make it exogenous – colonial history and
geographic susceptibility to disease -- also raise the question whether the sort of
institutions at stake are so predetermined as to make post-independence mortals
powerless to shape them so as to benefit their countries.54 But fatalist determinism can’t
be the answer. Successful institutions have in living memory been deliberately chosen
by mortal people, in countries as diverse as Germany, Singapore, Hong Kong, Chile,
Botswana… and Mauritius.
Measuring institutions
We will use measures of institutions in the econometric analysis in the next section.
But some are vulnerable to subjectivity. Where they come from surveys (for example
Transparency International’s widely cited results on corruption), there is the danger of a
“halo effect.” Survey respondents “know” that Switzerland is a more successful country
than Colombia, and so they tend to give higher ratings to institutions in one place than the
54

One might argue that the same is true of trade, as have Rodriguez and Rodrik (2001) in critiquing
Frankel and Romer (1999). They ask how we can be sure that the beneficial effects of trade that result
from trade policy decisions are similar to the beneficial effects of trade that are observed to result from sea
access and other geographic variables. The answer is that, although, as always with instrumental variables,
we cannot be sure the effects are the same, (i) those anti-globalizers who question the benefits of trade
liberalization generally feel the same when it is technological progress in transport and communications
that shrinks the world, and (ii) it is possible to measure trade unambiguously. The concept of “better or
worse institutions” lacks the unambiguous unidirectionality of “more or less trade.”

19

other, even when it might not be based on specific familiarity with the facts. Rotberg and
Gisselquist (2009) have since 2007 compiled The Index of African Governance which
attempts to be less subjective than survey-based measures from Transparency
International or the World Governance Indicators (WGI). The cost of eliminating
subjectivity is increased reliance on measures that could be regarded as endogenous
outcomes, instead of the more exogenous institutions that most of us mean by the word
“governance.” The Index of African Governance data are good for the ranking game, but
perhaps more worrisome as the independent variable in a regression. The solution is to
drop the three categories of “outcome” components (economic opportunity,
safety/security, and health/human development), and focus solely on the two “input” sets
of components (rule of law and participation/human rights). The correlation between the
rule of law measures in the WGI and in African Governance is .91.
Mauritius ranks first by participation and human rights. It ranks third in rule of law,
after Cape Verde and Botswana. Transparency International and the Internet Center for
Corruption Research rank Mauritius second only to Botswana in freedom from
corruption.55 It can be hard to square such rankings with common reports inside
Mauritius of government corruption that recurrently goes unpunished.56 Perhaps the
answer is that the basic comparison to most other African countries is valid, but
Mauritius still does not belong with the Nordic countries.
Very few available indicators of the quality of institutions seem able to escape both
the Scylla of subjectivity and the Charybdis of outcomes. Two of the best candidates
from the Index of African Governance are the reported number of days to settle a contract
dispute and the number of pre-trial detainees. Mauritius does not rank as highly if judged
by these two statistics as by the other indicators. Does the island paradise thus benefit
from a discriminatory halo effect when its institutions are rated? National prison
authorities themselves are the sources for the raw detainee data; perhaps the researchers
are not able to enforce across countries adequate honesty in self-reporting. We are left
short of unambiguous indications of high-quality institutions.
The unusual arrangement whereby the British Privy Council serves as the Supreme
Court of Mauritius sounds like a textbook case of a well-designed institution: It can be
expected to deliver answers that will be respected by competing groups who would not
necessarily trust home-grown mechanisms. Another observation encourages the notion
that Mauritius does actually have effective institutions: A sophisticated cyclone warning
system successfully gives warning of coming cyclones on a scale of four alerts, allowing
the people to move to higher ground. The system requires both government competence
and public cooperation. A new tsunami warning center has also been described as state of
the art. These are perhaps clean examples of specific successful institutions.
Democracy

55

Rotberg and Gisselquist (2009).
Dukhira (2002, 279-282) and Selvon (2005, 492-494). Needless to say, reports of corruption that are
more frequent in one country than another can reflect a freer press as easily as they reflect the corruption.
[Crime is another area where local residents (Dukhira, 2002, 271-276; and Selvon, 2005) paint a less
idyllic picture than the rankings, which give Mauritius the best possible rating on violent crime (homicides)
-- Rotberg and Gisselquist (2009 p. 57, 90).]
56

20

As noted, Mauritius and Botswana are the two African countries that have been
continuously democratic from birth.
The statistical evidence across countries is at best mixed as to whether democracy
per se is positive for economic performance. Barro (1996) finds that it is the rule of law,
free markets, education, and low government consumption that are conducive to growth,
not democracy per se. Tavares and Wacziarg (2001) find that it is education, not
democracy per se. Alesina, et al, (1996) find that it is political stability, not democracy
per se, that is positive for growth.57 Some even find that, after controlling for important
factors such as the rule of law and political stability, democracy has if anything a weak
negative effect on growth.58
One can claim good evidence for the reverse causation, that economic growth
leads to democracy, often assisted by the creation of a middle class.59 Examples include
Korea and Taiwan. Of course democracy is normally regarded as an end in itself, aside
from whether it promotes economic growth. Even here, one must note that the benefits
of the formalities of elections can be over-emphasized. For one thing, elections can be a
sham. Such leaders as Robert Mugabe, Hamid Karzai, and George W. Bush have each
claimed to have been elected without having in fact earned more votes than their
opponents. Western style or one-man one-vote elections perhaps do not deserve as high
priority in developing countries as do the fundamental principles of rule of law, human
rights, freedom of expression, economic freedom, minority rights, and some form of
popular representation.60

IV.

The Econometrics

Econometric studies of economic performance worldwide often show a negative
dummy variable for Africa. We begin with some econometrics that includes other parts
of the world, so as to see to what extent Africa’s problems stem from variables such as
tropical location. But rather than repeating the sort of 150-country data sets that are so
familiar from other papers, we look at a cross-section consisting of island countries
around the world. There are at least two reasons why this is of interest. First, islands are
a test case that can isolate certain factors.61 For example, national borders are not likely
to be endogenous. Second, as noted, not just Mauritius, but three out of the top four
performers in Africa are islands, an intriguing fact that invites investigation.
Performance Across Island Countries
57

It is worth noting, however, that many autocracies fail to deliver political stability that survives the term
or life of a particular autocrat (leaving aside whether they deliver economic benefits for the people).
China is the exception; also Singapore if it is not counted as a democracy.
58
Collier and Hoeffler (2009) find that when developing countries have democracies, as opposed to
advanced country democracies, they tend to feature weak checks and balances. As a result, when
developing countries also have high natural resource rents the result is on average bad for economic
growth.
59
Helliwell (1994), Huber, Rueschemeyer and Stephens (1993), Lipset (1994) and Minier (1998).
60
Zakaria (1997, 2004).
61
Feyrer and Sacerdote (2009) study a sample of islands as a natural experiment. (Their finding is that the
length of the colonial period is an important determinant of income today).

21

Table 3 reports results of a pure cross-section of island countries. Our dependent
variable is per capita income in 2006 (PPP basis). The results show a highly significant
negative effect for a dummy variable that registers a country’s location in the tropics.
Since the variables are in log form, a coefficient of -1.8 means that non-tropical countries
have a six-fold advantage relative to tropical countries, other things equal.62 The Africa
dummy is negative, but not statistically significant when included along with the tropic
dummy. The World Governance Indicators rule of law variable has a highly significant
positive effect.63 Its presence takes two-thirds off of the tropic dummy, confirming the
view that tropical lands tend to develop less satisfactory institutions.64 Surprisingly, the
coefficient on size (population) is negative. Normally size is a positive factor for
income, presumably due to internal economies of scale and diversity of factor
endowments. One conceivable explanation is that all islands are so geographically welldisposed to trade, because they by definition have good access to the sea, that they are
able to use trade to make up for the disadvantages of small size.
Within the island data set the trade/GDP ratio has a highly significant positive
effect. Remoteness has the expected negative sign but it is not significant when it has to
compete with trade, the main channel through which it is thought to work. When,
however, trade is excluded and we also condition on the WGI measure of rule of law,
remoteness is indeed significant, while the effect of the tropic dummy is greatly reduced.
Density too has the expected negative sign but is not statistically significant. Finally, we
tried fragmentation and fragmentation squared, to test the hypothesis of a U-shaped
relationship between ethnic/linguistic/religious homogeneity and economic success.
They are not yet significant. By limiting the data set to islands we have reduced the
sample size to 31, which inevitably raises standard errors, and may possibly explain the
statistical insignificance of many of these variables (remoteness, density, fragmentation).
Table 4 allows for conditional convergence in the islands data set by including
initial income as a regressor. The base case has only initial income and size. In Table
4a the initial year is 1968, the year of Mauritian independence. The coefficient on
income is very close to 1, so that we can think of the results as pertaining to average
growth rates over the period. That the coefficient is so close to 1 may also indicate that
we have not done an adequate job finding other determinants of equilibrium income.
(When the initial year is 1968 and we have only 15 island observations, nothing else is
significant. These results are in Appendix Table 4a. If we drop the trade and density
variables then we can expand the sample size to 20.)
A limited specification estimated on 20 countries is enough to generate some
significant results – at least when considering the non-base variables one by one.
Remoteness is significant, with the hypothesized negative effect. Significant coefficients
on fragmentation (negative) and fragmentation squared (positive) support the U-shaped
hypothesis: The suggestion is that either complete homogeneity or high fragmentation

62

exp(-1.8) = .16.
When we tried other measures of institutions from Freedom House, they did not do as well, at least not
when they had to compete with the WGI measure.
64
E.g., Hall and Jones (1999) and Easterly and Levine (2002). The Acemoglu et al (2001) story about
settler mortality is one way this could happen.
63

22

can be positive for growth, but that a modest number of large ethnic/linguistic groups in
inhibits growth.
When the initial year is 1976, we have 21 to 24 observations, in Table 4b. Trade
and size both now show significant positive effects. (Density is of the hypothesized sign
but insignificant.) The negative effect of remoteness is now statistically significant,
except when it has to compete with the trade variable. The U-shaped fragmentation
relationship is again significant.
When we start the data in 1996, in Table 4c, we are able to expand the sample
size further and also to use the World Governance Indicator rule of law index. WGI is
statistically significant, but trade loses much of its significant positive effect.
Remoteness becomes a significantly negative influence even when it has to compete with
the trade variable. Fragmentation loses statistical significance.
Performance Across African Countries
Next we switch to a data set consisting of African countries. Here we can use the
Index of African Governance, which attempts to avoid some of the subjectivity of the
other measures of institutional quality. We add a dummy variable for the island
countries. We also add a variable defined as the ratio of coastline to land area. This
variable will be zero for a landlocked country, small for the Congo, larger for coastal
countries, and larger still for small islands. The purpose is to test if access to the sea is
the key variable or if something else special about small islands emerges.
We see in Table 5b that the coastal variable is positive and significant, but only
when trade openness is not there to compete with it. A dummy variable for being
landlocked is negative as expected, and significant, but again only when it does not have
to compete with trade. (A country with at least a little sea access has an advantage of
more than 50% over one that is landlocked.) It seems clear that the coastal and
landlocked variables have their effects via trade. The reader who is concerned about the
endogeneity of trade will prefer the versions that show coastline and landlockedness in
place of trade, as they are much more exogenous. Across the specifications, the
coefficient on the island dummy hovers around zero.
Remoteness is never statistically significant (and is omitted from the results
reported here). One should not be too surprised that the remoteness variable does not
work in the African context, even though it works well in the rest of the world. It uses
straight line distances. Thus Tombuctou appears closer to Europe, and less remote, than
does Accra, and Kisangani appears less remote than Maseru. These are not the right
answers in a meaningful sense.
We add to the Africa regressions the measure of the rule of law from the Index of
African Governance. It has a highly significant positive effect on income. The Freedom
House measures of democracy do not do as well, though number of years under
democracy since independence has a significant positive effect when it does not have to
compete with Rule of Law. Population density has a significant negative effect. Size
has no significant effect.65

65

Results for conditional convergence within Africa are reported in Tables 6a-d and 7a-d of an earlier
version: Harvard Kennedy School Research Working Paper 10-036, Sept. 2010.

23

Findings from the econometrics
What have we learned from the regressions, across African countries or across
island countries? There is some confirmation, in the island results that small size is a
disadvantage but that trade can help make up for it (less so within Africa). Access to the
sea is important. Landlocked African countries are at a disadvantage, as is well-known.66
But beyond sea access, there does not seem to anything special about islands per se.
Straight-line distances are not very relevant in Africa, given that most trade has to go to a
coastal port first. Nor can tropicalness explain differential performance across countries
in sub-Saharan Africa, because they are all in the tropics, with the exceptions of South
Africa, Lesotho and Swaziland.
Institutional measures make a big difference. Democratic institutions per se are
not as important as rule of law. But institutions immediately bring up the question of
endogeneity, as does trade. If trade and rule of law lead to strong economics in Africa as
elsewhere, but remoteness, tropics and fragmentation can’t explain variation in trade, rule
of law and incomes within Africa, what can explain relative performance within Africa?
How did a small, remote, ethnically-divided country like Mauritius achieve success?

V.

So What is the Answer?

Mauritian success really divides into two distinct accomplishments The first big
accomplishment is that manufacturing took root after independence in 1968. The second
is that the country was able to adjust relatively well to subsequent shocks, such as the oil
price increases of the 1970s and further trade shocks in later decades, particularly the loss
of sugar and textile preferences.
1. Policies
One can list many of the specific policies that led to these two achievements:


Education. Mauritius has long invested heavily in quality schooling. Sir
Ramgoolam boldly granted free education to all citizens. As a result, the country has
achieved a high rate of literacy: 87% in 2007. Scholarships promote study abroad.
Successful recycling of export rents contributed to the fiscal position that made all
this investment in human capital possible.



The Export Processing Zone. We have already noted the importance attributed to the
decision to segment manufacturing exports from the rest of the economy by means of
favorable tax policy and labor policy, and to encourage Foreign Direct Investment by
Chinese businessmen to start the textile and apparel industry.67



Favorable trade preferences from Britain, Europe and the United States. We have
seen that the discrimination in favor of Mauritian exports in its major markets was

66

Everything else equal, of course. Landlockedness hasn’t stopped Botswana, nor has a long coastline
mattered enough to save Somalia.
67
Bräutigam (1997a, 1999a), Romer (1991), Subramanian (2001, 2007).

24

more than enough to overcome what, at least at the beginning, was an anti-trade bias
to national policy. Obviously these preferences were not policies set directly by
Mauritians. Good luck must be given its due. This includes the good luck to have had
multiple powerful patrons in the world, whether on geopolitical or sentimental
grounds, going back to the time when the island was the strategic cross-roads of the
East India trade. But Mauritian leaders were not merely passive beneficiaries in
winning these trade preferences. Their diplomats worked actively to negotiate them.


International diplomacy. When the UK joined the Common Market, the
Commonwealth sugar preferences were replaced by the 1975 Sugar Protocol of the
Lomé Convention. It happened that ACP sugar producers were negotiating terms for
the access of their product at a time (1974) when world prices were very high. Most
chose the option of relatively small EEC quotas, seduced by transitorily high world
prices. But Mauritius negotiated a large quota at the domestic EEC price. Even
though the EEC price was well below the world price then, during most of the time
since it has been far above, due to the political power of European farmers
domestically. Thus the decision by Mauritius to place priority on quantity turns out
to have been a brilliant strategy. Sugar exports to Europe produced large rents for
many years thereafter.68 The government was able to capture part of these rents and
use the revenue for social spending. Another part of the rents went to investment.69
From the beginning Mauritian leaders took diplomatic steps to maintain friendly
relationships with many countries, for example recognizing a single China very early.



A competitive exchange rate. The IMF-recommended devaluations restored
competitiveness in the early 1980s and put exports back on a vigorous footing. But
Mauritius had a competitively valued currency during most of its history, compared
with many African and Latin American countries.70 This, like the trade preferences,
helped promote trade.
2. Political institutions

The question that previous authors have understandably had a harder time answering
is why Mauritius made these growth-enhancing policy choices when so many other
countries did not. To be sure, if we were to say that the country was lucky enough to
have the right leaders who made the right decisions, that would not be an altogether
discouraging moral. Such a conclusion might help to let modern policy-makers realize
that they have free will, at times when they feel they are completely constrained by
history and politics. But some other authors have tried to go further to explain choices,
and so should we.
Were the decisions made around the time of independence just attributable to luck?
If so, what would account for the second half of Mauritian success, the ability to decide
to adjust to the various shocks that came along in the 1970s and 2000s?
68

Sugar rents were 5.4% of GDP on average, in some years much higher. Subramian (2001).
Bräutigam (1997a, 1999a), Subramanian (2009).
70
Iman and Manoiu (2008); African Economic Outlook (2008, p. 431).
69

25

Leadership
An answer to the second question is that many of the decisions that were made
around the time of independence involved the setting up of institutions – or the adoption
of practices that soon turned into institutions – and that these served the country well
subsequently.71 The institutions were put in place primarily by a combination of the decolonizers and the first prime minister, Ramgoolam.
Bräutigam (1999a, p. 144):
“Indeed, Mauritius was fortunate to have leaders who agreed to conduct their political competition
within the boundaries of democratic rules and who saw early on that labor-intensive
manufacturing for export could provide the employment required by the rapidly growing
population. However once the “defining moment” of independence had passed, the rules of
democracy and the other institutions established in that time created the constraints…for political
action,…”

Or Bräutigam (1999a, p. 158):
“Although the institutions put in place at the time of independence were established to solve the
immediate problem of economic and political instability in an ethnically diverse land, they also
created a set of norms, procedures, and constraints that continued to shape political and economic
strategies and behavior in the post-independence decades…”

The parliamentary system
The rules and institutions that she has in mind concern first and foremost the
Mauritian parliamentary system. During the preparations for independence, elites from
different ethnic groups deadlocked over whether delegates should be elected by
Proportional Representation. The British proposed pure Proportional Representation, but
the Labour Party rejected it on grounds that it would fragment the political process too
much. They wanted instead single-member districts which they would dominate. Other
ethnic groups, naturally, wanted arrangements that would insure them more
representation. The British brought in the 3-member Banwell Commission to work out
a solution with the various parties in 1967. The system that resulted features 20 districts
with three members each (and two additional from the small island of Rodriguez). The
three candidates in each district to get the most votes are elected. But the electoral
commission can seat an additional eight of the unsuccessful candidates with the highest
number of votes as “best losers,” which works to insure representation by all minority
groups.72 Furthermore the boundaries of the districts were constructed to give bias to
rural constituencies, which counteracts what Bates (1981) sees as a bias to urban
constituencies in much of mainland Africa.
The need to form coalitions requires consensus-building, encourages inclusion so
that nobody seeks routes outside the system, and produces moderation in policy-making.
Positions in the government have been shared out. Cabinet posts have been allocated to

71

Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2002) tell an analogous story for Botswana, attributing good policies
to good institutions and then in turn tracing back the origins of the good institutions.
72
Bowman (1991, 33-42), Bräutigam (1997a; 1999a, p.146); Selvon (2005, p. 436); Subramanian (2009, fn
17). Some object to the best loser system because it perpetuates communalism.

26

achieve ethnic balance.73 Various minorities have also been represented at lower levels
of public management as well.74
No army
Another institutional choice made at the beginning was to forego a standing army.
As with Costa Rica, its neighbors (such as the Comoros) chose differently. As with
Costa Rica the “pacifist” route has paid off subsequently. Military spending in Mauritius
in 1992 was only $6 per capita, equal to 0.45 percent of GDP or 4 percent of spending on
education and health. These statistics for other sub-Saharan countries are far higher,
averaging $20 per capita, 2.8 per cent of GDP, and 43 per cent of education and health
spending.75 Bräutigam points out the dual benefit to Mauritius: on the one hand,
financial savings, and on the other hand freedom from the military coups that have
plagued so many other African countries. One could argue that an island country has less
need of an army than a mainland country.76 But Cape Verde, the Seychelles and the
Comoros all spend substantially higher percentages of GDP on defense nonetheless.
Institutions chosen around the time of independence.
To summarize what we mean by institutions:
 No expropriation or taxing-away of the Franco-Mauritians’ sugar plantations,
which both allowed them to give up political power and established the
importance of property rights.
 A politically, economically, and socially stable environment, with rule of law,
respect for property rights, etc.
 No single elite group was in a position to dominate the others.
 Vigorous political opposition and media.
 Parliamentary structure: coalition governments and comprehensive participation
(representation for rural districts and ethnic minorities; best loser system; power
sharing in cabinet)
 No army.

3. The Deepest Determinants, and Lessons

73

Auty (2009a).
The share of Muslims and Chinese in the Senior Public Service rose in the first three decades after
independence. The share of Hindus had been a bit higher than in the general population ever since
independence, but had not risen as of 1995. The Chinese had 10% (vs. 2% of the population), the Creoles
had 13% (vs. 28% of the population), English/French have been reduced to zero, non-Muslim Indians
steady at 68% (vs. 52% of the population), and Muslims 9 % (vs. 17 % of the population). Carroll and
Carroll (1991, p. 476).
75
Bräutigam (1999a, p.153). [Her source is HDR 1995 from UNDP.]
76
Mauritius has in fact suffered the loss of territory to external military force. The United States and
United Kingdom took the Chagos Islands in order to build the base of Diego Garcia, without the permission
of either the islanders or Mauritius. Of course Mauritius has hardly been in a position to resist, with or
without an army. But small size has not stopped other countries from futile military endeavors.
74

27

If growth-supporting policies are not attributable solely to accidents of
personalities or history, but also to effective institutions that were put in place at
independence, this just pushes the question back another step.
When those institutions
were put in place, was it attributable solely to accidents of personalities or history? If we
dig deeper still can we find some more fundamental determinants as to why here and not
somewhere else?
Colonialists
In many ways the British administrators in the end served the future nation well.
It is relevant that very few British settlers arrived in the 19th century to displace the
Franco-Mauriciens, who remained in place as the land-owning elite. Thus when
independence came, the British did not have to protect the European settlers to the same
extent as in Kenya or other countries. At the time of independence, they helped broker
the power-sharing structure, in which the Franco-Mauriciens kept their sugar plantations,
while surrendering political power.
It was also useful that the British took their time to prepare the colony for
independence in a way that was not true in most African countries. That the process was
drawn out to 1968 is to some extent attributable to the lack of enthusiasm for
independence on the part of almost half the population.
Cosmopolitanism
Even though Mauritius ceased to be the cross-roads of the Indian Ocean when the
Suez Canal opened, it retained its cosmopolitan character and mindset. This is another
respect in which it resembles the entrepot city states, not just Singapore, but also Hong
Kong and Dubai. This cosmopolitanism came in handy in the process of economic
development. Ethnic links to China and India led directly to the rise of the textile and
apparel sector and the financial center, respectively.
Lessons for others
There are at least three possible lessons that can be applied to the rest of Africa. First,
trade is the key to growth, especially for a small country. Geographic impediments to
trade can be counteracted in other ways, including a competitive exchange rate and
regional free trade areas. Second, a well-designed electoral system can accommodate
ethnic diversity -- even harness it productively. Although oppressive rule by a single
group is not conducive to development, the opposite extreme of ethnically-blind
democracy is not necessarily feasible in all countries. Some deliberate steps to assure
representation of each ethnic group might be necessary in developing countries. Third,
democracies can achieve economic reform, and perhaps in a more sustainable way than
autocracies.
The puzzle
All this has been noted by other authors. But some ingredient seems to be
missing -- something having to do with the intriguing puzzle noted at the beginning of the
paper, that three of the most successful countries in Africa are islands. Is it some
superior cultural values of the Indians? No. For one thing, while Mauritius was

28

industrializing, India itself was stagnating with a miserable “Hindu rate of growth.”
Meanwhile, countries like Cape Verde have done well, with no Indians.77
Immigrant isles
What do Mauritius, Seychelles, and Cape Verde have in common? Each was
uninhabited three centuries ago.78 Everyone who is there came from somewhere else, in
modern times. The same is true of famously successful Singapore versus, for example,
benighted Sri Lanka.
Why does it help if everyone is an immigrant? There are two possible theories.
One theory is that migrants self-select for vigor and initiative, and they pass these traits
down to their descendants. Another theory is that most countries have nativist factions,
children of the soil, who resent newcomers regardless of their merit or perhaps because of
their merit. If everyone came from somewhere else, nobody can claim special privileges.
Consider a less successful small country that can serve as a comparator with
Mauritius because they have some important things in common: Fiji. The tropical island
economy has long been based on sugar, with indentured Indian workers brought to work
the fields, and was supplemented more recently by tourism. Ethnic Indians became a
majority of the Fijian population in the 1940s.79 But the first time an ethnic Indian was
elected Prime Minister in 1999, even though from a party that included many native
Fijians, he was soon overthrown in a coup. The political climate has been sufficiently
bad for the Indians since then that a high percentage of them have emigrated. As a result
of the political instability and the loss of the Indians, the economy has done poorly. What
was the key difference between Mauritius and Fiji? I believe it is that the native Fijians
always resented the newcomers, whereas there were no native Mauritians.
A combination of the two theories, immigrant initiative and absence of nativist
resentment, would emphasize the benefits when everyone feels they have a common
stake in building a new nation together.
Having said that, Mauritius illustrates that the ideal of an identity-blind
meritocracy, however desirable in principle,80 is not essential. The important thing is for
everyone to feel included. Some degree of power sharing along ethnic lines in some
circumstances might help achieve this goal rather than hurt it. Another lesson for
countries in Africa and elsewhere? History cannot be rewound. But any country can
adopt policies that are inclusive to all its ethnic groups rather than exclusive and that are
more welcoming to immigrants, past and future. This is the fourth of the lessons for
others.

5. Summary
77

Macedo and Pereira (2009) conclude that a combination of globalization and governance helps explain
the success of Cape Verde, where emigrants’ remittances are a major source of income.
78
If we go back to 1493, then we can add São Tomé & Príncipe to the list.
79
Leuprecht (2009) makes much of the fact that, because the Indian migration occurred later in Fiji than in
Mauritius, the population was younger and faster growing around the time of independence.
80
Ali Mansoor points out that the nation building might have been even more successful if the “best loser”
way of assuring minority representation had been supplemented by a provision for seating in parliament
some top vote-getters who represented no ethnic group or geographic district, but instead the country as a
whole.

29

While tropicalness, remoteness, small size and landlockedness go a long way to
explaining why Africa overall has done less well than some other regions economically,
these variables do not help much to explain relative success within Africa, with the
exception that access to the sea makes a difference. Tropicalness doesn’t show up
because almost all sub-Saharan countries share it. .) Remoteness doesn’t show up, if
measured by straightline distances, because the problem of getting from the interior to the
nearest seaport matters more in Africa than in most parts of the world. It is less clear
why small African countries do not seem on average to suffer much the usual
disadvantage relative to larger countries with economies of scale; it may reflect the
success of several small countries, especially the three top-performing island countries -Mauritius, Seychelles and Cape Verde – itself a puzzle considered by this paper.
Mauritius has made some policy decisions that turned out well, including the
establishment of the EPZ, diplomacy regarding trade preferences, spending on education,
avoiding currency overvaluation, and facilitation of business. These policies can be
attributed both to deliberate choices of individuals and to effective political institutions,
particularly a parliamentary system that builds consensus by representing all groups.
The effective political institutions, in turn, were the outcome both of decisions made at
the time of independence, by the first Prime Minister together with the outgoing colonial
rulers, and of some still deeper underlying causes. Any country can in principle adopt
effective institutions and strong policies at any time. In the case of Mauritius, the deep
underlying origins include a cosmopolitan population with an unusual combination of
ethnicities: Franco-Mauritians and Creoles who were willing at the time of independence
to trade off their past domination of political power for guarantees under the new system,
Indians who were willing to take the other side of the bargain, and Chinese who had links
to their country of origin. And, as with the Seychelles and Cape Verde, everyone in
Mauritius came from somewhere else.

References
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, James Robinson, 2001, “Colonial Origins of Comparative
Development: An Empirical Investigation,” American Economic Review 91, 1369-1401.
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, James Robinson, 2001, “An African Success Story: Botswana,” CEPR
Discussion Paper No. 3219, February.
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, James Robinson, and Yunyong Thaicharoen, 2003, “Institutional
Causes, Macroeconomic Symptoms: Volatility, Crises and Growth,” Journal of Monetary Economics
(Elsevier), vol. 50(1), pages 49-123, January.
Alesina, Alberto, Sule Özler, Nouriel Roubini, and Phillip Swagel, 1996, “Political Instability and
Economic Growth,” Journal of Economic Growth, Vol.1, No. 2, June.
Ancharaz, Vinaye dey, 2004, “The Effect of Trade Liberalization on Export-oriented Output and FDI: A
Case Study of the Mauritian EPZ, 1971-1998,” University of Mauritius Research Journal, vol. 5 pp 1-30.
Ancharaz, Vinaye dey, 2008, “David V. Goliath: Mauritius Facing Up to China,” draft scoping study
prepared for the African Economic Research Consortium, University of Mauritius, Réduit, January.

30

Anckar, Carsten, 2008, “Size, Islandness, and Democracy: A Global Comparison,” International Political
Science Review, 29, no. 4, 433-459.
African Economic Outlook, 2008, “Mauritius,” African Development Bank and Organisation for Economic
Cooperation and Development.
Auty, Richard, 2009a, “Elites, Rent Cycling, and Development: Adjustment to Land Scarcity in Mauritius,
Kenya and Cote d’Ivoire,” UNU/WIDER conference on Elites in Economic Development, Helsinki, June.
Auty, Richard, 2009b, “The Political Economy of Hydrocarbon Revenue Cycling in Trinidad and Tobago,”
paper prepared for workshop on Myths and Realities of Commodity Dependence: Policy Challenges and
Opportunities for Latin America and the Caribbean, World Bank, Sept. 17-18, 2009.
Barro, Robert, 1991, “Economic Growth in a Cross Section of Countries,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
CVI, May, 407-444.
Bates, Robert, 1981, Markets and States in Tropical Africa (University of California Press: Berkeley).
Bates, Robert, and Irene Yackolev, 2002, “Ethnicity in Africa,” in The Role of Social Capital in
Development, edited by C. Grootaert and T. Van Bastelaer (Cambridge University Press: NY).
Blattman, Christopher, Jason Hwang, and Jeffrey Williamson, 2007, "Winners and Losers in the
Commodity Lottery: The Impact of Terms of Trade Growth and Volatility in the Periphery 1870-1939,"
Journal of Development Economics (Elsevier), vol. 82(1), pages 156-179, January. NBER WP 10600.
Bowman, Larry W., 1991, Mauritius: Democracy and Development in the Indian Ocean (Westview Press
Boulder, Colo.; Dartmouth: London ).
Bräutigam, Deborah, 1997 a, “Institutions, Economic Reform, and Democratic Consolidation in
Mauritius,” Comparative Politics, vol. 30, no. 1, October, pp 45-62.
Bräutigam, Deborah, 1999 a, “The ‘Mauritius Miracle’: Democracy, Institutions and Economic Policy,” in
State, Conflict, and Democracy in Africa , edited by Richard Joseph (Lynee Riener: Boulder), 137-162.
Bräutigam, Deborah, 1999 b, "Mauritius: Rethinking the Miracle," Current History: A Journal of
Contemporary World Affairs, vol. 98, no. 628, May, pp. 228-231.
Bulte, Erwin, Richard Damania, and Robert Deacon, 2005, “Resource Intensity, Institutions and
Development,” World Development 33, no. 7, 1029-1044.
Bunwaree, Sheila, and Roukaya Kadenally, 2006, Mauritius, Country Report based on Research and
Dialogue with Political Parties (International Institute for Democracy and Electoral Assistance:
Stockholm).
Carroll, Barbara Wake, and Terrance Carroll, 1991, “State and Ethnicity in Botswana and Mauritius: A
Democratic Route to Development?” Journal of Development Studies 33, no. 4, April, 464-486.
Collier, Paul, 2000, “Ethnicity, Politics and Economic Peformance,” Economics and Politics 12, 225-45.
Collier, Paul, and Robert Bates, with Anke Hoeffler and Stephen O’Connell, 2008, “Endogenizing
Syndromes,” in The Political Economy of Economic Growth in Africa:1960-2000. (Cambridge University
Press: Cambridge UK and NY)
Collier, Paul, and Anke Hoeffler, 2009, “Testing the Neo-con Agenda: Democracy in Resource-Rich
Societies,” European Economic Review 53, 293-308.

31

Dukhira, Chit, 2002, History of Mauritius: Experiments in Democracy [Publisher: Dukhira. Printed by
Brijbasi Art Press, New Delhi.]
Easterly, William, and Ross Levine, 2002, “Tropics, Germs, and Endowments,” Carnegie-Rochester
Conference Series on Public Policy. NBER Working Paper No. 9106.
Engerman, Stanley, and Kenneth Sokoloff, 1997, “Factor Endowments, Institutions, and Differential Paths
of Growth among New World Economies: A View From Economic Historians of the United States,” in
How Latin America Fell Behind, edited by Stephen Haber (Stanford University Press), 260-304.
Engerman, Stanley, and Kenneth Sokoloff, 2000, “Institutions, Factor Endowments, and Paths of
Development in the New World,” Journal of Economic Perspectives XIV: 217-232.
Engerman, Stanley, and Kenneth Sokoloff, 2002, “Factor Endowments, Inequality, and Paths of
Development Among New World Economies,” Working Paper 9259, October.
Feyrer, James, and Bruce Sacerdote, 2009, “Colonialism and Modern Income: Islands as Natural
Experiments,” Review of Economics and Statistics 91, no. 2, May: 245-262.
Frankel, Jeffrey, 1974, “Cocoa in Ghana: The Cocoa Farmers, Cocoa Marketing Board, and Elasticity of
Supply,” MIT. At http://www.hks.harvard.edu/fs/jfrankel/cocoa_in_ghana.pdf .
Frankel, Jeffrey, 1997, Regional Trading Blocs (Institute for International Economics, Washington DC).
Frankel, Jeffrey, 2010, “The Natural Resource Curse,” Center for International Development, WP No. 195,
Harvard University, May. Forthcoming in Export Perils (University of Pennsylvania Press), edited by
Brenda Shaffer.
Frankel, Jeffrey, and David Romer, 1999, “Trade and Growth: Cause and Effect?” American Economic
Review, 89, no. 3, June, 379-99.
Frazer, Garth, and Johannes Van Biesebroeck, 2010, “Trade and Growth Under the African Growth and
Opportunity Act,” Review of Economics and Statistics, Feb., 92, no. 1, 128-144.
Gulhati, Ravi, and Raj Nallari, 1990, Successful stabilization and recovery in Mauritius,” EDI
development policy case series. Analytical case studies, no. 5 (World Bank, Washington DC)
Hausmann, Ricardo, and Roberto Rigobon, 2003, “An Alternative Interpretation of the ‘Resource Curse’:
Theory and Policy Implications,” in Fiscal Policy Formulation and Implementation in Oil-Producing
Countries, edited by Jeffrey Davis (International Monetary Fund: Washington, DC), p 12-44.
Hausmann, Ricardo, and Dani Rodrik, 2003, “Economic Development as Self-Discovery,” Journal of
Development Economics 72 (2) 603-633.
Helliwell, John, 1994, “Empirical Linkages Between Democracy and Economic Growth,” British Journal
of Political Science 24, 225–248.
Huber, Evelyne, Dietrich Rueschemeyer, and John Stephens, 1993, The Impact of Economic
Development on Democracy. Journal of Economic Perspectives 7, 71–85.
Imam, Patrick, and Rainer Köhler, 2010, “Balance Sheet Vulnerabilities of Mauritius During a Decade of
Shocks,” IMF Working Paper 10/148, June.

32

Imam, Patrick, and Camelia Minoiu, 2008, “Mauritius: A Competitiveness Assessment,” IMF Working
Paper 08/212, Sept.
Isham, Jonathan, Michael Woolcock, Lant Pritchett, and Gwen Busby, 2005, “The Varieties of Resource
Experience: Natural Resource Export Structures and the Political Economy of Economic Growth,” The
World Bank Economic Review (Oxford University Press).
Lange, Matthew, 2009, Lineages of Despotism and Development: British Colonialism and State Power,
Chapter 4, (University of Chicago Press).
Leuprecht, Christian, 2008-09, “Migration as the Demographic Wild Card in Civil Conflict: Mauritius and
Fiji,” New Directions in Demographic Security, Environmental Change and Security Program Report,
issue 13, pp. 34-39.
Lipset, Seymour Martin, 1994, The Social Requisites of Democracy Revisited. American Sociological
Review 59, 1–22.
Lutz, Wolfgang, and Anne B. Wils, 1990, “The Demographic Discontinuities of Mauritius,” Chapter 4 in
Wolfgang Lutz and F.L. Toth, editors, Population, Economy and Environment in Mauritius, International
Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, Laxenburg, Austria, p.39-66.
Macedo, Jorge Braga de, and Luís Brites Pereira, 2009, “Cape Verde and Mozambique as Development
Successes in Sub-Saharan Africa,” NBER Conference on African Successes.
Mathieu, Paul, and Patrick Imam, 2008, “The Mauritian Growth Miracle,” in Regional Economic Outlook:
Sub-Saharan Africa, October (Washington: International Monetary Fund).
Matsuyama, Kiminori, 1992, “Agricultural Productivity, Comparative Advantage, and Economic Growth,"
Journal of Economic Theory 58, December, 317-334.
Meade, James, 1961, The Economics and Social Structure of Mauritius—Report to Government of
Mauritius (Methuen: London).
Mehlum, Halvor, Karl Moene, and Ragnar Torvik, 2006, “Institutions and the Resource Curse,” Economic
Journal 116, 508, 1-20.
Minier, Jenny A., 1998, “Democracy and Growth: Alternative Approaches,” Journal of Economic Growth
3, 241-266.
Ministry of Finance, 2008, “Additional Stimulus Package: Shoring Up Economic Performance,” Mauritius.
Naipaul, V.S., 1972, The Overcrowded Barracoon (Random House).
Nath, Shyam and Neti Madhoo, 2008 “A Shared Growth Story of Economic Success: The Case of
Mauritius,” in The Political Economy of Economic Growth in Africa, B. J. Ndulu, Stephen A. O'Connell,
Jean-Paul Azam, eds. Vol. 2 (Cambridge University Press)
North, Douglass, 1994, “Economic Performance Through Time,” American Economic Review, 84, no. 3,
June, 359-368.
Poelhekke, Steven, and, Frederick van der Ploeg, 2007, “Volatility, Financial Development and the Natural
Resource Curse,” CEPR DP6513, October.
Rodriguez, Francisco, and Dani Rodrik, 2001, "Trade Policy and Economic Growth: A Skeptic's Guide to
the Cross-National Evidence," in: NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2000, Volume 15, pages 261-338.

33

Rodrik, Dani, 1997, “Trade Policy and Economic Performance in Sub-Saharan Africa,” Swedish Ministry
for Foreign Affairs.
Rodrik, Dani, Arvind Subramanian, and Francesco Trebbi, 2004, “Institutions Rule: The Primacy of
Institutions over Geography and Integration in Economic Development,” Journal of Economic Growth 9
no. 2, 131-65.
Romer, Paul, 1990, "Endogenous Technological Change," 1990, Journal of Political Economy. Vol.98, No.
5, Oct., pp. S71-S102.
Romer, Paul, 1992, “Two Strategies for Economic Development: Using Ideas and Producing Ideas,”
ABCDE, World Bank.
Romer, Paul, 1993, “Idea Gaps and Object Gaps in Economic Development,” Journal of Monetary
Economics, Volume 32, Issue 3, December, Pages 543-573.
Rotberg, Robert, and Rachel Gisselquist, 2007, 2008, and 2009, Strengthening African Governance: Index
of African Governance Results and Rankings, Harvard Kennedy School.
Sacerdoti, Emilio, Gamal El-Masry, Padamja Khandelwal, and Yudong Yao, 2005,
Mauritius: Challenges of Sustained Growth (Washington: International Monetary
Fund).
Sachs, Jeffrey, 2003, “Institutions Don’t Rule: Direct Effects of Geography on Per Capita Income,” NBER
WP 9490, February.
Sachs, Jeffrey and Andrew Warner, 1997, “Sources of Slow Growth in African Economies,” Journal of
African Economies, 6 (3): 335-76.
Sala-i-Martin, Xavier, 1997, “I Just Ran Two Million Regressions,” American Economic Review 107, May.
Sala-I-Martin, Xavier, and Arvind Subramanian, 2003, “Addressing the Natural Resource Curse: An
Illustration from Nigeria.” IMF Working Paper WP/03/139.
Selvon, Sydney, 2005, A Comprehensive History of Mauritius (publisher: Selvon; 2nd edition).
Simmons, Adele, 1982, Modern Mauritius : The Politics of Decolonization (Indiana University Press,
Bloomington).
Subramanian, Arvind, 2001, “Mauritius: A Case Study,” Finance and Development, IMF, Dec., 38, no. 4.
Subramanian, Arvind, 2007, “The Mauritian Success Story and Its Lessons,” UN/WIDER Research Paper
No. 2009/36 2009.
Subramanian Arvind, and Roy Devesh, 2003, “Who can Explain the Mauritian Miracle: Meade, Romer,
Sachs, or Rodrik?” in Rodrik, ed., In Search of Prosperity: Analytic Narratives on Economic Growth
(Princeton U. Press).
Torvik, Ragnar, 2001, “Learning by Doing and the Dutch Disease,” European Economic Review (Elsevier)
45, 285-306.
Wright, Gavin, and Jesse Czelusta, 2003, “Mineral Resources and Economic Development,” Conference on
Sector Reform in Latin America, Stanford Center for International Development Nov. 13-15.

34

Wright, Gavin, and Jesse Czelusta, 2006, “Resource-Based Growth Past and Present,” in Daniel Lederman
and William Maloney, editors, Neither Curse nor Destiny: Natural Resources and Development (Stanford
University Press and World Bank).
Zakaria, Fareed, 1997, “The Rise of Illiberal Democracy,” Foreign Affairs, November.
Zakaria, Fareed, 2004, The Future of Freedom: Illiberal Democracy at Home and Abroad (Norton: NY).

35

Table 2: Performance of Sub-Saharan African Countries
GDP per
capita, PPP
Country
Angola
Benin
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cameroon
Cape Verde
C.A.R.
Chad
Comoros
Congo (Brazz.)
Congo (DR)
Cote d'Ivoire
Djibouti
Eq. Guinea
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Gabon
Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
Sao Tome & P.
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Somalia
South Africa
Sudan
Swaziland
Tanzania
Togo
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe
1

(Constant 2005
International $)

4163.76
1319.02
12252.27
1060.48
347.02
1972.82
2796.55
670.82
1304.66
1116.86
3640.58
271.55
1536.51
1889.75
24416.68
609.91
683.38
12933.20
1181.91
1242.08
955.95
489.09
1386.43
1345.99
334.31
901.25
660.13
1012.80
1820.52
10476.46
707.77
5659.85
602.68
1800.82
833.97
1486.65
1611.75
18414.93
678.64
8861.93
1743.57
4410.90
1104.95
782.19
966.31
1168.84

Average annual GDP growth
rate (Constant 2000$)

Population,
Millions
16.56
8.76
1.86
14.36
8.17
18.17
0.52
4.26
10.47
0.61
3.69
60.64
18.91
0.82
0.50
4.69
77.15
1.31
1.66
23.01
9.18
1.65
36.55
1.99
3.58
19.16
13.57
11.97
3.04
1.25
20.97
2.05
13.74
144.70
9.46
0.16
12.07
0.08
5.74
8.45
47.39
37.71
1.14
39.46
6.41
29.90
11.70
13.23

_________________________________________

1968-1976

1977-2006

1.55%
15.28%
3.17%
3.53%
4.29%

3.81%
7.85%
4.49%
1.42%
3.15%

3.00%
1.88%

0.68%
4.16%

6.63%
1.87%
7.78%

4.10%
-0.94%
1.09%

15.95%
5.24%
1.29%

0.68%
3.65%
3.46%

6.43%
4.79%
3.29%
1.10%
5.91%
4.40%
2.92%
8.00%1

2.02%
3.51%
3.82%
-3.55%
1.59%
2.83%
2.95%
2.86%
4.34%

-1.86%
9.97%
4.77%

2.07%
2.71%
3.11%

2.71%
7.19%
3.45%

2.78%
3.76%
1.54%

3.73%
5.70%

2.42%
3.82%
5.02%

3.62%

2.25%

2.75%
7.01%

1.62%

(2006 unless otherwise noted)

World Governance
Indicators, Rule of
Law Index Ranking
39
18
2
14
34
32
3
45
42
29
38
47
44
22
37
31
19
25
9
7
43
40
28
8
30
12
15
11
20
1
26
6
27
35
23
17
10
5
36
48
4
41
24
13
33
16
21
46

Index of
African
Governance
Ranking

UN Human
Development

Ranking
13
26
6
41
40
19
5
43
38
11
10
42
28
21
4
30
36
3
33
20
35
39
15
22
34
14
27
44
18
2
37
8
46
23
32
9
31
1
45
N/A
7
16
12
17
25
24
29
N/A

44
13
4
20
35
25
3
43
46
14
28
47
42
26
36
41
31
8
27
7
40
30
17
12
38
16
11
23
32
1
22
6
24
39
18
9
10
2
37
48
5
45
34
15
29
19
21
33

Estimated.

36

Table 3: Islands Cross-section
Log of 2006 GDP per capita, PPP
Tropic dummy
Log population

Trade/GDP
Remoteness

-1.811***
(0.328)
-0.0870*
(0.0497)
0.00569***
(0.00131)
-0.234
(0.463)

Africa

-1.725***
(0.330)
-0.0914*
(0.0495)
0.00552***
(0.00129)
-0.140
(0.477)
-0.537
(0.457)

WGI

-0.605*
(0.351)
-0.0123
(0.0441)
0.00313**
(0.00125)
-0.338
(0.346)

-1.800***
(0.405)
-0.0860
(0.0551)
0.00578***
(0.00193)
-0.251
(0.439)

0.731***
(0.155)

Log density

-0.773**
0.344

-0.00833
(0.124)

Fragmn.squared

R2
Root MSE
Observations

-0.342
0.400
0.032
0.053

0.826***
0.183

Fragmentation

Constant

-1.961***
(0.364)
-0.121*
(0.0692)
0.00534***
(0.00126)
-0.601
(0.568)

13.02***
(3.789)
0.570
0.839
33

12.31***
(3.819)
0.594
0.830
33

11.91***
(2.796)
0.694
0.730
32

13.17***
(3.488)
0.570
0.855
33

4.189
(2.905)
-3.177
(5.902)
15.79***
(5.076)
0.625
0.836
31

15.018***
2.766
0.6246
.77857
37

* significant at 10 percent level,
** significant at 5 percent level
*** significant at 1 percent level
Robust standard errors are reported below the coefficients in parentheses

37

Table 4a: Islands from 1968
Log of 2006 GDP per capita
in constant year 2000 dollars

Log 1968 GDP per capita
Log population1968

1.003***

1.004*** 0.956*** 0.967***

(0.108)

(0.138)

(0.103)

(0.107)

-0.017

0.168

-0.004

0.008

(0.047)

(0.270)

(0.048)

(0.041)

Trade/GDP 1968-72

0.011
(0.016)

Log density1968

0.010
(0.125)

Remoteness

-0.731

-0.690**

(0.445)

(0.321)

Fragmentation

-9.065**
(3.224)

Fragmentation squared

11.535**
(5.115)

Constant

1.138

3.715

7.171**

2.551**

R2

(0.985)
0.8325

(5.966)
0.9103

(2.873)
0.8511

(0.859)
0.8793

Root MSE

.66361

.6263

.64503

.59983

20

15

20

20

Observations

38

Table 4b: Islands from 1976
Log of 2006 GDP per capita
in constant year 2000 dollars

Log 1976 GDP per capita
Log population1976

1.035***

1.083*** 1.033*** 0.977***

1.026***

(0.096)

(0.082)

(0.089)

(0.089)

(0.113)

0.034

0.218**

0.190*

0.038

0.040

(0.053)

(0.078)

(0.092)

(0.050)

(0.052)

0.012***

0.010*

(0.004)

(0.005)

Trade/GDP 1976-80

Log density1976

-0.020
(0.086)

Remoteness

-0.522

-0.802**

(0.344)

(0.284)

Fragmentation

-6.060*
(2.990)

Fragmentation squared

8.412*
(4.787)

Constant

-0.175

-4.298**

1.215

7.055*

0.727

R

(1.194)
0.8649

(1.641)
0.9215

(3.930)
0.9302

(2.456)
0.8906

(1.300)
0.8800

Root MSE

.57133

.46467

.46616

24

21

21

2

Observations

.52690
24

.56627
24

39

Table 4c: Islands, from 1996
Log of 2006 GDP per capita
in constant year 2000 dollars

Log 1996 GDP
per capita
Log population 1996

1.037*** 1.017*** 1.024***
(0.022)

(0.024)

(0.022)

(0.049)

(0.043)

(0.049)

0.000

0.000

0.012

-0.020

-0.017

-0.002

(0.011)

(0.010)

(0.013)

(0.021)

(0.020)

(0.015)

0.002**

0.000

0.000

0.001*

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.001)

0.050

0.040

(0.031)

(0.030)

0.216**

0.233**

0.157*

(0.097)

(0.089

(0.085)

Trade/GDP
1996-00
Log density 1996

WGI1996
Remoteness
Constant

0.918*** 0.894*** 0.945***

-0.237**

-0.207*

(0.110)

(0.104)

-0.106

2.089**

-0.355

0.838

2.797**

0.489

2

(0.246)
0.9793

(1.026)
0.9812

(0.274)
0.9818

(0.525)
0.9896

(0.988)
0.9908

(0.476)
0.9878

Root MSE

.20375

.19711

.19942

.18214

.19736

Observations

40

40

36

22

22

R

.18747
22

40

Table 5a: Africa Cross-section
Log of 2006 GDP per capita, PPP
Trade/GDP

Log population

Log landarea

0.0108***

0.00968***

0.0111***

0.0100***

(0.00294)

(0.00311)

(0.00292)

(0.00308)

-0.337**

-0.285*

-0.141

-0.0703

(0.155)

(0.152)

(0.106)

(0.102)

0.196**

0.214**

(0.0873)

(0.0940)
-0.190**

-0.209**

(0.0872)

(0.0936)

Log density

Democracy years (Freedom House)

0.0257*

-0.00879

0.0257*

-0.00881

(0.0130)

(0.0166)

(0.0130)

(0.0166)

Rule of Law

Constant

0.0347**

0.0347**

(0.0131)

(0.0131)

9.172***

6.713***

9.120***

6.658***

(1.966)

(2.111)

(1.959)

(2.106)

R2

0.438

0.541

0.435

0.538

Root MSE

0.858

0.785

0.860

0.787

43

43

43

43

Observations

41

Table 5b:
Africa Cross-section with coastal variable
Log of 2006 GDP per capita, PPP
Coast/Area

Rule of Law

Trade/GDP

0.00595

0.690**

-0.0363

0.727**

0.0658

0.683**

(0.528)

(0.341)

(0.539)

(0.346)

(0.514)

(0.330)

0.0314***

0.0339***

0.0289***

0.0304***

0.0300***

0.0297***

(0.0105)

(0.00969)

(0.0106)

(0.00979)

(0.0102)

(0.0100)

0.00908**

0.0101**

0.00964**

(0.00433)

(0.00434)

(0.00424)

-0.293*

-0.402**

-0.293*

-0.415**

-0.294*

-0.416**

(0.154)

(0.150)

(0.156)

(0.158)

(0.154)

(0.158)

0.221**

0.225**

0.234**

0.237**

0.218**

0.250**

(0.0985)

(0.0922)

(0.0990)

(0.0944)

(0.0981)

(0.0972)

-0.354

-0.519**

(0.228)

(0.233)

0.0286

-0.395

0.237

-0.154

(0.516)

(0.446)

(0.511)

(0.436)

7.005***

9.327***

6.772***

9.385***

6.966***

9.283***

(2.212)

(2.183)

(2.256)

(2.290)

(2.136)

(2.178)

R2

0.560

0.501

0.540

0.454

0.538

0.453

Root MSE

0.790

0.806

0.797

0.832

0.788

0.822

43

46

43

46

43

46

Log population

Log land area

Landlocked

Island

Constant

Observations

42

