                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      WORLD FOOD PRICES AND MONETARY POLICY

                                              Luis Catão
                                             Roberto Chang

                                         Working Paper 16563
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w16563


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2010




We thank Pietro Cova, Gian Maria Millesi-Ferretti, Bianca de Paoli, Alan Sutherland, Carlos Vegh
as well as seminar participants at the Bank of Italy, IADB, IMF, PUC-RJ, the 2009 meeting of the
European Econometric Society, and the 2010 World Econometric Society Congress for discussions
and comments on an earlier draft. We are also grateful to Marola Castillo for excellent research assistance,
to Roberto Rigobon for sharing his food expenditure database with us, and last but not least, to the
Research Department of the IADB, where much of this paper was written. The opinions expressed
here are, however, the authors' alone and do not necessarily reflect those of any of the above institutions.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by Luis Catão and Roberto Chang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
World Food Prices and Monetary Policy
Luis Catão and Roberto Chang
NBER Working Paper No. 16563
December 2010
JEL No. E5,E6,F41

                                              ABSTRACT

In recent years, large fluctuations in world food prices have renewed interest in the question of how
monetary policy in small open economies should react to imported price shocks. We address this issue
in an open economy setting similar to previous ones except that food plays a distinctive role in utility.
A key novelty of our model is that the real exchange rate and the terms of trade can move in opposite
directions in response to food price shocks. This has several consequences for observables and for
policy. Under a variety of model calibrations, broad CPI targeting emerges as welfare-superior to alternative
policy rules once the variance of food price shocks is as large as in real world data.


Luis Catão
International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street
Washington DC 20431
and Inter-American Development Bank
LCatao@imf.org

Roberto Chang
Rutgers University
Department of Economics
75 Hamilton Street
New Brunswick, NJ 08901
and NBER
chang@econ.rutgers.edu
1. Introduction
Dramatic swings in world commodity prices in recent years have renewed interest
in the issue of how monetary policy in small open economies should react to
imported price shocks. Wide fluctuations in food prices have been of particular
concern. Given the large weight of food on households’ consumption baskets and
its limited substitutability with other goods, food price fluctuations can have a
sizeable impact on overall consumer prices as well as on terms of trade.
    While much has been written on the inflationary eﬀects of oil price shocks and
their role in monetary policy (Bodenstein, Erceg and Guerrieri 2008, Kilian 2009,
and others), the evidence suggests that food price shocks have been no less im-
portant as drivers of global inflation. To illustrate, Figure 1 displays relative food
prices against the world price level (proxied by the US WPI) since 1960.1 The
correlation coeﬃcient is sizeable (0.54). Also, fluctuations in the global relative
price of food lead fluctuations in the WPI. More formally, Tables 1 and 2 present
correlations and Granger causality tests to allow for a comparison with the infla-
tionary eﬀects of oil price shocks. Restricting attention to the past two decades as
in Bodenstein et al. (2008), which coincides with the gradual worldwide adoption
of inflation targeting regimes, Table 1 shows that food price cycles bear a closer
correlation (either contemporaneous or lagged) than oil price cycles with most
indicators of global inflation. Over the entire 1960-2008 period, Granger causality
tests in Table 2 reject the hypothesis that food prices do not Granger-cause global
inflation, whereas the same hypothesis is not rejected for oil prices. Further, the
attendant F-tests suggest that, if anything, food prices Granger-cause oil prices
but not the other way around. In short, food prices have been at the centre of
major inflexions in global inflation rates.
    The large swings in world food prices have translated into significant varia-
tions of inflation rates in small open economies. This includes not only earlier
episodes when those economies often operated looser monetary regimes, but also
the latest boom and bust which took place under the discipline of inflation tar-
geting (IT). As shown by the cross-country medians depicted in Figure 2, large
deviations from central targets for consumer price inflation (CPI) were observed,
with inflation rates breaching the upper IT tolerance bands in some cases2 . Only
   1
     More precisely, the figure displays HP-filter detrended fluctuations in the IMF index of US$
price of non-fuel commodities relative to the overall US wholesale price index (WPI), and the
year-on-year fluctuations in the absolute global WPI.
   2
     The Chilean experience provides a vivid illustration. The 12-month CPI inflation rose from
when world food prices underwent a steep decline, following the global financial
crisis in September 2008, did national inflation rates recede and the attendant
deviations from central inflation targets narrow sharply.
     Insofar as world food price shocks are exogenous to small open economies,
these developments pose an important question for their central bankers: Should
they tolerate big fluctuations in CPI inflation if driven by food prices, and thus
accommodate at least partially the external relative price shocks, as long as pro-
ducer price inflation (PPI) remains within target? 3 Or should they instead react
forcefully to CPI inflation, possibly requiring much lower inflation (or even de-
flation) rates in non-commodity domestic sectors? To elucidate the answer, this
paper investigates the transmission mechanisms from imported commodity price
shocks to output and inflation in a small open economy model, and measures the
welfare implications of diﬀerent monetary policy rules. In particular, the paper
examines which of the targeting rules typically employed by central banks, broad
CPI targeting, producer price index (PPI) targeting, or exchange rate targeting,
delivers the highest welfare if the small open economy faces sizeable external fluc-
tuations in the price of a key item in the domestic consumption basket such as
food.
     The context for our analysis is that of a small open economy which is a net food
importer and where food represents a sizeable share of household spending. Our
model builds on the now canonical model of Gali and Monacelli (2005), which is
itself a variant of a wider class of recent New Keynesian models (Woodford 2003,
Walsh, 2004, and Gali 2008). But we impose several departures, including: i)
allowing global food prices to vary widely relative to the overall world price index;
ii) letting food expenditure shares to diﬀer between the small open economy and
the rest of the world; iii) taking the peculiar nature of food commodities into
account by separating out its role in utility from that of domestic goods. That (i)
is warranted is clear from Figure 1. Table 3 provides cross-country evidence for (ii):
emerging economies tend to allocate a larger share of consumption expenditure
around 3% in 2005 to as high as 9.3% by 2008Q3, well away from the oﬃcial IT range for broad
CPI (2-4% a year). As commodity prices collapsed since, inflation has receeded to low single
digit levels, back to within the IT tolerance bands by late 2009.
   3
     An aﬃrmative answer appears to have characterized the latest cycle. Estimated Taylor rule
coeﬃcients on CPI inflation for all IT countries show sizeable and statistically significant drops
during the 2007q1-2008q3 food price upswing. This suggests leniency on the part of national
central banks in responding to the imported food inflation as prescribed by broad CPI targeting.
The respective country regressions are not reported here to save on space but are available from
the authors upon request.
into food than more advanced peers, and in some cases substantially so. Regarding
(iii), there is ample evidence on other peculiar characteristics of food commodities,
besides its high weight on spending, which has been glossed over in previous
open economy models and yet clearly justifies separating it out from other goods
composite.4
     Correspondingly, our model has novel implications for key variables. Most
notably, in response to relative external price shocks (in our case food prices), the
terms of trade (TOT) and the real exchange rate (RER) can move in opposite
directions. Because we assume that food has a higher weight in the domestic
consumption basket than in the foreign one, higher world food prices can increase
the cost of consumption at home relative to that abroad (a RER appreciation)
while weakening the relative price of domestic output (a fall in the terms of trade).
In contrast, Cova and Sondegaard 2004, Gali and Monacelli, 2005, de Paoli, 2009,
and many others assume that food price shocks are absent, which implies that
TOT and the RER always move in the same direction.
     The implication that RER and TOT do not always move in the same direction
not only adds realism to our model but also allows for more varied comovements
between observables. In previous models, for instance, shocks that cause a TOT
deterioration must also result in a RER depreciation, and hence higher output
(because domestic output has become relatively cheaper) and higher consumption
(because of complete international risk sharing). But our model implies, as we
have mentioned, that RER and TOT do not always move in the same direction,
and hence allows for more complex patterns of comovements between output and
consumption. .
     Likewise, implications for policy and welfare can be quite diﬀerent from those
of previous models. In those, for example, the small open economy under study
becomes isomorphic to a closed one if preferences are Cobb-Douglas and the price
elasticity of exports is one. The consequence is that the main friction to be ad-
dressed by monetary policy is domestic price stickiness, so domestic PPI targeting
   4
     One is that food has low price elasticities of substitution with other goods. This, together
with the average high share in spending, implies that food price shocks should have a non-
trivial impact on marginal rates of substitution and labor supply. In addition, food is a highly
competitive industry, displaying fast pass-through from cost shocks to prices, as well as high
price volatility (Gouveia 2007). This makes food very diﬀerent from the typical composite good
variety in models featuring staggered sectoral prices. Finally, many IT countries are large net
food importers or exporters. In these cases, swings in the relative world price of food can entail
large terms of trade variations.
emerges as a welfare maximizing rule. In our model, however, the small open econ-
omy does not become isomorphic to a closed one even under the unit elasticity
assumptions just mentioned (in such a case, output does equal natural output at
all times and trade is balanced, but the RER, and therefore consumption, moves
with world relative price shocks).
    More generally, a variety of model calibrations confirm and complement our
theoretical discussion. We discuss how the presence of world relative shocks in-
fluence the impulse responses of main macro aggregates. Also, we show that the
welfare rankings of alternative policies can be overturned, relative to previous
studies, when world relative price shocks are realistically large. More specifically,
when the variance of food price shocks is calibrated to be as large as in real world
data, CPI targeting and fixed exchange rates tend to lower the volatility of the
RER, have more expansionary eﬀects on output, and appreciate the mean RER.
This, in turn, allows the country to better take advantage of the so-called terms
of trade externality (that is, to consume more per unit of domestic output and
thus, given disutility of labor eﬀort, enhance welfare). However, the volatility of
output and employment, and domestic inflation, is higher relative to a PPI tar-
geting rule. So significant policy trade-oﬀs are at stake. These trade-oﬀs relate to
how the distinct policies exploit relative price covariances, notably that between
the TOT and RER. While the role of the terms of trade externality in weaken-
ing the welfare dominance of PPI targeting has been noted before for particular
parametrizations of the canonical model (Cova and Sondegaard, 2004, de Paoli,
2009), we establish the welfare dominance of CPI targeting under a much broader
array of calibrations. We also emphasize how that dominance relates to the rel-
ative variance of food price shocks coupled with the weight of food in national
consumption baskets. Indeed, we show that when food price shocks are small
enough, our model delivers the same policy rankings as the previous literature.
    The remainder of the paper is as follows. Section 2 lays out the model. Section
3 discusses Phillips curve relationships, fleshing out how inflation and the appro-
priate measure of the output gap are aﬀected by changes in world relative food
prices. Section 4 discusses the dynamic IS curve and impulse responses. Section
5 examines welfare and the ranking of the monetary policy rules for a wide range
of numerical calibrations. Section 6 sums up the results and discusses additional
policy implications.
2. Model
We study a small open economy populated by identical agents that consume a
domestic good and imported food. The domestic good is an aggregate of interme-
diate varieties produced at home with domestic labor. The intermediates sector
is characterized by monopolistic competition and nominal rigidities, as in recent
New Keynesian (NK) models. The composition of the CPI indices at home and
abroad diﬀer, so PPP does not necessarily hold. Given nominal rigidities, domes-
tic policy can aﬀect the real exchange rate (RER) and the terms of trade (TOT),
and thus manipulate the latter to the country’s advantage (the so-called terms of
trade externality). Marginal costs depend on openness and international relative
prices as in the canonical NK setting, but a main distinction is that relative prices
depend on the exogenous world price of food.

2.1. Households
The economy under study has a representative agent with preferences:
                                         X
                                         ∞
                                                
                                         =0

where 0    1, () is the expectation operator, and
                                         Z 1
                                1−         ()1+
                          =          −               
                              (1 − )    0   1+

     and  are parameters,  denotes consumption, and  () is the supply of
labor employed by a firm belonging to industry  ∈ [0 1]. As in Woodford (2003),
we assume that there is a continuum of industries, that each of which employs a
diﬀerent type of labor, and that labor types are not perfect substitutes from the
viewpoint of the household.
   Consumption is a C.E.S. aggregate of a home final good  and an imported
good (food)  :
                      h                                    i(−1)
                                   (−1)         (−1)
                   = (1 − )1       + 1  

where  is the elasticity of substitution between home and foreign goods, and 
is a measure of the degree of openness.
      The price index associated with , or CPI, expressed in domestic currency, is
                               £        1−
                                                     ¤1(1−)
                          = (1 − )    + 1−
                                                                              (1)
where  and   are the domestic currency prices of the home good and imports.
Also, given total consumption  and prices  and   , optimal demands for
home goods and foreign goods are given by
                                              µ      ¶−
                                                 
                               = (1 − )                                     (2)
                                                  
                                          µ       ¶−
                                              
                                   =               
                                              
Note that, if  =   ,  equals the fraction of all consumption that is imported.
In this sense,  is a measure of openness. Home bias corresponds to the case
  12 5
    The agent chooses consumption and labor eﬀort taking prices and wages as
given, and having unfettered access to the world financial market. We assume that
the latter is characterized by complete markets. Finally, the agent owns domestic
firms and receives their profits.
    The resulting maximization problem is well known (see e.g. Gali and Monacelli
2005). One implication is that, if  () is the domestic wage for labor of type ,
optimal labor supply is given by the equality of the marginal disutility of labor
with the marginal utility of the real wage:
                                                   ()
                                   () =                                   (3)
                                                    
Also, complete financial markets imply that
                                                  1
                                      = ∗                                       (4)
where  is a positive constant, ∗ is an index of world consumption, and  is the
real exchange rate, that is, the ratio of the price of the world consumption index
to the domestic CPI, measured in a common currency.6
    Finally, the domestic safe interest rate is given by
                                        "µ       ¶−      #
                            1               +1       
                                 =                                           (5)
                          1 +                    +1
  5
    We have assumed  6= 1 If  = 1  and  are Cobb Douglas.
  6
    To be sure, we have employed the assumption that the marginal utility of consumption in
the rest of the world is proportional to ∗− 
2.2. Prices
For simplicity, we assume that all food is imported, and that the world price of
food is exogenously given in terms of a world currency. Using asterisks to denote
prices denominated in world currency, the domestic currency price of food is then

                                            =  ∗

where  is the (nominal) exchange rate (domestic currency per unit of foreign
currency). So, there is full pass through from world to domestic food prices.
   Likewise, we assume that the world currency price of the world consumption
index is exogenous.7 Denoting it by ∗  the real exchange rate is then:

                                         =  ∗ 

   It is useful also to define the domestic price of food relative to the price of
home output, or terms of trade, by

                                                  ∗
                                       =        =                                           (6)
                                                  

   As in other models, the terms of trade and the relative price of home output
are essentially the same, since 1 implies that
                           µ     ¶1−
                             
                                      = (1 − ) + 1−
                                                    
                             

    Other models also imply that the real exchange rate and the terms of trade
are tightly related. In our model, however, that relation is less tight. To see this,
inserting the expressions for  and   into the consumer price index (1) yields
   7
     In solving the model, and to simplify the algebra, we will in fact assume something stronger:
that shocks to  ∗ and  ∗ are independent from each other. To justify this, one can assume
that food has a negligible share in the world consumer basket, in contrast with the domestic
basket. This is a defensible assumption since, as shown in Table 3, the food share in the CPI is
substantially higher in small emerging economies than in advanced countries.
  It is also worth stressing that the presence of food price shocks is consistent with perfect
insurance: since 4 holds at all times, the home agent is implicitly purchasing all the insurance
he needs given the price of risk.
the following relation between the real exchange rate and the relative price of
home final goods:
                                  µ     ¶1−
                                    
                      1 = (1 − )            + 1− ∗1−                (7)
                                    

where ∗ = ∗ ∗ is the world’s relative price of food, which we take as exoge-
nous.
    An improvement in the terms of trade (a fall in  ) implies an increase in the
relative price of domestic output (  ). Given ∗  7 then implies that  must
fall (a real appreciation). But  and  can move in opposite directions when
∗ moves.
    Since this aspect of our model is largely responsible for the novelty of our
results, it deserves further elaboration. Other models have typically assumed that
home agents consume a domestic aggregate and a foreign aggregate (such as  ∗
in our model), and that there is some home bias, so that PPP does not hold. In
contrast, we assume that home agents do not consume the foreign aggregate but
instead a diﬀerent good (food). This would not make a diﬀerence if the relative
price of food were fixed in terms of the foreign aggregate (e.g. if  ∗ = 1). So
the basic diﬀerences between our model and previous ones emerge because  ∗ is
allowed to fluctuate.
    In particular, the standard specification (with  ∗ constant) implies, as can be
seen from the three previous expressions, a very tight link between the terms of
trade and the real exchange rate: with  ∗ = 1  and  must always move in the
same direction. In addition, using lowercase variables for logged variables, one can
show that  = (1 − ) to a first order approximation, so that (to second order)
 ( ) = (1 − )2  ( ) : the variance of the real exchange rate is proportional
to the variance of the terms of trade, the constant of proportionality being less
than one and pinned down by the degree of openness. These implications seem
quite restrictive.
    In our model, in contrast, fluctuations in the relative price of food mean that
 and  can move in opposite directions (in response of shocks to  ∗ ). Also,
in a first order approximation, we will see that  = (1 − ) −  , so that the
variance of  can be smaller or larger than the variance of , depending on the
volatility of 
2.3. Domestic Production
The home final good can be obtained by assembling intermediate goods varieties,
indexed by  ∈ [0 1] :
                                ⎡ 1                ⎤(−1)
                                 Z
                           = ⎣  ()(−1)  ⎦
                                   0

where  is the elasticity of substitution between domestic varieties. Minimizing
the cost of producing the aggregate implies that, given  , the demand for each
variety is given by                    µ        ¶−
                                          ()
                               () =              
                                          
where  () is the price of variety , and  is the relevant price index:
                                  ⎡ 1            ⎤1(1−)
                                   Z
                             = ⎣  ()1−  ⎦                             (8)
                                       0

   Variety  of intermediates is produced by only labor of type  according to the
production function
                                   () =   ()
where  () is the employment of type  labor and  is a productivity shock,
common to all firms in the economy.
   Firms take wages as given. We allow for the existence of a subsidy to employ-
ment at constant rate  Hence nominal marginal cost is given by

                              Ψ = (1 − ) ()                           (9)

where  () is the wage rate for type  labor.
    Variety producers are monopolistic competitors and set prices in domestic
currency as in Calvo (1983): each individual producer is allowed change nominal
prices with probability (1 − ). As is now well known, all producers with the
opportunity to reset prices in period  will choose the same price, say ̄  which
satisfies:                 ∙                                 ¸
                  X ∞
                                                  
                        
                         + +| (̄ −     Ψ+| ) = 0              (10)
                   =0
                                                 −1
where +| is the demand in period  +  for a producer that last set her price
in period  :                          µ       ¶−
                                          ̄
                              +| =             +                        (11)
                                         +
+ is the period  pricing kernel applicable to nominal payoﬀs in period  + 
and Ψ+| is the nominal marginal cost of production at  +  for producers that
set their prices at 
    It also follows (from 8) that the price of the home final good is given by:
                               £                       ¤
                                                  1− 1(1−)
                          = (1 − )̄1− + −1                          (12)

2.4. Equilibrium
We assume that the foreign demand for the domestic aggregate is given by a
function of its price relative to ∗ and the index ∗ of world consumption. Hence
market clearing for the home aggregate requires:
                                            µ        ¶−
                                               
                              =  +          ∗
                                                         ∗                   (13)
                                               
where  is a constant and  is the price elasticity of the foreign demand for home
exports.8
   Equilibrium is determined once a rule for monetary policy is specified.

2.5. Output and Relative Prices
Because of nominal rigidities, domestic output is demand determined. Demand
is, in turn, a function of the key relative prices in this model. Understanding the
relation between output, demand, and relative prices is crucial for the ensuing
analysis.
     Combining the preceding expression for the demand for home produce with
(2) and the definition of the real exchange rate to get:
                               µ     ¶−             µ     ¶−
                                                   
                = (1 − )               +              ∗
                                                     
                           "         µ      ¶−              µ      ¶− #
                                               1           
                   = ∗ (1 − )                +                        (14)
                                                              
  8
     Note that, unlike Cova and Sondegaard (2004) and de Paoli (2009), we allow the home and
foreign elasticities of demand for home goods,  and  to diﬀer.
where we have used 4 for the second equality.
    This expression emphasizes that the demand for domestic output depends on
three variables. The first one is world consumption, which aﬀects proportionally
not only foreign demand for home produce but also domestic demand via the risk
sharing condition 4. The second one is the real exchange rate. Because of risk
sharing, an increase in  (a real depreciation) implies an increase in domestic
consumption (with elasticity 1), a fraction (1 − ) of which accrues to domestic
goods. Also, ceteris paribus, the increase in  means a fall in the world relative
price of home exports, and hence an increase in foreign demand for home goods,
with elasticity  The third factor is the domestic relative price of home output
  or, equivalently, the terms of trade. Holding fixed  and ∗  a terms
of trade deterioration (an increase in  , or a fall in   ) reduces the relative
price of home output in terms of both domestic and foreign consumption. This
increases the demand for home goods, with elasticities  and  respectively.
    As we noted previously, in the absence of food price shocks,  and  must
move in the same direction. Hence 13  must also move in that direction. In
response to food price shocks, however,  and  can move in diﬀerent directions,
so that the impact on  is ambiguous.

3. Relative Prices and the Open Economy Phillips Curve
The possibility of imported inflation has a significant eﬀect on the derivation of
the aggregate supply relation characterizing the tradeoﬀs between output and
inflation in the economy. To understand this, here we examine a first order log
linear approximation of the model around a nonstochastic steady state with zero
inflation.

3.1. Inflation and Marginal Costs
We shall use lowercase variables to denote logs. Starting with the pricing equa-
tions, and following Gali (2008, p.45), one can rewrite 10 as

           X
           ∞       ∙                                                 ¸
                                     ̄                  
                 + +| (        −       +| Π−1+ ) = 0
           =0
                                    −1    − 1

where
                              +| = Ψ+| +
denotes marginal cost in terms of domestic goods for those firms that set prices
in period . A first order approximation then yields:
                                X
                                ∞
      ̄ − −1   = (1 − )   ()  (+| − ) + (+ − −1 )   (15)
                                =0

where  = log( − 1) = − is the steady state value of marginal costs.
   To gain insight on the previous expressions, note that


                     +| = Ψ+| +
                             = (1 − )+| + +
                                              
                             = (1 − )+   +| + + +
where the last expression follows from 3. Now, our assumptions about production
imply that +| = +| which, together with 11 and the previous expression
gives
                                                 µ           ¶−
                                                      ̄
                              +| = +
                                                     +
where
                             = [(1 − )  1+
                                                        ]                (16)
is a measure of marginal cost averaged across firms. This says that the marginal
cost of production at  +  for³a firm´that last set its price at  depends on average
                                          −
                                ̄
marginal cost times the term +       which reflects the diﬀerence between the
demand for that firm’s output and aggregate demand due to that firm’s relative
price.
    Log linearizing the two preceding expressions yield:
                             +| = + + (+ − ̄ )                  (17)
and

                = − + log  +  +  − (1 + ) + ( −  )
   To proceed further, use the linearized version of 4 and 1 to get

           = − + log  +  log  + ∗ +  +  +  − (1 + )        (18)
    This emphasizes that average marginal costs depend on the real exchange rate
and the terms of trade, in addition to domestic production  and exogenous
shocks. The  term determines the price of home output in terms of home con-
sumption, which matters because of the discrepancy between the product wage
and the consumption wage. The real exchange rate  aﬀects marginal costs be-
cause of its impact on domestic consumption (via international risk sharing) and,
therefore, the disutility of labor.
   Of course, the real exchange rate and the terms of trade are both endogenous
variables that are determined by equilibrium . The approximate relation between
them in our setting is given by
                    = (1 − ) + (∗ − ∗  ) = (1 − ) − ∗              (19)
where ∗ = ∗  − ∗ is the log of the world relative price of imports. As already
stressed, if world relative prices were constant, ∗ would be zero, and the real
exchange rate would be proportional to the terms of trade. But here world relative
price changes do matter and have to be taken into account. One consequence is
that  and  can move in opposite directions, in response to shocks in the relative
price of food.
    We are ready to obtain a relation between domestic (producer) inflation and
marginal costs of the kind emphasized in the NK literature. Replacing 17 in 15
and rearranging we obtain:
                             X
                             ∞
                                             1                  X∞
   (̄ − −1 ) = (1 − )   ()           (+ − ) +     ()   +
                            =0
                                          1 +                 =0


   Combining this expression and the linearized version of 12 leads to:
                             =   +1 + ( + )                        (20)
where
                                   (1 − )(1 − ) 1
                            =
                                                   1 + 
    As mentioned, this says that domestic inflation depends on its own expected
future value as well as marginal costs. In contrast with previous papers, however,
marginal costs depend not only on domestic production but also on the relative
price term  +  =  − ∗  that is, on the terms of trade and the real exchange
rate. At least one of these has to be treated as an endogenous variable.
3.2. The Phillips Curve
We can proceed as in the recent work of Woodford (2003) and others to usefully
summarize the impact of exogenous shocks with the concept of output gap. Here,
another gap turns out to be useful, that of a terms of trade gap.
    In an equilibrium with flexible prices, monopolistic competitors would set
prices to be a constant markup over marginal costs. This implies that the log
of marginal cost would be equal to − In such a natural equilibrium, therefore,
domestic output and the terms of trade would have to satisfy the corresponding
version of (18)9 :
                                           
             − = − + log  +  log  +  +  + ∗ − ∗ − (1 + )   (21)
where output and the terms of trade have been given a superscript  to indicate
"natural".
   Substracting the last equation from (18) then gives:
                                                
                               +  = ( −  ) + ( −  )
   This says that the deviation of marginal costs from their flexible price value
depends on the departures of domestic output and the terms of trade from their
natural values. The first term is the one emphasized in the conventional literature,
but the second term is not.
   One can then insert the last equation into (20) to obtain an equation:
                                                      
                          =   +1 + ( −  ) + ( −  )      (22)
which can be seen as a version of the New Keynesian Phillips Curve. This in
fact is similar to others found in the literature (e.g. Gali and Monacelli 2005),
except that the tradeoﬀ between inflation and domestic production is shifted by
the terms of trade gap. In this setup, however, such a deviation is endogenous,
with significant implications.
    Now, recall that 14 is the key link between the demand for domestic output
and relative prices. Log linearizing it gives:
                                       1
        = ∗ + {[( −  ) +  ] + (1 − )( +  −  )}
                                      
                 ∗              1
            =  + {[ +  ] + (1 − )( +  )}
                       ∙ µ               ¶            ¸
                 ∗                (1 − )                     
            =  +    +                + (1 − ) − ∗ ( + (1 − ))
                                                             
  9
      We use ( +  ) =  − ∗
where we have used the linearized version of 6 for the second equality and 19 for
the third one.
    Since this holds under flexible prices, the natural levels of output and terms
of trade must satisfy:
                    ∙ µ               ¶            ¸
            ∗               (1 − )                      
       =  +    +              + (1 − ) − ∗ ( + (1 − ))         (23)
                                                          
   The two preceding expressions then imply:
                                      
                              Θ( −  ) = ( −  )                         (24)

where                     ∙ µ             ¶            ¸
                                  (1 − )
                     1Θ =   +           + (1 − )
                                     
   Inserting in 22 yields a Phillips curve that finally looks like a conventional one:
                                                        
                             =   +1 + ( −  )                     (25)

where
                                    = { + Θ}
    While the preceding form of the Phillips curve agrees with conventional ones,
the similarity is misleading. First, the slope of the Phillips Curve (given by )
depends on various elasticities and parameters of the model, including the degree
of openness  This is because our final Phillips curve summarizes not only the
conventional eﬀect of the output gap on marginal costs and domestic inflation,
but also the eﬀects of the terms of trade gap on the latter.
    Second, and more importantly, the natural rate of output moves around with
the shocks in the model, including the world relative price shocks ∗  Some
straightforward algebra yields the solution for the natural rate of output:

          1
 =           (− − ( − Θ)∗ + Θ [( − 1)] ∗ +  − log  −  log  + (1 + ) )
       ( + Θ)
                                                                                 (26)
    It is straightforward to show that, if  =  = 1the coeﬃcients on foreign
demand (∗ ) and world food prices (∗ ) will be zero. In this case, natural output
fluctuates only in response to productivity shocks.
    To understand these results, refer to Figure 3. Under flexible prices, the mar-
ginal cost equation 21 implies a relationship such as MM between  and  , with
slope − In turn, the market clearing condition 23 induces a relationship such as
DD, with slope Θ The natural levels of output and the terms of trade are then
given by a point such as E in the figure. An increase in the relative price of food,
say a unit shock to ∗ , shifts MM up by the same amount (one unit). The same
shock shifts DD up by Θ(  + (1 − )) Accordingly, a positive shock to ∗ always
causes an increase in  (a deterioration in the natural terms of trade). And the
shock will result in an increase in  if and only if Θ(  + (1 − )) is less than
unity, as in that case the vertical shift of DD will be smaller that of MM. But the
sign of [1 − Θ(  + (1 − ))] is equal to the sign of  − 1
    Why is the relation between  and 1 the key one? Use the definition of the
real exchange rate  =  ∗  to rewrite the market clearing condition 14 as
                         "          µ        ¶−          µ         ¶− #
                                                1
                                                     −       
                = ∗ (1 − )          ∗
                                                  + 
                                                          ∗

    This expression expresses the demand for home goods a a function of world
consumption, the real exchange rate, and the world relative price of home goods,
  ∗  If world consumption and the world relative price of home goods are
fixed, the eﬀect of the real exchange rate on  , depends only on  − 1 A one
percent increase in  (a real depreciation) increases domestic consumption by
1 percent via risk sharing. But, given   ∗  a one percent increase in 
also implies a one percent increase in the domestic relative price of home output.
This leads to substitution away from home goods and causes domestic demand to
fall by  percent.
    Suppose that there is a shock to world food prices, say a one percent increase
in ∗  Under flexible prices, that shock can be accommodated by only relative price
movements, with no changes in home output, if  = 1 In that case, 21 says that
the terms of trade  would increase by one percent. Since  = (1 − ) − ∗ 
the real exchange rate would then fall by  percent. But, as we have just seen,
this would have no eﬀect on demand if  = 1 If   1 however, substitution
eﬀects would prevail and the fall in the real exchange rate would result in an
increase in demand. In that case, the accommodation of the shock requires an
increase in the natural rate of output. Note the strength of this would depend
not only on  − 1 but also on  and, further, on the domestic share  in the
demand for home goods. This explains why the impact of ∗ on  in 26 depends
on ( − 1).
4. Implications for the IS and Impulse Responses
As mentioned, the model is closed by adding a monetary policy rule and by
specifying stochastic processes for the exogenous shocks. To gain insight on the
transmission of the external price shock to domestic aggregates and illustrate the
attendant dynamics, we solve for a linear approximation of the model assuming a
standard Taylor rule and discuss the impulse—responses for shocks to the relative
price of food, ∗ 

4.1. The Dynamic IS and the Natural Interest Rate
As stressed by Woodford (2003), the model’s response to a given monetary policy
rule is best understood by describing the interaction between the rule’s implica-
tions for the real interest rate and the natural interest rate. Hence our first task
is to define the natural interest rate appropriately.
    Linearizing the Euler condition 5 yields:

                       −  +1 =  ∆+1
                                       £                ¤
                                   =  ∆∗+1 + ∆+1

where the second equality follows from linearizing the risk sharing condition 4.
This says that the real (CPI based) interest rate is given by expected consumption
growth and hence, via risk sharing, by world consumption growth and expected
real depreciation.
    Now we can use 19 and its flexible price counterpart to derive a useful expres-
sion for the real exchange rate:

                            =  + (1 − )( −  )
                              =  + (1 − )Θe

where e is, as before, the output gap, and  is the natural (flexible price) ex-
change rate. Note that the latter is exogenous.
   Combining the preceding expressions,
                                 £                                  ¤
                 −  +1 =  ∆∗+1 + ∆+1 + (1 − )Θ∆e+1

   This relates the real interest rate to the expected change in the output gap,
plus the exogenous variables ∆∗+1 and ∆+1  One could define a natural interest
rate by the term ∆∗+1 + ∆+1  but it is more intuitive to rewrite this in terms
of domestic inflation instead of CPI inflation, since the NK Phillips curve depends
on the former. To do this, use
                            =   + ∆
                              =   +  [∆ + Θ∆e
                                                    ]
to get
                    £                                                     ¤
  −   +1 =  ∆∗+1 + ∆+1 + (1 − )Θ∆e          
                                                 +1 + (∆+1 + Θ∆e
                                                                    +1 )
                    £                                  ¤
                                 
                =  ∆∗+1 + ∆+1       ∗
                                      − ∆+1 + Θ∆e
                                                  +1
where we have used  +   =   −  ∗  The LHS is the PPI-based real interest
rate.
    Defining now the natural (real) interest rate:
                                £                        ¤
                         =  ∆∗+1 + ∆+1
                                                    ∗
                                                 − ∆+1
the previous expression can be rewritten in the form:
                                1
                        e = − [ −  +1 −  ] +  e+1              (27)
                               Θ
which corresponds to the dynamic IS curve of Woodford (2003) and Gali (2008).
As stressed by those authors, this equation says that the output gap is given by
the interaction between a real interest rate and its natural counterpart. Rewriting
it as
                             1X £
                                ∞
                                                                
                                                                  ¤
                    e = −         + − +  ++1 − +              (28)
                             Θ =0
(under the assumption that the infinite sum converges) stresses that the output
gap falls when the discounted sum of current and expected real interest rates
exceeds the corresponding sum for the natural interest rates. In this sense, high
real interest rates are contractionary; but, notably, what matters is not only the
current value of the real interest rate, but also the expectation of all its future
values.

4.2. Policy and Impulse Responses
Given the behavior of real interest rates, the IS curve 27 gives the behavior of the
output gap, and the Phillips curve 25 the behavior of PPI inflation. To close the
model, consider a PPI based Taylor rule:
                                  =  ̃ +   
   We will focus on the impulse response to a shock to the relative price of food,
∗ 
    It is best to start with tracing the eﬀect on the natural levels of output and
the terms of trade, given by 21 and 23. Ignoring irrelevant constants:
                                       
                                       =  ∗

                                       =  ∗
where
                                      Θ [( − 1)]
                                =
                                          ( + Θ)
and                              £                     ¤
                                Θ 1 + (  + (1 − ))
                            =
                                       ( + Θ)
    As noticed at the end of the previous section,   0 and   1 when   1;
the opposite is also true. If  = 1  = 0 and  = 1, so it is easiest to start
with this case. Then  = ∗  so that the natural interest rate does not change
with the  ∗ shock. Now, if the real interest rate is also expected to remain constant
at all times, the dynamic IS curve implies that the output gap remains at zero.
Then the Phillips curve implies that domestic inflation must also remain at zero.
Finally, the PPI based Taylor rule implies that the nominal interest rate is also
kept at zero, which validates the conjecture that the real interest rate remains
constant.
    The key to understand this result is, again, to consider the impact on the
demand for home output of a change in the real exchange rate given the world’s
relative price of the home good. Since  = − = −∗  the real exchange rate
must appreciate. Keeping the the world’s relative price of the home good fixed,
this appreciation reduces the domestic relative price of home goods, and increases
demand with elasticity  On the other hand, risk sharing implies that the real
appreciation must reduce domestic consumption, with elasticity 1 If  = 1
these eﬀects exactly cancel each other, and the real appreciation has no eﬀects on
demand if other relative prices are kept unchanged.
    The same reasoning implies that if   1 there will be an increase in the
demand for home goods at unchanged relative prices. Hence domestic output and
the output gap will expand, domestic inflation will be positive, and the nominal
interest rate must go up. This can be seen in an alternative way: If   1
then   1 so an increase in today’s relative price of food increases the natural
interest rate. There are two eﬀects at work. An increase in ∗ implies that  ∆+1
                                                                                   ∗
is negative, because of mean reversion. This means that, given the expected
path of the natural terms of trade, there has to be an expected real depreciation
(that is,  ∆+1 increases). The anticipated depreciation leads to anticipated
consumption growth, via risk sharing: this increases the natural interest rate. The
                                                     ∗                              
counterbalancing eﬀect is that the negative  ∆+1     leads to changes in  ∆+1
of the same sign, that is, an expected improvement over time of the natural terms
of trade. This leads to an expected real appreciation and, via international risk
sharing, a fall in expected consumption growth, or a lower natural interest rate.
The first eﬀect dominates if   1; in this case, the natural interest rate increases
at all horizons. Then the IS curve 28 implies that the output gap must increase,
the Phillips curve implies that domestic inflation increases, and the policy rule
yields higher nominal interest rates. The reasoning is the opposite if   1
    A calibrated example illustrates and confirms the analysis. Baseline para-
meters are given by Table 4 and a steady-state ratio of food expenditures to
consumption set to 25% so that  = 075 10 . The elasticity of intratemporal sub-
stitution  between food and non-food goods is allowed to vary between 0.25 and
2, and the coeﬃcient of risk aversion,  is set to 2. The remaining parameter
choices in Table 4 are similar to the ones found in Gali and Monacelli (2005) and
de Paoli (2009) as well other studies.
    Figure 4 displays impulse responses for the PPI rule. The responses for the
output gap, PPI inflation, the nominal interest rate, the terms of trade, the real
exchange rate, and natural output are exactly as expected given our analysis. The
responses of the other variables follow easily. Of particular interest is the behavior
of the nominal exchange rate, which follows:

                                    ∆ =   + ∆ − ∆∗

    If  = 1, as we have seen,  = ∗  Let  = 0 be the period of the initial shock.
Since a  ∗ shock has no eﬀect on the output gap or domestic inflation in that case,
0 = 0∗ and ∆0 = 0 If, say,   1   1 but the output gap and domestic
inflation increase. So 0 must jump up, on impact. Also on impact, ∆0∗ = 1 The
increase in domestic inflation is more than compensated by the negative eﬀect of
the term ∆0 − ∆0∗ = Θ∆e    0 + ( − 1)∆0∗  so the exchange rate jumps down.
In subsequent periods  = 1 2 , ∆ becomes negative as the terms of trade
adjust to their steady state value. However, ∆ − ∆∗ = ∆ + Θ∆e           − ∆∗ =
                     ∗
Θ∆e  + ( − 1)∆  The expected change in the nominal exchange rate is then
  10
       Based on cross-country data underlying Rigobon (2008), as kindly supplied by the author.
aﬀected positively by higher domestic inflation and the expected mean reversion
of the food price shock (the ( − 1)∆∗ term), but negatively by the expected
fall in the output gap (the Θ∆e   term). In figure 4 the former eﬀect dominates
the latter, so the change in the nominal exchange rate becomes positive but small
in periods  ≥ 1
    Finally, it is also worth noticing that, in the case  = 1  = −∗  as
we have seen. Then international risk sharing implies that domestic consumption
must fall in response to the real appreciation. This underscores the fact that, even
in a flexible price world, our model is quite diﬀerent from previous ones because
food price shocks sever the links between the real exchange rate and the terms of
trade.
    Now let us consider a CPI rule:

                                   =  ̃ +   

    For comparison, assume that the coeﬃcients of the rule are the same as those
of the PPI rule. Now, since  =   + ∆ we can rewrite the rule as:

                =  ̃ +    +  ∆
                  =  ̃ +    +  ∆ +  Θ∆e  
                  =  (1 + Θ)̃ −  Θe  −1 +    +  ∆

     This emphasizes that the CPI rule will diﬀer from the PPI rule in making the
interest rate react to (exogenous) changes in the terms of trade plus (endogenous)
changes in the output gap (over and above those prescribed by the original rule).
From the last line of the above expression, it can be seen that this in turn implies
that, on impact, the CPI rule will react more strongly to the output gap than the
PPI rule.
     To understand the diﬀerence this makes, consider again the case  = 1 so
that a shock to  ∗ does not aﬀect the output gap nor domestic inflation under a
PPI rule. Also, the natural interest rate is not aﬀected by the shock in this case.
However, the natural terms of trade must change, since  = ∗ . This implies
that ∆  0 and  ∆+
                          
                               0  = 1 2 Keeping the output gap and domestic
inflation constant, this would mean that  would increase on impact but also that
all expected future interest rates would fall. The dynamic IS then implies that this
is likely to be expansionary, and the Phillips curve implies that domestic inflation
is likely to increase.
    Figure 5 displays impulse responses for the CPI rule For the case  = 1
the figures confirm the discussion in the previous paragraph. The other cases are
just a mixture of this case and the results for the PPI rule.
    Note that our discussion explains how the CPI rule leads to a jump in the
output gap in spite of an increase in the interest rate on impact. Also, the fact
that the nominal interest rate goes back to almost zero after the initial period
becomes intuitive.
    Finally, consider the behavior of the nominal exchange rate under the CPI
rule. Assuming  = 1 once more,  =  + Θe         = ∗ + Θe  which means
that the terms of trade will be higher than with a PPI rule because of the CPI
rule implies a positive output gap, as explained. The expression for the nominal
exchange rate change becomes ∆ =   + ∆ − ∆∗ =   + Θ∆e          , which is
positive for all  Note that this explains why ∆ is much larger at  = 0 than for
 ≥ 1 : this is because ∆e  is positive for  = 0 but negative afterwards. This is
all consistent with the various panels in Figure 5. The cases with a CPI rule and
 6= 1 are now straightforward after taking into account the induced responses
of the output gap and domestic inflation, discussed already.

5. Welfare and Policy Comparisons
As already mentioned, previous work in closed as well as small open economies
generally find that PPI or "core" inflation targeting is superior, in terms of welfare,
than CPI inflation targeting or an exchange rate peg. Further, there is consensus
that this is always the case when all elasticities are one, i.e. preferences are Cobb-
Douglas (Gali, 2008). Finally, between CPI targeting and exchange rate pegging
rules, the latter has been found to generate higher welfare levels (cf. de Paoli,
2009). This section examines whether these results still hold in a small open
economy subject to shocks to the world relative price of food, over and above the
usual shocks to domestic productivity and interest rates.
    One key diﬀerence between our model and previous ones is easiest to illustrate
in the benchmark case of Cobb-Douglas preferences and fully flexible prices. Con-
sider an external shock, that is, a shock to either ∗ or ∗ . As seen above, when
 =  = 1 natural output (and also actual output, since prices are flexible) does
not respond to either shock. From subsection 4.2 we also know that ∆ = ∆ =
∆∗ and, since  = (1 − )∗ , the real exchange will move by ∆ = −∆∗ .
Risk sharing then implies that the response of home consumption is given by
∆ = −∆∗  + ∆∗ . This is diﬀerent from zero provided that ∆∗ 6= ∆∗ .
   More generally, when prices are sticky and  =  = 1, it is also straightfor-
ward to show that the CPI rule will typically entail less RER and consumption
volatility for a given z* shock relative to PPI targeting even when all elasticities
are one11 Since consumption has a key bearing on utility, it is no longer war-
ranted that PPI targeting will be the dominant policy rule even under this very
particular parametrization, once  ∗ shocks are non-trivial.
   In what follows, we examine the relative superiority of CPI targeting, PPI
targeting, and exchange rate pegging, under general parameter configurations and
show how the attendant welfare ranking depends on how these policy rules aﬀect
the variances and co-variances of key relative prices.

5.1. A Second Order Approximation to Welfare
Evaluation of the welfare implications of monetary policy can be based on a second
order approximation of theX  utility function of the representative agent, here the
expected utility function         . Following Gali (2008) and Woodford (2003),
one can show (see Appendix 3) that the relevant part of the utility function is:


                                X
                                ∞
                                               1−       1− 2
                     =               {         ( +     ) −  1+ [
                                 =0
                                                          2
                                1+
                              +     ( −  )2 + Θ 2 ]} +             (29)
                                 2
where  stands for terms independent of policy.
    As it is now well know, a diﬃculty emerges because of the presence of the
linear terms  and  , which mean that a correct second order approximation
to  cannot be based on a first order approximation to the equilibrium equa-
tions (see Woodford 2003, chapter 6). One alternative is to solve for a second
order approximation to equilibria, and use the resulting expressions to eliminate
the linear terms  and  from the previous expressions. This is the strategy of
e.g. Benigno and Benigno (2003) and de Paoli (2009). In our case, that route
leads to complicated expressions that give little insight (at least to us). There-
fore, we compute second order approximations to welfare numerically in the next
subsection.
 11
      The respective derivations are available from the authors upon request.
    A little work, however, yields some information about the policy tradeoﬀs in
our model and the diﬀerences we find relative to other previous work. The pre-
ceding expression for  reveals that the welfare associated with a given policy
depends positively on the expected level of consumption, negatively on the expec-
tation of output (labor supply), and negatively on the volatility of consumption,
output, and inflation. Now, noting that the risk sharing condition
                                                 1
                                     = ∗ +     
                                                 
is an exact relation, it follows that the expectation of  increases with the expec-
tation of the real exchange rate   Hence, there is an incentive for home policy
to engineer a real depreciation, on average.
    On the other hand, if the real exchange rate is expected to be weak, the home
good might be expected to be relatively cheap, and hence expected labor supply
may increase, reducing utility. To elucidate this issue, one can use 7 and (14)
to solve for a second order approximation of  in terms of the first and second
moments of  and ∗  In this approximation, the covariance term  ∗ appears
with a sign that depends on the parameters of the model. For example, in the
less unwieldy case of equal (but not necessarily unity) elasticities ( =  = 1),
this yields:
                          µ        ¶
                                            ∗
              ≡ 1 +                +       
                             1−          1− 
                             Ã µ         ¶2       µ      ¶               !
                        1                            
                     + 2                 + 32            +  ( − 1)
                        2          1−              1−
                          Ã µ          ¶2      µ      ¶!
                        1                         
                     +                   − 2            ∗2
                        2       1−              1−
                        Ã µ          ¶2      µ       ¶                !
                                                         (1 −  )
                     +                 + 2           +                 ∗
                              1−              1−          1−

   This expression shows that  increases with the level of ∗ and  and with
the variance of the real exchange rate. Hence a policy rule that delivers more real
exchange volatility relative to others (as such as PPI vs. CPI targeting) will be
associated, all else constant, with higher  , as seen in previous work (cf. de Paoli,
2009). What is diﬀerent here from models in which the terms of trade and the real
exchange rate move in the same direction is the presence of the covariance term
 ∗ . Even though it has an unambiguously positive coeﬃcient, this covariance
can be larger or smaller, depending on the policy rule. In fact, our discussion
of impulse responses indicate that this covariance is likely to be negative under
both PPI and CPI targeting, leading to lower output. This means that there
are non-trivial trade-oﬀs associated with the way alternative policies exploit the
covariance of the real exchange rate and global relative prices. Under more general
parametrizations, welfare may increase or decrease if monetary policy results in
a larger covariance between price shocks and the real exchange rate. This eﬀect,
of course, is absent from other models, as they do not allow for shocks to world
relative prices.

5.2. Policy Rules
As mentioned, the equilibria of our model are pinned down once a monetary policy
rule is given. If monetary policy is an interest rate rule, we need to append the
Euler equation 5 to the equilibrium system. The model is then closed by specifying
diﬀerent rules relating the domestic interest rate to other variables.
    The first rule we consider is a domestic inflation (PPI) Taylor rule:
                                                                 
                   log(1 +  ) = ( +  (Π − 1) +  ( −  ) +  )

where  is natural output12 We also study a CPI Taylor rule, given by:
                                                                
                   log(1 +  ) = ( +  (Π − 1) +  ( −  ) +  )
where Π+1 = +1  
   Finally, we consider a nominal exchange rate peg rule, in which the mone-
tary authority fixes the nominal exchange rate  to a constant  Then the real
exchange rate must satisfy  = ∗  , which implies:
                                                         
                                         = ∗ (       )
                                                         
where by definition,
                                                    
                                          Π =
                                                   −1
  12
     Natural output is obtained, together with other natural variables, by setting  = 0 in
equation (12) and substituting in the equations in Appendix 1. This yields a static 4-equation
system which can be solved for       and 
                                                      
                                                         given the exogenous variables ∗  ∗  and
 .
    Introducing these equations in the system, and withdrawing the Euler equation
in the monetary policy rule that we had for the CPI and PPI cases, we are
now left with eleven equations in the eleven variables:  (  )   (̄  )
Π      and  Having the level of  as a new variable to solve for,
and with a constant the domestic price level is pinned-down by introducing a
stochastic process the (log of) world price, given by: ∗ =  + ∗−1 +  , where 
is white noise.

5.3. Policy Rankings

We use the numerical procedures and programs of Schmitt Grohe and Uribe (2004)
to calculate the utility associated with each of the three policy rules under study.
We follow Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2007) and Wang (2006) in computing wel-
fare comparisons that are "conditional " on the same starting point which, as in
these previous studies, is the non-stochastic steady state. Besides the obvious
theoretical appeal of this metric, Wang (2006) shows that it also simplifies the
computational burden considerably. Specifically, he shows that the second order
approximation of the instantaneous discounted value of the representative agent’s
welfare, conditional on such a starting point, has the form:
                                          1      −
                                =  +  ( 0)
                                          2
where  is steady state conditional utility,  is a vector of the model state variables
at the non-stochastic steady state,  is the second derivative of the  function
with respect to the variance of the shocks (once the system is set so that the vector
of control variables takes the form  = (  )), and  is a scalar governing the
variance of the shocks. Intuitively, given each policy, the last term in the above
equation captures the adjustment of initial positions due to uncertainty.

    Computationally, this calculation amounts to a simple addition of a control
variable  to the system of equations entering the Schmitt Grohe and Uribe algo-
rithm, which will evolve according to the law of motion  − = (   )Then,
the relative welfare loss of policy rule  relative to policy rule , expressed in per-
                                                                                   
centage units of steady state consumption, will be given by 100×(1−(1−)(0 −0 ) )
5.4. Calibration
In the calibrations that follows, we examine the net balance of the policy trade-oﬀs
on welfare using benchmarks from a prototype emerging market (Chile) as well as
other international data to calibrate the stochastic processes for the relative world
price of food, TFP, domestic and external interest rate shocks. We also assume
Taylor rule coeﬃcients that are close to those estimated in practice for economies
operating inflation targeting regimes. We evaluate the robustness of the results
for a wide range of alternative parametrizations, including that of the standard
deviation and persistence of the various shocks as well as various combinations of
the intra-temporal elasticity of consumption, which we let take on values between
0.25 and 4, and the coeﬃcient of risk aversion (the inverse of the inter-temporal
elasticity), which we let take on values between 0.5 and 4, consistent with the
range of estimates found in empirical macro studies.
    Baseline parameter values are reported in Table 5. All parameters are com-
puted on a quarterly frequency and the ratio of home good consumption to income
in steady-state () is set to 0.75. We show later the eﬀects of varying it within a
wide but still reasonable range (0.6 to 0.9). Since in the non-linear representation
of the model’s steady state  is a function of  and  ∗  we must fix only two of
these three parameters and allow one of them to adjust across distinct combina-
tions of the substitution elasticities. Since we have no evidence of what a realistic
calibration for  might be (something complicated by its dependence on the unit
of measurement with which one evaluates the weight of consumption and leisure
in utility), we fix both world income  ∗ and the initial level of net foreign assets
that pins down  and let  adjust so as keep 1 −  fixed. The other parameter of
interest is world consumer price index. Initially we fix it to unity but let it later to
evolve according to a stochastic process with considerable persistence ( = 099)
and (quarterly) standard deviation of 1.3%, as obtained from a quarterly AR(1)
regression of an unweighted average of advanced countries (G-8) PPIs during the
1990-2008 period.
    Critical to our results is the volatility of world food prices relative to world CPI.
We parameterize  ∗ as displaying a conditional (quarterly) standard deviation of
4.5% and an AR(1) coeﬃcient of 0.85, consistent with regressions of the IFS-
IMF index of food commodity prices relative to world (G-8) WPI between 1990
and 2008. Based on estimates using Chilean data, the standard deviation of
productivity shocks is set at 1.2% per quarter and its AR(1) coeﬃcient at 0.7. The
latter is very similar to one used by Gali and Monacelli (2005) using Canadian
data, whereas their reported standard deviations of TFP shocks for Canada is
nearly half (0.7%), consistent with the fact that output in the Chilean economy
has been about twice or so more volatile than in Canada. Further below, we also
examine the robustness of the results to changes in such TFP parameters. Finally,
we calibrate  by running a Taylor rule-type regression with Chilean data from
1991 to 2008. We obtain a standard deviation of  of 0.62% per quarter and and
AR(1) coeﬃcient of 0.6. Again, we examine the sensitivity of results to alternative
calibrations. In calibrating labor supply (1) and export price () elasticities,
we take values used in other studies (e.g. Bergin et al, 2007; Gali, 2008) with
acknowledgement that they appear to vary widely in the data. So, we let their
range vary from 1 (benchmark) to 1/3 and from 1 to 5, respectively.

5.5. Results
We start with the baseline parametrization in Table 6 and with the coeﬃcient on
the output gap set to zero, so that we have "strict" (as opposed to the so-called
"flexible") inflation targeting. As with all subsequent welfare ranking tables, we
report the values of  for pair-wise comparisons between PPI targeting ("rule 1),
CPI targeting ("rule 2") and the exchange rate peg ("rule 3), and the resulting
overall relative rankings between the three rules. The table allows for diﬀerent
values of  and 
     As usual with welfare comparisons,  values are generally low, albeit generally
of an order of magnitude higher than those featuring in Lucas’s (1987) classic
illustration of the welfare cost of business cycles. Be that as it may, the conven-
tional wisdom on PPI dominance is clearly overruled. The ranking at the bottom
of Table 6 identifies CPI targeting ("rule 2") as the best rule for the majority of
 −  configurations, and particularly for the arguably more realistic cases where
 is low and  is high.
     Our allowance for international relative price shocks (here food price shocks)
is crucial in accounting for this result. Tables 7 and 8 provide some insight. Table
7 keeps the same parametrization as in Table 6 but sets the variance of world
food price shocks to near zero. Then we recover the results of previous authors:
either the exchange rate peg or PPI targeting dominates. In particular, for the
unit elasticity case ( =  =  = 1), it can be shown (by combining 13, 4 with
 = 1 and a fixed ) that trade will be balanced at all times. With the variance of
 ∗ shocks negligible, our economy then becomes isomorphic to the Gali-Monacelli
benchmark, for which they show analytically that PPI is the dominant policy rule.
This is precisely what our numerical results show. So, if relative food price shocks
are negligible, PPI is the dominant rule when agents are risk averse and, more
generally, when intra-temporal substitution elasticities are not too low.
     To gain further insight into this result, Table 8 computes means and standard
deviations for the model variables that have a key bearing on welfare13 . We do
so for the case in which only food shocks are present, as well as for the cases
where only productivity and only monetary policy shocks are present. Columns
(1) to (6) show that, if only food price shocks are present, CPI targeting yields
lower RER and consumption volatility, as well as lower output (and hence lower
eﬀort) and a higher consumption to output ratio. The table also points to what
is behind such a higher C/Y ratio, namely a more appreciated RER on average
(0.32% above steady state).
     Why CPI targeting tends to produce a more appreciated RER under food
price shocks is apparent from the expression for home pricing equation derived
in Appendix 2. As PPI targeting seeks to minimize home price volatility and
its covariance with  ∗ shocks (and hence with the CPI), then ̄ will be lower;
all else constant, this implies a weaker RER. In contrast, CPI tends to be more
accommodative with home price volatility and lets it co-vary more in tandem with
 ∗ shocks (and hence with the CPI). That entails a stronger RER which allows the
country to exploit its terms of trade externality, leading to a higher consumption
to output 14 . So, the welfare superiority of CPI targeting shown in Table 6 appears
to reflect that rule’s edge in generating more consumption relative to output and
lower consumption volatility relative to both PPI and PEG rules, at least when
only food price shocks are present.
     Table 8 also indicates, consistent with our discussion, why CPI is less attractive
if only productivity or monetary shocks are present. In the productivity shock-
only case, PPI targeting produces the lowest consumption and real exchange rate
volatility, as well as (marginally) higher C/Y. So, in a world where domestic
productivity are of overwhelming importance, PPI targeting ought to be preferred.
Again, this can be explained with referring to the relationship between the level
of the home price index and the covariance between income and marginal cost
shocks under Calvo-pricing, which we flesh out in Appendix 2. With productivity
shocks only, that covariance will be negative. Because the overriding goal of PPI
rule is to stabilize  , PPI targeting will react in a stronger procyclical manner
  13
     These moments are computed by feeding the second-order approximation solution to the
model with a 20,000 random draws of z*, a, and v shocks.
  14
     This is shown for  = 2 or  = 4 in the table; further parametrizations available from the
authors upon request.
to productivity shocks than CPI targeting. This will prevent marginal costs from
falling as much as it would so that covariance will be less negative than under CPI
targeting. So, as per equation 30, the home price level will be higher, and hence the
RER will be more appreciated under a PPI rule. With a more appreciated RER,
the ratio of C/Y will be higher, all else constant. This is indeed what columns
7-9 of Table 8 show. So, only when food price shocks reenter the picture, as in
the last three columns of Table 8, do the reasons for CPI dominance reemerge.
     Table 9 examines what happens to relative welfare rankings if the volatility of
monetary policy (interest rate) shocks doubles, from 0.6% per quarter to 1.2% per
quarter, under the baseline parametrization of Table 6. As expected, the result is
to increase the attractiveness of the peg rule. As monetary policy shocks become
larger, the numerical magnitudes of welfare diﬀerences also grow larger, in some
cases reaching 0.6% of steady state consumption.
     Tables 10 repeats the exercise for domestic TFP shocks. For the reasons al-
ready discussed, this increases the attractiveness of PPI relative to other rules.
Yet, keeping the standard deviation of  ∗ shocks at non-trivial levels (45% a
quarter), this does not translate into far-reaching PPI dominance.
     Table 11 goes back to the baseline specification of Table 6 except that we have
now a more aggressive policy reaction to inflation, with  = 30 . What this does
is basically to increase the attractiveness of exchange rate pegs. But focusing
only on the CPI-PPI trade-oﬀs, a more hawkish anti-inflation stance increases the
dominance of PPI over CPI, although the welfare gaps are particularly tiny for
realistic values of  (i.e. above 1).
     Table 12 moves away from strict inflation targeting by placing some weight on
output stabilization. This reduces even further the numerical gaps between rules:
with (the correct measure of) output weighting on monetary policy decisions,
all the rules become more similar in terms of welfare losses, with the diﬀerences
between CPI and PPI shrinking considerably for higher values of 
     Table 13 moves the export price elasticity parameter from  = 1 to  = 5,
consistent with some empirical work (see Harrigan, 1993). One might expect
that this would decrease the attractiveness of CPI targeting under  ∗ shocks,
since a higher substitutability between domestic and foreign non-food goods oﬀers
less scope for the small open economy to exploit its terms of trade externality.
However, a higher  also implies that greater RER volatility brings about greater
domestic output volatility (as domestic goods become more substitutable with
foreign ones) and hence higher employment volatility, which hurts welfare (see
equation 31). Overall, the upper panel in Table 13 clearly indicates that the
latter eﬀect dominates: CPI targeting becomes even more attractive than PPI
targeting, with the numerical welfare gaps (  ) being not so negligible at times.
By the same token, CPI beats PEG more often, implying that the dominance of
CPI targeting increases relative to the baseline of  = 1.
    Table 14 diﬀers from Table 6 in lowering the labor supply elasticity to a third.
As can be gleaned from equation (29), a higher  increases the weight of disutility
associated with higher employment levels and volatility. Combining this with the
simulation results of Table 8, it is clear why a higher  reduces the attractiveness
of the peg relative to both CPI and PPI.
    Thus far, from Table 6 to 14, we have set the volatility of the world price ∗ to
zero, thus increasing the stabilization properties of exchange rate pegging . Table
15 changes this by letting ∗ be driven by a very persistent stochastic process, with
a realistic quarterly variance of 13%. This results in greater dominance of CPI
and PPI relative to the exchange rate peg, with CPI becoming more dominant for
higher risk aversion  when, as discussed, the higher RER volatility engendered
by PPI targeting hurts welfare more strongly.
    As a final experiment, Table 16 takes the benchmark case of Table 6 but
changes  to 06, hence letting the economy be more open in steady state relative
to the baseline  = 075. This high openness scenario entails even greater CPI rule
dominance, especially for  above 0.5. No less importantly, for the empirically
more realistic combination of higher  and lower  , the welfare gains of CPI
relative to PPI are not so trivial, ranging between 0.33 percent ( = 2 and  =
025) and 0.62 percent ( = 2 and  = 075 ) of steady state consumption.

6. Conclusion
Wide fluctuations in the global relative price of primary commodities have been
long-standing phenomena (Jacks, O’Rourke, and Williamson 2009). Among pri-
mary commodities, food price volatility has been particularly pronounced, typi-
cally spiking up in the run up to global inflationary spurts. Yet, its macroeconomic
transmission and implications for monetary policy in small open economies have
not been previously examined in the growing literature on monetary DSGE mod-
els. Given the potentially important role of food price shocks in deviating inflation
from target in these economies, and in light of concerns that food price pressures
may re-emerge once the global economic recovery strengthens, it seems urgent to
fill this literature gap.15
     This paper has sought to do so in the context of a canonical small open economy
model, modified by the introduction of an imported good (food) with a weight
in utility that is sizeable and larger than that of the rest of the world, and with
a fluctuating world relative price. The model also takes into account some well-
known features of food in utility, such as its low intra-temporal substitution with
other consumption goods, and explores quantitatively attendant implications for
monetary transmission and policy targeting under a wider set of parametrization
than previous studies.
     Some notable results emerge, of both analytical and quantitative nature. First,
we show that the global relative price shock opens up the possibility of opposite
movements in the terms of trade (TOT) and the real exchange rate (RER). This
is because if food has a higher weight in the domestic relative to the foreign
consumption basket, higher world food prices tend to appreciate the RER while
depreciating the terms of trade of the small net food importing open economy.
This in turn has a theoretically ambiguous eﬀect on domestic output: an adverse
food price shock can be expansionary or contractionary depending on the model’s
parameters and the specific policy rule. This results contrasts with wisdom in-
herited from previous models where such global relative price shocks were absent
(e.g. Cova and Sondegaard, 2004; Gali and Monacelli, 2005; de Paoli, 2009). In
that case, TOT and the RER necessarily move in the same direction and their
juxtaposition would imply that an adverse terms of trade shock must be unam-
biguously expansionary. Empirical evidence to the contrary argues in favor of our
more general setting.
     The second novel result is that, even under standard risk sharing and Cobb-
Douglas preferences (when all intra- and inter-temporal elasticities equal to one),
the small open economy is not isomorphic to a closed one in the sense that do-
mestic consumption is not invariant to the world relative price shock, all else
constant (including world consumption). This is because insofar as food repre-
sents a non-trivial share of the domestic consumption basket relative to the foreign
counterpart, the RER moves with the exogenous relative price, and so does domes-
tic consumption. This result is of particular importance since all previous studies
agree that under Cobb-Douglas preferences the main imperfection that monetary
policy should seek to mitigate is the domestic price stickiness; hence targeting
domestic PPI inflation is always welfare superior to other rules. Once this full
  15
    See, e.g., http://www.ft.com/foodprices for recent developments in world food supply and
prices as well as on debate on the resurgence of food price pressures.
isomorphism is broken, the superiority of PPI targeting is no longer warranted,
as we illustrate by model calibrations under various alternative parametrizations.
    Third, and on a broader quantitative take, we show - via both impulse-
responses on the log-linearized model as well as simulations using a second-order
approximation - that significant diﬀerences in the responses of macro aggregates
to the food price shock arise under distinct policy rules. This is not surprising
since, from a simple re-writing of the CPI targeting rule, we show how it entails
a direct reaction to the terms of trade shock as well as a stronger response to
impact changes in the output gap than the PPI rule. We also show that shifts in
world food prices typically entail very distinct responses of the exchange rate, out-
put and inflation relative to the more standard shocks to domestic interest rates
and productivity. In particular, as domestic interest rates rise with the shock,
the nominal exchange rate will depreciate (rather than appreciate on impact) in
response to the monetary tightening, CPI inflation will rise, and output can go
either way, as the terms of trade and the real exchange rate can move in opposite
directions as discussed above. A key implication of this distinct pattern of covari-
ances is that the welfare ranking of monetary policy rules will be very distinct
from previous studies once imported price shocks are non-trivial.
    In general and in contrast with previous calibrations of the canonical DSGE
small open economy model, we find that CPI targeting generally dominates PPI
targeting and exchange rate pegging. This is because CPI targeting tends to lower
the volatility of the RER relative to PPI and appreciate the mean RER relative
to both peg and PPI rules. This, in turn, allows the country to take advantage of
the so-called terms of trade externality, i.e., to consume more per unit of domestic
output and thus enhance welfare (given disutility of labor eﬀort). The volatility
of output and employment, however, will be higher relative to the PPI rule and
so will be domestic inflation, implying that important policy trade-oﬀs are at
stake, pertaining to how the distinct policies exploit relative price covariances.
We further corroborate these results by showing that if global food price volatility
becomes trivial, and/or the food share in the domestic consumption basket shrinks
substantially, the welfare rankings of previous studies are replicated.
    A final issue is whether a higher weight on the output gap in the monetary
policy reaction function could narrow or even overturn the welfare superiority
of CPI relative to PPI targeting. We show that this is the case provided that
the central bank uses the theoretically correct (model-based) measure of natural
output. We show that such a measure for a net food importing country should
include fluctuations in the terms of trade and hence in the relative world price of
food. Once this correct measure of the output gap is introduced in the monetary
policy reaction with empirically sensible weights, welfare diﬀerences between PPI
and CPI targeting are narrowed and the CPI welfare superiority even overturned
under certain parametrizations. A practical problem of such a reinstatement of
an output-gap adjusted PPI targeting is, of course, its reliance on the correct
measure of the output gap, which is known to be highly non-trivial in practice.
    Our results thus shed new light on question of how far monetary policy should
lean against the wind of shocks to relative world food prices. Given the general
welfare superiority of broad CPI targeting and that the latter typically implies
a strong reaction to imported inflation, there is a strong case against monetary
policy leniency towards the imported price shock even though the economy is
small and thus unable to aﬀect world prices.
    Some other policy implications follow. One is that the rationale for broad
CPI targeting as currently adopted by many central banks is strenghtened once
we allow for the role of food in utility. This rationale reinforces considerations
related to transparency and avoidance of ad hoc criteria to define the "core"
component in CPI, as well as the credibility gains that might arise from targeting
a broader price index.
    Second, the case provided here for CPI targeting and implicit partial oﬀset of
imported food inflation therein also rectifies some of the regressive distributional
bias associated with the usual prescription that monetary policy should focus on
oﬀsetting the sticky-price distortion. To the extent that food and other com-
modity prices are less sticky and determined under a more competitive market
structure, this prescription implies that central banks should be more lenient to-
wards inflation or deflation in those sectors. Yet, we know that the weight of food
in overall spending is higher among poorer households which are also precisely
the ones with more limited access to credit markets to smooth real purchasing
power fluctuations arising from shocks to relative food prices. Thus strict PPI
targeting has a regressive distributional bias that CPI targeting mitigates. While
a model like ours featuring identical households is not suitable to address such
distributional eﬀects on welfare, it seems important to note here that this might
be an non-trivial extra benefit of CPI targeting predicated by our calibrations in
a representative agent setting.
    Finally, if all inflation targeting central banks follow a non-accomodative stance
against such imported price shocks, this should help mitigate the externality prob-
lem associated with uncoordinated/inward oriented policy responses that typically
arise when central banks target PPI or the exchange rate. Less accommodative
policy based on broad CPI stabilization would thus be more conducive to keep
global inflationary pressures in check, as well as its converse whenever commodity
prices tank.
7. Appendix 1: Recursive Representation of the Model
Consider the pricing function:
             X∞       ∙                                         ¸
                                     ̄               
                   + +| (     −     +| Π+ ) = 0
             =0
                                        − 1

Let us write the previous expression in a recursive way:
                                         ̄       
                                              =     
                                               −1
where
                                              X
                                              ∞
                                    =            + +|
                                              =0
and
                                     X
                                     ∞
                           =            + +| +| Π+
                                     =0
   Recall                                          µ          ¶−
                                                      +          
                                  + = 
                                                                  +
and                                           µ            ¶−
                                                    ̄
                                   +| =                      +
                                                   +
to derive:
                          X
                          ∞
       = | +              + +|
                          =1
              µ         ¶−     X∞        µ      ¶− µ      ¶µ         ¶−
                  ̄                      +                ̄
           =            +      ()                                   +
                             =1
                                                     +      +
             µ     ¶−             µ      ¶− µ       ¶µ       ¶−
               ̄                   +1               ̄
         =            +                                   +1
                                            +1    ̄+1
To express  recursively, it is convenient to write:
                                       
                   +| = [(1 − )+ + 1+           
                                                  + + ]+|
                                          
                                 = + +|
where
                                        = (1 − )  1+
                                                                
so that:
              X
              ∞
                                      1+ 
 =                + + +| Π+
               =0
                               X
                               ∞
    =       |1+   +                           1+ 
                                      + + +| Π+
                               =1
              µ         ¶−(1+)                       µ          ¶− µ          ¶µ           ¶−(1+)
                  ̄                                      +1                      ̄               +1
 =                               1+   +                                                            +1
                                                                     +1        ̄+1               

Nine equations in the ten variables: , , (  ),  , (̄  ), Π , , , , 
   The system is completed with the specification of monetary policy.
8. Appendix 2: Relationship between Home Pricing and
   Covariance of Income and Cost Shocks

           X
           ∞ ∙              µ                    ¶¸
                             ̄           
 =       + +|        −      +|     =0
    =0
                                − 1
             "       µ        ¶−       Ã                  µ       ¶− !#
    X∞
                         ̄                                 ̄
  =       +              + ̄ −          
                                                     +                 =0
    =0
                       +                    − 1         +

X                     µ               ¶−                                                                 µ            ¶− µ           ¶−
                                                            X 
∞                                                              ∞
                               ̄                                                                             ̄            ̄
        +                            + ̄ =             + + +
=0
                          +                           − 1 =0                                            +            +
                                                                                                    Ã              !
      X
      ∞
                     ̄−+1                          X 
                                                           ∞
                                                                                                        ̄−−
                                                                                
            + − +                   =             + + +                       −−
      =0
                     +                          − 1 =0                                            +

      Let: Ξ+ = + + +
                                   

                                                                                          Ã                  !
           X
           ∞
                                           X 
                                                  ∞
                                                                                              ̄−−+−1
                                                                     
                   Ξ+          =             + + +                          −−
           =0
                                         − 1 =0                                                +
                 X
                 ∞
                                                  X 
                                                       ∞
                                                                       
                           
                                 Ξ+   =             Ξ+ +   
                                                                            + ̄−−1
                  =0
                                                − 1 =0
                                                 X
                                                 ∞
                                                                                 (+1)
                                                        + + + +
                                                                                 

                                           =0
                        ̄+1 =                                                                                      (30)
                                         −1                X
                                                            ∞
                                                                      
                                                                          Ξ+
                                                            =0


9. Appendix 3: A Second Order Approximation to the Util-
   ity Function
We follow Gali (2008) and Woodford (2003). Ignoring higher order terms here
and in the rest of this section, a second order approximation of the consumption
part is easy:
                      1−         1−      1−       1− 2
                              =            +       ( +    )
                     (1 − )     (1 − )               2 
with lowercase letters referring to log deviations from nonstochastic steady states
henceforth.
   The term in labor eﬀort is approximated as follows:
    ()1+     1+                     1+
             =          +  1+ [ () +        ()2 ]
    1+        (1 + )                      2
                 1+
             =
               (1 + )
                       ∙                                                      ¸
                   1+           1+ 2                             1+ 2
               +        () +         () − (1 + )  () +     − 
                                    2                              2
The last line comes from  () =  () +  
  Hence,
Z
   ()1+          1+
             =
   1+             (1 + )
                           ∙                                                                 ¸
                       1+               1+        2                             1+ 2
                   +          () +          () − (1 + )   () +     − 
                                          2                                        2
where   () denotes the cross sectional average of the  ()0  Use
                                          1        1
                         =   () + (1 − )  ()
                                          2        
to second order and get:
          Z
             ()1+           1+
                       =
              1+             (1 + )
                                                     1+ 2
                              + 1+ [ −  +             − (1 + ) 
                                                       2 
                                 1 1                       1+ 2
                              + ( + )  () +              ]
                                 2                           2
Now,
                             () = 2  (log  ())
and hence:
         Z
              ()1+       1+
                        =
              1+           1+
                                                    1+ 2
                               + 1+ [ −  +       − (1 + ) 
                                                     2 
                                   1+ 2 1
                               +       + (1 + ) (log  ())
                                    2     2
Finally, one uses the result in Woodford (2003, p. 400):

                       X
                       ∞
                                                                       X         ∞
                                  
                                  (log  ()) =                       2
                           =0
                                                       (1 − )(1 − ) =0

to get
             X
             ∞             Z                          X          ∞
                               ()1+                                  1+ 2
                                        =  1+        [ −  +     −
             =0
                                1+                   =0
                                                                           2 
                                                                         1+ 2
                                                       (1 + )  +       + Θ 2 ]
                                                                          2
                                                                 1+
                                                       +
                                                           (1 + ) (1 − )

where
                                          1                 
                                       Θ = (1 + )
                                          2          (1 − )(1 − )
In sum, the relevant part of the utility function is:


                                         X
                                         ∞
                                                      1−       1− 2
              =  +                         {         ( +     ) −  1+ [ − 
                                         =0
                                                                 2
                                 1+ 2                    1+ 2
                               +     − (1 + )  +     + Θ2 ]}                   (31)
                                  2                        2
where:                                                µ                       ¶
                                            1                1−     1+
                                      =                           −
                                         (1 − )           (1 − ) (1 + )
 Now we have expressed the objective function without idiosyncratic variables,
only in terms of aggregate ones.
References
 [1] Aoki, K. (2001) "Optimal Monetary Policy Response to Relative Price
     Changes" Journal of Monetary Economics 48, pp55-80.
 [2] Benigno and Benigno, 2003, Price Stability in open economies, Review of
     Economic Studies 70, 743-764.
 [3] Bergin, P., Shin, H., Tchakarov, I., 2007. Does exchange rate variability
     matter for welfare? A quantitative investigation of stabilization policies. Eu-
     ropean Economic Review 51(4), 1041-1058.
 [4] Bodenstein, Martin, Christopher Erceg, and Luca Guerrieri, 2008, "Optimal
     Monetary Policy with Distinct Core and Headline Inflation Rates", Journal
     of Monetary Economics 55, pp.518-533.
 [5] Corsetti and Pesenti, 2001 Welfare and Macroeconomic Independence, Quar-
     terly Journal of Economics, 116, 421-445.
 [6] Cova, P., Sondergaard, J., 2004. When should monetary policy target the
     exchange rate? Royal Economic Society Annual Conference, Paper Number
     51.
 [7] Deaton, Angus., 1998.Getting Prices Right: What Should be done?. Journal
     of Economics Perspectives-Vol 12, Num 1.
 [8] Devereux and Engle, 2003, Monetary Policy in the open economy revisited:
     price setting and exchange rate flexibility, Review of Economic Studies 70,
     pp. 765-783
 [9] Devereux, M., P. Lane and J. Xu, 2006, Exchange Rates and Monetary Policy
     in Emerging Market Economies, Economic Journal.
[10] De Paoli, Bianca, 2009. Monetary policy and welfare in a small open economy.
     Journal of International Economics 77 (2009) 11—22.
[11] Galí, Jordi. 2008. Monetary Policy, Inflation, and the Business Cycle: An
     Introduction to the New Keynesian Framework
[12] Galí, Jordi and Tommaso Monacelli, 2005. Monetary Policy and Exchange
     Rate Volatility in a Small Open Economy. Review of Economic Studies (2005)
     72, 707-734.
[13] Goodfriend, M. and R. King, 2001, The Case for Price Stability, NBER
     Working paper 8423.
[14] Gouveia, Solange, 2007, Price Rigidity in Brazil: Evidence from CPI Micro
     Data, Working paper 143, Central Bank of Brazil.
[15] Jacks, David, Kevin O’Rourke, and Jeﬀrey Williamson, 2009, Commodity
     Price Volatility and World Market Integration since 1700, NBER working
     paper 14748
[16] Kilian, Lutz, 2009, "Not All Price Shocks are Alike: Disentangling Demand
     and Supply Shocks in the Crude Oil Market," American Economic Review,
     99(3), pp.1053-69.
[17] Kollmann, R., (2002) "Monetary Policy Rules in the Open Economy: Eﬀects
     on Welfare and Business Cycles" CEPR Discussion Papers 3279, C.E.P.R.
     Discussion Papers.
[18] Obstfeld and Rogoﬀ, 2002, Global Implications of self-oriented national policy
     rules, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117, pp. 503-535
[19] Rigobon, Robert, 2008. "“Distribution of Inflation Impact: The Recent Ex-
     perience in Central America and Mexico” "
[20] Rose, Andrew, 2007, "A Stable International System Emerges: Inflation Tar-
     geting is Bretton Woods Reversed", Journal of International Money and Fi-
     nance 26, pp. 663-81
[21] Schmitt-Grohe, S. and M. Martin Uribe, 2004. Solving dynamic general equi-
     librium models using a second-order approximation to the policy function.
     Journal of Economic Dynamics & Control 28 (2004) 755 — 775
[22] Schmitt-Grohe, S. and M. Martin Uribe, 2007, "Optimal Simple and Imple-
     mentable Monetary and Fiscal Rules", Journal of Monetary Economics, 54,
     1702-1725.
[23] Sutherland, A, 2005, Incomplete Pass-through and welfare eﬀects of exchange
     rate variability, Journal of International Economics, 65, pp.375-399.
[24] Woodford, Michael, Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Mone-
     tary Policy, Princeton University Press, 2003.
Table 1: Correlations between World In‡ation Indicators and Food and Oil Prices, 1990-2008
                                      (all series HP detrended)


            a) Contemporary Correlations
                            USWPI       World WPI     World CPI      Pfood        Poil
               USWPI             1          0.83689      0.74349   0.61911     0.7255
            World WPI       0.83689               1      0.66171   0.63273    0.46531
            World CPI       0.74349         0.66171           1     0.5597    0.39451
                 Pfood      0.61911         0.63273       0.5597         1    0.17133
                   Poil      0.7255         0.46531      0.39451   0.17133          1


            a) Lagged Correlations
                            USWPI       World WPI     World CPI      Pfood        Poil
               USWPI             1          0.83689      0.74349   0.44189    0.29036
            World WPI       0.83689               1      0.66171   0.46337    0.27692
            World CPI       0.74349         0.66171           1    0.36737    0.52542
               Pfoodt¬ 1    0.44189         0.46337      0.36737         1    -0.03128
                 Poilt¬ 1   0.29036         0.27692      0.52542   -0.03128         1
                     Table 2: Causality Tests
    47 observations used for estimation from 1962 to 2008
    a) Food Prices -US WPI
       Dependent variable is                         WPIGAP
      Independent variables:             ZGAP(-1) -ZGAP(-2)
Lagrange Multiplier Statistic         CHSQ(2)= 10.4873[.005]
   Likelihood Ratio Statistic         CHSQ( 2)= 11.8668[.003]
                  F Statistic           F( 2, 42)= 6.0317[.005]


      b) Oil Prices -US WPI
       Dependent variable is                         WPIGAP
      Independent variables:    PROILGAP(-1) -PROILGAP(-2)
Lagrange Multiplier Statistic          CHSQ( 2)= 1.4879[.475]
   Likelihood Ratio Statistic          CHSQ( 2)= 1.5119[.470]
                  F Statistic           F( 2, 42)= .68653[.509]


                c) Oil -Food
       Dependent variable is                            ZGAP
      Independent variables:    PROILGAP(-1) -PROILGAP(-2)
Lagrange Multiplier Statistic          CHSQ( 2)= 1.1923[.551]
   Likelihood Ratio Statistic          CHSQ( 2)= 1.2077[.547]
                  F Statistic           F( 2, 42)= .54659[.583]


                d) Food -Oil
       Dependent variable is                      PROILGAP
      Independent variables:             ZGAP(-1) -ZGAP(-2)
Lagrange Multiplier Statistic         CHSQ( 2)= 14.1011[.001]
   Likelihood Ratio Statistic         CHSQ( 2)= 16.7653[.000]
                  F Statistic           F( 2, 42)= 9.0010[.001]
             Table 3: Food Expenditure Shares
Austria               15.50%             Latvia   40.40%
Belgium               16.10%          Lithuania   45.45%
Bulgaria              43.36%        Luxemburg     13.60%
Costa Rica            13.11%             Malta    34.17%
Cyprus                26.40%            Mexico    32.69%
Czech Republic        24.20%       Netherlands    11.92%
Denmark               14.03%           Panama     34.90%
Estonia               30.83%            Poland    30.41%
Finland               15.63%          Portugal    22.20%
France                15.08%          Romania     58.74%
Germany               15.60%           Slovakia   33.33%
Greece                21.28%           Slovenia   22.91%
Hungary               29.40%              Spain   25.40%
Ireland               17.98%            Sweden    12.05%
Italy                 28.26%   United Kingdom     12.91%


Overall Median        23.55%
Overall Mean          25.26%


EM Median             32.69%
EM Mean               33.95%


Advanced Median       15.55%
Advanced Mean         16.81%
                                  Table 4: Calibration of Linearized Model
Discount Factor                                                                                                 0.99
Coe¢ cient of risk aversion                                                                                     [1,4]
Inverse of elasticity of labor supply                                                                             1
Degree of Openness                                                                                               0.4
Average period between price adjustments                                                                        0.66
Coe¢ cient on domestic in‡ation in Taylor Rule                                                                   1.5
Coe¢ cient on output gap in Taylor Rule                                                              y         0.125
Parameter of persistence associated with moderately persistent monetary policy shock                 v           0.6
Parameter of persistence associated with moderately persistent world relative food price shock       z          0.85
Price Elasticity of Foreign Demand for the home goods                                                         [0.2,5]
Elasticity of substitution between varieties produced within country                                               6
Elasticity of substitution between domestic and foreign goods                                                [0.25,1]
Ratio h /h in steady state                                                                                   0.75




          Table 5: Calibration of the Model’s Second-Order Representation and Policy Rules
    Discount Factor                                                                                0.99
    Coe¢ cient of risk aversion                                                                   [0.5,4]
    Inverse of elasticity of labor supply                                                         [1,3]
    Degree of Openness                                                                             0.4
    Average period between price adjustments                                                       0.66
    Coe¢ cient on domestic in‡ation in Taylor Rule                                                 [1,3]
    Coe¢ cient on output gap in Taylor Rule                                            y            0
    Parameter of persistence associated with persistent monetary policy shock          v         [0.6,0.8]
    Parameter of persistence associated with persistent relative food’s price shock    z     [0.85,0.9]
    Elasticity of substitution between varieties produced within any given country                  6
    Elasticity of substitution between domestic and foreign goods                                [0.25,2]
    Ratio h /h en equilibrium                                                                 [0.6,0.9]
    Index of foreign demand                                                                        1
    Parameter associated with tastes and preferences                                            [0.04,7]
    Constant on Perfect Risk Sharing Condition                                        {             1
    Price Elasticity of Foreign Demand for the home goods                                         [0.2,5]
    Standar Deviation associated with monetary policy shock                            v   [0.0062,0.0167]
    Standar Deviation associated with relative food’s price shock                      z   [0.0001, 0.05]
    Standar Deviation associated with productivity shock                               a          0.012
    Table 6: Welfare Comparisons with Baseline Calibration
             = 1:5;        = 0:6;    v   = 0:6%    y   = 0:0;       z   = 0:85;
a   = 0:7;   a   = 1:2%;      = 0:25;       = 1; ' = 1;         z   = 5%; ! = 0:75


      Domestic In‡ation-CPI In‡ation
        n         0.25         0.5          0.75           1                2
       0.5       -0.2165     -0.2166       -0.2146      -0.2106          -0.1801
      0.75       -0.0222     -0.0102       0.0052        0.0235           0.1153
        1        0.0068       0.0232       0.043         0.0656           0.1729
        2        0.061        0.0859       0.114         0.1443           0.2784
        4        0.0955       0.1256       0.1585        0.1934           0.3422


      CPI In‡ation -PEG
        n         0.25         0.5          0.75           1                2
       0.5       0.2107       0.2218       0.2285        0.2315           0.2142
      0.75       0.025        0.0135       -0.0021      -0.0210          -0.1184
        1        -0.0069     -0.0236       -0.0442      -0.0679           -0.183
        2        -0.0673     -0.0937       -0.1236      -0.1565          -0.3046
        4        -0.1062     -0.1386       -0.1745      -0.2130          -0.3817


      Domestic In‡ation-PEG
        n         0.25         0.5          0.75           1                2
       0.5       -0.0057      0.0052       0.014         0.0209           0.0341
      0.75       0.0028       0.0033       0.0031        0.0025          -0.0031
        1        -0.0002     -0.0004       -0.0011      -0.0023           -0.01
        2        -0.0063     -0.0077       -0.0097      -0.0122          -0.0262
        4        -0.0107      -0.013       -0.016       -0.0196          -0.0395


      Dominance relative to SS
        n         0.25         0.5          0.75           1                2
       0.5         1            3            3             3                3
      0.75         3            3            2             2                2
        1          2            2            2             2                2
        2          2            2            2             2                2
        4          2            2            2             2                2
Table 7: Welfare Comparisons with Low Variance of Food Prices
              = 1:5;         = 0:6;       v   = 0:6%;     a   = 0:7;    a   = 1:2%
 y   = 0:0;    z   = 0:85;     = 0:25;          = 1; ' = 1;      z    = 0:01%; ! = 0:75


       Domestic In‡ation-CPI In‡ation
          n          0.25         0.5             0.75            1            2
        0.5         -0.008      -0.0076         -0.0072        -0.0067       -0.0049
        0.75       -0.0028      -0.0027         -0.0026        -0.0024       -0.0012
         1         -0.0025      -0.0025         -0.0024        -0.0023       -0.0011
         2         -0.0026      -0.0027         -0.0027        -0.0026       -0.0015
         4          -0.003      -0.0031         -0.0032        -0.0032       -0.0021


       CPI In‡ation -PEG
          n          0.25         0.5             0.75            1            2
        0.5         0.0507      0.0498           0.0489        0.0477        0.0426
        0.75        0.0093       0.008           0.0067        0.0052        -0.0013
         1          0.0043      0.0029           0.0015           0          -0.0068
         2         -0.0035      -0.005          -0.0067        -0.0083       -0.0154
         4         -0.0077      -0.0094         -0.0111        -0.0127        -0.02


       Domestic In‡ation-PEG
          n          0.25         0.5             0.75            1            2
        0.5         0.0427      0.0422           0.0417         0.041        0.0377
        0.75        0.0065      0.0053           0.0041        0.0028        -0.0025
         1          0.0018      0.0004          -0.0009        -0.0023       -0.008
         2         -0.0061      -0.0077         -0.0093        -0.0109       -0.017
         4         -0.0107      -0.0125         -0.0142        -0.0159       -0.0221


       Dominance relative to SS
          n          0.25         0.5             0.75            1            2
        0.5           3               3            3              3            3
        0.75          3               3            3              3            1
         1            3               3            1              1            1
         2            1               1            1              1            1
         4            1               1            1              1            1
   Table 8: Model statistics Under Simulated Random Shocks SS with Balance Trade and ! = 0:75

                                        = 2;    = 0:25;   =1                      = 4;    = 0:25;    =1
                                 PPI rule      CPI rule    PEG ule       PPI rule        CPI rule     PEG ule
                                Shocks to   Shocks to     Shocks to     Shocks to     Shocks to      Shocks to
                                       zt            zt            zt            zt             zt            zt
Standard deviations (in %)            (1)           (2)           (3)         (4)              (5)           (6)
             Domestic Output        0.367         1.137         0.863       0.000           0.936          0.945
                Consumption         1.154         1.152         0.546       0.606           0.584          0.292
 CPI-based Real Exchange rate       2.307         2.298         1.091       2.420           2.328          1.164
       Home Good Price/CPI          2.470         2.695         2.956       2.432           2.684          2.940
            Domestic In‡ation       0.035         0.529         0.204       0.000           0.540          0.213
Means in % of SS deviation
             Domestic Output      -0.0044       -0.2327     -0.0445         0.000           -0.194        -0.033
                Consumption       -0.0119       -0.1699     -0.0577        -0.008           -0.097        -0.034
 CPI-based Real Exchange rate     -0.0105       -0.3263     -0.1125        -0.008           -0.368        -0.129
       Home Good Price/CPI         0.0709       -0.0115        0.0954       0.067           -0.027         0.088
            Domestic In‡ation      0.0003       -0.0135        0.0002       0.000           -0.014         0.000
         Natural Consumption       -0.013       -0.0115        -0.013     -0.0076         -0.0076      -0.0076
                  Natural X t     -0.0138       -0.0089     -0.0138       -0.0083         -0.0083      -0.0083
Consumption/Output ratio           99.99        100.06         99.99       99.99          100.10       100.00


                                        = 4;    = 0:25;   =1              = 4;    = 0:25;    =1              = 4;   = 0:25;   =1
                                 PPI rule      CPI rule   PEG rule       PPI rule        CPI rule         To all     To all    To all
                                Shocks to   Shocks to     Shocks to     Shocks to     Shocks to           Shocks    Shocks    Shocks
                                       at            at            at            vt            vt
Standard deviations (in %)            (7)           (8)           (9)        (10)            (11)           (12)       (13)        (14)
             Domestic Output        0.269         0.315         0.313       0.424           0.497          0.501     1.101     0.887
                Consumption         0.115         0.135         0.134       0.182           0.213          0.642     0.634     0.725
 CPI-based Real Exchange rate       0.461         0.539         0.537       0.726           0.851          2.562     2.525     2.898
       Home Good Price/CPI          0.154         0.180         0.179       0.242           0.284          2.448     2.704     2.471
            Domestic In‡ation       0.224         0.192         0.142       0.088           0.132          0.241     0.593     0.398
Means in % of SS deviation
             Domestic Output       -0.048        -0.039        -0.031      -0.013           -0.022        -0.061     -0.254    0.005
                Consumption        -0.021        -0.017        -0.013      -0.006           -0.010        -0.035     -0.124    -0.008
 CPI-based Real Exchange rate      -0.082        -0.067        -0.053      -0.023           -0.039        -0.113     -0.472    0.000
       Home Good Price/CPI         -0.027        -0.022        -0.017      -0.007           -0.012         0.033     -0.061    0.069
            Domestic In‡ation       0.001         0.001         0.000      -0.005           -0.005        -0.004     -0.018    0.002
         Natural Consumption       -0.004        -0.004        -0.004            0              0      -0.0114      -0.0114   -0.0114
                  Natural X t     -0.0038       -0.0038     -0.0038              0              0      -0.0107      -0.0107   -0.0107
Consumption/Output ratio          100.03        100.02      100.02        100.01          100.01       100.03       100.13     99.99
Table 9: Welfare Comparisons with Higher Variance of Monetary Shocks
                 = 1:5;        = 0:6;       v   = 1:25%;     a   = 0:7;      a   = 1:2%
      y   = 0:0;   z   = 0:85;     = 0:25;         = 1; ' = 1;          z   = 5%; ! = 0:75


           Domestic In‡ation-CPI In‡ation
             n          0.25        0.5             0.75            1               2
            0.5        -0.2437    -0.2419          -0.2378       -0.2318         -0.1932
           0.75        -0.0259     -0.012          0.0055         0.0259         0.1264
             1         0.0068      0.0252           0.047         0.0717         0.1878
             2         0.0663      0.0933          0.1234         0.1559          0.299
             4         0.1033      0.1355          0.1705         0.2076         0.3655


           CPI In‡ation -PEG
             n          0.25        0.5             0.75            1               2
            0.5        0.3452      0.3532          0.3566         0.3558         0.3217
           0.75        0.0478      0.0329          0.0137        -0.0092         -0.1254
             1         0.0044     -0.0157           -0.04        -0.0679         -0.2021
             2         -0.071      -0.101          -0.1349       -0.1721          -0.34
             4         -0.1163    -0.1524          -0.1924       -0.2353         -0.4241


           Domestic In‡ation-PEG
             n          0.25        0.5             0.75            1               2
            0.5        0.1015      0.1113          0.1188         0.1240         0.1285
           0.75        0.0219      0.021           0.0192         0.0166          0.001
             1         0.0112      0.0095           0.007         0.0038         -0.0143
             2         -0.0047    -0.0077          -0.0115       -0.0162          -0.041
             4         -0.0129    -0.0169          -0.0219       -0.0277         -0.0585


           Dominance relative to SS
             n          0.25        0.5             0.75            1               2
            0.5           3             3            3              3               3
           0.75           3             3            3              2               2
             1            3             2            2              2               2
             2            2             2            2              2               2
             4            2             2            2              2               2
Table 10: Welfare Comparisons with Lower Variance of Productivity Shocks
                    = 1:5;        = 0:6;       v   = 0:6%;     a   = 0:7;      a   = 0:7%
        y   = 0:0;    z   = 0:85;    = 0:25;          = 1; ' = 1;          z   = 5%; ! = 0:75


             Domestic In‡ation-CPI In‡ation
               n           0.25        0.5             0.75            1              2
              0.5         -0.2178    -0.2177         -0.2155        -0.2113         -0.1801
             0.75         -0.0213    -0.0089          0.007         0.0256          0.1188
               1          0.0084     0.0253           0.0456        0.0685          0.1773
               2          0.064      0.0895           0.118         0.1488          0.2845
               4          0.0994     0.1301           0.1635        0.1989          0.3493


             CPI In‡ation -PEG
               n           0.25        0.5             0.75            1              2
              0.5         0.171       0.183           0.1908        0.1971          0.1825
             0.75         0.0198      0.01           -0.0038        -0.0211         -0.1114
               1          -0.0074    -0.0222         -0.0409        -0.0632         -0.1705
               2          -0.0598    -0.0841         -0.1121        -0.1437         -0.2832
               4          -0.0942    -0.1244         -0.1582        -0.1956         -0.3553


             Domestic In‡ation-PEG
               n           0.25        0.5             0.75            1              2
              0.5         -0.0468    -0.0347         -0.0246        -0.0142         0.0024
             0.75         -0.0015    0.0011           0.0031        0.0046          0.0074
               1          0.001      0.0031           0.0047        0.0054          0.0068
               2          0.0042     0.0054           0.0059        0.0052          0.0012
               4          0.0052     0.0057           0.0053        0.0033          -0.006


             Dominance relative to SS
               n           0.25        0.5             0.75            1              2
              0.5           1              1            1              1              3
             0.75           1              3            2              2              2
               1            2              2            2              2              2
               2            2              2            2              2              2
Table 11: Welfare Comparisons with "Hawkish" Taylor Rule
              = 3;         = 0:6;    v    = 0:6%;    a   = 0:7;       a   = 1:2%
 y   = 0:0;    z   = 0:85;     = 0:25;        = 1; ' = 1;         z   = 5%; ! = 0:75
      Domestic In‡ation-CPI In‡ation
        n           0.25            0.5       0.75            1               2
       0.5         -0.5573     -0.5171       -0.4812       -0.4495         -0.3568
      0.75         -0.0923     -0.0777       -0.0653       -0.0549         -0.0287
        1          -0.0531     -0.0406        -0.03        -0.0211          0.0015
        2          -0.0013      0.009        0.0179        0.0255           0.0459
        4          0.0225      0.0323        0.0408        0.0482           0.0687


      CPI In‡ation -PEG
        n           0.25            0.5       0.75            1               2
       0.5         0.4458      0.4329        0.4193        0.4076           0.3522
      0.75         0.0938      0.0851        0.0768        0.0694           0.0543
        1          0.0607      0.0525         0.045        0.0384           0.0299
        2          0.0149      0.0074        0.0012        -0.0042         -0.0018
        4          -0.0072     -0.0143       -0.0199       -0.0246         -0.0165


      Domestic In‡ation-PEG
        n           0.25            0.5       0.75            1               2
       0.5         -0.1116     -0.0841       -0.0619       -0.0418         -0.0046
      0.75         0.0015      0.0074        0.0115        0.0145           0.0256
        1          0.0076      0.0119         0.015        0.0172           0.0315
        2          0.0136      0.0164        0.0191        0.0213           0.044
        4          0.0153      0.0179        0.0209        0.0235           0.0522


      Dominance relative to SS
        n           0.25            0.5         1           0.75              2
       0.5           1              1           1             1               1
      0.75           3              3           3             3               3
        1            3              3           3             3               3
        2            3              3           3             2               3
        4            2              2           2             2               2
Table 12: Welfare Comparisons with Taylor Rule with Moderate Reaction to Output Gap
                          = 1:5;         = 0:6;       v   = 0:6%;     a   = 0:7;       a   = 1:2%
             y   = 0:125;    z   = 0:85;      = 0:25;         = 1; ' = 1;          z   = 5%; ! = 0:75
                   Domestic In‡ation-CPI In‡ation
                     n           0.25         0.5             0.75            1               2
                    0.5      -0.1187        -0.1146         -0.1102        -0.1226          -0.0867
                   0.75      -0.0197        -0.0139         -0.0068        0.0046           0.0384
                     1       -0.0035        0.0045           0.0137        0.0238           0.0679
                     2       0.0311         0.0439           0.0577        0.0564           0.1288
                     4       0.0574         0.0736           0.0904        0.0749           0.171


                   CPI In‡ation -PEG
                     n           0.25         0.5             0.75            1               2
                    0.5      0.0193          0.038           0.0523        0.0776           0.0789
                   0.75      0.0194         0.0181           0.0144        0.0058           -0.0189
                     1       0.0074         0.0028          -0.0038        -0.0121          -0.0457
                     2       -0.0244        -0.0351         -0.0471        -0.0435          -0.1046
                     4       -0.0515        -0.0661         -0.0815        -0.0615          -0.1487


                   Domestic In‡ation-PEG
                     n           0.25         0.5             0.75            1               2
                    0.5      -0.0994        -0.0766         -0.0579        -0.0450          -0.0078
                   0.75      -0.0003        0.0042           0.0076        0.0104           0.0195
                     1       0.0039         0.0073           0.0099         0.012           0.0222
                     2       0.0067         0.0088           0.0106        0.0129           0.0242
                     4           0.006      0.0075           0.009         0.0134           0.0223


                   Dominance relative to SS
                     n           0.25         0.5             0.75            1               2
                    0.5           1               1            1              1               1
                   0.75           1               3            3              3               2
                     1            3               3            2              2               2
                     2            2               2            2              2               2
                     4            2               2            2              2               2
Table 13: Welfare Comparisons with High Export Price Elasticity
              = 1:5;       = 0:6;    v    = 0:6%;   a   = 0:857;      a   = 1:2%
   y   = 0:0;    z   = 0:85;    = 0:25;       = 5; ' = 1;        z   = 5%; ! = 0:75
        Domestic In‡ation-CPI In‡ation
          n           0.25          0.5        0.75          1              2
         0.5         -0.1321   -0.1165       -0.1008      -0.0849         -0.0211
        0.75         0.169     0.1975         0.226       0.2542          0.3638
          1          0.2255    0.2569         0.2881      0.3189          0.4371
          2          0.3273    0.3635         0.3991      0.4340          0.5655
          4          0.388     0.4267         0.4646      0.5016          0.6397


        CPI In‡ation -PEG
          n           0.25          0.5        0.75          1              2
         0.5         0.0912    0.0854         0.0784      0.0990          0.0323
        0.75         -0.0767   -0.0979       -0.1193      -0.2390         -0.2239
          1          -0.1162   -0.1403       -0.1644      -0.3041         -0.2805
          2          -0.1916   -0.2208       -0.2497      -0.4216         -0.3864
          4          -0.2389   -0.271        -0.3028      -0.4921         -0.4517


        Domestic In‡ation-PEG
          n           0.25          0.5        0.75          1              2
         0.5         0.0014    0.0065         0.0105      0.0141          0.0189
        0.75         0.014     0.0153         0.0163      0.0152          0.0188
          1          0.0144    0.0156         0.0164      0.0148          0.0179
          2          0.0143    0.0149         0.0151      0.0124          0.0129
          4          0.0134    0.0135         0.0131      0.0095          0.0071


        Dominance relative to SS
          n           0.25          0.5        0.75          1              2
         0.5           3            3           3            3              3
        0.75           2            2           2            2              2
          1            2            2           2            2              2
          2            2            2           2            2              2
          4            2            2           2            2              2
Table 14: Welfare Comparisons with Lower Elasticity of Labor Supply
                 = 1:5;         = 0:6;       v   = 0:6%;     a   = 0:7;      a   = 1:2%
     y   = 0:0;    z   = 0:85;     = 0:25;          = 1; ' = 3;          z   = 5%; ! = 0:75
          Domestic In‡ation-CPI In‡ation
            n           0.25         0.5             0.75            1              2
           0.5         -0.505      -0.5177         -0.5236        -0.5236         -0.4773
          0.75         -0.0589     -0.0355         -0.0012        0.0418          0.2673
            1          0.0033      0.0418           0.0909        0.1481          0.4226
            2          0.1305      0.2005           0.2794        0.3642          0.7263
            4          0.221       0.3119           0.4096        0.5114          0.9226


          CPI In‡ation -PEG
            n           0.25         0.5             0.75            1              2
           0.5         0.3557      0.3957           0.4259        0.4528          0.462
          0.75         0.0487      0.0321           0.0037        -0.0345         -0.2577
            1          -0.0078     -0.0404         -0.0849        -0.1401         -0.4246
            2          -0.1295     -0.1966         -0.2756        -0.3661         -0.7777
            4          -0.2211     -0.3131         -0.4169        -0.5320         -1.0311


          Domestic In‡ation-PEG
            n           0.25         0.5             0.75            1              2
           0.5         -0.1494     -0.122          -0.0977        -0.0708         -0.0153
          0.75         -0.0102     -0.0034          0.0025        0.0072          0.0096
            1          -0.0044     0.0014           0.006         0.0080          -0.002
            2          0.001       0.0039           0.0037        -0.0018         -0.0513
            4          -0.0002     -0.0013         -0.0072        -0.0261         -0.1084


          Dominance relative to SS
            n           0.25         0.5             0.75            1              2
           0.5           1               1            1              1              1
          0.75           1               1            3              2              2
            1            2               2            2              2              2
            2            2               2            2              2              2
            4            2               2            2              2              2
Table 15: Welfare Comparisons with World In‡ation Variability
              = 1:5;         = 0:6;       v   = 0:6%;     a   = 0:7;      a   = 1:2%
  y   = 0:0;    z   = 0:85;     = 0:25;          = 1; ' = 1;          z   = 5%; ! = 0:75
                                p   = 1:3%;       p   = 0:99
       Domestic In‡ation-CPI In‡ation
         n           0.25           0.5           0.75            1              2
        0.5         -0.2165     -0.2166         -0.2146        -0.2106         -0.1801
       0.75         -0.0222     -0.0102          0.0052        0.0235          0.1153
         1          0.0068      0.0232           0.043         0.0656          0.1729
         2          0.061       0.0859           0.114         0.1443          0.2784
         4          0.0955      0.1256           0.1585        0.1943          0.3422


       CPI In‡ation -PEG
         n           0.25           0.5           0.75            1              2
        0.5         0.0407       0.057           0.0691        0.0776          0.0846
       0.75         0.005       0.0008          -0.0072        -0.0185         -0.084
         1          -0.0083     -0.0173          -0.03         -0.0457         -0.1277
         2          -0.0405     -0.0585          -0.08         -0.1043         -0.2176
         4          -0.065      -0.0887         -0.1158        -0.1455         -0.2784


       Domestic In‡ation-PEG
         n           0.25           0.5           0.75            1              2
        0.5         -0.1757     -0.1596         -0.1455        -0.1330         -0.0955
       0.75         -0.0172     -0.0094         -0.0021        0.0050          0.0314
         1          -0.0016     0.0059           0.013         0.0198          0.0452
         2          0.0205      0.0274           0.0339        0.0400          0.0609
         4          0.0305      0.0369           0.0427        0.0479          0.0638


       Dominance relative to SS
         n           0.25           0.5           0.75            1              2
        0.5           1               1            1              1              1
       0.75           1               1            2              2              2
         1            2               2            2              2              2
         2            2               2            2              2              2
         4            2               2            2              2              2
Table 16: Welfare Comparisons with Higher Food Import Share
              = 1:5;         = 0:6;       v   = 0:6%;    a   = 0:85;     a   = 1:2%
   y   = 0:0;    z   = 0:85;         = 0:25;      = 1; ' = 1;        z   = 5%; ! = 0:6
                                 p   = 1:3%;       p   = 0:99
       Domestic In‡ation-CPI In‡ation
          n           0.25           0.5          0.75           1             2
        0.5          -0.491     -0.4813          -0.4647      -0.4372        -0.3137
        0.75         0.0389      0.0959          0.1568        0.2080        0.4834
         1           0.1428      0.2087          0.2775        0.3297        0.6297
         2           0.3333      0.4129          0.4934        0.5440        0.8806
         4           0.4481      0.5344          0.6206        0.6681        1.0222


       CPI In‡ation -PEG
          n           0.25           0.5          0.75           1             2
        0.5          0.3451      0.3514          0.3492        0.3401        0.2543
        0.75     -0.0319        -0.0775          -0.1275      -0.1807        -0.4074
         1       -0.1176        -0.1720          -0.2301      -0.2906        -0.5399
         2       -0.2808        -0.3498          -0.4211      -0.4934        -0.7789
         4       -0.3830        -0.4600          -0.5383      -0.6170        -0.9216


       Domestic In‡ation-PEG
          n           0.25           0.5          0.75           1             2
        0.5      -0.1376        -0.1228          -0.1094      -0.0971        -0.0569
        0.75     -0.0006         0.0089          0.0182        0.0273        0.0604
         1           0.0119      0.0214          0.0305        0.0392        0.0690
         2           0.0269      0.0356          0.0436        0.0507        0.0705
         4           0.0312      0.0389          0.0456        0.0512        0.0628


       Dominance relative to SS
          n           0.25           0.5          0.75           1             2
        0.5            1              1            1             1             1
        0.75           2              2            2             2             2
         1             2              2            2             2             2
         2             2              2            2             2             2
         4             2              2            2             2             2
                              Figure 1: World WPI and World Relative Food Prices

                                              (in1.deviations
                                           Figure   World WPI andfrom    HP-trend)
                                                                   World Relative Food Prices
                                                     (in deviations from HP-trend)

35%


30%                                                                                                          WPI
                                                                                                             World Food/WPI

25%


20%


15%


10%


 5%


 0%
       1960 1962 1964 1966 1968 1970 1972 1974 1976 1978 1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008

-5%


-10%


-15%
                Figure 2. World Commodity Prices and Deviations from Central Inflation Targets
               (Price indices in US$, 2005=100; IT deviations: cross-country median of % dev. from central target)
280                                                                                                                  120
               Food
               Fuel
               Median IT deviations (right scale)
                                                                                                                     100
230



                                                                                                                     80

180


                                                                                                                     60


130

                                                                                                                     40



 80
                                                                                                                     20




 30                                                                                                                  0
      2000   2001       2002         2003           2004   2005   2006       2007       2008       2009       2010
     Figure 3: Effects of Food Price Shocks on Natural Output and the Terms of Trade




qn                  M’                                           D’

                                                                                       D
     M
                                    E’




     D’                                  E

                                                                                       M’




         D                                                            M


                                                                                            yn
Figure 4: Impulse Responses of a 100% increase in world food prices with sigma = 2 and eta = [0.25, 0.5, 0.5, 2] and gamma = 1 with PPI

                                  Output Gap                          PPI Inflation                    CPI Inflation                    Nominal Interest Rate                            NER
             =2
                   0.08                                 0.025                              0.6                              0.05                                      0.1

                   0.06                                  0.02                                                               0.04                                     0.05
                                                                                           0.4
                                                        0.015                                                               0.03
                   0.04                                                                                                                                                 0
                                                         0.01                              0.2                              0.02
                   0.02                                                                                                                                              -0.05
                                                        0.005                                                               0.01
                                                                                             0
                      0                                     0                                                                  0                                      -0.1

                   -0.02                                -0.005                             -0.2                             -0.01                                    -0.15
                           0          10           20            0         10         20          0         10         20           0            10             20           0            10             20
            =0.25
            =0.5              Change in the NER                     Terms of Trade                   Consumer RER                          Producer RER                          Trade Balance/GDP
            =0.75
            =2    0.05                                   1.5                                0                              0.05                                      0.2

                                                                                           -0.1                                0                                      0.1
                      0
                                                            1
                                                                                           -0.2                             -0.05                                       0
                   -0.05
                                                                                           -0.3                              -0.1                                     -0.1
                                                          0.5
                    -0.1
                                                                                           -0.4                             -0.15                                     -0.2

                   -0.15                                    0                              -0.5                              -0.2                                     -0.3
                           0          10           20            0         10         20          0         10         20           0            10             20           0            10             20


                                  Real Wage                           Employment                      Natural Output                        Consumption                          Change in the Mark-up

                      0                                   0.3                              0.3                                 0                                     0.05

                    -0.1                                                                                                    -0.05
                                                          0.2                              0.2                                                                          0

                    -0.2                                                                                                     -0.1
                                                          0.1                              0.1                                                                       -0.05
                    -0.3                                                                                                    -0.15

                                                            0                                0                                                                        -0.1
                    -0.4                                                                                                     -0.2

                    -0.5                                  -0.1                             -0.1                             -0.25                                    -0.15
                           0          10           20            0         10         20          0         10         20           0            10             20           0            10             20
Figure 5: Impulse Responses of a 100% increase in world food prices with sigma = 2 and eta = [0.25, 0.5, 0.5, 2] and gamma= 1 with CPI rule


                                   Output Gap                        PPI Inflation                    CPI Inflation                    Nominal Interest Rate                           NER
               =2
                      0.4                                 0.1                             0.8                               1.5                                     0.8

                                                         0.08                             0.6
                      0.3                                                                                                                                           0.6
                                                                                                                              1
                                                         0.06                             0.4
                      0.2                                                                                                                                           0.4
                                                         0.04                             0.2
                                                                                                                            0.5
                      0.1                                                                                                                                           0.2
                                                         0.02                               0

                       0                                   0                              -0.2                                0                                       0
                            0          10           20          0         10         20          0         10         20           0            10             20          0            10             20
              =0.25
              =0.5             Change in the NER                   Terms of Trade                   Consumer RER                          Producer RER                         Trade Balance/GDP
              =0.75
              =2    0.8                                  1.5                               0                               0.5                                     0.4

                                                                                                                            0.4
                      0.6                                                                 -0.1                                                                      0.2
                                                           1
                                                                                                                            0.3
                      0.4                                                                 -0.2                                                                        0
                                                                                                                            0.2
                                                          0.5
                      0.2                                                                 -0.3                                                                      -0.2
                                                                                                                            0.1

                       0                                   0                              -0.4                                0                                     -0.4
                            0          10           20          0         10         20          0         10         20           0            10             20          0            10             20


                                   Real Wage                         Employment                      Natural Output                        Consumption                         Change in the Mark-up

                      0.2                                 0.8                             0.3                                 0                                     0.2

                                                                                                                                                                      0
                     0.15                                 0.6                             0.2                              -0.05

                                                                                                                                                                    -0.2
                      0.1                                 0.4                             0.1                               -0.1
                                                                                                                                                                    -0.4

                     0.05                                 0.2                               0                              -0.15
                                                                                                                                                                    -0.6

                       0                                   0                              -0.1                              -0.2                                    -0.8
                            0          10           20          0         10         20          0         10         20           0            10             20          0            10             20
